

FORTY SERMONS, WHEREOF Twenty one are now first published, The greatest part
preached before THE KING AND ON SOLEMN OCCASIONS.

By RICHARD ALLESTREE D. D. Kings Professor in the Chair of Divinity in the
University of OXFORD, Provost of ETON, and Chaplain to his MAJESTY.

To these is prefixed an account of the Author's Life.



Printed at the THEATER in Oxford and in London, for R. Scott, G. Wells, T.
Sawbridge, R. Bentley. M.DC.LXXXIV.

THE PREFACE.
IN all endeavors of persuasion, the credit of the Speaker being of as great
moment as the inherent truth and evidence of what is spoke, it will be
reasonable that there should go along with this large collection of Sermons,
some account of the Person who was the Author of them; for if it be made out,
that they came from one of integrity and knowledge, who neither would deceive
others, nor was likely to be deceived himself; one who practiced what he
taught, and preached to his own soul what he delivered to his Auditory, his
discourses must carry with them a proportionable weight and value. That this
narrative may be the more satisfactory, by being entire and particular, it
shall take the Author from his infancy, and bring him to his grave, without the
vain additions of flattery and ostentation, which he abhorred while alive, and
therefore needs not being dead.

He was the Son of Robert Allestree, a Gentleman of an ancient family in
Darbyshire, who being decai'd in his fortune by the profuseness of his
Predecessors, retained unto Sr. Richard Newport, afterward created Lord Newport
Baron of high Arcol, in the quality of his Steward; and being married, settled
himself at Uppington near the Wreken in Shropshire, where Richard Allestree,
the person of whom we write, was born, in March An. 1619. He being grown up to
be capable of institution, was sent to a neighboring country free Schole, and
from thence to another somewhat more celebrated, at Coventree, where he
remained till he became fit for the University. In the year 1636 he was brought
to Oxford by his Father, and placed a Commoner in Christ-Church, having for his
Tutor Mr. Richard Busby, who since is Dr. Busby the eminent Master of
Westminster Schole, and Prebend of that Church. Six months after his
settlement in the University, Dr. Samuel Fell the Dean observing his parts and
industry, made him Student of the College, which title he really answered by
great and happy application to study, wherein he made remarkable emprovements;
as a testimony and encouragement of which, so soon as he had taken the degree
of Bachelor of Arts, he was chose Moderator in Philosophy, and had the
emploiment renewed year by year, till the disturbances of the Kingdom
interrupted the studies and repose of the University, putting them into Arms.

His Majesty in the year 1641 being by tumults driven from London, and issuing
out his Commission of Array into the several parts of the Nation, did also
direct it to the University of Oxford, where it found an active and a ready
obedience, as by the generality of the members of that place, so particularly
by Mr. Allestree, who engaged in the service, and continued in it till Sr. John
Biron, afterward the Lord Biron, (who was sent with a party of horse to
support and countenance the Scholars in arms there,) withdrew from thence; He
after a short stay was called off to join with Prince Rupert, and by the
assistance of the loial Gentlemen of Worcestershire was received into that
City, where he was pressed by the Rebels forces; but the Prince came up
seasonably to reinforce him, and thereupon followed the sharp fight in Poyick
field near the aforesaid City, the unexpected success of which gave great
consternation to the Rebels, who being Masters of the Money, Forts and Magazeens
of the Kingdom, hoped to have carried all without a stroke. As many of the
Scholars as could furnish themselves for a sudden march, went along with Sr.
John Biron from Oxford; the others, among whom was Mr. Allestree, stayed
behind, and returned to their Gowns and Studies.

Soon after this, the Lord Say with a party of the Rebels forces drew into
Oxford, and plundered the Colleges of such plate as had not bin before sent to
his Majesty, making enquiry after those who had bin forward to promote the
King's service; on which occasion, and also a particular accident that then
happened, Mr. Allestree was called in question. The occasion was this: at
Christ-Church some of the Rebels attemted to break into the Treasury, and after
a days labor forced a passage into it; but met with nothing, except a single
groat and a halter in the bottom of a large iron chest: enraged with that
disappointment, they went to the Deanery, where having ransackt what they
thought fit, they put it altogether in a chamber, locked it up, and retired to
their quarters, intending the next morning to return and dispose of their
prize. But when they came, they found themselves defeated, and every thing
removed to their hand. Upon examination it was discovered that Mr. Allestree
had a key of the Lodgings, the Dean and his family being withdrawn, and that
Mr. Allestree's key had bin made use of in this enterprise: hereupon he was
seized, and notwithstanding all the defense he could make, had bin severely
handled, but that the Earl of Essex called away the forces on the sudden, and
so redeemed him from their fury.

In October following, the King having strengthened himself at Shrewsbury with
the supplies that came from the North, and Wales, and the Loial Gentlemen of
other parts of the Nation, began his march toward London, and was met by the
army of the Rebels, commanded by the Earl of Essex, in Keinton field in
Warwickshire, where both armies engaged: at this battle Mr. Allestree was
present; after which, understanding that the King designed immediately to march
to Oxford, and make his Court at the accustomed place, the Deanery at
Christ-Church, which was in part left to his care in the absence of the Dean,
hasting thither he was taken Prisoner by a party from Broughton house, which
was garrisoned by the Lord Say for the Parliament. His confinement here was
very short, the Garrison surrendering it self to the King's forces, who summoned
it in their passage.

The war being now formed, and the King being returned from the fight at
Brainford, having made Oxford his head quarter, Mr. Allestree settled himself
again to his study, and in the next Spring took his degree of Master of Arts;
after which he was in great hazard of his life, being seized by the
pestilential disease which raged in the Garrison, and which was fatal to very
many eminent men of all emploiments and conditions; and fell more severely upon
him by reason of a relapse, which doubled the calamity and danger.

Having recovered a little strength, he was engaged to employ it in military
service, the exigence of his Majesty's affairs calling for the aid of all his
Loial Subjects, and in particular the Scholars: and accordingly a Regiment of
them was raised, who served as Volunteers without any pay or reward, and
performed all duties not only in the Garrison, and sallies for the defense of
it in case of attacques and sieges; but were also commanded upon parties
abroad, and endured the fatigue of marches, and ill treatment of mean quarters,
differing in nothing from the poor mercenary Soldier, besides their civility
and justice to the country people while they staid with them, and paying them
at departure: things so unusual, that when at their going off from quarters
they offered their Landlords money, they imagined it don in jest and abuse, and
at last by finding it left with them, were convinced that it was don in
earnest. In this Regiment Mr. Allestree, tho a Master of Arts and fellow of the
College, thought it no disgrace to carry a musket, and perform all duties of a
common Soldier, forward upon all occasions to put himself into action. And in
this service he continued till the unhappy end of the war, gaining still what
time was left from military duties, to the prosecution of his studies: nay
joining both together, frequently holding his musket in one hand and book in
the other, and making the watchings of a Soldier the lucubrations of a Student.

But then when carnal weapons proved frustrate, and Divine Providence called
his servants to the more Christian exercises of prayers and tears for the
defense of the King and the Church, Mr. Allestree wholly betook himself to
these, and put himself into that warfare, to which his former education had
designed him: entering into Holy Orders, at a time when there was no prospect of
temporal advantage; and his being in the service of God threatened no less
danger, than his having bin in the service of his Prince.

In that little interval of safety, which the Articles of Oxford gave, and was
for some time continued, while the two factions of the Rebels were in contest
who should divide the spoil of the Nation, and enjoy the price of blood; Mr.
Allestree with great sedulity addicted himself unto his studies, and became a
Tutor of many young Gentlemen and other Students; which trust he discharged
with great sufficiency, as he did also the office of Censor in the College:
moreover he bore a part in the signal test of the Loialty of the University of
Oxford, possibly the greatest that has bin given by any society of men; I mean
the passing of the solemn Decree and Judgment of theirs against the Covenant
and Rebellion enflamed and fomented by it, performed in Convocation, when the
City was held by a Garrison of the Rebels, whose swords were at the throats of
those Confessors, and yet the decree was carried by a most unanimous suffrage
of the whole body, there being but one dissenter in that numerous Senate, and
he a person who had absented himself from the University during the war, and
taken part with the Rebels.

Soon after which great performance, the Visitors of the pretended Parliament
being at last come with a second Commission to kill and take possession, having
lost their first by outstaying in a long prayer and sermon the time assigned
for the opening of it, began their enquiry, and did it not as one would have
expected from men of Zeal and Godliness, with an inspection into vice and
immorality, but set their whole affair upon the short issue of submitting to
the Authority of the pretended Parliament; and they who could prostitute their
allegiance to their Prince, and oaths to the University, and their local
Visitors, and comply with the lust of these Usurpers, tho never so flagitious,
were immediately received to favor: all others, however meriting, were without
farther regard proscribed, the method whereof was, to write the names of as
many as they thought fit to sacrifice at once in paper, and affix it upon the
door of St. Mary's Church, wherein 'twas signified, that the persons there
named were by the Authority of the Visitors banished the University, and
required to depart the precincts thereof within three days, upon pain of being
taken for spies of war, and accordingly proceeded against. By which practice
often repeted, the men of greatest hopes and merit in the University were
spoiled of all things, and not suffered to breath the common air; so that
within the compass of few weeks an almost general riddance was made of the
loial University of Oxford; in whose room succeeded an illiterate rabble, swept
up from the plough tail, from shops and grammar Schools, and the dregs of the
neighbor University. Tho in that scandalous number, some few there were, who
notwithstanding they had parts and learning, were preferred upon the account of
their Relations; who merited a better title to the places they possessed, and
have since proved useful men in the Church and State. Those of the ancient
stock who were spared upon this trial, were afterward cast off upon the second
test of the engagement, till in the end there were left very few legitimate
members in any of the Colleges.

In this diffusive ruin Mr. Allestree had an early share, being proscribed
about the middle of July in the year 1648. And tho he had the care of several
persons of quality his Pupils, and accounts of his own and theirs to make up;
he with difficulty obtained from the Governor of the town Lieut. Coll. Kelsey a
little respit, for his settling his affairs, and doing justice to those for
whom he was concerned; the Visitors utterly refusing his request, for this
reason, as Dr. Rogers, one of their number was pleased to word it, because he
was an eminent man.

Mr. Allestree being thus driven from Oxford, retired into Shropshire, and was
entertained as Chaplain to the Honorable Francis Newport Esquire, now Viscount
Newport, where he continued till such time as Richard Lord Newport the father
died in France, whither he had some time before retired to avoid the insolence
of the conquering Rebels. On this occasion Mr. Allestree was sent over to clear
accounts, and see if any thing could be preserved from the inhospitable
pretense of the droit d'Aubeine, which pillages those Strangers who happen to
die in the French Dominions. Mr. Allestree having dispatched this affair with
good success, came back to his emploiment, and continued in it till his
Majesty's march into England with the Scotch Army, and his miraculous escape at
Worcester; at which time the Managers of the King's affairs wanting an
intelligent and faithful person to send over to his Majesty, desired Mr.
Allestree to undertake the journey, which accordingly he did, and having
attended the King at Roan and received his dispatches, he came back into
England.

At his return he found his friends Mr. Dolben and Mr. Fell, the present
Archbishop of York and Bishop of Oxford, who had likewise bin banished the
University, adventuring to sojourn privately there, and serve the uses of those
who adhered to the Church of England in performing Religious offices according
to the order of the Church; whereupon he joined himself to their assistance,
and continued with them till such time as Sr. Antony Cope a loial young
Gentleman of considerable quality and fortune in the County of Oxford,
prevailed upon him to live in his family; which he did for several years,
having liberty to go or stay as his occasions required, whereby he was enabled
to step aside without notice upon messages from the King's friends; which
service he managed with great courage and dexterity.

After several difficult journies succesfully performed, in the Winter before
his Majesty's happy restoration he was sent over into Flanders, from whence
returning with letters, he upon his landing at Dover, was seized by a party of
Soldiers, who waited for him. The Rebel's Spy, who was employed by them in his
Majesty's Court, having given notice of his dispatch; and described
particularly his person and his habit. But notwithstanding this diligence of
the Rebels, Mr. Allestree had so much presence of mind, to secure his letters,
and shift them into a faithful hand, who took care of them.

The Soldiers according to their orders guarded him to London, where he was
examined by a Committee of the Council of Safety, and charged with having
correspondence with the King, and having brought letters from him, which they
backed with several circumstances of his journey, and threats of utmost severity
in case he should persist in contumacy, and not confess the truth. But they not
being able by questions to entrap, nor menaces to fright Mr. Allestree to
betray either himself or others, he was sent Prisoner to Lambeth house, which
was then made a goal for the King's friends, where by ill usage he contracted a
sickness which was like to have cost him his life. After the durance of about
six or eight weeks, his friends made means for his enlargement, which was the
easier obtained, for that some of the Leaders of the Party, seeing things move
toward his Majesty's restoration, were willing by kindnesses to recommend
themselves in case of a revolution; among whom was the late Earl of Shaftsbury,
who was used to value himself, that Mr. Allestree owed his preservation to him.
Mr. Allestree having obtained liberty, returned to Oxfordshire, from whence
after a short stay he went into Shropshire to see his Relations; in his return
from thence designing in his way to visit his excellent friend Dr. Hammond at
Westwood near Worcester, he at the gate met the body of that great man carrying
to his burial; which circumstance is therefore mentioned, because that eminent
Light of the English Church, at his death gave this testimony not only of his
kindness to Mr. Allestree, but also of his esteem of his parts and learning,
that he left to him his Library of books as a Legacy, well knowing that in his
hands they would be useful weapons for the defense of that cause he had during
life so vigorously asserted.

The King being happily returned, Mr. Allestree was soon after made Canon of
Christ-Church, where he cheerfully concurred to the attemt, which was set on
foot there for the repairing of those decaies and ruins which had bin made by
the late Usurpers; for however those Godly Robbers who had invaded that Church
and College, suffered them both almost to drop upon their heads, and without
shame sawed down for firing the timber work of the North side of the great
Quadrangle: the legitimate Children were concerned first to cloth their
Mother's nakedness, and not till that was provided for, consider their own.

Mr. Allestree at the same time undertook one of the Lectures of the City,
thinking it might be a service to instill principles of Loialty there after the
contrary infusions of schismatical rebel Teachers, which for so many years had
bin the Gospel of that place, discountenanced by none of the Parochial
Ministers, besides Mr. Lamplugh the now Reverend Bishop of Exeter, who had the
courage and loialty there to own the Doctrines of the Church of England in the
worst of times. This Lecture Mr. Allestree continued for several years, never
receiving any part of the Salary belonging to it, but ordering that it should
be distributed among the poor.

While he employed himself in popular preaching, he was also called to the
service of the Court being the King's Chaplain, and also to the severer studies
of Scholastical Learning, in his exercise for the degree of Doctor, and
Moderator-ship in Divinity in the College; and soon after upon the vacancy of
the chair of that faculty, to the laborious emploiment of Regius Professor in
the University.

In the year 1665 the Provost-ship of Eton falling void, that honorable and
beneficial emploiment was by his Majesty's especial grace and favor conferred
upon him, to the acceptance whereof he was not without difficulty induced; and
particularly the consideration that a great interest was made by a Lay man, who
probably might succeed upon the advantage of his refusal, notwithstanding that
the Provost there be actually the Parson of Eton Parish, and presented to the
Cure, and instituted by the Bishop of Lincoln the Diocesan, as all other parish
Priests are: so that as nothing could be more plainly sacrilegious and
irregular in it self, than such an usurpation by a Lay person; so nothing could
be a greater disservice to the Church, than by an unseasonable modesty to make
way for it. Upon these motives it was, that Dr. Allestree became Provost of
Eton; and for the same reason it was, that during his life he continued so,
never harkening to any offer of preferment, which might make a vacancy, and
repete the former hazar^d. And it may be truly said that this was the greatest
secular care that he carried with him into another world, it being his dying
request unto his friends, to interpose with his sacred Majesty, that he might
have a Successor lawfully capable, and who would promote the welfare of the
College.

The Succession in the Chair he more timely secured, for finding his health,
and particularly his eye sight exceedingly empair'd by the toil of that
emploiment, he resigned it in the year 1679, and had the satisfaction to be
succeeded by his friend Dr. Jane, of whose abilities he had perfect knowledge.

But diseases are not cured by the removal of the causes which first occasioned
them, and tho by the use of mineral waters in the Summer season, and the taking
of journies in the Autumn, he for some time supported himself, the decay
continued and encreast upon him, till it was formed into a Dropsy; the
prevalence of which was so great and sudden, that his Physicians advised him
by all means to come up to London, where he might be near their inspection and
care; in compliance with whose desires more than from an expectation of cure,
he went thither, and having taken a private lodging, submitted himself to the
methods they proposed: in the mean time settling his little temporal concerns;
but was more intent upon his everlasting interests, employing those vacancies
which his sickness gave, in attending the offices of the Church constantly read
to him, and his private devotions; and when he saw his end approaching, in
receiving the great Viaticum of the holy Sacrament: in reference whereto having
desired those friends of his who happened to be in Town to communicate with him,
the present Lord Archishop of York, the Lord Bishop of London, the Lord Bishop
of Lincoln, the Lord Bishop of Exeter, the Lord Bishop of St. Asaph, the
Reverend Dr. Busby, Mr. Fell one of the Fellows of Eton who continued with him
the whole time of his sickness: he afterward took his last leave of them with
great equanimity and constancy of mind, and waited for the hour of his release.

Having hitherto drawn together the series of actions and emploiments which
made up our Authors life, it will not be amiss to set him in another light, and
take a prospect of his mind and personal qualifications. As to his bodily
appearance and outward features, as they are of less importance, so are they in
recent memory, and by sculpture and other delineations are so generally known,
that there will be no need they should be expressed by words.

His mind, that nobler part of him, was composed by an extraordinary indulgence
of nature, those faculties which in others use to be single, and are thought
necessarily to be so, as excluding each the other, were united in him. Memory,
Fancy, Judgment, Elocution, great Modesty and no less Assurance, a
comprehension of things, and fluency of words; an aptness for the pleasant, and
sufficiency for the rugged parts of knowledge; a courage to encounter, and an
industry to master all things, make up the Character of his happy genius. Which
felicity of temper was seconded by the circumstances of the times in which he
lived, which engaged him severally to exert and cultivate his faculties. Before
the national calamity of the civil war, he had secured the foundations of the
whole circle of learning, by his own indefatigable study, as also the indulgent
care of his Tutor Dr. Busby, than whom no person is more happy in the Arts of
transfusing his knowledge into others; and the particular encouragement of Dr
Fell the Dean, who always looked upon him as a part of his family, and treated
him with the same concern as his own children.

When the war broke out, he had the benefit of being, instead of one, in
several Universities; Oxford was then an Epitome of the whole Nation, and all
the business of it: there was here the Court, the Garrison, the Flower of the
Nobility and Gentry, Lawyers and Divines of all England. And times of action
have somewhat peculiar in them to ferment and envigorat the mind, which is
enervated by the softness of peace. The calamitous times which succeeded, as
they engaged him to the exercise of popular preaching, a talent which nothing
besides necessity and practice can cultivate; so they led him out into foreign
parts, entered him into the managery of business of greatest trust and hazard,
and made him as well read in Men, as in Books. After all this, it was no small
advantage to be returned by the King's happy restoration to the University,
and to the opportunities of reading and conversation with learned men, and in
that conspicuous Theater, to have the obligation of a public emploiment to
exert all his faculties, and with utmost endeavor to improve and communicate
his knowledge. And we may say it without envy, that few of his time had either
a greater compass, or a deeper insight into all the parts of Learning; the
modern and learned Languages, Rhetoric, Philosophy, Mathematics, History,
Antiquity, Moral and Polemical Divinity, all which was not to be pumpt up, or
ransackt out of common place books; but was ready at hand, digested for his own
use, and communication in discourse to others.

From his first childhood he had a strong impression of Piety, and the Duties
owed to God and Men, which next to Divine Grace may be ascribed to the strict
and severe education which he had from his Father; a blessing that cannot be
sufficiently valued, and on which he often reflected with a great sense of
gratitude. Hereby notwithstanding the license of war, and incitations of youth,
he preserved his innocence, and love of God and virtue, till he made the more
immediate service of them his profession. In his constitution he had a great
deal of warmth and vigor, which made him apt to take fire upon provocation; but
he was well aware of it, and kept a peculiar guard upon that weak part: so that
his heat was reserved for the great concerns of the honor of God, and the
service of his Prince and Country, wherein he was altogether indefatigable, and
in the most dismal appearances of affairs would never desert them, nor despair
of their restoration. There was not in the world a man of clearer Honesty and
Courage; no temtation could bribe him to do a base thing, or terror affright
him from the doing of a good one.

This made his friendships as lasting and inviolable as his life, without the
dirty considerations of profit, or sly reserves of craft; not the pageantry of
ceremonious address, or cold civility: much less the servile falseness of
obsequious flattery. It was a solid and masculine kindness, a perfect coalition
of affections and minds: so that there was nothing he possessed, but it was his
friend's as absolutely as it was his own; and it became a general observation,
that he and they had all things in common.

This temper of his directed him to live with great kindness with his Neighbors
and acquaintance, so that Eton College, while he lived there, was but one
family, his lodging being every Fellow's chamber, and they as much at home with
him as in their own apartment: And in the University, tho his station and parts
might object him to envy, he had no competition or difference with any person;
so that no man ever lived with a more universal good will of all that knew him,
or died with a more general sorrow at his loss.

His conversation was always cheerful and entertaining, especially in the
reception of his acquaintance at his table, and friendly visits; and in the
evening after he had wearied himself with the studies of the day, which he
generally continued till eight of the clock at night, during the many years he
held the Chair, soon after which he was to be called away to the night prayers
of the College; this short interval he made as easy as he could to himself and
those that were with him: and he had great reason to relax his mind at this
time with a little cheerful discourse, there being no person who more literally
verified the saying of the wise Man, that much study was a weariness to the
flesh. After his days work he was used to be as faint and spent, as if he had
bin laboring all the time with the sith or flaile; and his intention of
thought made such wast upon his spirits, that he was frequently in hazard,
while at study, to fall into a swoun, and forced to rise from his seat, and
walk about his room for some time, before he could recover himself.

To render secure from the inordination of intemperance, he frequently
abstained from lawful satisfactions, by the stated returns of fasting and
abstinence; and continuance in celibacy during his whole life. Nor had his
singular abilities and endowments the usual effect to make him proud and
contemtuous; all his discourses were with deference and respect, and were spoke
with weight becoming a Professor, but the softness of a Learner.

In his conversation he was exceedingly tender of saying any thing that might
administer offense, or reflect upon any ones reputation; and most ready, in
case of resentment, to give the person aggrieved, whoever he happened to be,
the utmost satisfaction. A remarkable proof hereof is his dealing with one who
had taken part with the Rebels in the late war, and who was said to have don an
act of cruelty therein, which Dr. Allestree in a private discourse had chanced
to mention. The party concerned hearing hereof, wrote to the Doctor, professing
his innocence, and charging him with uncharitableness in believing, and
injustice in reporting such an untruth. Hereupon, notwithstanding that the
matter of fact had for about thirty years gone on as common fame, and also had
bin charged in print, and that collateral evidence by a person now alive and a
sufferer from the same hand, had bin produced to enforce the probability, and
that here nothing was asserted but on the credit of what had bin formerly
heard; yet Dr. Allestree by letter desired the said Complainant's pardon: who,
without regard to the laws of civility, printed it as a vindication of his
innocence, when indeed it was rather a proof of the Doctor's candor, and an
evidence that the Complainant wanted better arguments for his defense. But it
were to be wished that they who were in their youth so unhappy to be engaged in
an ill cause, would spend their old age, which God's and the King's mercy has
given them, rather in repenting of what they have don amiss, than in contesting
what they have not don; and would more busy themselves in humble retractations,
than passionat Apologies.

His contemt of the world was very extraordinary, as in his large and constant
charities, both by settled Pensions to indigent persons and families, and
occasional Alms; so also his bounteous hospitality, which will need no
attestation, being performed in so conspicuous a Scene as Eton, and in the view
of Windsor, which for several years his Majesty has favored with his Court and
Presence. Yet a higher instance hereof will be his giving away a fixed and
constant revenue that he might have fairly retained, to the value of above
three hundred pounds by the year; the particulars whereof are thus.

At his Majesty's return, as we have intimated, he was made Canon of
Christ-Church in Oxford, and soon after King's Professor in the Chair of
Divinity, to which emploiment a Canonry in the said Church, and the Rectory of
Ewe Elm in the said County and Diocese are annexed, so that the profit of two
Canonries and the Rectory belonged to him, and being earned with the labor of
that weighty charge, no one who made a just estimate of things, would have
envied it to him; but he regretted it to himself, and for several years gave
the whole profit of one of his Canonries to the repairs of the College: and
afterward being moved by the right reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in the behalf of an ancient Student of the College, who was
destitute of a suitable support, he entirely quitted the advantage of the
aforesaid Canonry to him. And as to the Living, he never received a penny from
it, but left it to a friend, whose circumstances required such an accession.

The revenue of Eton had a suitable disposal, the west side of the outward
court of the College being built from the ground and finished at his single
expense. And whereas at his coming to Eton, he found the Society dipped in a
great debt, by an ill custom brought in by the pretended godly men of the late
times, who at the year's end divided what ever money remained after the ordinary
paiments were discharged, incidental ones and debts contracted being still
thrown off to the future year; which in time grew to a bulk, that endangered
the College's becoming bankrupt. To remedy this he by an exemplary retrenchment
of his own dues, prevailed on the Society to do the like, so that within few
years the College has paid above a thousand pound debt, expended above two
thousand pound in repairs, and every day goes on to do things honorable and
beneficial to the Society.

It may not here be omitted, tho it be an instance of lesser moment, that the
Edition of the first Volume of these Sermons was entirely upon an account of
Charity. For his ingenious Kinsman Mr. James Allestree the Bookseller, from a
plentiful fortune being by the fire of London reduced to great poverty, Dr.
Allestree, besides other assistances, bestowed upon him the copies of eighteen
of his Sermons, to make some reparation to his losses.

But the uncontrollable proof of contemt of the world, is the dying poor, and
not to have collected any thing against the hazards of fortune, and commonly
pretended exigences of old age and sickness; which was in a remarkable manner
Dr. Allestree's case, he having never during his life purchased an inch of
ground, nor any annuity or lease to the value of a penny; nor did he take care
to renew the patrimonial estate which he held by a lease for life, tho it were
the place of his birth, which generally gives an endearment, and a desire to
continue the possession. Thereby, as the Author to the Hebrews expresses it,
sojourning in the earth as in a strange country, and showing plainly that he
looked for a better one, and a city which has foundations whose builder and
maker is God.

His greatest tresure was his Library, which was indeed a considerable one,
both for the number of Books and choice of them; but these he disposed of by
deed before his death to the University of Oxford for the use of his Successors
in the Chair. So that his Executors had only his personal estate to share among
them, which he took to be so inconsiderable, that he thought it not worth the
formality of a Will; but designing, after the distributing some little
remembrances among his friends, that small pittance which remained to his
Relations, conceived that the Law by an Administration would of course divide
it among them. But being told by his Friend, to whom he communicated this
purpose of his, that in this malicious world the dying intestate would be a
thing of ill fame, and interpreted the product of an unwillingness to think of
death, or part with what he had: and that what he so left would come less
obligingly to his Relations, and probably would occasion contention among them:
he took the advice, and by Will disposed of such Legacies as he thought fit to
leave to the poor and to his friends, and gave the remainder among his sisters
and their children.

Tho he hung thus loose from the world, he neither was negligent in secular
affairs, nor unskilful in the managery of them; which was made manifest by his
dextrous discharge of the private trusts committed to him in behalf of his dead
friends, and the administration of his public emploiments. He was for several
years Tresurer of Christ-Church, in a busy time of their repairing of the ruins
made by the entruding Usurpers; and amidst the necessary avocations of study,
found leisure for a full discharge of that troublesome emploiment.

The College of Eton, as I intimated before, he found in a very ill condition
as to its revenue and fabric, and what was no less a mischief, unstatutable and
unreasonable grants of Leases; to all which, excepting one, whose reduction
must be the work of time, he applied effectual remedies. The Schole he found in
a low condition, but by his prudence in the choice of a learned, discreet and
diligent Master; by his interest, in bringing young Gentlemen and Persons of
Quality thither, and by his great kindness to them when there; and taking care
for the building fit accommodation for their reception within the precincts of
the College, in few years the Schole grew into that great reputation and credit
which it yet maintains.

And here we may not pass by another considerable service don in behalf of the
said Schole, and also King's College in Cambridge, whose Seminary it is: that
whereas both those Societies were formerly under the discouragement, that the
Fellowships of Eton were generally disposed of to persons of foreign education;
by the vigorous interposition of Dr. Allestree added to the petition of the
Provost and Fellows of King's College, his sacred Majesty was pleased to pass a
grant under the broad Seal, that in all future times five of the seven Fellows
should be such as had bin bred in Eton Schole, and were Fellows of King's
College, which has ever since took place, and will be a perpetual incitement to
diligent study, and virtuous endeavor in both those roial foundations.

In the managery of the business of the Chair of Divinity, as he performed the
Scholastic part with great sufficiency in exact and dextrous untying the knots
of argument, and solid determination of controverted points, so that he was not
oppressed by the fame of any of his most eminent Predecessors: his prudence was
very remarkable in the choice of subjects to be treated on; for he wasted not
time and opportunity in the barren insignificant parts of Schole Divinity, but
insisted on the fundamental grounds of controversy, between the Church of
England, and the most formidable Enemies thereof. With an equal steddiness he
asserted the Gospel truth, against the usurpations of Rome, the innovations of
Geneva, the blasphemies of Cracow, and the monsters of our own Malmsbury, never
intermedling with the un^athomable abyss of God's decrees, the indeterminable
five points; which in all times and in all countries wherever they have
happened to be debated, past from the Schools to the State, and shocked the
government and public peace. By his judicious care herein, tho he found the
University in a ferment, and a great part of its growing hopes sufficiently
seasoned with ill prepossessions, he so brought it to pass, that during the
whole tract of seventeen years that he held the Chair, there was no factious
bandying of opinions, nor petulant sidings on the account of them; which thing
disturbed the peace of the last age, and helped forward to inflame those
animosities, which ended in the execrable mischeifs of the civil war.

There is nothing at this day which learned men more desire or call for, than
the publishing of those Lectures, which were heard, when first read, with the
greatest satisfaction of the Auditory; it may therefore be fit to give some
account of the reason why those expectations are defeated, which in short is
this. Dr. Allestree a little before his death having communicated to the Bishop
of Oxford several particulars concerning his intentions for the disposal of his
goods and papers, the Bishop observed that there was no mention made of his
Lectures, and knowing how his modesty had during his life resisted all
importunities for the publishing of them, suspected that the same motive might
be more prevalent at his death; therefore he wrote to him thereupon, desiring
him that his Lectures might be preserved, which had cost him so much study and
labor, and would be useful proportionably to others. His answer by letter
bearing date Jan. 19. 1680. was, that having not had opportunity to revise what
he had written, which was not every where consistent with his present
imaginations, tho in nothing material, yet in some particulars which he should
have better examined; especially diverse of the Act Lectures, which being upon
the same head, the thread of them was not right nor didactical, and Nectarius 's
Penitentiary not expounded the same way in one place as in another, and the
first blundring and not true: therefore he adds, that if the Bishop had not
writ, and for that he himself would not go out of the world without satisfying
him in every thing, he had resolved to have sent for his papers and burnt them;
but now he gave them up all to the Bishop upon this inviolable trust, that
nothing of them should be published as a Scheme of his, but to be made use of
to serve any other design the Bishop should think fit. Dr. Allestree's words
are here transcribed, for that the plainest account of things is always the
most satisfactory.

His Sermons not lying under the same interdict, so many of them as were
thought needful to make up a Volume, are here published. The variety of
Auditors for whom they were first designed, makes them not to be all of the
same finess of spinning and closeness of texture: but in them all there will
appear the same spirit of persuasive Rhetoric and ardent piety, whereby tho
dead he yet speaks.

Upon the 28th. day of January in the year 1680. this excellent person after a
life spent in indefatigable studies, and faithful endeavors for his Religion,
his King and Country, and after the patient sufferance of a long and painful
sickness, with Christian resignation and full assurance, rendered his soul into
the hands of God; and on the first of February was decently interred in the
Chore of the Collegiat Church at Eton, where his Executors erected to his
memory a Monument of white Marble with the following inscription.

H. S. I.
RICARDUS ALLESTREE
Cathedrae Theologicae in Universitate Oxoniensi
Professor Regius,
Ecclesiae Christi ibidem Praebendarius,
and
Collegii hujus Aetonensis Praepositus;
Muniis istis singulis ita par, ut and omnibus major.
In
Disputationibus irrefragabilis, Concionibus flexanimus,
Negotiis solers, Vita integer, Pietate sanctus.
Episcopales infulas eadem industria evitavit,
Qua alii ambiunt;
Cui rectius visum,
Ecclesiam defendere, instruere, ornare,
Quam regere.
Laboribus studiisque perpetuis exhaustus,
Morte, si quis alius, praematura,
Obiit Vir desideratissimus
Januarii XXVII. An. M.DC.LXXX.
Aetatis LX.
Nobile sibi monumentum,
Areae adjacentis latus occidentale,
Quod a fundamentis propriis impensis struxit,
Vivus sibi statuit.
Brevem hanc Tabellam Haeredes defuncto posuere.
TABLE of the First VOLUME.
1 Pet. 4. 1. He that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin. Page 1.
Psalm 7^. 1. Truly God is loving to Israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart. 15. Levit. 16. 31. Ye shall afflict your soul by a statute for ever. 29.
John 15. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. 43. Ezekiel.
33. 2. Why will ye die? 57. Psalm 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. 69. Mark 1. 3. Prepare ye
the way of the Lord. 81. 1 John 5. 4. This is the victory which overcomes the
world, even our faith. 95. Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ. 109. Luke 9.
55. Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. 123. Luke 16. 30, 31. Nay,
father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent.

And he said unto him, if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, tho one rose from the dead. 137.

Luke 2. 34. Behold this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in
Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against. Page 151. James 4. 7.
Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. 165. Phil. 3. 18. For many walk of
whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the
enemies of the cross of Christ. 181. Mark 10. 15. Verily I say unto you,
whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not
enter therein. 195. Acts 13. 2. The Holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and
Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them. 209. Hos. 3. 9. Afterward
shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, and David
their king, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness. 227. Matt. 5. 44. But I
say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, pray for them that despightfully use you and persecute you. 243.
TABLE of the Second VOLUME.
2 Timothy 3. 15. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
Page 1. Romans 6. 3. Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his death? 21. Matt. 9. 13. Go ye and learn what
that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Page 36. Psalm 102. 13, 14.
Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the
set time is come.

For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof. 50.

Acts 24. 16. And herein I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void
of offense, toward God and toward man. 65. Matt. 5. 4. Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted. 79. 1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this
hope in him, purifies himself as he is pure. 93. Isaiah 26. 20. Come my people,
enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self as
it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast. 107. Matt. 11.
28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. 118. 1 Cor. 15. 57. Thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. 133. Psalm 17. 15. As for me I will behold thy face in
righteousness: I shall be satisfied when, I awake, with thy likeness. 143. John
20. 28. My Lord, and my God. 157. Mark 9. 24. Lord I believe, help thou my
unbelief. 170. Matt. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. 191. 2 Cor. 6.
2. Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation. 201. 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed. 215. Luke 16. 8. The children of this
world are in their generation wiser than the children of light. 230. Matt. 6.
22, 23. The light of the body is the eye, if therefore thy eye be single, thy
whole body shall be full of light.

But if thy eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness; if therefore
the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? 247.

Sermon. 2. 261. Sermon. 3. 272. Sermon. 4. 284. Sermon. 5. 296.
THE Divine Authority AND USEFULNESS OF THE Holy Scripture ASSERTED IN A SERMON
On the 2 Timothy 3. 15. And that from a child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith
which is in Christ Jesus.
THE words are part of St. Paul's reasoning, by which he presses Timothy to
hold fast the truth he had received, and not let evil men, seducers, work him
out of what he had bin taught: urging to this end both the authority of the
Teacher himself, who had secured the truth of his doctrine by infallible
evidence; and beyond that, as if that were a more effectual enforcement,
pressing him with his own education in the Scriptures; how he had bin nursed up
in that faith, sucked the Religion with his milk, that it was grown the very
habit of his mind, that which would strengthen him into a perfect man in
Christ, and make him wise unto salvation if he did continue in the faith and
practice of it; which he proves in the remaining verses of the Chapter.

In the words read there are three things observable.

1. Here is a state supposed, Salvation; and put too as of such concernment,
that attaining it is looked upon as wisdom; wise unto salvation.

Now since true wisdom must express it self both in the end that it proposes,
and the means it chooses for that end to be pursued with and attained by, and
take care both these have all conditions that can justify the undertaking, and
secure the prudence of it, and this wisdom to salvation therefore must suppose
both the^e; in order to them both we have here

2. That which with all divine advantage does propose this end, and also does
prescribe most perfect means for the attaining it; and that is Holy Scripture
through faith which is in Christ Jesus. Thou have known the holy Scriptures
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in
Christ Jesus. Holy Scripture probably of the Old Testament; for there was
hardly any other Timothy could know from a child, scarce any other being
written then. The faith of that then through the faith which is in Christ
Jesus, that is, together with the faith of all things necessary to be known
concerning Christ, is meant. Now since St. John, after the view of all that the
other three Evangelists had wrote concerning Christ, adding his story also
says, that Christ John 20. 30, 31.
did and spoke more than what is written, yet affirms most positively that
those things were written that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God, and believing might have life through his name; and so enough is
written for that faith which is in Jesus that is necessary to eternal life:
therefore the Holy Scripture of the Old Testament, together with the faith of
what is written in the New, is that which St. Paul affirms is able to make us
wise unto Salvation.

3. Here is the advantage Timothy had above others as to Faith in these, and
consequently the far greater obligation to continue in it. He had known them
from a child. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scripture, etc.

The first thing that does offer it self to our consideration is the state
supposed, Salvation. But because my Text supposes it, I shall do so too, nor
shall think it needful to prove here, that there is such a state, nor
consequently that all those are stupid who propose not to themselves this
everlasting safety for their main end, and by strict care in the duties of
Religion and Gods service aim at it: for if that state be granted, nay if it
be but possible, it must be granted, that there can be no security but in doing
so, nor consequently any wisdom without being wise thus unto salvation.

But then if this were granted, that the wisest thing man could propose to
himself, were by strict care in all the duties of Religion to design Gods honor
and his own salvation; still, as to the other part of prudence which consists
in the choice of means, we are to seek for that Religion we are to pursue this
end by and attain it; since there are so many and so opposite Religions in the
world, that it is not easier to reconcile them, then to make peace between
enemies and contradictions. And it always was so; for excepting that mankind
agreed still in the notion of the necessity of Religion, that all had
apprehensions of invisible powers above us, and differed not much in the rules
of Justice and Morality, in other things there was no nearness. Almost from the
beginning there was more variety of Gods then Nations, I had almost said then
Worshippers. Beasts were their sacrifices and their Deities, and therefore
their Votaries were certainly no better. Vices also were their worships; things
which their Cities and their Camps would not endure, found Sanctuary in their
Temples; and the actions which were whipped in the Judgment-hall, were their
piety in the holy places. And tho some wise men among them found good reason to
decry this, yet they knew not what to take up in the stead. I need not add the
present differences of the world, even that called Christian too, great part of
which as heretofore they sealed their faith with their own blood, now seal it
in the blood of all that differ from them; and by their persecutions hope to
merit Heaven more, then those did hope to gain it by their Martyrdoms. But
these I need not add to make up this into a demonstration, that it is
impossible for lapsed men, so far as they are left to themselves, and have no
other guide to follow but their reason, to find out what they are to believe of
God, and how to serve him, and save themselves. The Hill. l. 1. de Trin^t. p.
53, 54. Clemens Al. Strom. 6. p. 675. (...)
Fathers and (...). Vid. Justin. Mart. ad Diognetum p. 499. Athanas. ad
Serapionem tom. 1. p. 191. 194 edit. Par. 1672.
Philosophers too, conclude that we can learn from none but God, what we must
understand of God; who must be known only as he himself is pleased to revele
himself. His worship also, how he will be served, and what observances he does
require, or will admit, since it depends on his own good pleasure, therefore
without his directions it is in vain to hope to please him with our Religious
service whatever it be, and by consequence impossible without his guidance and
assistance to acquire the end of all our Service and Religion, the salvation of
our souls. So that how wise soever he be who does propose this blessed end to
himself, if yet withal he be not some way from the Lord instructed by what
means he must pursue that end, and do not make choice of, and use those means,
it is impossible he can be wise unto salvation. Now for this St. Paul assures
us most expressly, here we may be furnished: For he says, The Holy Scriptures
are able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ
Jesus. And he does assert this on the very ground we mentioned, for they are
(...), inspired by God; they come from him. All which must be made out in the
next place.

That those Holy Scriptures which St. Paul first mentions, those of the Old
Testament were so, and did contain sufficient revelation both of God, and of
the way of worship of the Jews, that Nation did so perfectly believe, that
neither Sufferings nor Miracles could persuade the contrary; neither the Roman
persecutors that destroyed their worship, nor the Son of God that changed it,
could yet take them off from Moses and his Scriptures. Now that this Moses led
that Nation out of Egypt with an high hand, and made himself their Prince and
Lawgiver, multitudes of Justin. ex Trogo l. 36. Diod. Sicul. l. 1. St^abo l.
16. Plin. 30. Tac. Hist. 5. Joseph. contra Apionem mentions many others.
foreign Histories of the first times, and the best account assure us: whose
relations we cannot question as derived from themselves, because they hated
Jews beyond all possibility of such compliance. But the Exodus 7, 8, 9, 10.
Chapters.
Scriptures also tell us, how in Egypt by strange wonders, (such as their
Magicians could not imitate nor bear, who tho they had permission to do some,
it was that so they might appear to be outdon the more miraculously, themselves
confessing Gods hand in those prodigies) Moses wrought on the Egyptians to give
leave the people should depart: and how when yet notwithstanding that leave
given they were pursued, he made way for them through the Exodus 14. 21.
Sea by Miracles, which was a rampart and defense to them, a ruin to their
enemies: How they were Exodus 16. 15. Deuteronomy. 8. 24.
fed for forty years with Manna raining down from Heaven in the wilderness: and
that they might depend on Providence for their daily provision, when he forbad
them to take care or gather for the morrow, whatsoever their greediness or want
of faith provided, strait Exodus 16. 20.
bred worms and stank, except that on the Sabbath eve, to keep off such cares
from the day of their Religion, they gathered double which Exodus 16. 24.
corrupted not: How when they mutined for flesh, would have variety, Paradise
in the desert, such great plenty of Number. 11. 16. 20. 31, 32.
Quails flew to them as fed the whole Nation till their very lust was
surfetted; and they had no more will then hunger to them; How Moses Rod did
strike a living stream, a River that sufficed that people and their cattle out
of a Number. 20. 8. 11.
Rock: How in the midst of lightning and thunder God himself promulgated his
Law Exodus 20.
to the whole Nation audibly at once: How his glorious presence showed it self
in all necessities upon the Ark, in which the Tables of the Law were laid up:
How the waters of the river Jossh. 6. 20.
Jordan fled from that Ark both ways, flowed upwards to give passage to the
people into Canaan: How the walls of Josh. 6. 20.
Jericho without any other battery, any other force but that the Ark was there,
fell down before it.

But to name no more, If these be true; that power by which these were wrought,
was great enough to give that Law, require obedience to it, and reward it, and
to punish all transgression according to the tenor of these Scriptures: that
is, it was God; and he that wrote those Scriptures must have had communication
with, and bin inspired from, God to write them. But,

2. whether they were true or no according as they are recorded in those
Scriptures, that whole people from the greatest almost to the least must know;
because they are recorded as all don, not only in the presence of them all, but
as the objects and the entertainments of their senses, every one; so that if
they were forged, not one of the whole Nation could be ignorant of it. And then,

3. If they knew them forged all; that Number. 2. 32. Number. 11. 21.
600000. men, besides their wives and families, should endure this Moses,
having brought them forth only into a wilderness, there to lay such a heavy
Law, and so severe a yoke upon them, with such penalties annexed to every least
transgression, and adjure them to observe it on account of all those prodigies
that had bin wrought among them, and upbraid them with stiffneckedness,
rebellion, and appeal to their own senses for the truth of all this, and record
all to posterity in this Scripture, cause all to be read before them; and that
they should bear all this from him they knew so impudent a deceiver, and
conveigh that Scripture and the faith of it to their posterity, ground their so
strict, so chargeable Religion on that book, which they were certain had no
word of truth in it: this sure transcends belief and possibility.

It Is certain therefore, since the Jews of that age did perform the services
required, and in performing them according as that book directs, did teach
their children the great works that God had don in their sight, therefore they
believed those Miracles and Scriptures. And since it was impossible that they
should be deceived; if they believed them, they were true: and their posterity
received from them the faith of this, and so derived it on, that neither Gods
dread judgments, nor man's cruelty can yet shake it. Now had they not bin don,
and on that account conveyed; when ever they were broacht, and that book
first appeard, the men of that age must needs know their Fathers never had
performed such services, had such a book read to them constantly, nor told them
of such Miracles that had bin wrought: and therefore it was impossible that
they could have believed it had bin so from Moses, if it had bin true that it
had first begun to be taught in their own time, or in theirs with whom they
lived. And this discourse must be of force concerning every age, if we ascend
until we come to that of Moses wherein all was effected. Yet besides this, they
had also that perpetual Miracle in the High Priests Pectoral, the Oracle of
Vrim and Thummim, that did keep alive their faith and strengthen it: and they
had Prophets constantly foretelling, as from God, things that were sometimes
suddenly to come to pass, and sometimes not till many ages after, the event of
which depended often on the will of those that would not of some hundred years
be born; others on Gods own immediate will and hand: and therefore none but God
could look into, foretell, and bring to pass all those events. Now such were
Jeremies predictions of the taking of Jerusalem, and the captivity of the
people, and the express number of Jer. 25. 11, 12.
years it would continue; Esays naming Isa. 44. 26. 21. 28. and 45. 1.
Cyrus, who was to release it, near two hundred years e're he was born; All
Daniels prophecies, particularly that must eminent one of the Dan. 9. 24. etc.
Messiah this Christ Jesus, of whose Scriptures we are next to speak.

That that Jesus, whom Cornelius Tacitus the heathen historian in the fifteenth
book of his Annals, calls Christiani dogmatis autorem, the Tac. An. l. 15.
Author of the Christian Doctrine, did work Miracles, and prophesy, both Vid.
Raim. Martin. pugfid p. 2. c. 8.
Jews and learned Celsus apud Orig. l. 2. Julian. Cyril. contra ipsum 6.
Orig^n. contra Cells. l. 2. c. 69.
Heathens do confess. But these Books tell us, when he first began to preach,
he publicly cast out a Devil in the Synagogue on the Sabbath day; and at even,
when the whole City was assembled, he healed all their sick, and cast out many
Devils, which confessed before all, that he was the Son of Mat. 8. Mar. 1. Luc. 4.
God. Then he cast out a Legion of such mischievous malign Spirits, as having
got license, drove two thousand Swine headlong into the Sea and choakt them,
which was known to the whole Country of the Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Luc. 8.
Gadarens. Before the Pharisees and Doctors, that came out of all the Cities
both of Galilee, and Jewry, and Jerusalem, and so great a crowd as forced them
to unroof the house to come to him, he freed one from his Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luc.
5.
palsy and his sins. A multitude was witness of the death of Mar 5. Luc 8.
Jairus's daughter, and bewailing her laughed him to scorn that undertook to
raise her, yet he called her into life. And on a feast day in the Temple,
before all the people, he recovered one that had lain lame John 5.
eight and thirty years: and when a widows son was carried to his funeral, and
all the City followed him, he only touched the bier, and bid him Luc. 7.
live. With two fishes and five loaves he fed Man. 14. Mar. 6. Luc. 9. John 6.
5000 men besides women and children, and with what they left they filled
twelve baskets, when one basket carried all before they ate; so that they were
convinced, he was that Prophet that was to come into the world: and with seven
loaves he filled Mat. 15. Mar. 8.
4000 afterward and seven baskets. He commanded a dumb spirit out of him that
had bin Mat. 17. Mar. 9. Luc. 9.
Lunatic, vexed with a Devil from his infancy, before the people and the
Scribes, whom his Disciples could not cast out. And when John 11.
Lazarus had bin dead four days, and buried till he stank, yet at his call,
although bound hand and foot with grave clothes, he came forth, all the multitude
beholding. From so many more I chose out these, because they are reported don
before the people, and the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Doctors. I might name
his Mat. 24. Mar. 13. Luc. 21.
Prophecies of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the propagation and
continuance of his Religion; even of the woman's box of Mar. 26. Mar. 14. John
12.
Spikenard, which event has made notorious to the world. But his death was so
even at the present: when if the rending of the Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luc. 23. John
19.
veil of the Temple was apparent Miracle to all Jerusalem, the suns prodigious
Eclipse, when it was impossible by nature he should be eclipsed (it being then
full moon,) was so to the whole Hemisphere. It serves the use I am to make of
this, that it is here recorded, but withal Heathen ^hlegen apud Origin. con^ra
Cells. l. 2. p. 8^. Eusebius. ad Olyn. 20^. ann. 4 (...) lop. and Georg. Syncd
Thall^s apud African vid. Scal. ammad. ad Eusebius. Chron. p. 186 ad ann. 2044.
Etiam vide Just. Mart. p. 76. and p. 84. and Tertull. A^pol. c. 21. and de isto
terrae motu agere Tacitum and Plin. l. 2. c. 84. scribit Oros.
Historians and Chronologes bear witness to it: for when they relate that in
the 4th year of the 202 Olympiad, the year that is assigned to Christ's death,
there was such a great Eclipse as never had bin, day at noon turned into night,
the stars appearing, and earthquakes as far as Bythyma, since it is apparent by
the motions of the Heavens and the calculations of Astronomy, there could be
none such then according to the course of nature, it must be this the ^ospel
speaks of. But beyond all this, it is registered here, that according as he had
foretold, he raised himself from death the Mat. ^8. Mar. 16. Luc. 29. John 24.
3d day; yea and many bodies of the Saints that had bin buried, long it may be
some of them, he raised with him. That notwithstanding all the art and
treachery of the Chief Priests to conceal it, yet that very day he appeared
Mar. 16. 9.
First to Mary Magdalen, Luc. 24. 5.
2dly the Women, 3dly V. 33.
Peter, 4thly to them that went to V. 13.
Emaus, last of all on that day to the eleven V. 36, 37, 41.
except Thomas, being seen and handled by and eating with them; 6thly eight
days after to the same eleven with John 20. 24
Thomas; 7thly at the sea of John 21.
Galilee appearing in a miracle of fishes; 8thly to all his Disciples and Mat.
28. 16. Mar. 15. 6
500 Brethren more in Galilee, then to James, 1 Cor. 15. 7.
then to all his Apostles, promising them the Luc. 24. 49. Acts 1. 4. 5.
Holy Ghost; and lastly all of them beholding he Acts 1. 9. Luc. 24. 5^.
ascended into Heaven, and ten days after as he promised sent the Acts 2. 6,
7, 8.
Holy Ghost upon them in the shape of fiery tongues, so as that they spoke all
Languages immediately, to the amazement of the Jews of every Nation under Heaven
to which they were scattered, that the Miracle might spread as far.

Now if all this be true, he that did these must have communication with a
power above all that we account the powers of Nature; such an one most
certainly as can perform whatsoever he in this book promises, inflict what e're
he threatens; such as is Divine. And since he wrought all these, on purpose to
evince he came commissioned from that Divine power, brought these Miracles as
seals of that commission, that we might believe him, therefore whatsoever he
delivers must be embraced by us, as we hope for those blessed rewards that he
proposes, and on pain of those eternal torments if we do not; of both which it
is not possible to doubt if these accounts be true.

2dly. Since the most and greatest of these must be don but once; he could not
be incarnated, and born, and live, and preach, and dye, and rise again, and go
to Heaven every day, of every age, in every place, to convince every man by his
own senses; to all those that did not see the matter of fact, therefore faith
of all these must be made by witnesses. And

3dly, If we can be sure the witnesses that do assert a fact understand it
exactly, if the things be palpable, and they must certainly know whether they
were really don or no; and if we can be sure too, that they are sincere, will
not affirm that which they do not know, and do not lie, their testimony of it
must be most infallible: because it is impossible such witnesses can be
deceived, or will deceive.

4thly. The witnesses in this case, the Apostles and the 70 Disciples (for I Will
name no more) must needs know most perfectly: for they not only saw the
Miracles, but were Luc. 1. 14.
instruments and parties in some of them; sent to cure diseases, cast out
Devils, and knew whether all this were in earnest. And most certainly they saw
(as all the Jews did too) Christ crucified, his heart pierced with a spear, and
his body buried; and whether they did see him risen, handle him, eat with him
they knew. And if they might mistake in his Ascension, yet the fiery tongues,
if such did light on them, they must needs see; and whether they themselves,
who spoke no Languages, could then speak Tongues, it cannot be but they must
know. In these there is no possibility they could err, unless they did it
wilfully: but then it is as impossible that they could do it wilfully, if they
were sincere and honest, such as would not lie.

Now that they were such, I might urge their simplicity and openness, without
disguise, not covering their own errors; men who seemed to live as well as
preach against all artifice, and to have no design on any thing but the
amendment and salvation of mankind. For he that can suppose it possible that
they were otherwise, men of art and finess, that they contrived the story, must
needs know; First, that such would not seal their falsehood with their blood;
design no recompense to all their travels but contemt, and hatred,
persecutions, prisons, whippings, wounds and death, to be the scum and the
offscouring of the world; lay out their lives against their conscience to
preach that Jesus, who did only call them out to be a 1 Cor. 4. 9.
spectacle to all the world, just such as Malefactors when exposed to fight
with, and to be devoured of wild beasts. Their sufferings are too known to stay
upon: St Paul's own catalogue of his for five whole verses 2 Cor. 11. is such,
that to sustain them only for this end, to put a cheat on mankind; count a so
laborious, vexed, torn, miserable life and an infamous death gain, so the fable
might be believed: to think they could do this, is sure as great a madness as
to do it. But yet I will suppose that possible; that those who wove the fable
pleased themselves so infinitely with the expectations of imposing on mankind,
as that those hopes could make misery and death it self look lovely to them. But

Then 2dly that all and every of them should be of that mind, that amongst so
many that bare witness of Christ's Miracles and resurrection not a man should
discover the cheat; that when their persecutors did with arts of torment as it
were examine them upon the rack, they should work not one single confession out
of them; that no ones courage should be broke, nor have a qualm so far as to
acknowledge how it was, disclose the plot, lay open the confederacy, the whole
mystery and the contrivance of it: When of twelve Disciples one was so false to
betray his Masters person at a vile rate, yet that all of them, and many more,
in a feigned story of his Miracles should be so true to one another, that no
engine of man's cruelty ever could screw out the sacret, not one should betray
the forgery and be a Judas where he ought to be: no not that Judas, whose
concern it was, whose treason to his Master had bin justified had he bin an
impostor: yet that he should stir no least suspicion of it, but should burst,
choakt with his grief because he had betrayed innocent blood: This, if he knew
it had all bin imposture, must be most stupendous.

But yet we will give them this too, that vainglorious hopes of drawing in the
world to follow them, might make all of them obstinate in secresy against all
attemts of cruelty; or if some weak brethren did perchance discover, we may not
have heard of it. But

For them 3dly to begin their preaching at Jerusalem is yet more strange. To
hope to draw men into a persuasion, and to bottom that persuasion upon
Miracles, and a Resurrection don amongst them there; where if discovery were
made it must be made, and where it could not but be made if there were fraud.
For to relate and write those works with every circumstance of persons, place,
and time, where they not only could examine every circumstance, but where they
rather then their lives would find them false, if nothing else would, this must
needs discover it. They preach them to the face of the whole multitude and of
the Pharisees, and tell them they were don before their eyes, sometimes 500 and
sometimes 5000 being by and the chief Priests and Pharisees and Doctors: so that
'twas most impossible they should not know if they were true or false, as sure
as there was never a Jew in all the Land, but knew whether there were a
darkness over all the land when Christ was crucified. Now if these were forged
to hope to draw Jews out of their Religion with apparent forgeries, which they
knew such, speaks these Apostles men so far from art to manage a design of
changing the Religion of the world, that they were mad beyond recovery and
president.

But let us give them that too. Yet it is certain 4thly that the Jews, if any
such were wrought on by them, must be much more stupid to believe them upon the
account of such things don in all the country, in their Cities, and the Temple,
before all the Nation, when they could not choose but know they were not don,
if they were not don, but were feigned all. For what ever might be motive to
Christ's Followers and his Apostles, with the certain danger of their lives to
forge the cheat, what possible temtation could there be so great to incline
Jews, the most stiffnecked people, the most stubborn in Religion in the world,
to embrace a faith which nothing but the Cross and shame and misery attended,
and which they must know false too? Had they so great lust to dye, as for that
to bid farewell to their Moses, their Religion and their Law? It is impossible
had they not known the truth of those things, that in waters of affliction, in
Jerusalem, ipsis persecutionum fontibus, in that Fountain, that springhead of
persecutions, as the Fathers call it, they would ever have bin baptized into
Christ.

Yet suddenly in one day at one sermon of St Peter we read near 3000 were
baptized Acts 2. at another strait 5000 Acts 4. and such beginnings, such sums
are required to make good what the Governor of Palestine (...) Suidas in voce
(...)
Tiberianus tells the Emperor, that he was not sufficient to put to death all
those that confessed themselves Christians. All which must needs have either bin,
convinced those things were true, or else as well against their conscience as
against the powers, thus embraced that faith and death together.

Neither was this a first surprise of Christianity, as it had seized men's minds
at unawares; for it went on conquering till the world came into it, receiving
the Religion with the loss of all that was dear to them in this world. For in
one age from Christ's death, what with the Apostles sermons, miracles, and
Whence Eusebius says l. 2. Eccl. hist. c. 14. they at Rome not thinking it
enough to have heard the Gospel once (...), not being contented with the
preaching of the heavenly doctrine while it was but an unwritten doctrine,
earnestly entreat St Mark, that he would leave in writing with them a monument
of that doctrine which had bin delivered to them by preaching. Nor did they
give over till they had prevailed; which when St Peter knew by revelation of
the H. G. (...) being extremly pleased with that desire and their earnestness
in it, He approved it, and appointed it to be read in their assembly.
writings also to confirm and keep men in the truth, and to conveigh it better
to posterity, and their Disciples after them, who went forth Eusebius. l. 3. c. 37.
delivering those writings, preaching on, and doing wonders also, very many
Nations are recorded by Historians as converted almost wholly. And the truth of
it is evident, since nothing but almost whole Nations, nor yet they but as
buoyed up by the wonders and the graces of Gods spirit, ever could be able to
endure, or be sufficient to employ the Swords, the Flames, the Lions, and the
other numberless tortures which the Jews and Nero and Domitian, and above all
Trajan in that first age raged with, till they made their Cities, villages and
provinces so desolate, that the Proconsul Pliny, being frighted with the
multitude of murdered Christians, did advise with him about relaxing his
edicts, as he himself l. 10. epist. 97.
assures us.

It was the same the next age, when the power of Miracles Just. Mart. dial cum
Tryph. Judaeo p. 247, 302, 311. Iren. l. 2. c. 56, 57.
yet lived, and those which Christ himself wrought were scarce all dead, (some
Excerpt. ex Quadrat. Apolog. ad Hadrianum apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 3.
lived till near that time, who rose up with him at his resurrection;) when
these Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 98.
books, (writ by the will of God to be the pillar and foundation of men's faith
in after ages, as says Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
Irenaeus in that age,) were also read in the assemblies weekly; when not only
those that did assemble were by Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Eccl. Smyrnens. apud
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15. Ecclesiarum Viennen. and Lugdun. comment. de passiene
Martyr. suorum apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1. and Niceph. l. 3. and 4.
Hadrian martyred, but they put men to their oaths, to find out whether they
were Christians, that they might massacre them.

And in the third it was the like, when Miracles they say were not Orig. contra
Cells. l. 2. p. 62. and p. 80. Tertul* Apol. c. 23.
yet ceast, yet sure the greatest was the constancy of Christians in adhering
to this book and patience in suffering for it. For they report the Niceph. l.
5. c. 29.
sands on the sea shore almost as easy to be numbered as the Martyrs of that
age; what by V. Eusebius. l. 6. and 7. fere integros de Sev. Spartian. and Tertul.
de Decio S. Cypr.
Valerian, Decius, Maximinus and Severus, but especially by Eusebius. l. 8. c. 2.
^. 6. Niceph. l. 7. c. 6. Eusebius. l. 8. ^. 11. etc. 9. Sulp. Sev. l. 2. Oros. l.
7. c. 25. Ignatii Patr. Antioch. literas apud Scalig. de emend. temp. l. 5. p.
496. Spond. ad annum 302. n. 4.
Dioclesian, who put so many men to death for not delivering up their Bibles to
be burnt, and refusing to Sacrifice to his Gods, as if he meant to have
depopulated the whole earth. And this is as notorious as that men do now
profess that they are Christians, and that these are holy Scriptures. Therefore
I shall need to go no further.

Now among so many myriads who on the account of all these Miracles (whatever
they were) suffered themselves to be converted to the faith of Christ, and then
as if they cared for nothing but Religion and their Bibles, for them bore the
loss of goods, and life it self, and engaged their posterity to do so also;
that not one of these should know whether indeed any such miracles were
wrought, if any were restored to life or no: (for if they knew, then they were
true:) and that among so numberless a crowd of teachers, who by assuming to
speak languages, raise the dead, work signs, drew in those Myriads to Religion
and the stake, and went before them, gave them an example both in faith and
death; that not one of all those should believe either the Miracles or himself
that did them: for if any one that did them did believe them, since he knew who
did them, they must needs be certain: but not one of them to know it, sure is
such a thing as neither could be don nor be imagined.

He therefore that requires strict evidence in things of faith which cannot
bear it, he that calls for Mathematical demonstration, nor will believe on
easier terms, yet is so credulous and so unwary, that he can believe so many
things which by the nature and the disposition of mankind I have demonstrated
not possible, which yet must be true, unless these Scriptures be from God: it is
plain he does not seek for certainty, but for a pretense of not believing;
would fain have his Infidelity and Atheism look more excusable, and is not fit
to be disputed with but to be exploded.

But if these Scriptures be from God, then whatsoever they affirm (with modesty
I may conclude) is true. And therefore when St Luke Acts 1. 1. declares his
former treatise contained all that Jesus began both to do and teach until the
day in which he was taken up: since Christ before he did ascend taught every
thing that was required to be believed and don in order to salvation, and more
too; therefore if his Gospel did contain all that he taught, and did, since it
did not contain all absolutely, it must needs mean it contained all that was
necessary, or it must mean nothing. And since the same St Luke in the beginning
of that Gospel does affirm he wrote it, Luke 1. 4.
that Theophilus might know the certainty of those things wherein he had bin
instructed; It Is plain he avers that the certain knowledge of all those things
wherein the having bin instructed made Theophilus a Christian, might be had out
of the Gospel: and when St Paul says here, that the Holy Scriptures are able to
make us wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus, and St John
in his 20 chap. v. 31. that tho he had not wrote all the things that Jesus did,
yet those that he had wrote were written, that we might believe that Jesus was
the Christ the son of God, and that believing we might have life through his
name; It Is evident the Scriptures say that what was written was sufficient to
work that belief which was sufficient to life and salvation, as far as the
credenda do concur to it. And when St Paul in that verse that succeeds my text,
in most express particular words sets down the usefulness of Scripture in each
several duty of a man of God, or Preacher of the Gospel, both for Doctrine of
faith, for reproof or correction of manners, and instruction unto
righteousness, and tells you Gods express end in inspiring it, and consequently
its ability when so inspired was, that the man of God might be made perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto every good work that belongs to his whole office; it is
most certain that what is sufficient for that office to instruct, reprove,
correct and teach in, must needs be sufficient to believe and practice in for
all men: i. e. what my text affirms, they are able to make us wise unto
salvation.

I might call in Tradition universal to bear witness to this truth for holy
Scriptures, if having once demonstrated that they are Gods word, when that does
affirm it, and bears witness to it, there were need of any other. And this I
dare boldly say, that if the Scripture did say as expressly, that the Pope had a
supremacy or sovereignty over the whole Church, or that he or the Roman Church
were infallible; their definition, or the living voice of their present Church,
a most sure rule of faith, as it does say Scripture is able to make us wise
unto salvation, those Articles would suffer no dispute, it would be blasphemy
or sacriledg to limit or explain them by distinctions, when those sayings of
the perfectness of Scriptures are forced to bear many. Then we should have no
complaints of the obscurity of those books; if those articles were either in
the Greek or Hebrew, they would never say the Bible were not fit to be a Rule
of Faith, because the Language were unknown to the unlearned, and they could
not be infallibly secure of the Translation; were they there they would account
them sure enough, who think them plain enough already there, and that we must
believe them because, Thou art Peter, Feed my sheep, and Tell the Church, are
there.

And for him that shall affirm, all necessaries that must make us wise unto
salvation are not in the Scripture, it is impossible to give a rational account
how it should come to pass that some are there, the rest are not.

It must be either on design, or else by chance. Now 1. That God should design,
when very many things that were not necessary were to be written, that the main
and fundamental ones should be omitted: and when of the necessaries most he did
design for Scripture, then He should not suffer the Apostles to write the
remainder of them: and yet what he would not suffer them to write, designed
that the Trent Fathers (who I hope have perfected the Catalogue) should write
all: of these since it is not possible to give a reason, it is not therefore
rational to affirm it was upon design. But

2. If he shall say it only happened so by chance, he does affront both
Scriptures and Gods Holy Spirit, who, as they affirm, inspired them for this
very end, to bring men to the faith and to salvation. But there is no place for
chance in those things that are don in order to an end, by the design, impulse
and motion of the infinite wisdom of Gods Holy Spirit. He certainly does most
unworthily reproach his Maker, who can think it possible, that what he did
design expressly and on that account alone to attain such an end by (namely
that men should believe and be saved) and inspire it for that purpose, should
yet fail, not be sufficient for that purpose. And sure if it be sufficient it
contains all necessaries, otherwise it were deficient in the main; yea so
clearly also, as that they, for whose salvation they are intended, may with use
of such methods, as are obvious and agreed upon by all men, understand them:
for otherwise they could not be sufficient: if men could not be instructed by
them in things necessary both to faith and life, they could not make them wise
unto salvation.

I must confess the Scripture labors under a great prejudice against this
doctrine, from the different sense and interpretations that are made of it,
even in the most fundamental points, by them that grant it is the word of God;
when yet all use the same means to find out the meaning, and no doubt they seek
sincerely after it. But yet I think it evident this happens not from the
obscurity of Scripture, since it is not only in the most express texts; but
also if you should suppose the doctrins were as plain set down there as words
can express them, yet there are such principles assumed into the faith of
different sects, as must oblige them to interpret diversely the same plain
words. I am not so vain as to imagine that no places are obscure in Scripture,
and I know that learned men have arts by obscure places to confound the
plainest, just as the Philosopher did motion. Neither am I so perverse and
singular not to think that universal practice and profession of the Church does
much assure and confirm explications of Scriptures, whether obscure or plain.
But this I say, that the diversities of explication come, as I now said, from
the diversity of principles or rather prejudices, and that this only is the
cause of it I thus demonstrate.

First in the Socinian, who interprets all those Scriptures, which the Catholic
world has still applied to the Divinity and satisfaction of Christ, that I
name no more points, otherwise then the Church did always; and I affirm he does
it, not because he thinks the words do favor his interpretation, but because
his principle requires it; namely this, To admit nothing into his faith but
what agrees with that which he counts reason, which in a Socinians faith is
judge of all points in the last resort. And I mean reason upon natural
principles, and thus I prove it. Socinus speaking of Christ's satisfaction,
says the word is not in Scripture, Ego quidem etiamsi non semel sed saepe id in
sacris moniment is scriptum extaret, non id circo tamen ita rem prorsus se
habere crederem. Socin. de Jesu Chr. Servatore part 3. c. 6. operum tom. 2. p.
204.
yet if it were there very often I would not believe it, because it does not
consist with right reason, that is, with the arguments that he had brought
against it drawn from human principles. And therefore he there adds; those
things which it is apparent cannot be, ( i. e. that appear such to him who
judges by the principles of natural reason, which yet cannot judge of
supernatural and infinite beings,) tho the Holy Scripture does expressly say
they are, yet must not be admitted; and idcirco sacra verba in alium sensum
quam ipsa sonant per inusitatos etiam tropos quandoque explicantur: and for
this reason we make use of even unusual tropes, strained figures to explain the
words of Holy writ to other senses then the words themselves import. And so he
therefore serves that great variety of words by which the Scripture does
express Christ's suffering for our sins, in our stead, as our sacrifice; against
the universal notions of those words, not only which the Church of Christ, but
which the Jews and which the heathen world had of them. And when his reason
told him that Christ could not be God one with his Father, that he was so far
from having any being from eternity, as that he was not at all, till he had a
being from the Blessed Virgin; Therefore when the Scripture says directly John
10. 30.
I and the Father are one, he must strain it to this meaning, are of one mind,
we agree in one: although St John avert that, by 1. John 5. 7. The Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. 8. The Spirit, and the
Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one.
distinguishing those two expressly. Yea worse, when to prove that Christ had a
being e're the world was made, we urge from the first Chap. to the Heb. 1. 10,
11, 12.
Hebr. what St Paul produces from the Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 27.
Psalms, and does apply to him most particularly. Thou Lord in the beginning
have laid the foundation of the earth and the Heavens are the works of thine
hands; they shall perish, but thou remainest, and they all shall wax old as
does a garment; and as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be
changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. They explain it
thus: that God by Christ will at last destroy these Heavens, and this Earth,
and change them, according to that saying in the Psalms; which although the
Apostle produce at length, as it stood there, both concerning the Creation and
destruction of the world, yet he intended only to apply this last to Christ.
And tho he say as well of the same Lord, Thou Lord in the beginning did lay
the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands, as,
thou shall change them; yet he meant no more but that this change God would
effect by Christ. It is not possible that the text can give any the least
countenance to this interpretation. The different explication of this Scripture
does not come from the obscurity of any words in it; for in the Psalm they and
we understand the same words in the same sense exactly: therefore that we
differ here, is not from any thing in the words quoted, but is wholly from the
Principle. And we may not wonder, for the plain sense will not suit with their
Hypothesis.

There are no other that are instanced in as differing from us in points of
faith but the Romanist. I know not whether they account those differences to be
in things necessary to salvation. The reasonableness of this supposition might
be demonstrated if there were any need of it.
If that be true that they allow (for what cause they know best,) some that are
reconciled to their Church to communicate with ours, that is, join in our
worship, and by doing so own the profession of our faith in distinction to that
of others, or at least espouse the scandal of the owning it; Then one would
think they must account that there is nothing in our worship don that is
unlawful, nor omitted that is necessary, nor any thing Heretical professed, at
least that there is no scandal in the owning that profession. For if there were,
they did allow them only to profess and act gross sin, which certainly they
would not do. So that poor Protestants when they are pleased to give leave may
be no Heretics, and therefore there is nothing of it self in that profession
faulty. But yet on the other side since we see they call us Heretics, and when
they have no power over us, damn us to Hell fires, and when they have had
power, damned us to the fire and faggot also; sure they think the differences to
be in things necessary. But yet the account is easy, how not the obscurity of
Scripture, but a Principle or prejudice does cause this. For we are bound in
conscience to grant they believe their own Principles. Now it is a Principle
with them, that their Church cannot err, and therefore that their present
faith and consequent depending practice was their faith and practice always.
That it may appear so, they must seek for countenance from Scripture: and if
any thing there seem to thwart their faith or practice, they must smooth and
disguise it, that it may look friendly. And it is most certain if the Scripture
should be never so express against them, whilst they think it is not possible
that they can err, they cannot think it possible Scripture can mean what it
pretends to speak. 'Twere easy to make instances. As first for invocation of
the Saints departed, which with them is a point of faith, L. 1. de Sanct.
Beatit. c. 17.
Bellar. and Cochleus produce that of the Psalms, I will lift up mine eyes unto
the hills from whence comes my help. Psalm 121. 1. and although the text directs
that looking up expressly to the Lord that made heaven and earth. v. 2. and tho
it be a Principle with them, that on those everlasting hills there were no
Saints in David's time that could be invocated, they were all in limbo then they
say; yet as I said, they would have countenance from Scripture, and for want of
better they are therefore forced to interpret those words, I will lift up mine
eyes unto the Hills, thus, I will invocate the Saints. Now will any say it is
the obscurity of this Scripture that does hinder Protestants from seeing the
bright evidence of this argument, and not rather that it is the weak foundation
of this practice that does make the Romanists seek to build it on those
mountains? So among those several texts which in the 2d Nicen general Council
are produced for adoration of the images of Christ and of the Saints, and are
expounded to evince it, none is plainer then that which I produced now from
Bellarmin. I shall give one or two examples from the Psalms: Psalm. 27. 8.
Thy face, Lord, will I seek: and, Psalm. 4. 6.
Lord, list thou up the light of thy countenance upon us: and again, Psalm. 45.
12.
the rich among the people shall entreat thy face: therefore David thought the
picture of Christ was to be adored. It is their own Council. tom. 18. p. 295.
conclusion from these texts, and they have no better for it. Yet they saw the
doctrine in these so apparently, as that with great opposition to great
Councils, and more bood-shed I think then yet ever any doctrine has bin settled
with, it was imposed. Yea more, the first experiment of the Popes power over
Sovereign Princes was on the account of this same doctrine: when for opposing
Image Worship Gregory the 26d excommunicated the Greek Emperor. Pope Sigon. de
regno Ital. ad annum 712. l. 3. p. 94.
Constantine for the same cause indeed had 14 years before don so to
Philippicus, but he did not go much further, whereas Gregory absolved the
Emperor's subjects in the Roman Duchy from their Allegiance; commanded them
not to pay him any tribute, nor in any wise obey him; whereupon they Sigon. de
regno Ital. ad annum 726. l. 3. p. 103.
killed their Governors, and Leonis imperium respuerunt, ac solenni sacramento
se Pontificis vitam siatumque in perpeluum defensuros, atque ejus in omnibus
rebus autoritati obtemperaturos jurarunt. Ita Roma Remanusque Ducatus a Graecis
ad Romanum Pontificem pervenit. Sigon de regno Ital. ad anmum 727. l. 3. p. 105.
swore obedience to the Pope. And this was the beginning of St Peter's
patrimony, and it was thus gotten by this doctrine, which they saw so clearly
in these Scriptures; when they cannot see the contrary in those plain words,
Thou shall not make to thy self any whether Graven image or idol it matters
not, since it follows, nor the likeness of any thing which is heaven above,
etc. nor in those where God takes care expressly that himself be not worshiped
by an image Deuteronomy. 4. 15. and then judge if it is obscurity or plainness that
makes them see or not see doctrines in the Scripture: rather if it be not
merely the necessity of prejudice. So again we differ in the meaning of the
14th chap. of the 1. of Cor. where we think St Paul asserts and argues, yea and
chides against all service in an unknown tongue in the public assemblies saying
all must be don there so as it may be 1 Cor. 1. 5. 12. 19. 26. 17.
understood, and to edification. But that which is performed there in an
unknown tongue does not V. 6. 14. 16. 17.
edify says he there: yet to justify this practice they must make it have a
different meaning, which no Fathers countenance, but which Basil. Mag. in reg.
brevier. interrog. 278. Tom. 2. p. 641. Theodor. and Oecumen. in locum etc. and
the Commentary under St Ambrose's name makes these who in the Church of Corinth
would use an unknowntongue in their sacred offices, (against whom St Paul
directs his speech, and takes occasion for that which he says in this chap.)
converted Hebrews; who would it should seem perform the service or at least
some parts of it in the Christian Assemblies, as they had bin don of old in the
Synagogues, in the Hebrew tongue, which the Corinthians understood nor, against
which St Paul disputes.
several expound as we do, yea and diverse of their own do so too, particularly
their Pope Conc. tom. 24. p. 287.
John 8th in his 247th Epistle writing expressly on that Subject. Once more, so
their half communion, that it may be reconciled with that express command Mat.
26. 27.
Drink ye all of it: and this do, obliges them to find another meaning: drink
ye all must be directed to them only as Apostles; and do this must signify
consecrate the Elements, although St Paul apply it most directly to the drinking,
and the drinking to his lay Corinthians. Nor dare they say in truth it means
the other, for 1 Cor. 11. 25.
St Paul when he does say do this, did not intend to make his Lay Corinthians
male and female all Yet the Council of Trent Sess. 22. c. 9. Can. 2. pronounces
Anathema to all those that shall say those words do this, quoting them also in
the margin out of this place 1 Cor. 11. did not constitute Priests, and ordain
that they should offer the body and blood of Christ. Edit. Col. Agrip. anno
1261.
priests, and give them power to consecrate. The words are plain, there is
nothing in the text obscure that makes us differ, but the practice had by
little and little grown upon them, till it became Universal, and so grew into
their faith: and then since they believe they cannot err, they must expound
Christ's words so as they may not contradict their practice; because that would
overthrow their Principle.

But the Church that builds upon no Principle but Gods word, can have no
temtation to pervert or strain it, since what ever does appear to be the
meaning of it, that their Principle must needs engage them to believe. And
therefore if it say This is my body, we believe it; if it says too after
consecration it is 1 Cor. 11. 27.
bread, we believe that also: and because it therefore says it is both, we so
believe it one that it may be the other: which since both say it is impossible
that it can be substantially, neither has God in express words told us which
it is substantially; therefore seeing when he calls it body, he is instituting
his Sacrament, there is all reason in the world he should mean Sacramentally;
since it is the most proper meaning: and by consequence it is bread
substantially, as all ways of judging in the world assure us. Here Is no stress
on Scripture, as there is no Principle to serve; when as the other makes us
differ, not in Scripture only, even where it is plainest; but tradition too. For
the most express and evident sayings of the primitive Fathers are on every head
of difference, as much the matter of contention as the texts of Scripture are;
as it were easy to demonstrate if that were my business. So that it is mere
deceit to lay our quarrels to defects in Gods word, and particularly to its
obscurity, which a man would think were evident enough from this that Children
knew it. The last thing I am to speak to.

And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

I cannot pass this, that it is St Chrysostomes observation, that Timothy was
nursed up in the Scriptures from his childhood. Yea and since his Father was an
Heathen, he must have bin taught them by his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother
Eunice, whose faith St Paul speaks of 2 Timothy 1. 5. Children therefore then, and
Women, and they sure are Laics, read the Bible. Yea and since they knew it,
they must read it in a language which they understood: and we know where that
is unlawful now. If we consider the first prohibition that appeared in that
Church with Synodical authority against such men's having any Bibles in their own
tongue, we shall find it was immediately upon the preaching of the Waldenses,
one of whose doctrines it was, Vsser. de Christ. Eccl. success. c. 6.. 17.
that the Scripture was the rule to judge of faith by: so that whatsoever was
not consonant to that must be refused. This they preached in France and over
Europe in the latter end of the c. 8.. 1.
twelf Century: and that Council which forbad their having of the Bible, we
find lately put forth by the friar Spicileg. tom. 2. p. 624.
D. Achery as held at Toulouse in the beginning of the 13th Century. It seems
they apprehended then their doctrines hardly would abide that touchstone: and
they therefore had no surer, more compendious way for its security then to
prevent such trial, taking care men should not know what was or what was not in
Scripture. And it is not possible for me to give account why in their
catechizing they leave out all that part of the commandments, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven image, etc. but this only, that they dare not let
the laity compare their doctrine and their practice with that Scripture. But
tho it is possible they might conceive some danger if the whole Scripture
should be exposed, yet in those portions which the Church it self chose out for
her own offices, the little Lessons, and Epistles, and Gospels, those sure one
would think were safe: no, not their Psalter, Breviary, nor their Hours of the
Blessed Virgin must they have translated in their own tongue; as that Cap. 4.
Council did determine. And truly when the Roman Missal was turned lately into
French, and had bin allowed to be so by the general Assembly of the Clergy in
the year Ordennance de Mess^eurs les Vicaires Generaux de Monseigneur
l'Eminentiss^me Cardinal de Retz Archevesque de Paris, which is in the 137th
page of the Extrait du Procez verbal de l'Assemblee general du Clerge de
France, tenue a Paris en l'annee 1660.
1650. and when it was don it had the usual approbation of the Doctors and some
Bishops, and then was printed at Paris with the license of the Vicars general
of their Archbishop. Yet another general Assembly of the Clergy the year 1660,
whereat there were p. 128. of that Extrait.
36 Bishops, upon pain of Ibid. p. 128. and p. 139.
excommunication forbid any one to read it, and condemn not only that present
traduction, but the thing in general as p. 130.
poisonous, in an Encyclical Epistle to all the Prelates of the Kingdom: and in
p. 141. les enfans de nostre mere ent pris les arms contre nous, ^ls la vont
attaquer ^usques dans la Sanctuaire, des Mysteres de son Espou^ pour les
prostituer.
another they say of him that did translate it, and the Vicars general that did
defend him in it, that by doing so they did take arms against the Church,
attaquing their own Mother (namely by that version) at the Altar, in that
sanctuary, that closet of her spouses mysteries to prostitute them: and in
Ibid. p. 132.
another Epistle they beseech his Holiness Pope Alexander 7th to damn it not in
France alone but the whole Church; which he then did by his p. 147. and the
same bull is printed in the Index of prohibited books set out by the command of
Alex. 7. at Rome 1664. p. 382.
Bull, for ever interdicting that or any other Version of that book, Missale
praefatum Gallico idiomate conscriptum vel in posterum alias quomodolibet
conscribendum and evulgandum perpetuo damnamus, reprobamus, and interdicimus,
ejusque impressioonem, lectionem and retentionem universis and singulis
utrinsque sexus Christi fidelibus, cujuscunque gradus, ordinis, conditionis
existant, sub poena excommunicationis latae sententiae ipso jure incurrendae
perpetuo prohibemus: mandantes quod statim quicunque illud habuerint, vel in
futurum quodcunque habebunt realiter and cum effectis exhibeant and tradant
locorum Ordinariis vel Inquisitoribus, qui nulla interposita mora, exemplaria
igne comburant, and comburi faciant.
forbidding all to read or keep it on severest pains; commanding any one that
had it to deliver it immediately to the Inquisitor or Ordinary that it might be
burnt forthwith. Now thus (whatever it be otherwise) the Mass is certainly a
sacrifice when it is made a burnt offering to appease his Holiness's
indignation: when that ver^ Memorial of Christ's passion again suffers, and
their sacred offices are martyred. To see the difference of times; 'twas
heretofore a Pagan Dioclesian, a strange prodigy of cruelty, who by his edict
did command all Christians to deliver up their Bibles or their bodies to be
burnt: 'Twas here his Holiness, Christ's Vicar, who by his Bull orders all to
give up theirs, that is, all of it that they will allow them, and their prayers
also, that they may be forthwith burnt, or themselves to be excommunicated,
that is, their souls to be devoted to eternal flames. And whereas then those
only that did give theirs up were excommunicate, all Christians shunned them as
they would the plague; and multitudes, whole regions rather gave themselves up
to the fire to preserve their Bibles: now those only that have none, or that
deliver up theirs, are the true obedient sons of that Church, and the thorough
Catholics. I know men plead great danger in that book: it is represented as the
source of monstrous doctrines and rebellions. I will not say these men are bold
that take upon them to be wiser then Almighty God, and to see dangers he
foresaw not, and to prevent them by such methods as thwart his appointments;
but I will say that those who talk thus certainly despise their hearers; as if
we knew not Heresies were hatched by those that understood the Bible
untranslated: and as if we never heard there were rebellions among them that
were forbid to read the Bible. For if there were a Covenant among them that had
it in their own tongue, so there was an Holy League amongst those men that were
denied it. While those that had the guidance of the subjects conscience were
themselves subject to a foreign power, as all Priests of that communion are.
How many Kings and Emperors have there bin that did keep the Scriptures from
their people, but yet could not keep their people from sedition, nor themselves
from ruin by it? In fine when God himself for his own people caused his
Scripture to be written in their own tongue, to be weekly read in public too,
and day and night in private by the people; and when the Apostles by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost indicted Scripture for the world, they did it in
the language that was then most vulgar to the world: what God and the Holy
Spirit thus appointed as the fittest means for the Salvation of the world, to
define not expedient, as the Holy Fathers of Trent did, looks like blasphemy
against God and the Holy Spirit. But blasphemies of this kind are not to be
wondr'd at from that kind of men, that call the Scripture a dumb ^igh. 3. de
hier. Eccl.
judge, Eccius.
a black Gospel, inken Divinity, Figh. de hier. l. 1. c. 2 fol. 8.
written not that they should be the rule of our faith and Religion, but that
they should be regulated by, submitted to our faith; Idem ^igh.
that the authority of the Church has given canonical authority to Scriptures,
and those the chief, which otherwise they had not, neither from themselves nor
from their authors; and, that if the Scriptures were not sustained by the
authority of the Church they would be of no more value then Aesops Vide Chemn.
examen de S. Can. p. 47.
fables. And lastly, Peers de tradit. par. assert. 3.
that the people are permitted to read the Bible was the invention of the Devil.

But to leave the controversy and speak to the advantages which may be had from
early institution in the Scripture; it is so evident that I need not observe how
it is for want of principles impressed and wrought into the mind in Childhood,
that our youth is so licentious. And it is not possible it can be otherwise,
when they have nothing to oppose to constitution, when it is growing, and to all
the temtations both of objects and example; no strict sense of duty planted in
them, no such notions as would make resistance to the risings of their
inclination, and seducements of ill company: and they therefore follow and
indulge to all of them. And in Gods name why do parents give their Children up
to God in their first infancy, deliver him so early a possession of them? as if
they would have Religion to take seizure on them strait, as if by their
baptizing them so soon, they meant to consecrate their whole lives to Gods
service, make them his as soon as they were theirs, as if they had bin given
them merely for Gods uses? And they therefore enter them into a vow of Religion
almost as soon as they have them: why all this? if accordingly they do not
season and prepare them as they shall grow capable. Why when they are but newly
born their children, do they take care they shall be regenerate and born again
Gods Children? if they do not furnish them with necessaries, educate them into
all the qualities and hopes that appertain to the condition of Gods children,
as well as they do to that of their own. That parent which not only, like some
delicate ones refuses her own breasts to her own infant, but provides no other
to sustain it; that does only wash her babe from it is first blood and
uncleanness to expose it the more handsome prey to wolves and tigers in the
desert, is more savage then those tigers: Lam. 4. 3.
even the sea monsters draw out the breasts, they give suck to their young
ones, says lamenting Jeremy, but he adds the daughter of my people is cruel
like the Ostrich in the wilderness, Job 39. 14.
which leaves her eggs in the earth, and forgets that the foot may crush
them, or that the wild beast may break them, she is hardened against her young
ones: such are they who when their children are so born again to God, yet as
they shall wax capable provide not that which St Peter calls the 1 Pet. 2. 2.
sincere milk of the word that they may grow thereby: but from their being
washed so in the laver of regeneration, take no more care, but expose them
forthwith to such lusts and conversations, as are much more wild and savage
then those beasts in the comparison; to which they cannot choose but be a prey.
They strive indeed, they say, to educate them into men betime, that is, make
them conversible and bold: and since for that they must engage them into
frequent company, where they see and hear men's follies, that I say no worse; by
that means they come to have their understandings stored with nothing but the
Modes, and sins of conversation; filled with froth and puddle; men betimes only
thus, as they have forwarded their inclinations to, and got an early
understanding and experience of, those vices, which one would think men only
could be equal for. But by this means the mind, that only part that makes us be
men, is not only not improved, but dwarft. They do not only still continue
children in their understanding as to any thing that is real and solid; but the
hopes of reason are destroyed in them, and its growth killed, by turning all
its nurishment to feed the beast part; and the Christian is quite starved.
There needs no other cause be given for the most part, why so many men have no
Religion, own being Liberti^es, and profess vice; for want of education they
have nothing in them that does check this, for they had no principles of a
Religion instil'd into them. And if at any time it comes to pass that they
think it is their interest to take upon them the profession of some Religion,
they therefore, since they have no Principles nor rules to judge by, are most
apt to choose to profess that Religion, which is like to be most gentle to the
courses they have steered, and are engaged in. Now that men hope to find such
an one, (whether by its constitution I shall not enquire but,) by its practice
is but too apparent. Accordingly when they go over to it, they carry with them,
and preserve in it the vices of their no Religion; and by consequence they went
not over seriously for Religion: and are therefore so much worse now then when
they owned no Religion, that they do their wickednesses with certainty of easy
absolution, and so hopes of salvation; and by this are likely to be made
twofold more children of Hell then before: and let them triumph in such
conquests. There Is nothing in the world that contributes so much to this as
men's being not acquainted early with, instructed in, those Divine rules and
obligations to piety and virtue, which this book the Bible does afford. If men
had bin seasoned first with the knowledge and the sense of duty, with the
comforts that are in it, with the apprehensions of great blessings that attend
it; and the mischiefs that are consequent, indeed essential to impiety and vice
here* and their minds were furnished with examples of both, which this book
abounds with; and their hearts too raised with expectations of far greater
blessedness in a life hereafter, and with the belief that both that blessedness
and life shall have no end: and were made sensible also of strange dreadful
torments that await the breach of duty, which shall also last for ever: if
these impressions I say, did prevent all other, and take up the mind, and had
in them the stamp and character of God, and so there were a reverence and awe
of him wrought in them, and they looked upon him as concerned in all this; how
it was his word that said it; and these sentiments were grown into the very
habit of their mind; as it would not be easy to corrupt or soften such, so
'twould be much more difficult to shake them, since their faith is founded on
the rock of ages. Besides the Holy Scriptures carry in them such an obligation
of adhering to them, and to them alone, since they are sufficient to make us
wise unto salvation, and are Gods word, that men would not be apt to exchange
them for Legends, pious forgeries, for things that can make good no certain
title from the Lord: for let them show an equal derivation of it, bring it down
through all the ages as we have don the Scripture's title to him. Otherwise it
justly may provoke Gods exclamation in the Prophet Jer. 2. 13.
Jeremy: Be astonished, O ye Heavens, and be horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate; says the Lord, for my people have committed two evils, they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken
cisterns that can hold no water: cisterns therefore that may leave them in a
state to want a drop of water, when their tongue shall be horribly tormented:
whereas he that drinks that living water which Christ gives, his John 4. 14.
compard with c. 6. 34.
word, shall never thirst, but it shall be a well of water in him springing up
to everlasting life.

A SERMON OF THE OBLIGATION OF BAPTISM.
Romans 6. 3. Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his death?
THE Ancient Severities of this season, by which men strove (as if they had
designed a fellowship with him in sufferings) to celebrate Christ's death in
mortifying Rigors and Austerities, at least to use the body of Sin as cruelly
as his was used: these, I say, were not only for the discipline of Penitents,
of Christians that had sinned against their solemn undertaking and profession,
so to actuate their Repentance and to mortify their lusts and inclinations, and
by that prepare them for an Absolution on Good Friday Eve: but they also were
much earlier employed upon the Catechumens, that were Candidates of
Christianity, as by which they did express their sorrow for, and detestation of
their former lives, and so prepared themselves for Baptism on Easter Eve: for
that was their most solemn time, as Tertullian does assure us in the 2d
Century, just when that death and passion into which they were baptized was
celebrated, De Baptismo cap. 19.
Diem Baptismo solenniorem Pascha praestat, cum and Passio Domini in qua
tinguimur odimpleta est* Ibid. de Poeuit. c. 6. praesertim.
And that they did prepare for it with watchings, fastings, weepings, and all
rigid mortifying discipline: and before him Justin M. And they had in the Vid.
Menard. not. ad Creg. S. p. 137. 138.
Greek Church their forty days for these severities: and a while too in the
Roman in Epist. 61. ad Pammach. c. 4.
St Hierom's time, and Pope Siric. ad Himer. Tarrac^n. c. 2.
Siricius it was so, but quickly sunk into this single weeks performances. But
in all those times they had their Tertull. de Poenit. c. 6. and de Bapt. vid.
Menard. p. 136.
scrutinies, their strict examinations to try whether their performances were
real and sincere. So nice and so severe a thing they thought it to become a
Christian. The man was to be mortified and die into the very name. But now, God
knows, as for the former discipline for Penitents one Church has lost it, and
the other has debaucht it into Pageantry, and taught it to countenance and
bolster men's continuance in Sin, and minister to vice. So for the other
discipline too, if that did import that Baptism has such engagements in it,
men in every Church live now as if they either never had been Christian'd, or
had never known, or had perfectly forgot the obligations of that Sacrament; the
thing which St Paul reproves here by his question, Know you not etc. And which
therefore it is impossible there can be a more proper time to call to your
Remembrance then this is, before you are to celebrate that death you were
baptized into. Now to inform such he disputes here very closely. The sum is
this: They that are dead to Sin cannot live any longer in it. Now as Christ's
Death was a death to Sin, for in that he died, he died unto Sin once v. 10. i.
e. there was an efficacy in that death of his to put an end to all the powers
of Sin: which being so, it was impossible he could dye more then once; but must
be alive always afterward to God. So in like manner whoever is baptized, he is
baptized into the likeness of that death v. 5. namely into a death to Sin;
inasmuch as by solemn profession and express undertaking he does die to it, for
he renounces it; and if he answer that his undertaking, does so really: and
really as Christ died once, so as to live always afterward to God; engaging
himself to keep Gods holy will and commandments and to walk in the same all the
days of his life. So that the words suggest these things to be discoursed of.
1. Christ's death was a death to Sin. 2ly They that are baptized are baptized
into that death, namely into a death to Sin. 3ly They that are baptized into
that death are to die as Christ did, i. e. to die to Sin once, so as to live
always afterward to God.

1. Christ's death was a death to Sin, i. e. there was an efficacy in Christ's
death to put an end to all the powers of Sin. And here I mean not that
extrinsic efficacy of his death, as it confirmed the Covenant of the Gospel,
whose rewards and punishments engage us against all those powers; nor as his
blood did also purchase grace whereby we are enabled to resist them, but the
direct influence of that death tends to destroy all the power that the Devil,
World, or Flesh had either to command us or condemn us. The Scripture tells us
that by Death he destroyed him that had the power of Death, i. e. the Devil
Heb. 2. 14. Christ tells us he has overcome the world for us John 16. 23. and
St Paul says by his Cross the World is crucified to us, and assures us that God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and a Sacrifice for Sin
condemned Sin in the flesh that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled
in us Romans 8. 3. Which place discovers how all was effected, namely as he was a
Sacrifice for Sin: and that not only as that Sacrifice did consecrate him to,
and install him in a power to pardon Sins upon Repentance, and so whomsoever by
virtue of that motive he took off from serving Sin, from them he took away the
guilt of it: but as that Sacrifice did take away the guilt of Sin from us by
bearing it in his own body on the tree, the direct consequence of which as to
its tendency and efficacy is, that we being dead to sin might live to
righteousness. And in both these manners 1 Pet. 2. 24.
by his stripes we are healed.

I do not mean to entertain you with the controversy that there is on the
account of these two Schemes, concerning the effects and uses of the death of
Christ. Only I cannot choose but wonder why it should be said to be unjust in
God to lay upon him the iniquity of us all: so as that he bore death as the
punishment due to sin by making satisfaction for us Sinners. For I would gladly
know to whom the wrong were don in this, that makes the injustice, and on whose
part it was unjust: not on his part that made the satisfaction sure. For
whether it be wrong to force an innocent person without his consent to suffer
for the guilty I shall not dispute. But here Christ gave himself for us Tit. 2.
14. and had power to do so John 10. 18. And having power to lay down his life,
and power to take it up again, if he had so much love and pity for lost
mankind, as to lay it down for three days to prevent their everlasting death
and misery; no justice certainly, nay no self-love forbids this. Much less was
there wrong don to them, for whom the satisfaction was made; unless eternal
redemtion and eternal blessedness purchased at such dear rates with such
infinite kindness be accounted injuries. Nor yet was it unjust in him that did
receive it: for none charge it upon that account. That death which all confess
Christ did justly submit to, God most justly might accept; since he could so
dispose it, as not only by it to work the Salvation of those whom it was
undertaken for, but also the advancement of his humane Nature, that did undergo
it, to the highest pitch of glory, to all power in heaven and earth Phil. 2. 9.
and withal thereby declare his own Righteousness Romans 3. 26. and work the honor
also of his other glorious attributes. And therefore if there had bin no
injustice (as they say) although Sin had bin pardoned without any Satisfaction;
much less could the receiving this be a wrong to him. Indeed it seems as if
there had bin no right don him by it, because he furnished all that makes the
satisfaction, and he could not receive it therefore, since he gave the value to
it. And it is most true in compensation of rights of real possessions, and such
as can be satisfied no otherwise then by that which we call restitution. As for
example in a debt, be I never so willing, it is impossible I can truly restore
or satisfy a debt in any part with what the creditor does furnish me to do it
with: for that is really his extinguishing and forgiving it, and not my
payment. But it is not so in compensation of the rights of estimation, or of
honor, which are satisfied by that which we call reparation. The man that had
brought up a false report of me, and lessened my just reputation and esteem,
but yet repents upon his death bed, and would fain repair my honor, sign a
recantation, but has nothing then to make it with, nor strength nor skill it
may be to subscribe it: tho I furnish paper pen and ink, write the form and
hold and guide his hand to sign it, and explain the marks too of the witnesses,
and publish it, which makes the very matter of the Satisfaction; yet he truly
satisfy's. The case here also was a case of honor; there was no restitution to
be made to God, from whom it was impossible we could take any thing, or make
him sustain any real loss: but we had don that which tended to his dishonor
infinitely. For when God had made man in his Image, righteous, and Lord of all
his creatures, built for immortality of happiness; and as in order to his
Government of the whole Universe he put rules into them to guide their
workings, so he gave man laws to direct him how to use the other creatures
regularly, and to steer himself in order to attaining his own ends of
blessedness: so least he should transgress those laws, and so disorder and
deprave himself, and the whole Government indeed, if there were neither check
nor fear upon him; he did therefore add a Sanction to his Laws, decreed death
the penalty of each transgression, and God knows that could not be but death
eternal; for it was not possible we could recover and rescue our selves out of
it if dead once. Now if notwithstanding men did slight this mound, and broke
out into all excess of licenses, so as to discompose and vitiate the order, the
whole frame of things, not only using other creatures to irregular ends, and so
abusing them, but themselves also, disturbing the whole kind; their vices
forced them to invade other men's proprieties and and liberty and life, and
consequently to expose their own; no one thing could be safe, their coffers,
and their beds, and their breasts too were broke into and thrown open, and
having broke the Government thus far, they also set up other Governors, framed
new Gods, and forgot him that made them, and gave all their service to those
forged usurping Deities, and worshiped them with villainy and vices; so far as
that they lost the very rules of virtue, and the principles of honesty were
quite debauched. Things being thus, it is impossible that any thing in the
world can be more reproachful to one then this is to God: for what can so much
tend to the disgrace of an Artificer, as that his workmanship should by no
means serve those ends, which it was made for; but the direct contrary to all:
designed to work the glory of their Maker, and their own Eternal happiness; and
instead of that they work out nothing but their own destruction and eternal
misery, and their Makers disservice: and what could more reproach the wisdom of
the Maker? Or what can so much tend to the dishonor of a Supreme Governor, as
to have his Authority slighted, his laws broken, trampled on, and for any
trifling, least occasion, as if it were don contemtuosly, his threatenings all
despised, his person libel'd, and before his face his homage, worship, Throne
given to the meanest, vilest of his creatures, to his basest Rebels? If God
suffer this and cannot help it, where is then his power? If he can, and will
not, where his holiness? how does it appear he is displeased at Sin, or does
indeed not like it? He is aware the Sinner cannot choose but make such Judgments
of him, for he told him long since, Psalm. 50. 21.
these things have thou don, and I kept silence, and thou thoughtest wickedly,
that I was such an one as thy self. At least as St Paul asks the wicked Jew,
through breaking the Law dishonorest thou God? For so it is: the name of God among
the Gentiles is blasphemed through you that pretend to his service, but live
wickedly, which makes them think your God is not a God that does require good
life. Now if he do not vindicate himself from these aspersions, and his laws
from violation, his authority from contemt, how is he just to himself? or how a
righteous Governor? It Is true he knows to vindicate himself, and make appear he
is an holy God, a righteous Governor; namely if he but execute his laws. But
then alas, mankind must perish for evermore, and so the whole design of the
creation, (which was made for man to serve God with it, and to praise him for
it, to be religious, and be happy,) had bin lost, and still the wisdom of the
Maker had bin questioned. Hereupon the Son, who is the wisdom of the Father, is
to take flesh, and be made man to teach virtue once more, and assure immortal
blessed recompenses to it, and then suffer death, the dire expresses of Gods
detestation and abhorrence of Sin, what ever he should think fit for
vindication of his laws and his authority, his righteousness and holiness; and
upon condition that he would receive to favor and to blessedness those that
sincerely would believe, repent of all their evil deeds, renounce them
heartily, and faithfully endeavor to obey him, he would fully satisfy for the
dishonor man had don him.

And truly when he bore the sharp inflictions of the wrath God had for Sin, as
certainly he did, for otherwise scarce any malefactor but did meet death with
more alacrity and courage. The two Thieves, that suffered with him, did not
entertain the apprehensions of it with such agonies, nor cry out so with the
pain of it, nor so soon sink under it. It was the sense of this which made his
blood run out in clots as it were flying from that sense: it was the
apprehensions of the guilt imputed to him, and the wrath which he knew was due
to it, and did apprehend must fall on him in such degrees and by such measures,
as might show how God detested Sin; it was this that did make him apprehend his
God, who was himself, was gone from him, since he left him so long lying under
it, as if he had not yet expressed that detestation full enough. Now if we
consider that it was the Son of God that did and suffered all this, we must see
more of Gods attributes exalted to a greater height of honor, then by mankind's
either suffering or performing what the Law required. We see his Justice
satiate it self in infinitely richer blood then man's, the blood of God: but we
see Mercy triumph against Judgment in that very blood. He could have shown his
detestation of Sin otherwise, even in the Sinners punishment, and so
demonstrated his holiness and justice; but it was impossible that he should
otherwise show mercy at these rates, by crucifying his Son who was himself,
that he might spare Sinners. Mere pardon had bin no such kindness, as to let us
see, that God would do all this and suffer so that he might pardon us. So that
mankind forgiven and in glory had not bin so great an evidence of his
compassion, nor in torments so great an evidence of his holiness and
detestation of iniquity. He had such compassion of us as inclined him to
deliver up his Son to torment, that he might show mercy to us; yet all that
compassion, tho his bowels yern'd so over us that he would shed his blood for
us, could not incline him to forgive Sin without such an instance of his
detestation of it; nor yet with it but to such as will forsake their Sins. For
how should he appear by those inflictions to detest Sin, if he should accept
the Sinner that amends not? give his pardons and rewards to one that will not
part with his iniquities? To such Christ's sufferings are the Copy of their
expectations; he does let them see how he detests, and will for ever plague Sin
unrepented of, who thus torments the imputation of it on the innocent the
blessed Son of God. So that Christ's sufferings not only are a perfect
vindication of the honor of Gods person, and his Government as to Sins
committed, but the most astonishing caution against committing them, that can
be imagined. With us the Law is satisfied by the offenders suffering, sometimes
in effigy, if we execute his picture, any thing that by the fright of the
example helps to guard the Law from being broken. But see here an example,
which to make, cost God the life of his own Son, which to make dreadful he
provided all the Agonies imaginable, to assure us, he that spared not his own
Son, will not spare the guilty: neither can the Sinner possibly be able to
endure that to Eternity, which his Son, the Son of God sunk under presently.
It Is not a satisfaction that will give us leave to enjoy our vices, and atone
for us; a price that will buy off the guilt of all our Sins, and let us have
them. The satisfaction of this infinite value looks at vindication of Gods
Honor, and his Laws, and serves the ends of Government, and assures the Sinner,
which amends not, that he must for ever perish. And thus this Sacrifice for Sin
condemned Sin to death by his own death. Which death, that we would imitate, we
did engage in Baptism: which brings me to the second thing, Whosoever are
baptized into Christ Jesus, are baptized into his death: (i. e.) that which the
efficacy of his death did work to, that by Baptism we did engage our selves to.
Now as to this.

1. Christ's death was, as we have now seen, undertaken for the death of Sin.
Now Baptism imports the undertaking the same thing; it being as Oecumenius upon
this place does say, a Baptism unto that death (...) etc. Because when we are
baptized, we do most solemnly profess and undertake to die to Sin, renounce the
Devil etc. and put upon our selves the strictest obligations in the world to do
this. That Baptism from its institution was administered with express
engagements to this in the very form of it, I could prove out of that office in
all ages that have any extant of it, in the rest out of express testimony of
See Just. M. p. 93.
Fathers through every one to the Apostles. Which so universal practice makes St
Hieroms, Primas. and others explication not seem strange, when they expound
that good profession Timothy professed before many witnesses 1 Timothy 6. 12. to be
that in Baptism. However it is sufficient evidence that St Peter, when he says
that the 1 Pet. 3. 21.
Baptism that saves us, is the (...), the whether question in Epist. 70, and 75.
St Cyprian, or the Answer in Tertullian; or indeed the stipulation (which is
both) of a good conscience toward God, does as much as say there was in
Baptism an obligation entered in that form of Law, that stipulation was, with
questions an answers to them. Vide Nicet. in Orat. 40m Greg. Nazian. Tom. 2. p.
1041. mihi.
For they were asked, and they did answer: Do thou renounce? I do renounce.
Do thou forsake? I do, etc. And he that at Sacrament says that he does this
with a good, sincere, and upright Conscience, has the Baptism that saves. But
the importance of the Rite may be best known from them that used it first, and
whence it was derived, even from the Jews: who when they did initiate a
Proselyte into their Covenant, did it with that Ceremony in this manner; when
any man desired to be of their Religion, and they had by several scrutinies
examined what the motives were of his conversion, what his aims; if they were
hopes of any thing of this world, they refused him; least his conversion should
die or change as quickly as his worldly hopes or desires. But if they saw all
reason to believe he was sincere, then they expounded to him all the
Commandments, laid before him the difficulty in keeping them: if this did not
affright him, they explained to him the mysteries of their faith, and the
Commandments again, together with the punishments that were allotted to
transgression, the Rewards to them that did observe them. After all which if
the man continued steadfast in his purpose, they circumcised him, sprinkling his
own blood on him as a ceremony to affright him into the Observance. And one
would think it were sufficient engagement to have signed his resolutions in his
blood, and sealed to them with Circumcision, as the Targum words it (...), and
carried the impression of his promise in his flesh to his life's end. But as if
Baptism had obligation beyond that (and it has most certainly with those that
are baptized into the death of Christ; for there the blood of sprinkling is
Christ's blood, the blood of God:) but with them also: after they had don this
to the man, he was no sooner cured of the wound of his circumcision, but they
put him (having by him three Witnesses) into the water, and as he was there in
it, read to him once again all the Commandments, and if he did profess his
resolutions still to keep them, they baptized him, and he was admitted thus
into their Covenant, the Conditions, and the Hopes of it. And by Baptism they
did admit the children also, if the three Magistrates of the place would
undertake for them, they should be brought up in the Jews Religion. And this
lets us see it is the assuming to keep Gods Commandments, to give over sinning,
to die to that, and to live to righteousness, to all holiness and virtue. And
with what strength of obligation this was understood to be performed by the
Ancients, we may perceive in that, as if there either really were, or at least
analogically, whatsoever gives solemnity or force in Law to an engagement, so
as that it may become inviolable; that they word this with. They seem to think
it was an oath; Tertullian calls the Answers Verba Sacramenti. So they might
call a vow made with hands lift up, as that was. Nicet. in Greg. Naz. Orat. 40.
n. 57. p. 1087. Tom. 2.
They were to do it before many Witnesses for more assurance, in the face of
the whole Church. Yea that profession too was registered in the Church records
always: and De Symb. ad Catech. l. 4. c. 1. Tom 9. page 1030.
St Austin says it was in heaven too, Deo and Angelis ejus conscribentibus
dixisti, Renuncio. And tho there were not really in fact, what De Antiqu. Bapt.
Ritibus l. 2. c. 27.
Vicecomes dreamed, a signing and sealing this their compact with Almighty God
meant, when Catech. 1. Mystagog.
Cyril says (...), and in De Pudicit. c. 9. p. 725.
Tertullians ring Signaculo lavacri -- quo fidei pactionem interrogatus
obsignat: yet the mere allusion does assure us, they intended to convince us,
that as in Covenants amongst men, when there is no one Ceremony wanting of all
the formalities and ties of Law to make a compact sure and not to be rescinded
or avoided, then performance of Conditions only will serve turn, and is
necessary; so this Sacrament puts all the same necessities upon the baptized.
And it is no wonder therefore if the same De Poenit. c. 6.
Tertullian word that men are intinctione alligati, tied from Sin by it. Nay
more St Paul says, we are held from it by the bonds of Death, for here he says,
we are baptized into Death to Sin, as if he did suppose us no more able to have
any motion to it, then a carcass has; yea shut up sequestered from the practice
of it as it were in the grave, buried with Christ, or as Christ was in that
Death.

It Is plain this Scripture does suppose a baptized person dead to Sin, as truly
as they are supposed dead, who are buried: for the Ceremony represents a burial
upon that account, and signifies the bonds or obligations, that by Baptism are
put upon a Christian to restrain him from Sin, are in moral speaking of like
force as those bonds and swaths, in which they wind up dead men, grave-cloaths
that do bind them hand and foot in natural speaking, are of, to restrain from
motion; and a Christian, that has burst all these engagements, and walks in
the way of Sinners, that courts pleasures, and embraces lusts, pursues the
world, or runs to the excess of riots, is a great prodigy in manners, as a
corpse that had broke his coffin, thrust away his gravestone, and that lapt up
in his winding sheet should yet come and converse, and practice all the offices
of life, would be a prodigy in nature. And therefore it is not strange, if our
Apostle press hard and suppose that they never do again return to live to Sin,
to which they were already dead and buried with Christ, (for they that are
baptized into the death of Christ, are:) they were so to die as Christ, that
is, to die to Sin once, so as to live always afterward to God, having engaged
to keep Gods holy will and commandments, and to walk in the same all the days
of their life: the 3d thing that I was to speak to,

That Baptism does bind us so to die to Sin, as that we never live to it again,
i. e. be given up to it, so that it come to have dominion of us, and that we
obey it in fulfilling of its lusts, and go on in a known deliberate habit, in a
course of its repeated acts, is the thing my text is brought to prove: for in
the verse before he says, We that are dead to Sin, (...), How shall we yet
again live to it? That cannot be: for they that are baptized, are baptized into
the death of Christ, a death like his, who in that he died to Sin, died but
once, v. 10. but ever afterward he lives to God, and cannot die again: So also
reckon ye your selves to be dead to Sin, v. 11. He therefore that is truly
dead to Sin, must be so dead as that he cannot live to it, for then there would
be a necessity that he should die to it again, which can no more be, it should
seem, by the importances of Baptism, then that Christ can die again. We read
indeed of those that crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, Heb. 6. 6.
but he dies not for them again, there remains no more sacrifice for sin; which
words being said of those who being once by Baptism enlightened fall away, and
do not persevere to their lives end, makes it look fearfully, as if it were
meant of every one, that after having undertaken this in earnest does relapse
to Sin so far, as that it lives in him, and reigns over him again. In the race
that is set before us he that runs with all his might and heart may stumble and
fall, but it is impossible that he can wilfully turn back again, walk contrary
in full cariere. Our Savior seems to state the question perfectly John 13. v.
8, 9, 10. where he tells St Peter and the rest of the Apostles, that they that
were washed, were clean wholly, save their feet, need only have them afterward
washed; but they had so much need of that, otherwise they had no part in him.
The Traveller that had cleans'd himself, and had preserved his body carefully
from all defilements, let him do his best, his journey yet must needs foul his
feet, and therefore 'twas the custom always there to wash them. So in your
Pilgrimage here, those that have by Baptism bin cleans'd (for so the Author in
St Cyprian expounds it, and Tertullian from this verse proves the Apostles had
bin baptized) and according to the vow there made renounced sincerely, rid
themselves of all the gross unclean habitual courses of their life, yet their
conversing with this Earth will certainly contract such sullages, that if that
which is typ'd and meant here by my washing of your feet, be not don to them,
however they have bin baptized into me, they can have no part in me, no benefit
from me. All of you, my Apostles, must be cleans'd from your ambitions, your
contentious pride, which puts you upon frequent strifes which of you shall be
greatest, Math. 20. etc. Some of you from the fury of your passion and
revengeful heats, that would needs call for fire from heaven, Luke 9. 54. Peter
in one night (some think in this that he was washed) did also find there was
occasion that his arrogant presumtion of his own strength, how tho all should
be offended, he would not; but would die for his Master Math. 26. 33. should be
washed away: his negligence and carelessness in duty also, watching not even in
temtation, when he saw his Master by him in an Agony, v. 40: his wrath so great
as that it made him draw his sword and wound without authority: and beyond all,
that evil temper of his mind, that made him thrice deny his Master, Savior,
God, for fear of danger; all these must be washed away. In fine, whatever
passions or affections to ill things, or single acts that do surprise men in
their course, all these, tho only he that washed us in his own blood, can wash
away and cleanse us from; yet these evidently may be in the (...), in the
baptized: but continuance, life, dominion cannot, he supposes. If these be,
the washing of the feet does not cleanse these, and there is no other
after-washing: for he that is washed must not need, save to have his feet washed.
So that he that is washed, however carefully he walk, he will contract some dust
and some foul spots it may be, but he will not roll himself, nor wallow in the
mire. At least Christ seems to think they would not; he would not imagine men
would live in constant opposition to such obligations of eternal consequence,
and of their own assuming; and after they had tied themselves with their own
vows, yet live most dissolutely, letting loose themselves to all the things
they had so solemnly abjured: indeed pursuing them as if the vow were on the
other side, as if they had renounced Religion and the God of it, and by their
actions did all they could to exorcize and conjure out of them the holy Spirit
and the whole Trinity, into whose possession they were given in their Baptism:
As if indeed their bodies were sprinkled to those purposes the Heathens bodies
were in the Solemnities of the infernal Gods; to consecrate and devote them to
those foul Fiends, and their fouler deeds. And where it is not thus, yet those
divine engagements are not half so sacred with them as the promises of their
debaucht converses, or the assignations of their folly: they break them without
any least reluctance in sport, in the intemperances of their mirth they drown
them; and with the least puff of scoffing or blaspheming breath blow of all
those necessities this Sacrament does put upon them; and however St Paul call
it death and burial, their Sin lives and conquers all Gods obligations to
piety, and triumphs over vows and oaths, and murders resurrection to new life.
I must confess I know not what it is, but it is plain now adays few men seem to
consider there is such a binding sacredness in Baptism, such things they
believe were promised in their names when they were Infants by their Sureties,
who, they think, may be concerned to mind them that they take good courses: but
sure this cannot be interpreted their own act so formally as to expose them to
such dismal guilts, as breach of vows and perjury, with all aggravations
possible, when e're they fail. They cannot think it the same thing as in the
Christians of the first ages, who had first perfect conviction of the
everlasting miserable state of Sinners, and that out of that there was no
refuge but in Christianity, which not only offered to relieve, but make them
blessed to Eternity, upon which assurance they repented, wept, and begged to be
admitted into it, and took upon them all the Rules of it with all obligations
to keep them; and this out of perfect understanding and deliberate choice, full
resolution. Such was the case of the first Christians, but theirs does not look
so sacredly.

Indeed if any do believe they can come off from all as from engagements put
upon them under age, that those vows were but promises made for them in
minority, and will not hold against them: then they might do well to be
ingenuous and plead this, to renounce the renunciations that were made for
them, cancel and disown all. So we read the men of Congo (when their land was
first discovered by the Portuguez) were easily persuaded into Christianity, and
baptized in great abundance; but when they found it did require some
strictnesses, they had no mind to bear, that they must leave their Heathen
practices, particularly their multitude of women, they came back to the Church,
renounced what they had don, and returned back to their indulgent Heathenism.
For why, they knew not how to reconcile the Christian vow with living in the
open breach of it, they were too honest for such practices. Now such an
obligation is most certainly Essential to Baptism in what age soever it is
administered. For that being the rite of entering the new Covenant, and a
Covenant being a mutual contract, something agreed on and contracted for on
both the parties that do covenant, of which that Sacrament is the Seal, it is
impossible, but from the nature of the thing it must oblige them that receive
it to the performance of all that the Covenant does require on their part. And
this obligation was still entered even when Infants were admitted in the way of
vow or solemn promise. It Is not Epist. 23. ad Bonifacium.
St Austins age alone which calls that custom ancient: but Tertullian in the
second Century assures us, Infants promised by Sureties; and we saw the
children of the Jewish Proselytes had undertakers. And evidently See Deuteronomy. 29.
v. 10, 11.
by Gods own prescription children entered Covenant with him; for they were
circumcised at eight days old, and that is called so Genesis 17. 14. and that by
that rite they did undertake to keep their whole Law, is most certain: for St
Paul assures us 5. Gal. v. 3. I testify to every man that is circumcised, that
he makes himself a debtor to do the whole Law. So here the rite has that
importance; the Sureties do but answer what it stands for, and if the infant
does not understand the vow at present, so he is not to perform it for the
present, it is an obligation in relation to future life, then he will
understand it, when he is to keep it. After the leisures of Nature, when the
Age of temtation and knowledge are come, then it will be of force upon him when
it is of use to him; but it is entered at the present.

And that none may think its being made for them by others in their name, and
their consent not had, lessens the engagement, give me leave to call to your
remembrance 2ly, how that was made up and supplied with all solemnity of
obligation possible in Confirmation. For as from the beginning upon those that
were baptized when they were of Age, the Apostles, and then afterward their
Successors, by solemn laying on of hands and praying did invite, call down the
H. Ghost, who hovered there over the laver of Regeneration to hatch the new
creature, as he once moved on the face of the waters to warm them into the
first creation; that so his strengths and graces might be added to their vows:
so when infants were baptized, this was deferred for this end, as our Church
declares, that when they come to years of discretion, and have learnt what was
promised for them in Baptism, they may themselves, with their own mouth and
with their own consent, openly before the Church, ratify and confirm the same,
and also promise, that by the grace of God they will evermore endeavor
themselves faithfully to observe and keep them; which they do there upon their
knees: whereupon that grace is prayed for for them, and they blessed by those,
whom God has appointed to bless in his name; that so they who just then are
grown able to be taught all the debaucheries of youth, warmed into the desires
and the strengths of vice, might have not only this check of their own vows
fresh upon them, but the effusions of the H. Spirit, those living Rivers in the
inwards, as St John expresses, that may quench and wash away those unclean
heats.

3. To express more the inviolable Sacredness of those obligations, which in
Baptism were entered, and to let us see they were baptized into the Death of
Christ, from the first times, they did immediately make them, that were
baptized, partakers of the Symbols of that Death. For from that Sacrament they
proceeded directly to the other, the Lord's Supper: of those that were baptized
after they were of age we can derive that practice quite from 2d Apol. page 47.
Justin Martyr; which being don so universally to them, no question gave
occasion to the doing it to Infants after Baptism, and then they found a text
for it, and made that universal also. But tho that be justly changed, yet after
Confirmation we proceed to that; and often we repeat the use of it: now that we
renew in the Lord's Supper what we did engage in Baptism, when we entered the
new Covenant, is evident. Christ calls the cup there in St Luke the new
Covenant in his blood, and in St Mark, this is my blood (...), that blood of
the new Covenant. The words relate to those Exodus 24. 8. where it is also said
this is the blood of the Covenant; for God dd seal his Covenants still with
blood. Whereupon neither was the first Covenant dedicated without blood. Heb.
9. 18. that was its Sanction. Now the Sanction of a Covenant is some Rite,
which being celebrated in the name of those that covenant, does oblige them to
stand to, not to rescind the agreement; which that Rite was contrived to do
(supposing that the most effectual way) by imprecating mischief on the person
that did break it. The usual way was either killing of a beast, the blood of
which they poured out, or in some Nations drank, or else they did dissect and
tear the victime and either swear over, or pass through between the parts; by one
of these significative Ceremonies implying a severe commination, So be it don
to him that breaks this vow. And all these the Heathen, who are full of the
Examples, seem to have derived from Gods own practice, who appointed Abraham to
do so, when he went to make a Covenant with him Genesis 15. and his meaning in
such Rites he has reveled by Jer. 34. 18, 19. the men that have transgressed
my Covenant, even the Princes, Priests, and all the People that have past
between the parts of the Calf (...), I will make those men that Calf, or as
that Calf, which they did cut in twain, and pass between the parts thereof, i.
e. I will divide and separate them among the Nations. For the wishes of all
this that Ceremony did import. But more expressly there in Exodus 24. 6. And
Moses took the half of the blood and put it in the Basins, for the Peoples
part, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the Altar, as on Gods part, and
then he took the book of the Covenant, v. 7. and read it in the audience of the
People. Now that Book, especially in the four foregoing chapters said on Gods
part what he required of them and what he would do for them: and the People
said on their part, All that the Lord has said we will do, and be obedient, v.
7. Upon which undertaking on both sides Moses took the blood and sprinkled both
the book and all the people, Heb. 9. 19. saying, this is the blood of the
Covenant, which the Lord has made with you concerning these words i. e. thus
both parts of you oblige your selves in figure to make good your Articles, In
shedding this blood on the Book the Lords indenture, he, for whom it is
impossible to fail his word, yet condescends to use this rite, by which those
men that covenant devote their own blood to be shed, if they should fail: and
in its sprinkling on you all, you also wish, if you perform not your part,
which you promised, that your own be so poured out. This is shed as your type,
and it is your giving earnest that your own is forfeit, when you fail in your
Conditions. For that these wishes were implied all in that Ceremony, and not
only at the first sealing of the Covenant, but mere Repetition of it, when
'twas only read again before and to them and their children, Moses tells them;
All you are here this day (...) to pass, alluding to divided Sacrifices, to
pass, I say, into the Covenant (...) and into the execratory oath, into the
imprecations which are signified in those divided Sacrifices and that
Bloodshedding, the Sanctions of that Covenant.

Now what that Blood and those divided Sacrifices were to that Covenant, that
Christ sacrificed, his body broken and his blood shed was to ours: and is
therefore called, Heb. c. 10. the Blood of the Covenant ((...), with which it
was ratified and hallowed) God no more engaged in faint types, in the blood of
goats and calves, but in the blood of God, with that he ratified, hallowed the
new Covenant. And when our Savior calls the Sacramental cup the new Covenant in
his blood, and the blood of the new Covenant, it must have the like importance,
the broken bread must be as the divided Sacrifice; the wine poured out, the
Covenant Blood: by taking which we much more properly may be said to pass into
the Covenant, and into the oath and curses of it, then the Jews were said by
Moses to do so at the mere Repetition of theirs, or indeed at the first making.
For that blood was not sprinkled on us as theirs was, but drunk in; we thus by
our own act and deed devoting our selves to those curses if we fail, yea taking
earnest of them into us.

The sum is this: Our Saviors words of this cup being the very same with those
in Exodus, demonstrate that this Sacrament is a renewing of our Gospel Covenant
with Sacrifice. The doing that is the assuming to endeavor to observe all the
conditions of that Covenant with a most solemn vow or oath, and under curses;
the tenor of those curses is, Let that light on me if I fail, which was
inflicted on the federal Sacrifice. Now that Sacrifice was Christ himself, the
ceremony of it was his body torn and his blood poured out, in a word, all those
bitter agonies which we there commemorate, and which that Sacrament does
represent. It signifies therefore that we there renew our vow of Baptism,
assume faithful Evangelical Obedience to all the Gospel does require: which if
we do not faithfully endeavor, and where we transgress repent, but fail
wilfully, we wish that all the agonies of Christ may be our portion. This is
the Tenor of those our performances.

And now consider, I beseech you in the fear of God, with what strange
multiplied arts of managery Almighty God pursued you through all the stages of
your life to seize on you, and scare you, that you might not be a prey to vice
and to the Devil. How in your first Infancy he took early possession, and in
the soft tenderness of that age (a temper the most capable of impression) set
his seal upon you, marked you for his own, that so the first thing you should
come to understand might be, that you already were engaged to him and to his
service, not only Sanctitatis designati in Tertullian, designed and set apart
for, consecrate to holiness; but in a solemn vow of it, sworn to Religion and
the keeping of Gods Commandments. So that the sense of these great obligations
might prevent not only any first essays of vice, but even the first
inclinations of the appetite or body. We know whose fault it is, if children be
not seasoned in this manner. Now when by means of careful education pious
principles have taken up their yet untainted understandings, when their minds
are stored with images of good things, and their apprehensions wrought into an
awe of God and reverence for Religion, and to an abhorrency of vice; least
constitution ripening, curiosity inciting, edging it, example drawing in,
encouraging, and conversation pushing forwards, Youth that is not settled
steady, has not firmness nor experience, might yield to, at least not break
the first assaults, which for the most part are the most impetuous: that age
was called upon to come, and solemnly upon their knees before the Congregation
to renew their vows. Which could not but refresh the sense of all their
obligations, and make new and strong impressions of their great concern of
fearing God and being cautious of all Sin, and more and more excite and actuate
their care in the performances of dutiful obedience. And truly besides those
assistances and blessings we might hopefully expect to reap in that rite from
the prayers and benedictions of Gods Officers of blessing; besides this, at
that time when the mind had not bin yet defloured, the mere shame of violating
what we had so publicly, so holily resolved and sworn, must needs be a strong
curb to rein us in from evil. Our heart would have failed us, if we had
attemted any; for our very blushes must have called away the blood from thence
to rise against the thing we had so solemnly renounced and bid defiance to. Yet
more to strengthen us we were thenceforwards yearly called upon at frequent
solemn seasons to renew all in a more engaging Ceremony, in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, where with deliberated preparation in the most tremendous
Symbols we again made oath, Plin. Epist. ad Trajan.
that we would not deceive, wrong, or oppress any, bear false witness, kill,
commit adultery, or steal, or covet: and all this with the most astonishing
circumstances possible, doing it in the blood of Christ that was shed for Sin,
as it were showing to our selves the cursed consequences of it, how it tore his
body, spilt his blood, and could have no less expiation: so to make it look
more dreadful to us. And having don so, taking in those pledges of that
expiation into us, as it were expressing we received them on those terms we had
resolved there; and no otherwise expected that they should be salutary to us,
then as we endeavored to observe them. And to do thus has bin our constant
practice, and this I must suppose we are designing now, preparing for, and the
more to affect our own selves with a real intimate sense of all this, that
Passion of our Savior must be represented to us; Christ crucified before our
eyes. We consecrate a day to show our selves that infinite indignation God
Almighty has to Sin, which could not express it self in softer easier ways,
then in the Agonies and bloody sweat, the Cross and Passion of the Son of God:
and show our selves that infinite love of his to Sinners, that inclined him to
do all this for, accept it in the stead of those that faithfully would cleave
to him and leave their sins: and to give more pungency to all this, that it may
touch livelier and pierce deeper, we intend to entertain the celebration with
the humbling and afflicting of our own souls; and all this to actuate, give
life and vigor to the resolutions that we are to take upon it. For while our
hearts will be yet wreaking with the apprehensions, we intend in that blood to
renew again our vows, and this we do from year to year, and mean to do now. Now
sure we think we are in earnest when we do thus: we do not tie these sacred
bonds upon our selves, as Samson did teach Dalilah to do on him, only to try
our own strengths on them, and to serve us to break through. And therefore in Gods
name that we would now begin to try in earnest whether we could keep them, and
that whosoever vows thus would first set himself against that Sin, which
constitution or his custom makes his sorest enemy, that if he chance to come
near an occasion of it, he consider, I have deeply sworn against thee, I have
made a Covenant with my God and with my eyes, and with my ears, and bound them
from pursuing their careers over the invitations, that have hitherto crept in
at them, and betrayed me; and whenever a temtation does come toward thee,
bethink thy self, that it is the Devils harbinger, and that he himself is not
far off, but is there laying trains for thee, and however kind his address be,
he has a dagger at thy heart, and a chain at thy feet, which he is then come
from below to get thee into out of all thy vows; and a dungeon in Hell for
thee. Do not therefore treat with it, but call up all thy resolution and thy
oaths; for otherwise thou do betray thy self, and it is plain thou have no
mind to keep them, that thou did not take them with that meaning. And truly
any one would think so, that considered but men's vows and conversations: how
they first vow cleanness in the Laver, which the Holy Ghost did hallow, and
then make their whole lives to be but wallowing in uncleanness, and make that
filthy, which that vow had cleansed. And then they swear amendment at the
Altar, dip those oaths in blood to make them solemn; and strait mind and
contrive nothing else but how to vomit up those Oaths and that Blood. They seem
before a Sacrament to have some sorrow, or at least some thoughtfulness about
their Sins; but yet not resolving perfectly to part with them, they bring them
with them to that Sacrament, set them at Christ's table, as it were to feed on
that body which they crucified, make them imbrue their hands in that blood
which they shed. And this is the return they make to that blood shed for them.
They bring them and their vows against them both together to the Altar, and
they leave their vows there, but they take their Sins back with them, and serve
them still. Now does eternal ruin look so lovely to us, as that we will break
through all oaths to get at it? Is It worth the while to be at once false to God
and our own blessedness? Do vows so straiten us, that we cannot endure the
obligations to be happy? In Gods name be at last more true to your own Souls:
consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding.

A SERMON OF THE PREROGATIVE OF MERCY, in being the best SACRIFICE.
Matthew. 9. 13. Go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice.
THE words are part of a reply of our Saviors to a cavilling question of the
Scribes and Pharisees, who seeing him converse familiarly, accept the
friendship of an invitation, sit and eat with open noted Sinners, and (which
was as bad a name amongst them) Publicans, ask his Disciples why they and their
Master do what they know was forbidden and unlawful? To whom having answered,
that he did converse with them only in order to their cure, (now a Physician,
that goes to visit his sick Patients, is not therefore blamed for going to them
because they are sick,) he further justifies himself by an account of Gods own
mind and dealing set down in the Scripture, of whose meaning, if they had not
taken notice hitherto, he bids them now go learn it. For God tells them by his
Prophet Hosea, that he prefers acts of mercy, doing good to others, before any
Ceremonies of his Worship, tho himself ordained them, whether Sacrifices or
whatever others. For I will, says he, have mercy and not sacrifice. Therefore
Christ did but comply with Gods own will, when he accepted of an invitation
from such sinners, merely to have the better opportunity to invite them to
repentance and to heaven; and in doing so did but prefer the acts of highest
mercy in the world, the doing everlasting blessed good to souls, before
obedience to such ritual precepts, as forbad converse with the unclean and
sinful.

I need not here observe, that the negation is but comparative, and means, I
will not have Sacrifice, but Mercy rather, yea I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice, where I cannot have both; or that by Sacrifice also is meant all
Ceremonies of Gods Worship, although instituted by himself, and those not taken by
themselves and merely external Acts and void of the inward zeal and devotion
that should spirit them, but taken in their best states; yet God will have
works of Mercy rather. And that doctrine is, it seems, worth learning and
attending to: for so in the text there is besides the proposition it self I
will have mercy and not sacrifice, also the insinuation of its usefulness in
those words, go and learn what that means.

I shall not break these into other parts, but raise some Propositions for the
subjects of my discourse. And

First since God compares two sorts of things here in the text, and says he
will have, or is pleased with one and not the other, which other yet it is plain
that he was pleased with and would have, for he commanded them; it is evident he
does imply, that as these, called here Sacrifices, were grateful to him, as
they were obedience to his precepts; so the other therefore, which he does
prefer to those, they must be good and acceptable to him in themselves, not
only as they are commanded. Some actions therefore have an intrinsic honesty,
are of themselves, in their own nature morally good and well-pleasing to God,
as some also are the contrary.

2dly Of all that are so in that manner good, those of Mercy are in an especial
manner such, I will have mercy.

3dly Of all acts of mercy those are best and most well-pleasing in Gods sight,
which are employed in reducing Sinners from their evil ways: those were such
our Savior is here pleading for. And

4thly It Is only the opportunity and the design and hope of doing good to
Sinners by reforming them, that can make familiar converse with them excusable
and lawful: I mean, where no duty of a relation does oblige to it. Christ
himself had no other plea to justify his eating with them, but that he intended
it as a mercy to them, as his opportunity to call them to repentance, All these
we see flow naturally from the words.

First, some actions have an intrinsic honesty, are of themselves, in their own
nature morally good and well-pleasing to God, as some are the contrary. When I
say they have an intrinsic honesty and are in nature good, I mean the rule of
them is intrinsic and essential to the agent, is indeed his nature, and by
consequence their goodness is as universal and eternal as that nature. Now it
is a doctrine that has had Advocates as ancient as the great Carneades and the
Sect of the Pyrrhonians, that in nature antecedent to all laws and
constitutions there is no rule of unjust or just, good or evil, honest or
dishonest; and that nothing of it self is one or other, but as our concerns or
interests do make it to our selves, to prosecute which is the only inclination
and the only rule that nature gives us: or else, as the public interests
incline superior powers to prescribe them, whom it is our interest also to
obey. Accordingly we find ^this saying in Thucydides, that to them that are in
power (...), nothing is unreasonable that is useful. And the Athenians being
stronger tell the Melii, that by rules of human reason things are just in that
degree that they are necessary. And then as necessities and interests do chance
to vary, good and just must change into their contrary; and as different
countries and persons cannot but have opposite rules and mesures of necessity
and usefulness, so they must of just and honest: thus the laws of Virtue serve,
like Almanacks, but for such a latitude, and a different elevation of the Pole
quite alters them, and makes them good for nothing. A pleasant sort of good and
honest this, which any wall or dike, that divides Provinces or Countries, can
give boundaries, lines, and rules to, so as that it shall be virtue and right
on one side, vice and error on the other: as if those principles of good and
evil, which seem planted in us, and the world calls natural, were nothing else
but prejudices taken in from early conversation; as dogs learn (they say) the
skill of chase. And it were great pity, if this age, which so much needs the
patronage of such a principle to give countenance to their licentious
practices, had not also found out some, that reestablish and plead for this.
But I shall not give you or my self the trouble to advert to them, but shall
only briefly lay the grounds of the contrary truth, which is so plainly set
down here in the text: for if God himself tho he had constituted both the acts
of Mercy and the acts of Worship, so that whatsoever goodness law or
constitution (tho divine) could give, both had, if yet he shall prefer, and
will have one much, rather then the other, it is because there is some
difference in the things themselves. For he that sees and judges as things are,
if he shall judge one better, then it is so, and that by some rule antecedent
to that judgment, that is, from the nature of the thing it self, which is the
reason why he judges of them diversely, and constitutes, and wills them
differently. So that God supposes, that there are some actions of themselves,
and in their own nature morally good; neither is it hard to prove it. And tho,
if we but viewed man's nature in it self, whether made by God or chance and
atoms it matters not, we should see sufficient grounds to count his actions
laudable or blameworthy, as being morally good or bad, according as they are
directed by, or deviate from that rule: yet in my first proposal of the thing,
I shall make bold to take in God as the contriver of man's nature, and all
other. Now when the great Creator of the Universe had made it up of infinite
variety of beings in an excellent order, it is most certain that He being a most
wise agent made each being for some end, which it was to attain, unless it were
made in vain: but ends are not attainable but by operations suited and
proportioned to those ends. The operations of a simple element will not reach
the ends of life, or sense, or reason; as in artificial things we cannot use a
ball to cut, or Coulander to carry water in, and therefore as it is the
business of each art to take care, that their tools and all their productions
be wrought so, that their very make may fit them to work out these uses they
are made for: so in Nature, Gods art, it was therefore necessary he should
frame each several being so, as that the nature of it should be as it were a
rule to it, to regulate the manner and the measures of its workings, that so
they might tend orderly and constantly toward those ends, which he designed
their operations to work out, and in their courses might comport with one
another motions; and by doing so contribute to the ends and uses of the whole.
For if the nature of each being were not such a principle, causing some to move
in one way, some another, fitting this for one use, that for others: or if in
their motions, or their other actings they should deviate from the rule of
nature, they could neither be said to be those beings, neither would they make
a world, but Chaos, routing always and confounding one another. But while they
do observe that rule, act and are moved according to their nature, and by doing
so fulfill their uses, and work out the ends of their creation. So we see they
are the preservation of the world, and consequently they must needs be truly,
what God saw they were, when He had made them all, very good. Those of them
indeed that are determined by their nature to one course, which they can
neither err from, nor discern that they observe, not morally good; because
there is no place for virtue, since there is none for choice in such
determinations. But then there is a creature that has faculties to understand
and choose, and which has principles impressed upon him, that enable him for
apprehension, judgment, and discourse of reason, and by consequence who is
only able, as to understand himself, so also to find out the nature and the
uses of the rest, and therefore who alone is capable and fit to be the Lord of
them, and was made so, and has therefore ends above the ends of all the rest;
whose nature also, as the others were, (there being the same reason of them
all) was a law to it self, to regulate his actings, even all his apprehensions,
judgings, reasonings, and his choices. Now if he also do not turn aside from
the line of direction, which his being does incline him unto, in pursuance of
the aims of a nature that is rational and was made for society, his actings
must be good, that is, fit for the uses, which he was designed for, and it is
not possible that they can fail his Makers ends, and consequently must be well
pleasing to his great and wise and good Artificer, since so they justify the
goodness of the workmanship. But yet if he neglect and violate the laws of his
own being, and as he corrupts himself, so also being Lord of other creatures,
if he employ them not to their own uses, but abuse them, make them serve
irregular and vitiated purposes, this maladministration cannot but renverse
the state of things. Thus acting he not only puts himself by those ends he was
made for; but defeats God of his aims in the creation of the rest, by putting
them to uses that despite him merely, stand in perfect opposition to his
wisdom, holiness, and goodness, all his attributes, and work out nothing but
disorder and destruction, and by consequence are bad and most displeasing to
their Maker, and since these (as the other good ones were) are don discernedly
and with deliberation and choice, they are therefore morally so. So that
actions of men in themselves, and by the rules of nature, may be morally good
and well pleasing in Gods sight, or the contrary.

Yea which will follow from the premises, and which I only touched before, although
there were no law of a superior being, which required that man should live
conformable to his own nature, and to those impressions and notices, which in
his making have bin stamped upon him, to direct and regulate his actings, yet
his very nature, howsoever made or happening, being such a rule to all his works,
would have the reason of a law to him: for as with them that grant such a
Superior and Creator, that very supreme being, tho he be Almighty, can do all
things, yet there are such things, that it is impossible for him to do, they are
so bad, and all his actions are most infinitely good, not by reason of a
conformity to the precepts or prohibitions of a law; for none such can be set
to God, but merely as they are conformable to the most infinite perfection of
his nature. So abstracting from all law of a superior being, and considering
man in his own nature as a rational sociable creature, and relating to the
place and station he fills in the Universe, his actions would be good or bad by
disagreeing or conformity to that; and he that acts in opposition to it, is as
mischeivous, yea as unnatural a thing as if one of the Elements of the world,
or any chief ingredient of its making, should have changed its operations, and
by consequence not be it self, but the disorder and the pest of all the other.
We seem indeed astonished seeing heavy bodies to put off their nature and
ascend, and we rack principles to find out causes: when the vicious man, that
acts daily against his reason, is the same constant prodigy: the man, that
pours down streams of intemperance, until they mount into the throne of reason
and quench the little spark that is seated there, is as unnatural a thing as a
stream climbing up a wall, and every Sinner is as much a monster as a stone
falling upwards, does as much against his nature, reason; is indeed a greater
monster. For when those other things do leave their nature, it is either from
some violence in the efficient; if water mount, it is by the force of engine or
some other pressure, or, as some say, from violent impulses of a final cause:
it is for the preservation of the whole community of natures; for if it be to
avoid vacuities, it is so, and it does against its own inclination, only for
the strong concern there is for the benefit of the Universe: but the wicked
man, that lives against the dictates of right reason, his own nature, is urged
to it by no violences but those of wilfulness, is pusht on by no engine but a
naughty heart, nor has he any higher ends that make impulse upon him, but he
is only passionate for unworthy ruin, violent for an unreasonable destruction.

The Heathens were so sensible of Natures obligation in man to live virtuously
according to reason, that they called the doing so (...), as if there had bin
an engagement to it in his very constitution and being: and his principles and
frame did promise for him he should live so: and therefore Lib. 2. c. 9.
Arrian upon Epict, tells a man that did a thing injuriously or with passion
and impetuosity, or but without consideration, or to gratify his lower
appetites, (...), thou have destroyed the man in thee in having not kept
nature's word, but broke the promise, which thy very being made for thee. As if
man's nature undertook as solemnly he would be virtuous, as the fire's nature
does assure that it will burn.

But we who profess also to believe, that God made man in his own image,
consequently must needs grant, that so far as he impressed on him the likeness of
that nature, whose perfections, as they are most infinite and immutable, so
they are a necessary and unchangeable rule of goodness to those beings that are
transcripts of his being, so far therefore he has planted in us rules of good,
which since they are derived from our supreme Lord and Creator, must have the
force of law to us, and are that which the Scripture calls the Law written in
our hearts, whose dictates (howsoever slightly vain men think of virtue, that
it is but an emty name, or at the best but politic contrivance without any real
grounds in nature) have yet their causes as eternal, are themselves as
immutable, not only as man's nature, but as Gods, of which man's is the draught
and image, and are justly called participations of those form of goodness that
are in God, of which they are the prints; and amongst them none more lively
then the rule of Mercy, the thing that God does prefer here, when he sais, I
will have Mercy and not Sacrifice. Whence we observed, that amongst all those
actions, which have an intrinsic honesty, and are of their own nature in
themselves morally good, and well-pleasing to God, those of Mercy are in an
especial manner such; the second thing I was to speak to, for I will, says he,
have Mercy.

The word here (...) signifies benignity, and by it is meant all love and
kindness, the exercise of the habit of mind, that disposes a man to do all the
good he can to every man, in what condition soever. Now to prove that human
nature has implanted in it principles of universal kindness, and propensions
to have friendship to, have pity on, do good to one another, I shall not urge
what Acts 17. 26.
St Paul says, that God made of one blood all the nations of the earth, tho
certainly in that one kindred there be an obligation to the dear affections of
near relatives. But if all would grant that one blood, it would, I fear,
prevail not much, for now adays nearness of kindred is not apt to make close
friendships and concerns for one another, if an interest chance to interpose:
however one blood, when it is divided so and scattered, has not force to warm
and spirit strong affections or to cement much.

But this I will take confidence to urge, that in the latitude of creatures
none is born with so much need of mercy, as a man: none wants so many helps to
be brought forth, none leaves the parent, that did bear it and should nourish
it, in so weak and helpless a condition, (I speak as to the generality,) it is
merely others pity and assistance that they live: and then if mercy, others
help be the most pressing and the first necessity of humane nature, the return
of mercy, pitying and helping others is the first and the most pressing
obligation on that nature. To go forward; as this state of infancy demonstrates
nature did intend him for society, since without that it is not only most
impossible that he can be that rational creature, ever can exert the faculties
of speech and the discourse of reason, which yet it is plain nature has fitted
him for; but also most impossible that he can be brought up to be so, when he
is so, it is society alone that still preserves him, and it is only mutual good
offices that preserve society. Nam quo alio tuti sumus quam quod mutuis juvamur
officiis, says Seneca l. 4. de Benef. c. 18. and man's life subsists, is
furnished and rose only by commerce of kindnesses, by helping one another: take
him single, and what is he but the prey of any beast almost? vilissimus and
facillimus sanguis, the cheapest blood and easiest to be spilt. Those creatures
that are born in deserts, and born for them, are all armed, but nature gave no
strength to man besides the kindness and assistances of other men; take away
them, by which alone it does subsist, and the whole kind must perish. But so
far you labor to take them away, as you believe not to be good, kind, merciful,
and assisting is not a thing of it self ill and unnatural, which it must needs
be; and the contrary most natural, when as nature has provided only that, as
instrument of its security and preservation. So far is the accursed principle
of self interest and of man's just right to do what e're he lists to others,
howsoever mischeivous it be, if he conceive the doing of it useful to himself,
from being any principle of nature, that the first voice of nature teaches us
the direct contrary. And whosoever he be that is, I will not say unjust to
others, but not kind, friendly, and apt to do good to them; he that has regard
for only self, and mesures all by his own inclinations and interests, is such
a thing, if nature only judge of him, as ought to have bin exposed when he was
born, and to have no pity showed him, when in tears and in his blood he cried
for it; he should be still abstained and separated from, as one whom Nature her
self excommunicates, as one who is no part of human society, but the proper
native and inhabitant of the desert. But he that is unrighteous, who by worng
whether of violence or fraud or but of debt makes his own satisfactions, that
to serve his uses and occasions dares take, or but detain from others what is
due to them, and supports his pomp and plenty with that, which of right ought
to cloth and feed others; and so eats the bread and drinks the tears, and, may
be, blood of Creditors; he that is so unmerciful as to be thus cruel, tho
Almighty God were silent, even Nature would her self prosecute such a person
with her outcries, as we do fire, when it is broke out and rages, for he is all
one; fire also spreads and seises all it can come near, whether man's or Gods
house, to make fuel for it self and to increase its blaze: so that the other
should be looked upon with the same dreads and abhorrency, for he is the same
disorder in the frame of Nature, and in this the voice of Nature is the voice
of God, which is our other medium to discover what is natural. Now since we
have declared, that natural virtue is in man the imitation of God, is as it
were the workings off of those forms of goodness that are in him, and the lines
and rules of it are but the lineaments of his perfection, (...) will be easy to
evince, that the rule for mercy is a most important law of Nature, since the
practice of it is so natural to God himself. Now to prove this, passing by all
other methods of probation, I shall content my self with that one declaration
of himself he made, when he proclaimed himself Exodus 34. 6, 7.
the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity
transgression and sin, and that will by no means utterly cut off the guilty,
(so I understand it out of Jer. 46. 28.) will not make a full end, a clear
riddance of them, when I visit. God seems here to have taken flesh in his
expressions e're he was incarnate, that he might have words to phrase his
goodness in: and he had bowels of mercy before he was made man, and yet all
this, he says, are but the back parts of his goodness Exodus 33. v. ult. but that
of it which we meet with in his dealings with the Sons of men, as we see it a
posteriori, and in its effects here: but the face and glory of it was so bright
and dazeling, that he tells his friend there Moses, that 'twas not possible for
him to see it and live. Yet now St Paul says, God has given us the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Indeed there was Divinity of mercy, and more too; humanity was taken in, that
God Almighty might be able to bestow more then himself, and all that he might
show compassion on us men. It seems, O Lord, thou will have Mercy, yea and
Sacrifice too. If thou require such an offering, as the Sacrifice of thine own
blood and of thine own Son, that thou might have mercy on us; and then let
men dispute, that vindicative justice is essential to God, that sin and its
punishment are annexed by as unchangable necessity as Gods Attributes are to his
being, and that by the express exigence of his nature he no less necessarily
executes it, then the fire burns: we may well be content it should be so, when
this strict necessity, if such there were, did but make way for, was
subservient to the ends of infinite Mercy, and by that demonstrates, that
benignity, compassion and forgiveness are much more the inclinations of his
nature, and if he intended man in any thing his image, sure he did in mercy;
therefore does our Savior charge us, be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is
merciful, who as he had no other reason to create the world, so it is most
certain, that he had no other reason to redeem it. That Economy was intended
as the means of mercy to poor Sinners in reducing them, which is the Mercy my
third observation speaks of, which was this; that of all acts of Mercy those
are best and most well-pleasing in Gods sight, which are emploi'd in the
conversion of Sinners: that was such, for which our Savior is here pleading,
when he says, I will have Mercy.

But here I mean not such conversions as they are emploi'd about, who compass
sea and land, not so much to convert men from the evil of their ways, to the
true real practice of Christianity, as to convert them to their Church: to
which men would not go so fast, but that by the debauch of all good Christian
discipline, there are such easy absolutions to be had, tho men be not converted
from their evil ways; for it is impossible to find a Church or a Religion in
the world, which men may sin so hopefully and comfortably in, as that of Rome,
as it now stands. But these busy Agitators of conversion, besides that they
convert not men to Catholic Christianity, but to a name, and indeed faction,
have made Catholic a word of party: if they should multiply, we should soon
find, they would have Sacrifice, not Mercy. I do not mean their Host, that
Sacrificium incruentum, bloody Sacrifices, we know, are a main part of their
doctrine and their practice, who have used to turn whole Nations into shambles
for their Church's sake, and make bonfires with burnt-offerings of their fellow
Christians. But waving these Conversions, those the proposition speaks of, are
such, as reduce Sinners from their evil doings, to the universal faithful
practice of all virtue and all piety.

Now of all acts of Mercy, that those, which endeavor this, are best, Nature
herself would judge: since they do aim at reinstating man, the crown of all her
workmanship, in the integrity and rectitude of Nature, which is his own true
perfect state, and is therefore the most proper and best for him, as relating
to that state. But God, who beyond that designed to make man, who had fallen from
his own nature, to partake of the Divine Nature, as St Peter says 2. Pet. 1.
4. and in order to it called us to glory and virtue, v. 3. cannot but account
that kindness, which endeavors the recovery of Sinners from corruption and
misery, to the state of virtue, and so on to glory, and to be partakers of his
Nature, as a kindness that is in great degree Divine. And certainly, if acts of
Mercy be, as we have seen, so well pleasing to God, it is certain, that the acts
of greatest Mercy must be most well-pleasing; and it is as certain, that those
Mercies are the greatest, which relieve from greatest miseries, and invest with
highest blessedness: but the eternal happy preparations for the Penitent, and
the as infinite and immortal torments, that await the Sinner, transcend all
comparison with other things. Both of them indeed were proposed in Mercy, Hell
it self was threatened merely in compassion, to affright our passage, and to
make our entry inaccessible. It Is true it must be executed on the final
impenitent, that God may be true; he is engaged in his veracity to inflict it,
and yet he scarce knows how to do it, or to punish: How shall I give thee up, O
Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, O Israel? My heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11. 8. Since thou will not do it, not
turn, not repent, sure I must, for how shall I give thee up? Yea he does it
till that he be weary with repenting Jer. 15. 6. till he be in passion, so as
that with oaths he does expostulate Ezech. 33. 11.
as I live, says the Lord, I would not the death of the wicked, -- turn ye,
turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die: yea more he sent his Son out
of his bosom to prevent it. Would you know the value of that kindness, that
endeavors to reform such Sinners, it was worth the Incarnation of the Son of
God, the Word was made flesh purposely to call such to repentance: so my text
says, I came to call Sinners to repentance. But to call them to it, Lord! out
of thine own mouth we will challenge more from thee; for thou did answer to
this very same reproach of being a guest to one that was a Sinner, The Son of
man came to seek and to save that which is lost Luke 19. 10. not to call only,
but to seek; and how, he shows you in the Parable, chap. 15. v. 4, 5. What man
of you having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, does not leave the
ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he
find it? and when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders rejoicing.

The Sinner he has straid into by paths, gone away from the Shepherd of his
soul, is a lost sheep; but yet when he is gone his farthest, is in mazes, knows
not which way to betake himself, then this good Shepherd does not only call,
invite to a return, or (as the Father in the Parable) run to meet him in his
coming back, but goes himself to seek him, seems to mind the recovery of each
single one that is lost, and contributes as carefully to his return, as if that
one were all his charge, and the whole flock not dearer to him then that sheep,
he leaves the ninety and nine to seek that one, and he seeks till he finds it,
and then lays it on his shoulders: the wandering sheep it seems had strai'd
till it was weary, and had tired it self with running from its Shepherd, so as
that it neither could come nor be driven home; but that too is provided for,
for therefore he is carried: that none, how far soever he has gone away, may
yet despair of coming back. This sheep had wandered to so great a distance, and
to so much weariness, that he was fain to be born back, when he was found. Yea
and the burden was most acceptable, for he laid it on his shoulders rejoicing:
assure thy self he will refuse no burden for thy sake, who was willing to bear
the Cross for thee; be but contented to be found by him, and he will carry thee
with gladness, and the joy will spread it self to Heaven also, v. 7. There is
joy in heaven over one Sinner, that repents. The kindness, that effects this,
is worth a triumph in Gods presence among all, God, Angels; it is worth a
passion of the Son of God, it is fit to make a joy in Heaven, and fit to make
the Lord of Heaven descend to earth, and to the grave for it. Nor yet content
with having don all this himself, he gave his Spirit to ordain and qualify a
state of men to agitate this only work to the worlds end. For says 2 Cor. 5:
20.
St Paul, we are Ambassadors for Christ, as tho God did beseech you by us; we
pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

I know not whether the Ambassadors are likely to prevail, in what the Son
himself has failed; and whether Gods beseeching us will do that, which his
dying for us has not yet bin able to effect; or whether they that come with
the same Ambassy, have not reason to expect the same unkind reception: for it
is no wonder, if that Message, which did cause Christ to be crucified and his
Heralds martyred, which was so unwelcome, that they shed the blood of entire.
Nations almost to extinguish it, and laid wast whole Regions to extirpate it,
should not now be any whit more grateful: for without all doubt men love their
vices now as well as ever, and indeed it is hard to love the men, that come to
tear their bosom inclinations from their heart, whose words are corrosives and
caustics, lances, sawes, and whatsoever other instruments, that serve to
mortify and to cut off; men that design to sower all their satisfactions they
have in the world, by throwing in the thoughts of present guilt and after
torments, whom if they believe not, they must needs despise, and hate them for
assuming so to check and censure, lay such black dooms on their actions; if
they do believe them, they must needs be tortured by them, feel convulsions,
wracks within at their discourses, and by consequence cannot much affect them.
It Is hard not to be enemies to them, who, tho they say they come to treat a
reconciliation, are Ambassadors of war, and whose commission it is Isaiah 58. 1.
to cry aloud, not spare, but lift up their voice like a trumpet to proclaim
defiance, sound a charge against them, and to show the people their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. Now to be told of faults, to
have ones bosom ripped up, and the guilt displayed, was hardly ever acceptable;
good counsel, admonitions and reproofs never have bin welcome, and then how
should they be so, whose office it is to bring them, and who are, as the Wise
Man says, Ordained to reproving. But it is as unhappy sure, as it is
unreasonable to dislike the greatest kindnesses for being such; if mercy shall
be thought to merit hate, because it is the highest mercy, what then shall
oblige? The poor man does not scorn the garment that is sent to cloth his
nakedness, or the food that is bestowed upon his croaking, clinging bowels, tho
the very alms betoken and discover the necessity, he has yet no malice to his
Benefactor therefore: but the perishing naked soul thinks, he that labors to
relieve her wants, upbraids her with them, and the invitations therefore to the
Supper of the Lamb, the offers of the wedding garment, of the robe of
Immortality provoke her. Men allow the Physician yet to tell them of those
maladies, that have guilt in them, and receive prescriptions from him of such
methods of severity and discipline, as few would go through to Heaven, and all
this endears the man: but he that shall attemt an application to the vice,
which is the cause of all this, to remove which is the only possible way to
secure from relapses, and the certain way to health and life eternal, he is
judged a mortal enemy, as if there were nothing in the world so dear to men as
their sins are, no kindnesses, but what are showed to those, are grateful; that
were true love that would see them, let them perish everlastingly, and not
speak to them to direct them; as if all benefaction to the soul were injury,
and the mercies, that have in them Heaven and Eternity, were mere defiances.

But how irksom however such conversations are, as by admonitions, or whatever
other methods aim at the recovery of Sinners, they are the only conversations
with them that can be justified. For, which is the fourth and last thing that I
am to speak to,

It Is only the opportunity and the design and hope of doing good to Sinners,
by reforming them, that can make familiar converse with them excusable and
lawful; I mean where the duty of a Relation does not oblige to it.

And first, I will not give my self the trouble to find out a law of God among
the Jews forbidding to converse at all with Heathens, and by consequence with
open Sinners, which might give occasion to this question of the Pharisees,
since St Peter tells Cornelius Acts 10. 28. Ye know, that it is an unlawful
thing for a man, that is a Jew, to keep company, or come unto one of an other
Nation: and our Savior, when he would prescribe the distance, which his
censures were to make men keep, from any refractory Sinner, words it, let him
be unto thee as an Heathen or a Publican, as supposing they were not to company
with those; and in the Text he also reckons the observance of that distance
from all Sinners as a duty, calls it Sacrifice, and justifies his doing
otherwise by this plea only, that he came to them to call them to repentance.
But if a command be called for, we have several, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Now I have
written to you, not to company, if any man, that is called a brother, i. e.
professes himself a Christian, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater,
or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one no not to eat,
and the like: 2 Thessalonians. c. 3. v. 14. If any man obey not our word, note that
man, and have no company with him; adding v. 15. Yet count him not as an enemy,
but admonish him as a brother. The Converse is therefore lawful only, as an
opportunity of admonition. For

Secondly, if it be lawful otherwise, I might ask, for whom? not for the
Clergyman most certainly, whose calling it is to admonish, and he is false and
treacherous to his office, as well as his company, if he do not, who is set
God's Watchman, to give notice of approaching dangers, and who is responsible
for every soul that perishes for want of warning; nor the Magistrate, who if
he see vice, by his office is as much obliged to punish it, as the Clergyman
to preach against it. He also is the Minister of God to execute wrath, as the
other is to denounce it, whose easiness is much more baneful then the others
silence, and makes all those faults, which by not punishing it does encourage,
and by that is more unmerciful to the community then arbitrary tyranny, and is
guilty of that blood it does forbear to shed; and as not for these, so not for
any one, since reproofs and admonitions have bin the duty of every person from
the beginnings of Religion Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thine heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him. Silence then in Gods esteem is enmity, not to reprove perfect hatred;
and indeed to labor to preserve a man from perishing eternally does look like
kindness: but if this kindness be too sower, and sullen for this present age
that will not bear correption, and in opposition to Gods judgment calls that
hatred, looks upon it as a provocation and affront, and answers it with a defy,
and with the retributions of a mortal injury; yet there are commands

Thirdly, which God has made as fences merely to secure our virtue, charging
both in general of Sinners: My son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain
thy foot from their path Prove. 1. 15. and also in particular of almost every
sin: Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall
not go; least thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul, Prove. 22. 24,
25. and look not upon the wine when it sparkles: and sit not by a woman etc. so
that merely to converse with these solicitations to sin is the breach of
commands, which commands if they should be only methods of security, not rules
of express duty, yet not to observe them is to slight the only Antidote Gods
wisdom could prescribe against contagion, and that man, that does so, does
assume to guard himself, and so devests himself of the protection of Gods Grace
and Holy Spirit; and then, if he fall, he is not only guilty of the fault that
he commits, but of wilful contemtuous refusal of the means of preservation from
it, of design indeed to make the sin unavoidably to himself: for such
familiarities express, that he desires to be engaged in the necessity of
sinning. For he that does invite the danger, and converse, and play with the
temtation, can have no other ends, but to be ensnared and taken.

Now judge of your selves, I pray you, whether he that does require to pluck out
the right eye, if it offend, and cut off the right hand and foot, that with
such torment to our selves we should bereave our selves of those so useful
organs, whether for the ornament or the necessities of our being, if we find
that we shall be betrayed by them, and who requires it on this penalty, that
otherwise we shall be cast with both ours eyes, and hands, and feet into Hell
fire; whether he be likely to excuse the conversation with those objects, that
engage our eyes, and poison our souls through them; or else will allow me, by
thrusting my self thus into temtations, to lay violent hands upon sin and
destruction, who commands me to cut off my hand rather then touch vice. Or else
will he give me leave to run into the snare, who bids me cut my foot off rather
then be taken; sure he supposed we would be willing of our selves to divorce
and tear our selves from the allurements and occasions, who thought it
unnecessary to prescribe such easy remedies as to avoid them, and requires of
us, that when the allurements shall surprise, or force themselves upon our
senses, we tear out the organ rather then yield and be overcome. Or he thought
at least, that although the companions of my vices are grown dearer to me then
mine own eyes, their converse more useful and more necessary to my satisfaction
then my hand or foot is to me, yet to pluck out, cut off, and cast all from me.

But were I proof against temtation, and perfectly secure from the contagion of
such conversation, yet it is

Fourthly, less excusable in respect to Gods concern then any other. To sit and
see virtue not only violated and deflour'd with loose unclean discourses, but
like Thamar then thrust out of doors, despised, Religion scoft, and turned in
ridicule; all that is Holy laughed at and profaned, and Gods Laws vilifi'd,
his Word burlesqu'd and droll'd upon, his Name blasphemed and himself raill'd,
cursed, renounced, yea and denied a being; and hearing this, I do not say to
find delight and entertainment in this sort of company; for none, but those
that are of reprobate minds, can do that possibly, take pleasure in that which
has nothing in the world to recommend it, but the boldness of the villainy: but
to sit patient without any least sense of resentment, as one that had not any
least concern for God Almighty's honor or his being, is ingratitude to such a
bulk and brutishness of guilt, as is beyond the power and art of aggravation,
or indeed expression. It was not only death by Gods Law to dishonor or
blaspheme his Name, but at the hearing it, tho but in repetition by a Witness,
all the Jews that were in hearing were obliged to rent their garments, as their
Laws assure us in their Talmud. Yea we find the Courtiers in Isaiah 36. 22.
coming with their cloths rent to King Hezekiah, to report the words of
Rabshakeh an Alien, who but in a message from his own King had spoken slightly
of their God; and the High Priest, whom it was forbid to in most cases, in such
did it. And one would think that it should rent our hearts, of which the other
was but a Symbolic Ceremony, and implied that duty. To hear one slight tho but
by inadvertency a person, whom some one or other of the company has the least
relation, or but any little obligation to, requires that person by the laws of
honor indispensably to call for reparation. To touch the reputation of a
Mistress, or what is worse, and owned to be so, ought, they say, to be no
otherwise then fatally resented: and these are accounted such just causes of
men's indignation, that a man that is unconcerned, will take it for a glory to be
second in them, and he that never had the honor to be drunk in the man's
company, will venture to be killed and to be damned for him in such a quarrel:
Therefore every man, unless he do design to quarrel purposely, does think
himself bound to forbear offenses of such kind in company, where any one's
obliged in honor, or by rules that men have set it, to take notice of it. Now
tho it were prodigious insolence to urge in parallel to this, that it should
seem that God Almighty is not thought so much a friend to any, none have such
relation to him, nor on any account have reason to be so concerned for him, or
for his honor, that men should forbear him in their company: yet it seems
dreadful after such plenties of his blessings, Miracles of kindness in
stupendous rescues and deliverances; where, to pass by all those Mercies that
concern Eternity, his temporal preservations have contested with our
provocations, and overcom them, and so often that they have out numbered all our
hours, and all other numbers, but our sins: that these endearments should not
yet be able to oblige us so far, as to move us, when we hear his Laws or his
Religion, or his Word and Name, or himself dishonored, to desire them to
forbear that God, that has bin so kind to us; or if that be judged unmannerly
by the Swordmen, yet at leastwise by uneasiness and by withdrawing to assure
them, that we cannot bear the hearing it. God did once say in a severe
threatening determination, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Those that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. Go ye and learn, what that means; consider, I say, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things.

SERMON IV. Of Gods method in giving Deliverance.
Psalm 102. 13, 14. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion: for the time to
favor her, yea the set time is come. For thy servants take pleasure in her
stones, and favor the dust thereof. According to the version used in the
Liturgy: Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion: for it is time that thou
have mercy upon her, yea the time is come. And why? thy servants think upon her
stones, and it pitieth them to see her in the dust.
THE address of this text is not ordinary; they use to be directed to men for
their instruction and practice: but this does treat with God, seems to
prescribe to and appoint him: and now not to excuse this by a plea, that since
men have bin deaf to all addresses from this place, that have bin made unto
them, it is time to change the method; and seeing we cannot persuade men, try if
we can in that sense of St Paul's words persuade God: but to say for our selves
when human wisdom cannot find expedients for us, and our distresses are beyond
the succors of their power or their counsel, it is fit then to betake our selves
to God, to plead with the Lord, and never let him rest; and when the help of
man is vain, to to cry out, O be thou our help; and with holy confidence, thou
shall arise and have mercy upon Sion.

Indeed addresses to God use to be made otherwise, in a petitionary form at
least; and it would seem much more to become us, if we humbly begged, Arise, O
God, have mercy upon Sion: yet this here in the Text is such a form as does
need nothing else, but faith in the Petitioner to make it acceptable. There is
some difference in the reading of the latter verse, the one version rendering,
for why? thy servants think upon her stones, and it pitieth them to see her in
the dust: the other thus, for thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and
favor the dust thereof: yet this is easily reconciled, they think upon her
stones, indeed with sorrow for, acknowledgments of their demerits, which did
call down this calamitous condition, and being passionately thus affected with
the sense of it, they willingly receive, contentedly and cheerfully accept this
punishment of their iniquity, this return of their demerits (...): and since it
is on their account, namely through their demerit that she is so low, since they
are sensible themselves did make her fall into the dust, they cannot choose but
be more tender; love and pity her the more, and be more willing to do what they
can to raise her up, Jud. Lev.
pulverem ejus evehere cupiunt.

In the words there is an holy confidence, that God will grant the thing they
long for, mercy to Sion: thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion.

2dly A Reason of that Confidence; for the time of showing favor, the appointed
time for it is come.

3die A ground for that, because thy servants think upon her stones, and it
pitieth them to see her in the dust. In handling which I shall consider

1. The Stones of Sion, and those in the dust, or at least in great danger of
impendent ruin.

2. That tho God is not alwais minded to succor his own Sion, yet he has set
appointed times for that.

3. That when the Sons of Sion are affected toward her as the Text expresses,
then is usually Gods season for deliverance, his time of mercy and of showing
favor, then the appointed time for it is come; and then we may take holy
confidence, and in full assurance of faith say, Thou shall arise.

First of the Stones of Sion, and those in the dust. Sion was, we know, either
the City of the King, where there was the seat of Judgment, the thrones of the
house of David, Psalm 122. 5. or else it was the mountain of the Lords house;
and so the stones of Sion are either the stones of the seat of Judgment, of the
Throne in the dust, or the stones of the Lords house, the Sanctuary there. Both
these therefore might be treated of, and I shall speak to both, but more
particularly to the later. And those stones may be either taken naturally, as
they are the stones of a material Sanctuary; or else mystically, in that sense
they often have in Scripture, which sais, we as lively stones are all built up
a Spiritual house. 1 Pet. 2. 5.

1. The stones of Sion the material Sanctuary in the dust the Psalmist thought
an object for so much pity, that some Psalms are but the Liturgies of his pious
resentments upon that occasion. Psalm 74. is full herein, Think upon Mount
Sion, where thou have dwelt; lift up thy feet, that thou may utterly destroy
every Enemy, which has don evil in thy Sanctuary, Thine Adversaries roar in
the midst of thy Congregations, and set up their banners for tokens: they break
down all the carved work thereof with axes and hammers, they have set fire upon
thy holy Places, and have defiled the dwelling place of thy name even unto the
ground; yea they said in their hearts, let us make havoc of them all together.
It is not many years since this was our complaint, concerning both the house of
God and of the King, the Church and Monarchy, as if the life of one were bound
up in the others life. We saw Gods honor, at least the place where his honor
dwelt, laid in the dust; nor was it suffered to stay there, the stones of Sion
not allowed to find a place for burial in that dust, which is the common grave:
the Church it self had not a Monument, nor the tombs a sepulcher; but the very
ruins were disquieted, the rubbish troubled, and the stones and dust suffered a
deportation, used as if men thought with them to build a Sanctuary for those
Sins that demolisht them, and make a Refuge for their Sacrilege. It Is true, to
many this seemed no sad spectacle, nor would it now to such, as think any
occasional room, of the lowest name and usage, might do as well for the uses of
Gods service. Strange! when there was never a Religion in the world, that did
acknowledge any sort of God, but would allot some place peculiar to his worship:
with them whose deities were Sicknesses, the Fever had its Temple. Yea and
stranger, in a world that does devote set rooms to every use of nature, of
convenience, and of pleasure; the recreations have a place made for them, and
the meanest instruments of sport have so; meals have one, and feasts have
another, luxury has its offices, State has many; chambers, antichambers, and
withdrawing places, merely because there may be so many rooms of which there is
no use, for that is Pomp: if God should not have one too, for all uses that
relate to him, to meet us in with all his train of Angels, and to bless us, and
to entertain us with the food of heaven, with himself. But whether men desire
it so again, yet so it lately was; and when his table was removed, his
entertainment too was laid aside, and the Sacrament become as desolate as the
Altar, Gods houses and his mysteries too in the dust, God did arise. I cannot
choose but see that we have no such object of resentment now, but how much
farther off it is from being thus at this time, and how much less apposite to
our condition at this present, the discourse is so much greater demonstration
of what my Text affirms, that when Gods honor is affronted thus, and his house
vilified and ruined, then the time for favor, the appointed time is come; and
when the stones of Sion are thrown down into the dust, his Servants humbled too
into the dust with sorrow and resentments, then God shall arise; for so he did.

It was so also, if we look upon the Stones of Sion in their mystical and
figurative sense. Now although every sincere Christian, every one in whom, on the
foundation of a true sound faith, an holy life is superstructed, be not only
in 1 Pet. 2. 5.
St Peter's words a lively stone, but in 1 Cor. 3. 16.
St Paul's a Temple, yet more properly the whole community of Christians is in
Scripture represented to us as the body of a building. St Peter tells them, ye
are built up a Spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2. 5. and St Paul says, built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together grows up a holy
Temple in the Lord, in whom ye also are built up together for an habitation of
God through the Spirit. Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22. The ends for which it is called so,
seem indeed more lively represented in the parallel resemblance of a natural
body Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 12. and that body the body of Christ Ephesians. 1. 23. or
that of which he is the head Col. 1. 18. from which all Christians do receive
their life and motion, their increase and strength, no otherwise then as they
are united and tied by joints and nerves to one another and that head Ephesians. 4.
16. and have all one Spirit also 1 Cor. 12. 13. Of all which expressions as one
end is to enforce such unity in the profession of their faith, and communion in
Gods public worship among Christians, as there is unity and communion between
the several parts of one same person, that their union in it should be so
strict, that all their assemblies for it should make but one body with one
spirit; so another end is to assure that as in one same body there are several
parts for several uses, without which it could not be an organized, complete
animal body, so in the one body of Christ the Church too there are 1 Cor. 12.
5, 6.
several ministeries, offices, and powers, some more noble, others more
inferior; and the whole body may as well be all eye, as each member in the
Church a Seer, every part be tongue, as every man a Teacher: St Paul from that
Analogy deducing a necessity of several parts, and their subordination also in
that 1 Cor. 12. v. 28. and accordingly, says he, God has set several orders,
first Apostles, after Prophets, Teachers, helps or ministerial offices, and
governments; without which governments and which diversity it is as impossible
it can subsist, as for a body to see without an eye, or speak without a tongue,
consult, direct and call it self without a brain or understanding. Yet this
same is expressed all in the other body of a building, which my text relates to;
for Ephesians. 4. 11. Christ gave also some Apostles, and some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, and some Teachers, for the perfecting the Saints,
compacting and holding Christians together in assemblies for Gods public
worship; for the work of the ministry, for the edifying, or building up of the
body of Christ. Now this emblem to the body of a building (as the other) is a
type of Unity, but yet of several and subordinate stations in the Churches
unity. For stones however excellently squared and fitted, are yet no parts of
the structure, till they be cemented to the rest that lean on the foundation;
the number possibly may make a heap, but not a frame until they be disposed and
ordered in their several stations; for there are such in this body also, every
hewn stone cannot be a pinnacle nor corner stone: so in the Church all are not
capable of the same ministeries, offices, or powers. And yet we may remember
when it was so; all assumed all, seized the offices, usurpt the powers,
executed all the ministeries, all subordination was demolisht, order broken,
Governments under foot, the stones of the Sanctuary poured out in the top of
every street, as Chap. 4 1.
Jeremy laments; the Vrim and the Thummim, stones that gave the heavenly
Oracles, lost in ruins. Now then God to make good the promised method of his
Providential mercies, when it was thus, when these stones of Sion were in the
dust, the Ephod and the Priests thrown into it, and the Priesthood and the
Fathers of it, the the whole life, with all its offices and powers dying,
almost all that could continue it being laid in the dust, and Sions Enemies
expecting the expiring of the Order: then the appointed time was come, and God
not only did himself arise, but made a resurrection of the Church too, and
from the dust these stones were again most miraculously built into a Spiritual
House.

I cannot but acknowledge that the breaches which this desolation made were not
wholly made up, nor were well cemented, and as uncemented breaches use to do,
decai'd more and more daily; what arts were used to keep them open, yea to
widen them, by whom, for what ends too, is so evident I shall not touch it. But
it is sure we had not much face, had no great appearance of the bodies, that the
Scripture represents the Church by: for in those that were before broke off
from her, there was no subordination, nor no order, nor no unity; every broken
and divided piece of ruin took upon it self to be the entire building, the
whole body; every Faction was Christ's Church, each Assembly was his flock, his
Congregation, when indeed it was only a Spiritual riot. And when things were
disposed thus, then at once to break down all the poor remainders, he that
takes his place to whom Christ said, Matthew. 16. 18.
Thou art Peter, and on this rock I will build my Church, who yet, as not
content to thrust Christ out from being the alone foundation, then which none
can lay another true one 1 Cor. 3. 11. would be the chief head stone in the
corner also, on which whosoever should fall, shall be broken; but on whosoever
it shall fall, it will grind him to powder Matthew. 21. 44. He, I say, in
confifidence of that success attemts this on the Reformation, and particularly
on this, as they thought, tottering Church, to lay her stones all in the dust.
And truly such the instruments emploi'd are, that humanely speaking it must
seem impossible to be avoided. For in Gods name, under the Authority of
Religion, with the greatest Sacredness that can be, they contrive the
bloudiest, most irreligious, most inhumane murders, treasons and assassinations
imaginable, make the holy Eucharist the bond of their confederacy in those so
tremendous villainies, Christ's blood becomes the very obligation both to
commit, and not confess them; for which end they say and swear even at the
point of death, and upon their Salvation proved and confessed falsehoods. Now what
security or guard can mankind have against such, whom no ties of Religion or
humanity have any force on? Whether these be the doctrines of their Church, tho
that be true in most part, yet it matters not to them who are to be massacred,
if they be the constant practices, and if they have such guides of conscience
as can satisfy, and thereupon engage the instruments that must effect them to
those practices. How they do that, I must confess, seems strange; for they yet
look upon those actions, as for which they would have absolution, therefore
sins. For tho there have bin dispensations sent from Rome, permitting them to
promise, swear, subscribe, and do what else should be required of them, so as
in mind they did continue firm, and used their diligence to advance the Roman
faith in secret; yet such dispensations might be intercepted, as those were in
1580. and brought to King James in Scotland, and so might discover plots if
they were used to give them in all such occasions: besides that they would
stare the head of that Church in the face, betray his being privy to, and
abetting those designs of blood, which now, if they miscarry, they can cast at
first upon some private Desperado's, and then after lie and laugh them out of
men's belief. Such dispensations therefore being not to be expected still, they
took other ways. For seven years after, Sextus V. offering by the Bishop of
Dunblain to that King a marriage with the Infanta of Spain, if he would become
a Catholic, as he called it, and join with them against the Jesuits Catech. l.
3. c. 2.
English; and this being mightily resisted by the then Lord Chancellor, which
made that ineffectual, and who was their constant adversary, Father William
Chrichton, who had sometime bin the Rector of the Jesuits at Lions and came
thither with Dunblain, solicited one Bruce, who also had bin brought up by the
Jesuits, and who was the Spanish Agent then imploi'd for ships there (which
that Duke intended should be joined with, and assist in their Armada)
solicited him very often for money to procure the murder of the Chancellor, which
he had contrived by several ways; but being still denied, at first because his
money was not trusted to him for those purposes, he could not justify such
disbursment; another time because, as to the sin, it was all one to kill a man
with his own hands, or to give money to procure it; and that he for his part was
a private person, and had no Authority over the life of any man, and less over
that of the Chancellor, who was a chief man in the execution of the Justice of
the Land: and afterward because the question was about advancement of
Christian Religion; now this, he thought, would ruinate the same, in as much as
men went about to promote it by murder to the great scandal of all. But finding
himself still importuned more, he demanded of the Father, whether in good
conscience he might consent to that enterprise, or whether he could dispense
therewithal; to which the Jesuit replied, that he could not, but that the
murder being committed, and he coming to confess himself unto him, he would
absolve him of it. It seems they thought they had no further power then. Now
Bruce's answer, tho not much concerning my part in this subject, yet it was so
honest, and the consequence so strange, that I shall not pass it. He replied,
since your Reverence acknowledges that I must confess my self of it, you also
thereby acknowledge that I should commit a sin; and I for my part know not
whether, when I have don it, God would give me grace and enable me to confess
it: Besides I verily believe, that the confession of a sin, which a man has
don of set purpose intending to confess himself thereof, and to have absolution
for it, is not greatly available; and therefore the surest way for me is not to
put my self into such hazard: so it ended. But he ran into another hazard; for
the Duke of Parma dying, and the Count Fuentes Nephew to the Duke of Alva in
his place, Chrichton accused Bruce before him, that he was a Traitor, because
he would not disburse money to cause the Lord Chancellor to be slain, and the
process had its course, he not denying the thing, and after fourteen months
affliction was at last only released, without repair of his good name or
damages.

But passing by this, it seems they had no other snare to draw them in, could
give them no assurance then, but in that hopes of after absolution, which
proved insufficient; for they found themselves engaged in, and must wilfully
commit crimes at the point of death, of which they could not live to be
absolved. I do not instance in the perjuries of Father Garnet, tho with
horrible execrations. He cried mercy after; saying, that he had not thought
they could have proved the contrary: and he might have absolution. But Tresham,
just when dying, did deny on his Salvation things concerning Garnet, which he
had confessed before, and Garnet did himself confess too after, yea and several
others of their own persuasion unexceptionable persons also swore. The same
words are now current in the mouths of those that suffer, notwithstanding the
express Oaths of their Accomplices: as if they thought the virtue of their
Sacrament were such, as that when men confessed themselves of their intended
villainies, it absolved them of them e're they did them, and of all the sins
they should think needful to commit in the effecting them. Yea more, if they
should discover or confess ought tho dying, then that virtue of the Sacrament
retired, the absolution became void and unuseful, the Sins recoiled upon them,
of which otherwise it made them innocent, which gives them confidence on their
Salvation at the point of death to deny matters of known fact, which it is not
imaginable that they could do on any other, save on that account. And that it
is so, I have one irrefragable instance of one executed lately for a murder of
that kind in Ireland, which is assured by persons of best credit in that
Nation, who tho upon flagrant evidence condemned, denied the fact at his death
on his Salvation with deep execrations as he at the place of execution went to
be turned off; but it pleased God that the rope brake presently, and he soon
revived, but in the greatest horror in the world; for having with such
desperate execrations denied his own deliberate fact, and renounced his
Salvation, he openly acknowledged the falsity of his former asseverations, and
owned his being really guilty of what was charged upon him; and blessing God
for giving him those moments by so strange a way to disburthen himself of such
deliberate wilful perjury, declared that his Confessor, when he absolved him,
told him, if he did discover it, that absolution would not profit him, and that
he should be damned; but if he did not, then he was forgiven. Such monstrous
practices are made good and sanctified, as they contribute to the laying our
poor Sion in the dust; for we have ever bin the mark of all their mischeifs.
Since Pius the V. Bull, it was observed there never past four years all Queen
Elizabeth's reign without a most Proceed. Q.
pernicious plot for the subversion of the State and Church; and in the first
years of King James not four months Proceed. R.
without Treason: and they go now by the same rules, and in the same methods,
with the same Oaths, and the same Sacraments administered to the same purposes.
And just as they, sometimes designing open force, and sometimes private treasons
and assassinations; sometimes trying by the softer pleas of Liberty of
Conscience, toleration to do it, yea although it be but partial, an Indulgence to
our own Sects, any thing that may contribute to the breaches of our Sion, and
may keep them open: which it is said (whether in earnest or to color Blacker
purposes, and hide designs more violent) is now spoken of, and they hope for,
and has still bin pleaded for, as the birthright of each Christian, as
instated on them in the very charter of their Christianity. But yet to speak to
that too, I neither find the word in Scripture, nor the thing, as most men take
it, for the Liberty of Action: and besides this, whatever Arguments there are
that press it, they can be no Arguments for the Romanist, who never grants it;
for either they conclude or they do not; if not, why do they urge them? if they
do, why do they not allow them? if they can see no force in them, then they
must not use them; if they can, they must be wrought on by them: unless to be
the only men that may do wrong and resist reason, be their grant and Charter.
But not to evade only, I allow

1. That Christ came down to settle his Religion, plant the Christian Faith
without a grant from, or the leave of Secular Powers; when he commissioned his
Apostles to conveigh the Gospel through the world, they did expect or ask no
Passport from the several Princes, but in opposition to the Magistrates and
Governors and Kings, against whom he promised them to justify and bear them
out, they preached it. I allow too

2. That he autoriz'd and gave right to Christians, as such, to assemble for
Gods Worship and Service according to the rule of his Religion, whatever
prohibition, threats, or persecution they should meet from Secular powers on
account of doing so. Accordingly the Acts 4. 5, etc.
Apostles and their Converts did so, and St Paul gives it in charge to the
Hebrews not to forbear doing so for any fear or suffering whatsoever, Hebr. 10.
25.
not forsaking the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some
is. Now he that does require that they shall do so, notwithstanding any
opposition from the Secular Powers, gives them right to do so, tho in
opposition to those Powers: for all must have a right to do their duty, and
accordingly the Christians of the first Ages did meet for Gods Worship against
all the edicts, all the persecutions of the Heathen Emperors. But

3. Tho our Savior by this grant seems to pass by those Powers unregarded, or
at least not taken notice of, when he gives their Subjects Privilege to meet in
public full assemblies (such as those of Christians ought to be) without their
leave, yea and against their orders, yet does not this grant diminish or
entrench upon their safety in the least: because the only men he gives it to
are such, as can design or do no hurt to any Government. For Christ conferred
this privilege merely on the account of that Religion which he instituted, and
to men as his Disciples and Followers in it. Now himself so renounced all
pretense to any Secular interest or power, practis^d such obedience to his
Governors tho most unjust, taught such subjection to all in Authority whether
good or bad, Patrons or Enemies to the Religion, nursing Fathers to his
Followers or Slaughtermen and Executioners; and has made all this so much the
temper and the constitution of Christianity, which condemns all enterprizing
upon any rights of others, and much more of Princes, that it is impossible that
companies of such men, that is, of such Christians, such to whom alone Christ
gives the privilege of meeting, can create a danger or a jealousy in any State:
men that must indeed assemble, but must not resist, act, or contrive against
their Governors, but die, if they and laws will have it so, for that their
meeting. So the Primitive Christians did: so 20000 in one day at See Martyrol.
on Christmas day. Niceph. l. 7. c. 6.
Nicomedia for assembling. But men whose Principles or former practices upon
their principles have any thing that tends to sedition in them, especially if
they have used such meetings to foment it; or tho they did not that, the other
also, till they can give such security as will satisfy the state, of which the
State is to judge, can no more by their Christian birthright, by Christ's
whether grant or injunction of assembling for Gods Worship, claim a privilege
of such assemblies, then notoriously sinful, scandalous Christians, or then
open Heretics can by virtue of that same injunction claim the privilege of the
public Assemblies till they satisfy the Church: for the Church may
excommunicate these, and the State may restrain those others, and they have no
right or plea in conscience against it. The rights he gave were given to men so
far, as they should follow the Religion which he instituted; he gave no more
privilege to the seditious, then the scandalous. He did not by requiring such
assemblies for religious Worship mean to weaken the security of Governments,
which his Religion is above all other institutions framed to settle and
establish: which therefore by the grant of Christ's Religion, as well as by a
right inherent in their office, Governors may take care to provide for by
restraints of that kind, not at all examining men's pretension, whether their
Religion or their Principles be true or false; for that were endless and to no
effect, every man's Religion and his Principles are true to himself; but only
if they tend toward commotions, or give cause of jealousy, which still
Governors must judge of. Which if they cannot satisfy, they can plead no
Privilege, to which they have no further right, then as they free themselves
from such suspicions. In fine they cannot claim this on account of
Christianity, since Christianity admits of nothing, that is prejudicial or
gives fear to Governments; but is the basis of Obedience, the cement of
Society, Ecclesiastical and secular, it compacts all the Stones of Sion, of the
House of God, and of the seat of David, of the Sanctuary, and the Throne.

And therefore in the 4th place Romanists (and it is the same of every other
Sect of men, so far as they abet such Principles, or have ever showed
themselves in prosecution of them,) but Romanists for instance at the present,
who by all ways of assurance have convinced the world, the most destructive
Tenets, to government most abhorrent from the state of Christianity, are their
Principles, and their Faith; as namely by the general dictates of their
Schole-men, their allowed Theology of their Canonists: their allowed Laws of a
shole of particular Councils and some general their allowed Rule of Faith: of
their Popes their infallible Judge; and what is worse by multitudes of practices
the most inhumane that were ever heard of, and would never yet, however called
on or accused, retract or sentence; but still justify and practice them. Since
they therefore know themselves incapable of claming Toleration by the Laws of
Christianity, we can interpret them to mean no other thing by claming and
endeavoring it, but to get more opportunities to destroy the Government both of
Church and State, to widen and to make more breaches in the gaping, tottering
walls of Sion, tumble down her stones into the dust, and make their dust their
grave. Nor need I discourse, how others turn these mercies into gall and
bitterness; to contrive for parties and widen their own interests, and the
breaches of the Government; the outcry for liberty ending always in its denial
of it to all besides themselves.

Such is our prospect of the stones of Sion; it looks fatal, but it has this
Argument of comfort in it, that when Sion is in this condition that it is
usually Gods time of mercy and of showing favor, then the appointed time for it
is come, the next thing that I am to speak to.

That this is ordinarily Gods time of appearing to show mercy, is notorious
from David's challenging his aids elsewhere upon the same account Psalm. 119.
126. It is time for thee, Lord, to work, or it is time for Thee to put to thine
hand, for they have made void thy Law. And we shall find a reason for this way
of working in that prayer of the same King David, Psalm. 1. 9. 26. 27.
Help me O Lord my God; O save me according to thy mercies, that they may know
that this is thy hand, and that thou, Lord, have don it. When our distresses
are beyond the succors of means power and counsels, if deliverance come, we
must needs know it is from above. The Prophet speaks of men, as apt to Hab. 1.
16.
sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their drag with which they catch,
ascribing their successes to themselves. But when the Apostles use their net
all night and can take nothing, then if one upon the shore, whom they know not,
bid them cast in, and they do catch, strait one of them cries out, John 21. 7.
it is the Lord. When out of a desperate condition of affairs we see hope
drawn, we know it is the day spring from on high.

Whatever several of the late discoverers of the Popish conspiracy may have
said or don to disparage their evidence, and the credit of what they testify;
or men Popishly affected have contrived to make it be disbeliev'd; yet surely
while the trial and the letters of the late apostate busy Factor for the party
remain upon record, it will be manifest as the light, that there was a practice
and endeavor to subvert the present establishment in Church and State, and
introduce the superstition and tyranny of Rome among us. And that God will be
further gracious in the sending forth his light to discover, and to disappoint
their dire attemts, there is ground to hope, because it always was the ordinary
method of his working, making the day of Extremity the day of Salvation.

1. In the Jewish Church and Nation. And here I shall not mention their
deliverance from the Egyptian bondage, tho it be a demonstration of my
Proposition, but name that from the designs of Haman, who had satisfied the
King, their Laws, and their Religion, and their Worship differed from those of
all people, (...), says Josephus, and that were still occasions to embroile
the State; that if he would give order they should be destroi'd, he would bring
Ester 3. 9.
10000 talents, near two millions of our money, into the Exchequer: whereupon
the King allows him to make what declarations he shall please against them, and
signs an Edict to his Governors and his Lieutenants for the massacring the
whole Nation* which might easily be don, the Jews then being in captivity, and
mixed among them. Mordecay advises Ester to present her self before the King,
remonstrate the injustice of the fact: that being death to do, she would
decline it; but as one acquainted with Gods methods Cap. 4. 13, 14.
Mordecai does answer her, think not with thy self, that thou shall escape in
the Kings house more then all the Jews; for if thou altogether hold thy
peace at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the
Jews from another place, (here is a pregnant instance of the assurance of my
text) but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroi'd. And who knows
whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? Hereupon she and
her Nation fast and pray, and she adventures, and God gives her favor with the
King, and he reverses all; and the whole Nation on that very day it was to
perish is secured, and the design returns upon their heads that plotted it, on
all their Enemies. I need name no more, but there is one pregnant one, on which
there lies an imputation from great men: I mean, when throout that Nation their
Religion was so persecuted, that it was almost extinct, false Heathen worship
planted in its place, possessed the Temple and the Sanctuary, and all was
profaned by Antiochus Epiphanes: the state so lively propheci'd of by the
Prophet Daniel. Now when it was thus, and there was so universal a defection,
as already had subverted the whole Government, Religion, and almost the whole
Nation, God stirs up the Spirit of the Maccabbees, and on that day three years
that all was profaned, 'was again purified and they delivered. I instance so,
least that which L. 1. de Jure Belli c. 4.. 7.
Grotius satih, that nothing can defend that action of the Maccabbees, besides
extreme certain necessity; and what our Concerning the Rights of the Church in
a Christian Sat p. 306.
Thorndike says, it is manifest the Arms which they took up against their
lawful Sovereign, are by God approved, and their Faith commended Hebr. 11.
least these should misguide men, it may be seasonable to declare that it is
plain Antiochus Epiphanes, although he 1 Macc. 1. 41, 51.
call that land his Kingdom, was not then their rightful King: for after
Alexanders death, the first that got possession of it, was the King of Egypt.
It was after violently taken indeed from him by the King of Syria, and the Jews
gave up themselves to the protection of Antiochus the Great; but he gave it in
dowry to the King of Egypt with his daughter, and so parted with all right; and
whatever right the Kings of Syria could be supposed to have, Antiochus
Epiphanes had none of that, as being not a lawful King of any place, usurping
from his Nephew the right Heir: and with all injurious angry violence, when he
was driven out of Egypt, the attaques Jerusalem, and enters it, and sets up all
the Heathen Exercises and Religion, and forbids Gods Worship; ravages and
spoils and murders all refusers, till the Maccabbees opposed his fury, and till
Judas three years after, as I said, restored all, having fought against a
violent Aggressor, not his rightful Prince; and he is by Grotius made the very
man, that typ'd out Christ, and was seen by the Prophet in Isaiah 63. Who is he
that comes from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozra? to which he makes Judas
Maccabeus answer, I that defend Gods Worship and the true Religion, against
Antiochus and all his power, and to save my People cast my self upon extremest
hazards.

Once more, when Caius Emperor of Rome had sent Petronius into Syria, charging
him to make war on the Jews, and by all utmost force to make thew condescend to
let his image, the statue of himself I mean, be set up in their Temple at
Jerusalem: the Jews when he came into Syria to their Country, met him several
thousands, several times with supplications and entreaties to divert him, if
they could from doing it. But he declaring his Commission to them, let them see
it was not possible for him to contradict the Emperor; and they declared also,
since he durst not transgress the commands of the Emperor, he must not think it
strange, if they durst not transgress Almighty Gods command, resolving to
endure whatever should be inflicted on the, rather then violate that. Doing
this often, and in multitudes, Petronius asked them whether they did mean on
that account to fight with Caesar, and make war against him, they replied they
would not fight, but they could die on that account, and prostrating themselves
and offering their naked throats, showed their readiness to entertain their
death, and this for four days together, and neglected all their husbandry,
resolving not to till their land or to provide for life, when they had once
determined thus to die. Upon this Petronius undertakes to write to Caesar, and
dissuade him from the enterprise; but Caius answers that his letter with
another, which commands Petronius, for the punishment of his not executing his
commands, to kill himself, resolving also to exterminate the Nation: but before
his letter came to Syria to Petronius, the notice of the death of Caius came.
Thus God did then preserve both him and them, tho at that time a Nation guilty
of the death of Christ; yet in a cause, wherein they were resolved to suffer
any thing rather then disobey Gods Law so grossly, he was pleased to spare
them, and continue to preserve them.

As for the Christians, I might instance in the care God took soon after most
expressly and miraculously to call them all out of Jerusalem, when the Romans
were preparing to sit down before it, and destroi'd it utterly, and in all the
persecutions, particularly that of Diocletian, when that Nomine Christiano
deleto, qui Remp, evertebant superstitione Christiana ubique deleta, and cultu
deorum propagate, Grut. Inscrip. p. 280.
destruction that was levelled at, and falling on all Christianity, was in a
trice returned upon the Designers and on Heathenism. It might be a more
parallel instance to the genius of these later ages, should I name that of the
Arrians, men that were the At^n. Ep. ad S^^it. page 815, 821, 854.
first that ever drew the sword of persecution against their fellow Christians;
(...) was their petition to See Grotius De Jure Belli l. 2 c. 20.. 50.
Constantius, a copy which the Church of Rome has long writ after, with the
blood of those that differ from them. And indeed the Arrian persecutions were
most barbarous; Constantius
yet when had don all he could, had made the Universe, says St Jerome, all
Arrian by having banished almost all the Catholic Bishops of the world, then
very quickly God restores them, even by a Julian an Apostate: and then when
shortly after Valens the same again, himself repenting of it, did revoke them,
and lastly Theodosius restored them and established all. And tho afterward God
let the Goths continue both the heresy, and sometimes the persecution, for above
two Ages in our western world; yet since that, for the last thousand years, the
name of Arrian has scarce bin heard. But I have said enough to show, such is
the ordinary method of Gods Providential workings, when Sion is in that
condition: provided that the Church have not depraved it self as it is a Church,
modeled it self by worldly principles and powers, and adopted rules or
doctrines which are not consistent with those of Christ. There are few
instances to be produced, I think, where any Church has bin destroi'd, whole
constitution has preserved this temper, tho her wicked and ungracious members
may be cut off: at last, as 1 Pet. 5. 10
St Peter tells, after it has suffered a while, he will strengthen, stablish,
settle it. And if we look upon the low condition of our Sion together with
these instances of Gods procedure, may we not take confidence to hope, that the
appointed time is come? For is it not time for Thee to arise, O Lord, when thy
resting place is destroying? And thou, O Christ, who art the Rock on which the
Church is built, is it not time for thee to awake, to rise, rebuke the
Tempests, break the waves that break into thy Church, and threaten as if they
would swallow all that is built on Thee, the Rock of Ages? It is most certainly,
provided we have those affections, which the text sets down here, as the
diagnostics of that time; of which in the last place.

The first is this, thy servants think upon her stones with sorrow and sincere
acknowledgment, that their demerits called this state upon her, and they
therefore willingly receive, accept of Gods dealing with them, (...) they take
pleasure in it. It is observed, that this was the express condition, upon which
God covenanted to show mercy on his People. Levit. 26. From v. 14. to the end
we find, that if they should arrive at that height to abhor Gods Statutes,
break all his Commandments, merit all his curses, and he should inflict them,
and yet they go on still to walk contrary to him, and he overtake them still
with plagues, yea and this through all the stages both of sin and punishment, and
each stage of punishment seven times multiplied v. 18, 21, 24, 28. so as to
leave no more place for access, yet if then they confess their iniquity, and
their uncircumcized hearts be humbled, if then (...) they accpt of willingly,
contentedly receive the punishment of their iniquity v. 41. I will not case
them away, neither will I abhor them to destroy them utterly, and to break my
Covenant with them, v. 44. but will remember my Covenant, and I will remember
the Land, v. 42. and remember Sion also, if we have the like sentiments for
Sion; if her low condition, if her stones in the dust truly humble us into that
dust, and make us from the heart acknowledge, Neh 9. 33.
Thou, O Lord, art just in all that is come upon, and hovers over us; for thou
have don right, but we have don very wickedly: for we have walked unworthy of
the opportunities thou have afforded us, have bin unfruitful under the whole
latitude of all thy working methods, the Kingdom of God has had no Obedience,
nothing but Rebellion from us, and it is just it should be taken from us, be
given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof, and have our candlestic
removed, since we hate light, our deeds are so evil. It Is just that we, who
heapt our selves Teachers according to our factions and lusts, should be given
up to strong delusions, have a lying Spirit in the mouth of our Prophets,
Prophets that should daub with untemper'd mortar, such as never will cement the
stones of Sion, or build up a Church; that we, who have debaucht the
Reformation, should quite loose it. The present time does certainly suggest the
practice, which is set aside for great humiliation, and the occasion does
require it; both the commands and the necessities too of the Church expect it;
and God also calls for mourning, and for stricter applications to him on behalf
of Sion: and then they that do not answer all these calls by doing something
more then ordinary do not think upon the stones of Sion, neither does it pity
them to see her in the dust, it is certainly not time for God to arise in their
behalf, they are sufficient to divert his preparations for her. No O Lord, we
will put our hands upon our mouths, and our mouths into the dust, and
acknowledge righteousness belongs unto thee, but to us confusion of face, as
at this day; and we resolve to humble our selves under thy correcting hand how
sharp soever, and take pleasure in it too thus far, that do show by thy
castising us thou have not given us over as incorrgible, but have taken us into
thy care, and discipline, and managery; and on that account thy rod comforts
us, our correction is joyous, we take pleasure in the stones of Sion, and we
favor, love her dust; the other Symtom.

They prize her relics, wht is standing of her; and since it is on their
account, namely through their demerit, that she is so low and weak, they are more
tender, love, and pity her more in that condition which they brought her into;
will do what they can to raise her, pulverem ejus evehere cupiunt in the
Tigurine Translation.

It Is true indeed the stones of Sion in the dust are apt to become stones of
stumbling and rocks of offense, as St Peter says of the chief corner stone of
Sion, Christ hmself 1 Pet. 2. 8. whereat many stumble and fall. We had fatal
experience how when once the building was disordered, the subordination broken,
the Church offices and powers thrown down, on the one side Sion strait became
like Babel, every one almost spoke a strange language, and so built by himself,
built up, divided Faiths, and Churches, and Religions; on the other side that
broken tottering State made many run away as from a falling Church, take
shelter in another: and what the Cross of Christ was to the Jews, that the
Cross of his Spouse too was to many pretended Christians, a ground to renounce
her. They no sooner saw their Mother wounded, naked in the dust, but they
concluded her fit to be buried, and ran from her as from the house of death; as
if in the noblest way of sufferings to follow Christ could look like the mark
of being Antichristian: and the yet unsettled state of it is made great use of
for the same intents, her stones are laid on purpose to be stones of stumbling
and to give occasion of falling. And truly it is to be confessed, that since the
bonds of Government, which kept men under discipline, were unloos'd, and since
the Churches Ministeries and her Powers are cut so short, that they are not so
effectual to the ends of their institution to work out a strict Christian life,
as were to be wished; and since men are divided so by claims of several
Churches, and by fearful expectations also, both the Coversations and the
Faiths of men too are grown loose and dissolute: and 'twas not the least
Stratagem of our Adversaries to contrive men should be such as could, while
they continue such, find Sanctuary no where but in their Church, at their
Altars; whether they have but to come to be absolved of all. But truly it is
extreme barbarity in us, when it is on our account, by our demerits, for our
punishment, that she is distressed, that fears and dangers press upon her, then
to slight her: if when we see our Mother gasping, then to throw dirt at her,
make her mouth her mouth be stopped with the reports of her ungodly offspring,
the reproaches of a pointing Scorner, that shall cry, see how her Sons behave
themselves, how little love or pity they have for her. He favors her stones
that beautifies and guilds them with inscriptions of Religious actions; this,
if any thing, will raise them and repair her. And truly'tis to be expected from
the men that do pretend to have the pity and the sorrow that is due to their
Mother, whom the powers of Hell seem armed against to ruin her, so far as she is
disabled, should themselves supply to themselves what is wanting: if her
discipline be loosened, and she have no strong ties on men's actions, we should
do her work upon us, put obligations, fetters on our selves. It Is probable this
very state of Sion in the text was that, which Nehemiah labored to repair, and
see how he effected it c. 9. after a most solemn fasting and confession and
bemoaning, rather of their guilts then sufferings, in the 10th himself, the
Princes, and the Priests and Levites, and he rest of all the People with their
Wives, their Sons and Daughters that were come to understanding, entered into a
curse and into an oath to walk in Gods Law, and to observe and do all the
Commandments of the Lord our God, his Judgments and his Statutes, v. 29. Here
was a cement would compact the Stones of Sion, the whole building against all
assaults whatever, seat her in her perfect height and beauty. It is not he
loves her, who curses them that laid her in the dust, but he who enters such a
curse of serving God; it is not he favors her dust, who wishes, talks, or swears
on the Churches side, but he that humbles himself daily in the dust in her
confessions and Prayers, he who binds himself with such an obligation to
worship and serve God faithfully, as she prescribes: this will help to raise
her, make her visible in the lives of her Children; and when the dust of Sion
shall have a more perfect Resurrection in this world, and this of Christ shall
as his other body rise out of the earth, it will be comfortable to each one
that put his hands to the repairs, that did but fit one stone to it, that would
not let God rest till he had established our Jerusalem again a praise in the
Earth. Then God almighty would be importuned, prevailed upon to put it in the
hearts of those men, whose part it is to secure our Sion and repair her
breaches, to build by a true line and level, make such an establishment as may
be fitted not to the satisfying parties, factions, interests, or any human
appetites, but the just obligations or Religion; not build weakly, fearing, as
it were, the Churches strength should aw men in their practices, and that the
weapons of her warfare should gall their vices, besides that their own strong
holds may be still able to hold out, and not be beat down by her forces: for
this were to model the structure of Sion to men's own, and to their sins
convenience. But to build her up so, as that the profession and the practice of
true Religion may be preserved safe, and Gods Worship kept entire; that upon
our one only foundation, the rock Christ Jesus, we may be built up with a
lively faith into an holy life, all cemented by Charity, and all divisions be
made up, and we may with one heart and one voice meet and join in giving Glory,
Honor, etc,

SERMON V. OF THE EXERCISE OF CONSCIENCE, In the avoiding of Offense toward
God and Men.
Acts 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience
void of offense toward God and toward man.
MY text is the sum of a Christians practical duty; for as St Paul had in the
verse before set down his faith and hope, here he sets down his workings. In
the words we have

1. The state of that duty expressed (...), a onscience void of offense.

2. That is brancht out into its several respects, (...) toward God, (...) and
toward man; and those either

1. As the objects of that which a good conscience endeavors and means, an
unblameable conversation in those duties that look toward God, those of
Devotion, Piety and Godliness; or of those duties that look toward man, those
of Justice and Honesty, particularly so called. Or

2. God and Man here may be looked upon as having both to do in being the rule
of Conscience, God's law, and man's also, that is, the just laws of lawful
Superiors, both obliging it: and a conscience void of offense toward God and
toward man is such an one as does not only not offend God nor man, in that
which God commands to be don to himself and to the neighbor, but such also as
does not offend in what man, the lawful Governor, commands: for to these we
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but conscience sake.

3. Here are the seasons which this Conscience does respect, and they are all
seasons (...) always.

4. The interest St Paul does seek after in this condition (...) in this
Jexercise my self; as on one side it is not fancying or opining, often hearing,
no nor talking of conscience, but exercise and doing; for the Christians life
is (...), a constant exercise, and that is at once his duty and profession
here: so on the other side, it is not perfect possession of this state; there
is no such thing as perfection in this life, but laboring toward it. In
handling which parts I shall thus proceed.

1. Having in word explained (...), I shall enquire what are those offenses
that must be removed in order to that state that is here described; and having
cleared the conscience of those, 2dly view the latitude and extent of its
obligation, see how it respects both God and man, both as the rules and objects
of its acts, and as we go along, we shall direct the practice of that duty
which St Paul did labor in, how we must exercise our selves that we may be in
such a state, which is the 3d thing and the application of all. (...) may be
understood from the use of that word as it is taken either passively Phil. 1.
10. that ye may be (...) without offense, not led into evil by mistakes of what
is good, or any other color whatsoever; or else as it is taken actively 1 Cor.
10. 32. (...) give no offense to any man; which as the context proves is but
the same, and means, let nothing that you do be such as may induce another man
to sin; lay not (...) rocks of offense or stumbling blocks in any Christians
course: and therefore in my text (...) is such a conscience, as does not induce
the man himself to any sin against God or man, and a life that is not led into
it; a conversation that is according to such a conscience, is that which St
Paul aims to have, and which that we may have, all such (...) we must endeavor
to remove, which what they are, I told you, was to be my first inquiry.

And the first is error of judgment, which makes an erring conscience; such a
one as gives false information of duty, which either tells me that I may or
must do that which God's law or some other law in force upon me says I must
not do, or else tells me I must not do that which I may, or am perhaps bound to
do. A rock of offense this, upon which many men do split, and make shipwreck
of a good conscience; and which is worse error of judgment, called by some new
light, is such a light indeed, so placed between the rocks as must needs guide
the Mariner upon them, make it necessary for him to be wreckt; for in this case
sin lies on the right and the left hand, which way soever he does turn, he
falls upon it. For first if this man act against his erring conscience, he
sins, although the Law of God do not make the act sin Romans 14. 14. to him that
esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean; although St Paul says there,
he knew it was not in it self unclean, yet so it was to him, and that to such
an height, that the man whose example wrought with any one to eat against the
persuasion of his mind destroieth him v. 15. It Is therefore a destroying sin to
do a thing against the express judgment of the mind. And all the reason in the
world; for since good or evil do not, nor can move the will as they are in
themselves such, but as apprehended, and according to the notion we have of
them in the mind: it is certain therefore every motion of the will to good or
evil, consequently every good or evil action must be formally accounted such
from good or evil things not in themselves, but in the apprehension of the
mind; that is, according as our consciences dictate to us they are good or
evil. And indeed no law of God or man, no rule of duty can be applied to us but
by the mediation of conscience; for till that tell me such a thing's commanded
and my duty, it is to me as if there were no such command and it were not my
duty, for till then I am not conscious it is, know nothing of it. This alone
therefore does propose and apply duty to us; and consequently whether that
which it proposes be my real duty in it self or no, yet I must needs look on
it as so, as having no direction in the world besides what to do or forbear,
but what my conscience some way instructed tells me, God or my Governors
require: while therefore that does absolutely tell me such a thing is unlawful
whether it be so or no, while that persuasion lasts, the soul yet judges it
unlawful, and consequently if the heart embrace it, then it does deliberately
embrace unlawfulness, which tho it be not in the thing, is yet in the choice. I
like and follow that which in my judgment is vicious, and be it in it self what
it will, it is so to me; it is evident the inclinations and actions pursue vice,
when they pursue that which they cannot look upon but as vice. And therefore St
Paul says Romans 14. 23.
what soever is not of faith, whatsoever is contrary to the persuasion or
judgment of lawfulness, i. e. in other words, what is against conscience is
sin. Conscience therefore is the rule from which it is sin to recede.

But you will tell me, where the conscience errs, the rule is false and
crooked, and so must not be followed; but the rule of this rule, God's Law, and
not the conscience, must be obei'd. Good counsel if it could be followed; for
certainly if the man know what God's Law does require of him, in that case his
conscience does not err; if he do not know what God's Word requires, how then
can he follow it against that which his conscience tells him God requires? and
it is sure if the man should suspend his action, or have reason not to act
according to his erring conscience, he never can have reason to act according
to a conscience well informed: for it is plain his conscience does as much
propose the error as his duty, as it does the truth; the man as really believes
the one is to be don as the other, and has no reason to make difference, and
therefore if at any time he must follow his conscience, he alwais must, and
it will be sin to act against it, be it what it will.

But then you will hope it will excuse to act according to it. No alas, this is
but the other rock, it is sin too to act according to it. The proofs are very
pregnant Genesis 12. 17. Because of Sara Abraham's wife the Lord plagued Pharaoh
with great plagues and all his house, namely those that had commended her
before him v. 15. and so had contributed to the offense. On the same account he
plagued Abimelech Genesis 20. 17. although in the 6 v. God says, he knew Abimelech
did it in the integrity of his heart, and tho Abimelech did plead the same to
God, he did it innocently v. 5. yet in the 9. v. he expostulates with Abraham,
what have I offended thee, that thou have brought on me and on my Kingdom a
great sin. Again St Paul affirms of his own nation Romans 10. 2. that it was out
of zeal to God and his Law they persevered in infidelity and opposition to
Christ's doctrins, yet for that very opposition he affirms, that they were
hardened and designed to everlasting perdition. And Christ says of the same
Jews John 16. 2. that the time would come, when they that killed his Apostles
and Ministers should think they did God service, (...) think they offered an
oblation. The error was so strong, it made the sin look like Religion and
Atonement, yet that zeal and conscience was plagued with wrath that came upon
them to the uttermost, even to an utter extirpation: or to restrain our selves
to our Apostle, he says of himself v. 1. of the foregoing chapter, I have
lived in all good conscience before God until this day, and therefore when
against Christ's reformation he defended the Mosaic Law, and persecuted the
opposers of it, he did all out of a good mind, according to the dictates of his
conscience, sincerely what he was persuaded that he ought to do; and now if
conscience could excuse, here was enough of that, a good Conscience, and could
his fiery persecutions by virtue of that conscience be christian'd holy Zeal?
could his pure heart make his bloody hands undefiled? Oh no! 'twas 1 Timothy 1. 13.
blasphemy, and persecution, and injury, for all 'twas conscience. If this seem
strange, that acting thus according to the conscience should make men such
sinners, since all facts are estimated chiefly by the heart that they proceed
from, by the good or bad mind they are don with, that is, by the conscience of
the doer; we must know, that where the error is not the effect of any carnal
prepossession or principle, but truly error, there the sinfulness in this case
lies not altogether formally in acting so according to their conscience, unless
first the conscience take up persuasions and give sentence without a sufficient
inquisition, when there is the least appearance of a danger that it is plain
such a persuasion may engage us in a state of sin, we must examine strictly, and
this seems the case of Pharaoh and Abimelech; they were glad to think Sarah was
Abraham's sister, therefore made no close inquiry, were content with his once
saying so, and on that account, although the one and afterward the other took her
in the innocence of their heart, the text says, they committed a great sin,
for which God did plague them. Especially 2dly if men have bin called on to
consider, had the opportunity of means of conviction, such as God will judge
sufficient in their circumstances, then retaining those persuasions, following
such an error gives it that which is equivalent to wilfulness, makes the guilt.
This was the Jews case and St Paul's, tho Moses Law were given by God himself,
confirmed by wonders, and by such a constant series of Gods most immediate
dispensations, as might give them just cause to believe it was their certain
duty to adhere to it, yet when God judged Christ's works together with the
Prophecies that went of him, had given a sufficient testimony to his
Reformation, the Jews resisting that, tho out of zeal to God, and in obedience
to his Law and to their Guides the Priests and Sanhedrim, were hardened to
excision for it; or if, as it is most certain, they were leavened into
aversation to Christ's doctrine by their expectation of a pompous Messiah, his
Religion did not serve their sensual ends, it is to be feared the same does
influence the more sincere and erring party of the Church of Rome; yet St. Paul
also, tho out of a good conscience doing so, esteemed himself the 1 Timothy 1. 15.
chief of sinners for so doing. It Is the too hasty taking up, or the too
obstinate retaining this erroneous conscience, makes the sin it does engage
into be so exceeding sinful; therefore certainly whoever lets their conscience
be surpised by prejudice, or warmth of mind, much more ambition, pride,
revenge, or incidental discontents and disobligation, reputation of a party,
interest, design, if these or any sensuality tho but lurking indiscernably (
Jer. 17. 9.
for the heart is deceitful above all things, who can know it?) have given any
tincture to the heart and pufft a passion into conscience, or if in the
uprightness of their heart they took up their persuasions, yet if they retain
them in the least on any such account, or else however if they do not hearken
to, examine any calls or means, which God does either by his Providence or
Ministers offer the opportunities of, for their conviction, specially if by
seeing good and wise men do judge otherwise, they have any cause to doubt, and
yet persist still, and retain the error, it is this that spoils the Conscience,
so that while it errs it does ensnare the man, entangles him in a necessity of
sinning, leads him into such labyrinths of guilt that whatsoever he does, he
offends: if he do what his erring conscience dictates to him, then he sins
against God's Law, if he forbear, he sins then against God's Vicegerent, his
own Conscience; there is the guilt of his deed, here the guilt of his heart,
which does oblige a man to follow that which it is sin to follow, and which
makes him, he must and ought to do that which he must not, ought not to do.

And then the only application to such a Conscience is to advise the laying it
aside, to rectify the error; good counsel this indeed, but hardest to be taken
in the world. For that a man may set himself to rectify, he must know himself
in an error, and if he know that, he has not an erring Conscience; this when
it is such strongly, the man does not so much as doubt of his opinion, and
while he does not doubt, what temtation can he have to think of rectifying?
especially if men are persuaded that their Conscience is directed by such
Guides as cannot err. We cannot but remember how the violation of all Laws and
of all rights sacred and secular, sedition and rebellion, and such other
dreadful consequents as we must not remember, being dictated by conscience,
undertaken on account of Religion were esteemed the characteristics of a godly
side; nor are we suffered to forget, how the same things undertaken on account
of holy Church make Saints and Martyrs: for let not men pretend these are not
Doctrines or directions of the Chuch of Rome. There is no one of the rebellious
parties, but it may with much more truth and modesty affirm they are not
theirs, since they have not declared them so authentically; and if we are not
sure these are their doctrines, it is impossible to know that they have any, for
none of their doctrines have a greater attestation. If some few declaring their
opinion to the contrary, shall against the declarations of the Tenets of their
Schools, and the directions of much greater numbers, their Casuists, the rules
and practice of their whole law, the determinations of particular and general
Councils, make them not to be their doctrine, then no Church has any
doctrines. Now, if as one side of these pretend some to a Divine Light within
themselves, some to the Divine Spirit speaking in the Scriptures for their
Guide, so the other plead the public Spirit of the Church speaking at least in
the Assemblies of their general Council most infallibly, and consequently all
of them must judge it is impossible their Guide can err; how is it possible to
prescribe means to rectify the errors of such Consciences?

But should I pass these guilts of the first magnitude, to which it is wonderful
a Conscience can be debaucht, and err into them, should I mention one that is
common to all of them, violating the Laws, disturbing the Peace of the
Government, unhinging the constitution of it by illegal meetings to disseminate
their principles, and make more errors, and more separation, wider breaches. I
shall not tell these, that the Church no where gives a privilege to any to
assemble not for Gods own worship, from whose principles or practices the State
has reason to expect commotions or sedition, the diminishing their secular
Powers, or endangering their persons, and on that account forbids them. Sure I
am, there is no one word in the Gospel for it, and I leave all the mentioned
parties, Popish or the other, to consider whether they have bin so innocent as
not to be suspected justly? and would only ask each party of them, whether it
alone have right to act according to its conscience thus and otherwise against
the Laws, so that all others, what sincerity so'ere they act with, have no
privilege? or whether it be the Christians birthright, and due to all others?
If any party say, that it alone has right, besides that all the rest will
never grant this, nor have reason for it, and so all must quarrel; yet if they
do say so, sure there is nothing else but truth or confidence of having it, can
make them judge so: but since every the most erring conscience does and must
believe the truth is with him, he has the same reason, so contentions must be
endless, and this state of conscience is just the Leviathans state of war;
besides that this pretense of any single party for it self makes war with the
hypothesis it self of liberty of conscience. But if they grant all other Sects
to have just right to act according to their conscience, then those that really
believe the doctrine of their Church is true, their ways blameless, and the
statutes which restrain the liberties of the Recusants and the Dissenters are
all just, those of them also that have sworn obedience to these statutes, and
those Magistrates and Governors too that are bound by oath to the execution of
them, and to take care of the peace of their Subjects, and hold that, as it is,
a duty and an obligation in conscience on them: these, I say, have just right
too to act according to their conscience also, and by consequence to execute
the Laws upon those others; and then, I am sure in conscience, and according to
the very rules of all these men of liberty, those have a right to take away
their wild and dangerous liberties, and by the very Principles of all these
Dissenters are as much bound in conscience to restrain them, as they think
themselves bound to use those liberties according to their conscience. Yea
these are bound in conscience to suffer all their Governors to put restraints
upon them; because to do so is for them to act according to their conscience,
or if they think (as it is not strange if they think contradictions) that they
have a right in conscience to contend for this with Governors, who yet they
acknowledge to have a right too to restrain their liberties, (since all, as
themselves have granted, have the same right,) there must needs be endless
quarrels and contentions both with Governors and with themselves, and just of
all sides, in which each has right, which is another contradiction also; and
so still this state of conscience will be the Leviathans state of war, and must
dissolve all Government, as being inconsistent with it. Whether any consequents
in prospect or design can make this state of things allowed and eligible, or
how far Governments can properly secure themselves, if it be allowed, which yet
it is certain that they have a right to do against the clamorous pretenses of
all conscience whatsoever as to Church Laws: yet how far they can, I say,
secure themselves against such sorts of men (...) side, who declare that their
Government it self is sinful; or (...) the other side a sort of men, who not
only here in this Nation, after the most dire and hateful treason ever hatched
or thought of, were not, nor are suffered by the Guides of their conscience, by
their Pastors neither their Supreme one nor their particular Confessors, to
give assurance of their civil obedience and allegiance to their own Prince. But
in France, after the murder of two Kings by them, both of their Religion, when
as Lewis the 13th did design, and ask the advice of his Parliament, to make
provision for his own safety and assurance of the Loialty of his Subjects by an
Oath (a thing by Gods own People, since 'twas a Kingdom, practiced) all the
Clergy, those Directors of the consciences of that Nation, were so far from
suffering it, that they made the King to cause the Parliament to raze out what
of it was drawn and registered in their Journals, professing to his face that
they would excommunicate all as Heretics that were against that Proposition,
that the Pope could depose Kings. But it is not this, but how to secure
Governments against it, to rectify the erring conscience I would speak to; and
if the sense of any sacred obligations, if the calamities of Church or State,
that cry aloud bemoaning the effects of conscience thus let loose, call upon
him to consider, and at least suggest the duty of examining his conscience,
then the (...) here of the text, the exercises that are like to have an
influence upon him, besides humble prayer to Almighty God for a right judgment
in all things, together with a hearty resolution not to suffer any principle or
interest so to engage him to a practice or opinion, but that, if God will
please to show him light, he will follow it strait, and utterly forsake those
paths, to which he was misguided by the error of his mind, and so begins to act
accordingly as well as he can. Now such a resolution has a promise, John 7. 17.
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of
God, or not. Besides this, I say, let him thus exercise himself, when any thing
offers it self to practice, and gets this holy advocate of its side, brings
conscience to plead, then I will search and examine strictly that same action,
first undress it quite, see what it is naked by it self, and then ask not what
fine motives, what good end it has, but where the rule is for it. If it be in
things merely Spiritual, then what Law of God; but if in other things, what Law
of man, what just subordination to Gods will is there for this action? For
laws, not zeal do make the rules for Conscience: for Conscience being nothing
but a full persuasion, judgment, dictate that a thing is either duty under
obligation, is according to a Law that does command it, or else is unlawful, is
against a Law. If Conscience shall tell me such a thing I am bound to do, but I
have no Law of God or man for it; or else such a thing I must forbear, it is a
sin, absolutely unlawful, but truly I can bring no Law in force against it,
sure I shall easily reject the clamors of this Conscience, for it talks
contradictions: for nothing can be unlawful, but what is against a Law. If, tho
there be not express Law to forbid or command, yet I see grounds that stagger
me, and several hard things which incline to my opinion, this does not make the
erring Conscience: for that is dogmatical and positive, and must have law,
doctrines and grounds of probability; those only make a doubt, the next
offense I mean to name.

An offense this, that whosoever stumbles at, does fall into the lowest pit,
for he that doubts, is damned if he eat Romans 14. 23. Now the state of a
doubting conscience is this, either the man in himself really believes the
thing he does consult of is forbidden, but yet seeing the example of some man
he has esteem for, or else hearing some good probable grounds to the contrary,
does entertain some doubt whether it be so bad, and upon that without being
resolved, yea thinking still it is a sin, yet ventures on it: in this case tho
the man may have some hopes it may not be a sin, yet judging in himself it is,
and choosing notwithstanding, it is plain he does not only venture at, but
chooses sin, and therefore sins. This was the very case of the weak Christians
in relation to eating things offered to Idols, which St Paul there speaks of.
Or secondly, if he do not absolutely in himself judge it a sin, yet really does
doubt it is, and without endeavoring to be truly satisfied by all appointed fit
means, does it howsoever; this man does as much as resolve I know not what it
is I am about to do, I doubt it is sin, but I resolve to do it, tho it be so.
Now this is a wicked resolution, and the consequent action must be so too: it
is as much as saying, I resolve to venture Gods displeasure, rather then loose
the satisfaction of that action; now whatsoever otherwise the action be, yet
such a resolution stains it with a vicious tincture, by infusion of that wicked
purpose.

To bring this to our own concerns, if my lawful Superior command a thing by an
established law, which yet either by some obscure place of Scripture, or by the
silence of Scripture, or some inference of my own from others having put that
action to an evil use, or the infusion of some Teacher of whose holiness I have
an opinion, I doubt whether I may do it or no, and cannot satisfy my self, in
this case, if the man that doubts comply, without acquiring any satisfaction,
do it merely too because he will not be obnoxious to the penalty of law, it is
clear he does it with a doubting conscience, and so sins; but if he thus
discourse, (which is the proper (...) for such a conscience to remove this
offense) I am sure God has commanded me to obey the lawful commands of my
lawful Superiors, now am I sure this is not lawful? No, that I am not, for I
only doubt; why then I must needs also doubt it may be lawful, therefore I
must needs doubt God has commanded me to obey them in this, and then if I
refuse I must needs do that with a doubting conscience; for if the thing be
lawful, I am sure I sin in not obeying, and I doubt it may be so, and so not
doing will have the same guilt, which by not doing I endevor to avoid.

Now if whatever the action be, as long as I know not certainly whether it be
lawful or unlawful in it self, I shall have equal guilt in the refusal (although
there be no scandal or contemt) as I can fancy to my self in doing; and if I
cannot satisfy my doubt my self, since I have then no other way to seek for
resolution, but from those whom God has set over me, shall not the reasons and
commands of my Superiors, the example of all those that are obedient, weigh as
much with me as the opinion of some whom I think holy, or some little color
which can only make me doubt? If I be not sure it is unlawful, and am
perfectly assured of my duty to my Superiors, this certainly ought to suspend
my other doubt, and in so doing I am sure, I take far the more probable and
safer course; and he that does so, cannot have the guilt of a doubting
conscience, for the resolution of that was clean another thing: I doubt there
may be sin in it, however I will do it, whereas this man that he may take the
safest course to avoid sin, resolves thus, merely for fear there may be guilt
in my refusal, I do that which otherwise truly I would not do.

I cannot pass by this reflection here, how there will come a time, when it
shall be more tolerable for the erring or the doubting conscience,
notwithstanding their sad consequences, than for those that hold the truth in
unrighteousness: the one sort of these have some checks at sin, they doubt and
they demur; the other sort sin merely because they would please God, and offend
out of zeal; but the other sin because they will sin. If actions lawful
otherwise will make up an indictment to our condemnation, don but with a
doubting mind, what guilt and what damnation is there in those that are
undertaken against known command and present full conviction? that muster up
and recollect all the forementioned guilts, which when they were divided, did
make actions so ruining; at once they defy God and their own heart: if he that
doubts is damned if he eat, tho what he eat were lawful to him, what will
become of him that eats to surfeiting, and knows that such things call for
condemnation? with what face can he blast a deceived honest Heathen with his
Gods, who in the face of God, and of all Laws, in view of a believed hell, and
in despite of heaven and of his own conscience that suggests all these to him,
yet by frequent intemperances makes his belly his god, and by uncleaness that
new testament idolatry, sets up as many idols, as his foul heats find objects,
and by dishonesty and frauds serves covetousness, which is idolatry? They, who
defy their conscience thus, are in the ready way to a reprobate sense, the last
offense that I will name.

When the heart gives a false judgment of things, Isaiah 5. 20.
calls evil good, and good evil in the Prophets words, it is not uneasy to
deduce how arrive at this. There is no pains bestowed upon the education of
their childhood, they are made indeed to renounce the Devil, the evil Spirit is
exorcis'd out of that hold he had of them on the account of being born children
of wrath; but no provision for the Holy Spirit taken care of, rather all that is
possible is don to grieve him thence, and so the evil one Matthew. 12. 44, 45.
returns, finds the house emty, and takes to him seven spirits worse than
himself, and they dwell there; or to speak out of parable, there are no
principles of virtue planted in them, no labor used to make impressions of
Religion and the fear of God, the sense of duty, aversation to all vice; but as
far as conversation, with example of all lewdness, can have influence, they are
bred and fitted for the Temter, and when they and temtations are grown up, it
is no wonder if they taste, then swallow down the bait, and so are taken: then
they get to themselves principles, that may stop the mouth of natural
conscience; either Religion does not mean so strictly, or against the
strictness they oppose the custom of the age, or honor, or the like, and these
together with the conversations of sin do clean take off the aversation, and so
by degrees the sense, the mind first leaves to be afraid and startle at it, and
then leaves to check at it, and having don this long, the custom stupifies the
conscience, and makes the sins seem necessary to them, and they cannot be
without them, and the absolute necessity makes them conceit them little sins,
and in a while no sins at all: stick not to say, those terrors Clergymen do
talk of, are but Mormo's, but religious specter. We have this daily
experience, that looseness in practice quickly grows into irreligion in heart,
that they who with all might and main do long resist the power of Godliness, do
at last proceed to cast off even the very form, and they who would not receive
the love of the truth, but did prefer the satisfaction of their humors,
prejudices, passions, lusts before the doctrine of piety and virtue, tho it
came with the greatest evidence of reasonableness; that such, I say, are given
over to strong delusions to believe lies, even lies of so eternal unhappy a
consequence as this, that virtue and religion are but emty names, that
conscience is but prejudice: such are those St Paul describes 1 Timothy 4. 2.
(...), men of branded consciences. Now we use to account that person infamous
that is branded only in his hand or forehead, but these are men of stigmatized
hearts, there is a brand upon their soul and conscience; and you will find some
other characters upon them there, they depart from the faith, they give heed to
seducing Spirits, lay out for a Religion that will give them hopes of safety
tho they sin on, and to doctrines of Devils; fit Scholars for such Tutors,
seeds of a blessed education they have, that have such Instructors, and such
they have whose consciences are branded: and the whole progress of their
wickedness you will find Romans 1. from v. 18. because they hold the truth in
unrighteousness, joined impious lives with the profession of the true Religion,
were vicious in despite of their own understandings, which told them, they
should not be so; upon which great proficiency in guilt v. 24. God withdrew his
grace, left them to the pursuit of all their foul desires, permetted them to
break out into all reproachful villainies, sins that were violences,
contumelies to their nature; yea v. 28. because they acted perfectly against
all notions they had of God, he gave them up to that abominable state of mind,
to have no sense of guilt, to have a judgment so perverted, as not to think
things of the most forbidden and most detestable nature to be foul, and then
see what a shole of consequents break in: from v. 29. feind vices, things that
do not only merit hell, but possess, enjoy, and make the place. These are the
entertainments of those Regions, but none more essential than those v. 32. they
not only commit those things, but have pleasure in those that do them, do not
only favor themselves in the transgressions, (for to that men may have some
temtation from the flesh) but to evince their understandings are debauched,
their consciences corrupted, and that they are of a reprobate mind, they take
pleasure in others committing them, from which they have no pleasure, can enjoy
nothing but the villainy of being glad that others are debauched and vitiated,
this recommends men to them. And truly now I have no words for them, they do
outgo expression; I may apply that which the Psalm 14. 1.
Psalmist says of the fool, in his heart there is no God. I am sure there is
none in theirs, that will not let his Deputy be there, not suffer conscience
his Vicegerent to be within them; and it were well, if they could exclude it
for ever. But alas! when their sins and pleasures shall begin to die, then
conscience will revive, and be their worm that never dies; however they have
stupifi'd it here, then it will gnaw eternally, then oh that they could have no
conscience, no sting, no lash: but it will be an immortal feind to them, and
that which they so much trample on now, will then be their great hell.

And now I can prescribe no exercise will remove this offense, when the
conscience is past feeling, then it is past cure. The only method is
prevention here, the only (...) to keep the conscience tender; then it will be
sensible of every the least touch of guilt, check at whatever we shall do
amiss. Conscience is the eye of the soul, now tenderness is a disposition very
proper to the eye, it is the tenderest part of the whole body; and if the
conscience be right, that is so of the soul: the smallest spill or mote is
restless agony to the eye, it never leaves to force out tears, both to bewail
the torment, and to wash away the cause. I am sure our Savior calls a sin of
the least size or guilt (...), Matthew. 7. 3. things that should make the
conscience as restless, fret into lamentings, prick passages for repenting
sorrow. The conscience of Converts always does so, Acts 2. 37. When they heard
this, they were pricked in heart; and indeed this is the necessary constitution
of Soul for them that ever hope to have their conversation holy: he whose eye
is not tender, it is not useful; if it be not sensible of spills that get into
it, it cannot be sensible of objects, such a callum as will make it not feel,
will make it not see; and when it cannot perceive pain, then it cannot direct
or light: and so the conscience, if it feel no grievance from thy vices, it
will never boggle at them; but when it is tender as the eye, then it will roll
and weep, if any thing disturb it, 'twill be restless till it free it self. Let
other Souls be tickled, when they feel the pleasures of a sin; but, Lord, let
my heart smite me, then the stroke and smart may make me fly the cause. Let
sin, that and cruel Serpent, sting, stab, wound me thus; for then it will make
outlets for its putrefaction, it will draw tears to cleanse me from it self:
and sure after the blood of Christ, there is no other laver to wash away the
foulness of my sin, but that which gushes from those wounds of spirit, nothing
else will quench the power of it. This tender conscience will preserve the
whole conversation pure, if its respects be universal, if its cares reach to
the whole latitude of its object, if it be void of offense both toward God,
and toward man, which shows the extent of its obligation, and is my next
consideration, of which in a few words.

Void of offense toward God and toward men, a conversation unblamable in all
things that relate to God or man, both these must be joined: the Honesty
without the Godliness is but Heathen Morality, and the Godliness without
honesty but Pharisaical Hypocrisy. It Is just that which our Savior describes
and sentences Matt. 23. 14. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for
ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers; therefore ye
shall receive the greater damnation: as if their long and earnest prayers
pulled down nothing else but woes and condemnation on them, and their more
religion gained them but more hell. The one of these for all his honesty, if he
have not piety, he is without God in this world, nor shall have any thing of
his heaven in the other, whose life did not look thitherwards, but aimed no
further than a conversation that was regular betwixt man and man. The other,
the dishonest man, notwithstanding his Godliness, shall be without God in the
world to come; for sure he is not fit to live with God in that, who is not fit
to live with man in this: who will not behave himself honestly, must not think
he can live religiously; nor can that help him toward Gods rewards, that does
but help him to the greater condemnation. So that they must be joined, and our
conscience must be void of offense toward God and toward men; and that not
only as the objects of our duty, but the rules.

That Gods Law is the rule of conscience, that we are bound to do what he
commands, I think I need not prove; in this I have only to wish, our practice
were as orthodox as our opinions. But that man can oblige the conscience, that
laws however just of our rightful Governors are a part of this rule, and we are
bound in conscience to observe what they would have us do, many men doubt;
there been qui latuit, been vixit, a close offender does not sin, and if they
come not under the lash of the Law, they think the conscience has no whip for
these offenses; yet Scripture is express Romans 13. 5. Wherefore you must needs
be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. again 1 Pet. 2.
13, 15. submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, for so
is the will of God. I do not here set down that humane Laws oblige the
conscience immediately, it is enough for me they do it by Gods constitution,
that what we do so is for his sake, and it is his will that we should do it; and
then he that does not obey, he breaks the will of God, and so does that which a
good conscience must needs tell a man he must not do. I know some have found
out a subterfuge, that only passive obedience is required in conscience, not
active; and tho this interpretation would secure the Magistrate, for men must
not rebel against that rod, which they are bound to submit to: yet

1. It Is strange a man should not be bound in conscience to obey the Law, yet
should be bound in conscience to suffer for the not obeying it. What reason for
this difference? Sure if either, it is most reasonable to escape the punishment,
if he can. But

2. What sense will they make St Paul speak, * wherefore ye must needs be
subject, not only for wrath; if wrath mean punishment, as it certainly does,
and be subject signify submit, not actively, but submit to punishment, as they
will have it, then it means, therefore a man must submit to punishment not
only for punishment, or for fear of being punished, but also because he is
bound in conscience to bear the punishment: now it is indeed impossible that a
man ought and is necessitated to submit to the penalty of the Law for fear of
the penalty of the Law, be bound to suffer a thing for fear of suffering that
very thing, or that he may escape that very suffering, which he is bound in
conscience too to suffer. These are contradictions. But of the active obedience
the sense is plain: we must obey their just Laws, not only that we may avoid
their punishments which we shall suffer if we obey not, but because we are
bound in conscience to obey. All the Apostles instances also being of active
obedience, and the whole reasoning of the place evincing it, might serve for
further evidence, but this shall suffice me for proof; and St Paul truly seems
to take in these here in the text, for amongst several things laid to his
charge, some against God himself, as profanation of his temple v. 6. he was
accused of being also pestilent, a mover of sedition v. 5. to all which he
answers in my text, that he was so far from profaneness in Religion and his duty
toward God, and from sedition in the State, that he did exercise himself in
this alone, in laboring to have a conscience void of offense in all things, by
God or his Governors commanded.

And this president of our Apostle, every one that hears me knows, the true
sons of this Church always followed, both in doctrine and in practice, even to
the Martyrdom not only of their persons, families, but of the Church it self.
Not like those holy Churchmen who account themselves exemt, no subjects to the
secular powers; nor those others, who withdrawing their obedience in all things
which they do not like, do seem to own no powers but themselves, are Subject
only to their own minds.

Now he that does thus exercise himself always, (which is the only thing that
I have left to speak to,) is in that state of Christian perfection, which the
Travelers to Heaven, while they are upon the way, can arrive at: for that must
needs be a good life, which is regulated by a good conscience; for if a
conscience do its part, do neither err nor doubt, but is tender in all, in a
word, if it inform truly in all duty, and thou do accordingly, thou do
all thy duty: therefore all good life is called by the name of a good
conscience 1 Timothy 1. 19. and plainer Hebr. 13. 18. We trust we have a good
conscience, willing in all things to live honestly, sincere endeavors to obey
in every thing, a conscience that is right in every thing, not boggling with
it, accepting the persons of duty, (being very conscientious in some things,
but taking liberty in others,) and being so (...) always, not by fits, having
only Paroxysmes of Religion, now and then very conscientious, otherwise loose
enough, but to be so in all respect, and at all times: this was the sum of all
St Paul's endeavor, he had no stricter aims, this was the height of his
Religion, this his exercise.

Yet why should I call it his exercise, when it is his enjoiment? it is his ante
past of heaven it self. The applauds of an honest undeceiving heart that is
conscious to it self of this in earnest, they shed comforts into every state of
life, beyond all that the earth can give, they shed the peace of God that
passes understanding. If my conscience be clear, let my condition be never so
overcast, I live in shine; let them be troubled with afflictions, or with sad
expectations, who understand no delights but carnalities, whose souls are
married to some little comforts of this world, adversity indeed sweeps all
their joys away at once; but he that understands the comforts of a good
conscience, and knows where to find them, and who has a treasure of them in
his breast, will soon be able to allay the other sadnesses. What can I want, if
I have a continual feast, and such is a good conscience: let all the world look
black upon me as long as I have light within me, and in that light can see a
pleasantness upon Gods face. Yea it is this indeed must make prosperity
contentful, when to the candle of the Lord, the light of his countenance also
does add its shine; when I have no ill remembrances, either as to the
possession or to the enjoiment; when my heart assures me I did neither get it
ill, nor use it ill, 'twas truly Gods gift to me, and I strive to make it an
instrument of my service to him. This is transfigur'd prosperity, but without
this, for all the hurry of men's pleasures, something will now and then rejolt
worse than surfets, and come up bitterer than the gall of ejected riots, and
they shall find their great provisions are but variety of nauseousness, only
plentiful vexation, and a jolly restlesness, while they are here; and then when
they but think of going hence, Ecclesiasticus 41. 1.
O death! how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man, that lives at rest in
his possessions, to the man that has nothing to molest him, has has
prosperity in all things; and if he have the sting of conscience to imbitter
it, which will be sure to stir at such a time, alas! how unconceivable a
sadness must then dwell upon that soul, that can think nothing kinder to it
self than hell. But he that can at such a time say with Esaiah 38. 3.
Hezekiah, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have don that which is good in thy
sight, then if God do not send a message of fifteen years, yet he will add to
him an everlastingness of years of joy; if his days do no return, nor the Sun
mount back again to give him a more full noon light, he shall be taken to the
fountain of eternal light. Oh let me have that light, that will enlighten the
sad approaches of the dark grave; that, when I am going to make my house in a
black lonely desolate hole of earth, will be like the day spring of
immortality, like the dawn of heaven, and such glimpses will break in through a
clear conscience. 'Twas that which made the Martyrs run to the fires of
execution as to fires triumph, and they looked upon their flames as on Elijah's
chariot's flames, that flew upwards, not with have to their own Sphere, but the
Sphere of Martyr's Heaven, and whose brightness did prelude and expire into
Glory.

SERMON VI. Of the Blessedness of Mourners.
Matt. 5. 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
THE (...) shecina, say the Jewish Doctors, will not rest upon a sad person,
that is, God will not be especially with him, nor will his holy Spirit keep him
company, that is, a solitary Mourner: and indeed we often find in Scripture,
that when the Prophets would invite Gods Spirit down upon they did heighten
themselves with mirth; but now, says Elisha, bring me a Minstrel, and it came
to pass while the Minstrel played, the hand of the Lord came upon him. And he
said, thus says the Lord, 2 Kings 3. 15. as if the Music had inspired him, and
his soul was tuned into Enthusiasme; and so also 1 Samuel 10. 5. thou shall meet
a company of Prophets coming down from the high place, with a Psaltery, and a
Tabret, and a Pipe, and a Harp before them, and they shall prophecy: and the
Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee. Yea and as God would not dwell with
them, so neither would he let them keep him company, they were not to appear
before him sad Deuteronomy. 12. 7. And there ye shall eat before the Lord your God,
and ye shall rejoice: and therefore God has no worse expressions for unclean
Sacrifices, than the bread of Mourners, Hos. 9. 4. They shall not be pleasing
unto him, but their Sacrifices shall be as the bread of Mourners, and as the
(...) those Sacrifices, for their carcases shall not come into the house of the
Lord. Yea he would not let those Melancholy people keep others company in his
service, but there was porta lugentium, a gate for Mourners to enter by
themselves into the Temple-service, as if the mirth were among their precepts,
and to be sad were to be defiled and unclean. But it is not so with us in the
Gospel, where the only Sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, a broken and
contrite heart he will not despise; but the bread of Mourners shall be the
(...), from which he will never turn away his face, and a few penitent tears
are the scope and the fulfilling of all the Jewish purifyings, and the Spirit
of the Lord moves upon the face of these waters; (...) he flutters and hovers
over them, and as he did out of the first waters, so out of those tears he
hatches a new creation, they being the very first effects and signs of life in
the new creature and the new birth also, natural to both; Infants and the Child
of God also are born weeping and crying, this being the very first throw in
regeneration. Yea so far is this sorrow from displeasing God, that it is the
great engagement to him to give us comfort both here and hereafter, and it is
put amongst Christ's first beatitudes here, Blessed are they that mourn, for
they shall be comforted.

The words present either a bare description of persons, or withal involve a
duty, the being Mourners. Secondly import a designation of their condition,
that they are Blessed. Thirdly they give the reason and the manner of that
condition, For they shall be comforted; so that mourning may be doubly
understood, either as a duty, or as an aphorism: in the later case mourning is
taken not to be prescribed at all, but only Christ looking upon his Disciples
who were in the worlds esteem in a sad low condition, he does encourage them,
that notwithstanding their unequal estimate, yet they are in a blessed
condition, for they shall be sure to be comforted. And thus first it may be as
an appendage to the former aphorism, in that he had by the assurance of a
reward encouraged them in the entertainment of poverty and calamities, had
advanced the lowly into heaven, and enrich't the patient poor with the
inheritance of a Kingdom, those that were poor in Spirit, content with their
condition; and then this follows, blessed are those that mourn, for they shall
be comforted; as if it were after this manner: but what if our calamities do
grow upon us, and we are not able to bear them with an even mind and a serene
countenance, but they cast us down, we greive and mourn under them and cannot
be comforted? yet even for this condition there is promise, Christ is so far
from breaking this bruised reed, that he confirms and strengthens it; the
greivousness of our calamities shall not exclude all hope of ease, neither
shall our weakness and infirmity exclude us from the number of the blessed: he
will neither impute our want of courage, that groans and faints under the
burden, provided that we be not heated by it into impatience at his
dispensations, nor chaft into wrath against them that lay it on us, tho we do
mourn, if we do not vex, we are blessed; neither will he suffer our
calamities, when he has tried and purged us by them, quite to oppress us, but
how grievous soever they be, they shall find multitudes of comfort, even the
comfort of mitigation, for to that Gods faithfulness is engaged 1 Cor. 10. 13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be temted above that ye are able;
but will with the temtation make a way also to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it. Secondly the internal comforts of Gods grace 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulations. Thirdly the comfort of a
joyful recompense, even here for the most part, John 16. 20, 21. I say unto you
ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; and ye shall be
sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she is in
travail, has sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered
of the child, she remembers no more the anguish for joy that a man is born
into the world. Our afflictions may be throws, but they shall end in birth, and
have the ease and joy of a delivery; and therefore our Savior said of himself
(...) Luke 12. 50. how am I straightened? as a woman in child to accomplish his
Baptism, that Baptism of agony, sweat and blood; or certainly however an
eternal recompense of joy hereafter, everlasting consolations, as St Paul says
2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. When instead of this hunger and thirst and tears the Lamb which
is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living
fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there
be any more pain: Rev. 7. 17. and 21. 4.

And first we learn hence the compassion of our Savior, who has indulged us
the infirmities of our nature: he has not made our weak affections to be sins,
but has showed us a way to make them advantages toward blessedness; God that
was made flesh remembers that we are but flesh, and does not require of us to
be insensible, it is not a vice not to be a stock, such as the Stoics required
their wise man should be, (...), no grief, nor no sense of any external
calamity; tho you thrust his hand into the fire, it must be no more to him,
than if you burn his staff; for his body is but his organ, his instrument, no
part at all of him: but Christ requires no such hard tasks of us. Had he denied
us our tears, and forbid us the ease of mourning in afflictions, and made
weeping to be cowardice and sin, it had bin a hard saying, we had had reason to
have thought ourselves severely dealt withal: but he gives us leave as it were
to love the dear things of this world, a little to weep when they leave us, if
we do not love them so as not to love our brother and our God, leaving them if
the world leave us, and when by calamities our comforts are taken from us, by
frettings and vexations throwing off our God from us, repining at him, and
casting his commands away, of not envying, not returning, provided in our tears
we have humble perfect submissions and resignations of our selves, throwing our
selves down at his feet, and from our very souls saying, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: then Christ he yields to the
tenderness of our nature, and provided we mix no gall with our tears, no
bitterness with our weepings, no murmurs nor no grumblings with our groans, he
pardons all our weaknesses, and makes our mourning to be but as a call and
invitation to him to come to comfort us.

Secondly from the diversity of comforts that belong to every great greiving
calamity here, we learn the munificence of our Savior, who does with such
infinite advantage return our afflictions; he did himself suffer so many
sorrows, and found they were so hard to bear, that for every grief we patiently
endure he renders a fourfold comfort, and of those some Divine, the last
Eternal. Thus does he reward not our virtues only (for it is no command of
ours to be greiv'd,) but our mischances, our inflictions: he recompenses thy
enimie's malice to thee with multiplied and eternal consolations, yea he does
thus reward thy ease; for such it is to mourn in crosses, our greifs boil out
at our eyes, and ease their swellings by those eruptions of tears, yet this
very ease does he comfort us for, and makes those tears, which for the present
do refresh, to be the rivers of Paradise, the fountains of the waters of life;
teaches us the constant vicissitudes of grief and joy; sorrow and gladness so
receive one another constantly, that in this life they that mourn shall be
comforted, they that Luke 6. 25.
laugh shall weep. Laughter has in it self more than the tears of sadness,
(...) says Aristotle, the hurries of delight even in the very wicked weary
themselves into a dullness, and die into a sadness; the intemperances rejolt in
bitter risings, and the more forced and violent the delight is, it is but like
the raising the pendant weight, which by how much you lift it up one way, it
drives it self so much on the other side; yea in the better sort of Christians
the frollicks of these pleasures here below, tho not sinful, do for the most
part end in thoughtful sadnesses, careful regrets, not only in that such
persons, when they come to themselves, find themselves estranged from God, and
from devouter duty; a deadness is upon them, and they must take pains to wind
themselves up again: but if with any conscionable care they look into
themselves, they shall discern that little loosnesses and vanities and prides
and such other companions have insinuated themselves, and crept in with the
frollicks; matter for humiliation and sorrow, if they mean to recover the true
inward Religious content which never springs with such a stream, as from these
serious and retired reflections; they that so mourn shall find comfort. Thus
the Aphorism also has much truth in order to the two lives, that here and that
hereafter.

2. This Aphorism also thus taken bears the full sense of that frequent saying,
wherewith people used to comfort one another concerning these crosses, you are
happy you have your sufferings in this life; which sentence, tho it be not true
in the full latitude, as thoevery man that suffered here had a crown therefore
laid up for him; for afflictions may be vengeance for sins, which if they do
not reduce us, as many are not bettered by their sufferings, why then they do
increase their score, enhance their reckoning, and tho they be the very
beginning of Hell here, yet they do also heat Hell seven times more for them,
and their very sufferings make them suffer more hereafter, than if they had not
suffered here: because such sin against Gods last method of reducing them. Tho
this be too frequent truth, yet also there seeming some sufferings allotted to
every man, as he that has had no cross here, needs to look well to his tenure
by which he holds his inheritance, since God has said, Hebr. 12. 6, 8.
he chastens every son whom he receives; and if ye be without chastening,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. So also he that
runs on in the race of Piety that is set before him, if he do meet with sharp
stakes and stumbling blocks that hurt and gall him, yet if he starts up and
goes on, he may look upon these as good evidences of his sonship, and security
that he has drunk his cup, and the dregs are not reserved for him; and thus
both from this text, blessed are they that mourn, especially in St Lukes
expressing it, blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh; and woe unto
you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep, Luke 6. 21, 25. and most
clearly from Abraham to the rich man Luke 16. 25. Son, remember that thou in
thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but
now he is comforted, and thou art tormented, or as See Cypr. l. 3. Test. ad
Quirinum c. 61.
(...) may signify rogatur, now thou Dives art the beggar, Lazarus is begged
of; where you see clearly a portion of good and evil things seeming appropriate
to every man on earth, each has his good and evil things, and he that has
received the one may well look for the other: this clearly points out a
vicissitude of good and evil, of comfort and of torment.

We learn hence the unequitable mistake of those men, who expect and gape for
all good things in both lives, quadrigis caelum petimus, they would go to
heaven in triumphal chariots, and in smooth and broad ways sleep themselves
into bliss, have two Paradises, all ease here and heaven hereafter: and even
just such is that also of them, that make a calm prosperity here, to be a sign
and seal to them that they are in the right way to heaven; thus Turcism shall
commence the only true Religion, and Mahomet shall dethrone Christ from his
own purchased right hand of God, for he has the more purple sword; thus
succesful iniquity shall advance into piety, and sin by growing predominant, by
becoming powerfully and exceeding sinful, accumulate into virtue. No, my
Brethren, the comfort is promised not to them that have it here, but to the
Mourners, take heed least the Blessings you receive in this life be called your
good things, or your consolations, as Luke 6. 24.

I shall give you one sign whereby men may be able in some measure to discern,
whether they do esteem, and make them to themselves such; God gives the good
things of this world for uses, not to terminate our desires, as things of
themselves good: only He himself, who is the supreme, the last good, can be
so; all other are designed for ends, that do at last look up to him, and are
and ought to be subordinate to that last highest end. Health is given to enable
us to employ our selves in the actions of some honest calling, for our own
maintenance, for the good of others, and for the service of God, and carrying
on the works and ends of Providence: so wealth or the provisions we acquire and
enjoy, and every other good thing of this life. Now he that thwarts this order
or subordination, that lays out his desires on the things themselves, that
minds them for their own sake only, and the satisfaction he himself receives
from them without looking further, these are his ends apparently, and so his
good things which he rests in; which if God permit him to enjoy, he therefore
has his good things, and has no great reason to expect and look for other.
Now how miserably does this man delude himself? for this is to prefer the
present moment before the following eternity: it is as if the Embryo should
wish for a fair spacious womb, and choose to spring and leap there for its nine
months, rather than to live a pleasant age in a variety of full delights, and
so it may but dance in the womb not care to be delivered into a dungeon, and
born a fettered slave: it is to choose the riot of one meal, one good feast, and
to starve the whole remainder of a man's life; yea it is worse, it is to love a
pleasant moment more, than he fears eternal Hell, or loves as eternal Heaven.
And this will be discerned, (and is by most of them that live in jollity) when
they come to die; when they must bethink themselves of going hence, and have
not considered to provide a place, nay have all reason to believe they have no
place provided, but that which God Matt. 25. 41.
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; when they shall think in sad earnest, I
have lived a pleasant life, and never have denied my self an appetite nor
thwarted a design, nor yet has God denied me any thing, but Providence has
suffered every thing to serve my inclinations, and to gorge my appetites; but I
am going now where these unruly appetites, that I have so indulged, will
infinitely grow, and where all satisfaction will be impossible, and my desires
will be my endless torment.

3. This Aphorism also by pronouncing a present blessedness to the Mourners,
lets us see the advantages they have above other men in their journey to
Heaven. Delights for the most part they are but the baits and the sawces of
sin: by these the Devil and the World and our own Flesh temts us to iniquities,
and keeps us fast glew'd in them; this is every man's experience, yea the most
innocent delights they are at the best avocations from Heaven, and from better
things; they entertain and hold our thoughts upon fading objects, that will
never profit us, if it happen that they do not utterly ruin us: whereas the
causes of mourning, calamities, yea and the passion it self they beget virtues
in us, a whole chain of them; for tribulation works patience, patience
experience, experience hope, Romans 5. 3, 4. yea indeed they make us perfect and
entire lacking nothing, Jam. 1. 4. as if to be robbed and spoiled of all things
were the sure way of wanting nothing, not a virtue certainly, these deep waters
of affliction and these tears of ours, that raise the stream, they drive and
waft us to our God, Psalm. 78. 34.
when he smote them, then they sought him and inquired after God early; a storm
will make a Mariner pray, and when the tempest beats him down upon his knees he
will lift up his hands to Heaven; the Heathen Seamen fled to the true Jehovah,
when they were ready to suffer shipwreck Jonah 1. 14, 16. yea they do not only
drive but woo us to God, they are temtations in the sense of bait also, I will
allure her and bring her into the wilderness, says God Hos. 2. 14. when I have
made her solitary, put her as in the desert, brought her into the very place of
dragons, this shall be my allurements, my enticing wooings of her: and not to
loose the experience of this, St Chrysostom has given it in the frequent
example of men of most effeminate, loose, dissolute lives, yet by a cause of
mourning, by the loss of a bosom wife, of a dear only heir they become (at
least for that time of grief) strict and severe; how do they banish all soft
delights, no curious provision for the flesh, but more than Philosophical
abstinence almost to the pining of themselves, watches and silence, quiet and
humble prostrations of themselves, unspeakable meekness, huge commiseration of
all that are afflicted, these are their passions and their exercises; for a
while they so contemn the world, think it so little worth their moiling for,
that now it is not worth a wish; in that time should a fire seize on all they
had, or a spoiler run away with all, it would scarce divert a thought or eye to
it from their sad melancholy object, they look upon all gilded pomps and soft
pleasures as clothed with the same dark sable that themselves have on, they
are almost ready to betake themselves to the wives sepulcher, running to
inhabit that chamber of death, and again to marry themselves in that cold bed
the grave; so easily will mourning wean us. In this dimness of anguish, and
darkness as of the shadow of death, we should not run to hugg and embrace
gloworms, but prostrate our selves in this dust and ashes, and with sad serious
repentance set on mourning, which shall bring me to the consideration of the
words as of a duty.

And first of the duty in general: now the mourning here being opposed to them
that laugh in St Luke, the thing forbidden in the duty may be all foolish
lightness in conversation and manners, all vanity, looseness and wantoness, all
uncomly behaviors or jestings, all freer recreations that beget or are
accompanied with any of these; and the duty be in part the same with that in
the Phil. 4. 8. (...), if any things be grave, think on these things, says he
there, gravity being the very garb of a Mourner. Not that I would have this
duty to exclude all recreation, which also according to the persons with whom
it is, may be innocently light; as with children serious toys are no sport for
them. But

1. Recreation must be such as may cherish health and strength, and unbend the
mind by diverting it; for to weary my self by my refreshment is to contradict
the very aim of it, to make my recreation need another sport to refresh me
after the toil of my laborious idleness: and therefore also

2. It must be moderate; otherwise it does exchange with my calling, and my
refreshment becomes my emploiment: and

3. It must be innocent; I must not make it my sport to offend God; it is too
dangerous a recreation to jest with and provoke the Almighty, to play with sin,
and to sport away a virtue is of too ill consequence: and the duty of the text
says also it should be.

4. According to the condition of my person, somewhat grave, not so extremely
light and vain; and if you would by these examine the usual delights, first all
freer revelling, which if they be in pleasures of the taste, end frequently in
intemperance, are accompanied with foolish discourses, very often profane; and
with swearings, idle and bitter jestings at those which are present, and
detractions of those that are absent, whence proceed quarrels and the like:
they are also full of apishness in the process of them below the gravity of
common sense, much more of a Christian, a member of the Son of God: we should
find these, I say, to jarr with more than one of the former requisites of
recreation. Some other sorts are often the instruments of infinite vanity, the
great engines of lasciviousness and lust. Wanton Songs and unchaste books, these
very things they put a fucus upon sin, and they dress iniquity with all the
adulteries of possible art, that they may the more enticingly prostitute her:
here are young souls ensnared by these, to whom the very description of sin is
invitation and conquest. Do not sit by a woman that is a Singer, says the wise
Son of Syrach; and if innocent beauty be irresistible temtation, if it do at
once assault both at the eyes and ears, charge the soul with charms at both
those ports, how then shall the very pleasure of that temtation, the wantoness
it self be resistible, when it comes dressed with harmony, when it does melt the
imagination into the soft looseness of its own smooth airs and gentle
warblings? How shall they escape when they see sin clothed in all the flowers
of Rhetoric as books present, when they see the example of men temting to it
and learn the method, when they see it acted, and the delight of it expressed
with all the advantages of sinful art, with very prurient words, and committing
language. Some others, as great gamings, (not that I condemn the thing in
general) when they are used with much appetite, either of the sport it self or
of the price, they become immoderate, too much time is spent upon them. And
Causinus says, did a man commit no other sin, but conversing a good part of
his life with kings and knaves of cards, being invited to the conversation of
Angels, yet were it no small offense. But besides that they are the nurses of
anger, they dictate ill language, and they are the apprentiship of cursings,
oaths, and blasphemy: so that if you put all these together, you shall find
that by all these recreations we do but bait and temt our sins, we do the
Devils work against our selves; and we that know our strength is not
miraculous, that find how often and easily we fall, are bound in conscience to
avoid those things which we find are occasions to us of sin: and if you would
instead of those impressions, which the vain pleasures of those recreations do
leave upon your desires, entertain and heighten these few considerations to
your selves, it might a little bridle.

1. A Christian is a mourner, my blacks, my dark sad veils are are spread over
me; and should I see a woman in that habit, and, while it was new, go to
revels, sing obscene catches, and spend much of her time in gamings, what would
I think of that woman? Why even the same strumpet, lewd thing is my soul, that
in the days of her mourning does thus luxuriate. And is it not a sad thing that
a Christian, (a very serious name, that) a man, that has the delights of
heaven to refresh himself with, that has God to converse with, should not yet
know how to pass his time without these lighter vain follies, which yet he
would be loath to do before a man of quality and discretion; yea that he cannot
refresh himself without sinful delights, that he must go take a walk in Hell to
divert himself for fear he nauseate upon Heaven?

2. All the holy Angels, that so great cloud of witnesses, they look upon me
acting these my impertinent ridiculous follies, and it does break off their
melody; they mourn to see me, a Christian, a man that should be one of them,
thus foolishly passing my irrevocable time, idly spending my hours of
repentance, and vainly throwing away my possibilities of Heaven, and doing this
so unseemly, destroying my self with lightness and to no purpose.

3. How many now do mourn in their state and expectation of miseries, and with
sad yellings bewail their lost hours, and the sins which their lightnesses and
recreations drew upon them, the curses and ill language of their gaming, the
fornications of the lusts which their songs and dances did provoke them to, and
the intemperance of their revels, and the idle words of all of them in general,
of which yet our Savior says we must give an account? and have I not reason to
fear the same expectations and woes? and then had I not better be a little more
serious and grave, put on the strictness and severity of a Christian here,
unless I can resolve, so I may but sing wantonly here, not to care tho I howl
in hell eternally, so I may but revel and drink here, let the never-dying worm
for ever gnaw upon the very marrow of my soul, and Gods fury drink up my
spirits, and my self for ever suffer the perpetual thirst of feavor, dwell with
everlasting burnings, and rather than I will put on black and be a mourner
here, I will be thrust into the land of Matt. 8. 12.
utter darkness, where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth?

But I will now descend to the particular exercises of this duty, of which I
will name but two: the first is to bewail and mourn for the calamities that
befall or are impendent on a Church and State, or any member of it, either
others or our selves, without considering whether this be like to be our case
or no; I only put it in the general as a duty, and a particular exercise of
this in the text: whenever any judgment do befall a Land, to be truly humbled
and sadded by it, and to compassionate any one that is afflicted by it, and as
St Paul bid us Romans 12. 15. to weep with them that weep. Now to move us to
this, he that is not affected, he declares plainly, that he is no fellow-member
of him whose sufferings he does not partake in, nor a part of that Church in
whose judgment he is not humbled; for says St Paul 1 Cor. 12. 26.
if one member be afflicted, all the rest suffer with it: and experience says
it too, and then shall the body of our Head Christ, a whole Church be wounded
and maimed, have its last deathpangs upon it, lie struggling and gasping, and we
unmoved at this, have the same full delights, and taste them too, feel no
gripes, no sympathy of convulsions, and shall we yet think our selves members
of that body of Christ? Oh no, we hold not of the Head our Savior, we have no
communion with him; for if we had, we should have communion of sufferings, a
fellow-sense. There is no such convincing sign as this in the world, this
flowing from the very nature of grief; for grief cannot properly be but for an
evil that is some way annexed and proper to our selves, de malo conjuncto; for
as appetite is implanted for the use of him in whom it is implanted, so it is
not proper to it to have any aversation to evil, except it be some way evil to
him whose appetite has that aversation, and to greive at misery I must some
way conceive it to concern my self. Now then as he that does not conceive
himself a member of a Church, nor a fellow member, nor any way relating to it,
he cannot truly greive; so he that does not greive, declares no communion with
it, he is another thing, a member quite cut off or dead, and so stupid and
insensible. Such a judgment do thou pass upon thy self whoever do not
mourn, outlawest and excommunicatest thy self, neither belongst to Church nor
State, nor yet to Christ.

2. As thou have no charity to thy Brother, nor to thy afflicted Mother; so
neither have thou any love to God, whose glory tho it be asserted by the
punishment of a sinful Land or Church, he is also still dishonored by the sins
which do then reign, and to which he does permit for the most part the
punishment of sin, and that power and authority or discipline which divisions
in the Church cut short, has for its consequent all unbridled looseness and
profaness, Blasphemy and Atheism; the calamities of a State are embitter'd by
all sorts of licenses that grow when Government is weakn'd: to see a whole Land
mourn with the dark purple of its blood, all which blood as it is the
punishment of that Nation, so it is the guilt also to see the wickedness of a
Kingdom plagued with the ruin of many thousands of men's lives and thousands of
souls too that fell in actual iniquity, and yet to think that this plague is
the greatest wickedness of all, armed with the most crying sins that are, that
the very punishment must call for punishment and revenge of it self, and help
to make up the measure of judgment, that the sentence of desolation may be
irreversible and utter, to see two inundations overflow the Land, two abysses
of blood and guilt, and one deep calling upon another to meet and swallow us
and bury us in their graves of sin and deep ruin; yea to see iniquity become
impudent and sin triumphant, which is the great sign of utter ruin as it was to
the Jews, an omen worse than Comets or Blazing-stars, and the dismal voice of
(...), yea and in this ruin too I do not see how any will well free themselves
from guilt; for if they be the ruiners they are the great spoilers, the sinners
if the ruined; they have contributed to make those others the sinful
inflicters: and if in all this there be not matter for a little mourning, if
God dishonored, souls destroi'd, lives perishing, Church ruining, and nothing
but sin flourishing, and ourselves not unguilty, and if this be not an object
for our tears, we are the most uncharitable, most obdurate creatures in the
world, Niobe's stone is not fit to be our emblem, for that stone could sweat
tears; we are more rock than that which Moses struck, whom the rod of God
cannot make weep, we are next degree to Lucifer himself, for only Hell is sure
at ease to see its company increase.

3. Lastly this not mourning in the judgment of a Nation is a sin which God
does most heavily characterize and threaten, Amos 6. 1, 6, 7, 8. Isaiah 22.
when the Prophet had described how it should be in the day of desolation v. 4,
5. then because they did not do it, see the judgment v. 12, 13, 14. yea this
very thing, that men are insensible, is as it were the very last judgment on a
Nation, and the sign of utter rejection, Jer. 16. 5, 6, 7.

But how can this duty of mourning consist with those so frequent
Gospel-Commands to rejoice in utmost afflictions? James 1. 2, 3. Count it all
joy when ye fall into diverse temtations, knowing this, that the trying of your
faith works patience: and St Paul most often. It Is true indeed we are to
rejoice in them, because they are Gods methods of bettering us; by them he does
purge ad cleanse us, Isaiah 4. 4, 5. and c. 1. 25, 27. Redeemed with judgment,
even with the judgment that I shall execute upon them. But then

1. What reason have we to mourn also that we are such foul sinners as to need
such ways of purging, that Christ's death should not have motive enough in it to
turn us from iniquity, that his blood should not be sufficient laver enough to
wash us but our own must be poured out also, that our air should be so infected
that nothing but an universal conflagration can purify, that we should be such
refractory stubborn persons, whom nothing but wounding will do good upon,
nothing but ruin will reduce? But then

2. How are we more to mourn that this very method should not be able to reduce
us, that we will run upon lashes, swords and deaths to sin, that in the midst
of judgments and against them too we commit iniquity, that every stripe does
increase our reckoning, add to our iniquities, and no possible method left to
reduce them whom correction will not make sensible; but our villainies grow up
with our sufferings, and our sins are fatned by our blood, as the land is.

Yea lastly how are we to mourn that to the rest of our sins this also is added
by us, of not mourning at our judgments, but using all possible means to
prevent it, to lay a sleep the sense of any judgment that is upon the Nation,
to be so far from bestowing one hour of sadness upon those so grand motives to
it, that they do all they can to keep it from them; and if those judgments
happen to some, they look upon it carelessly, as a thing that does not concern,
rather as a matter only of rejoicing; if to others whom they wish well to,
they search out wine and vice to quench and to divert the memory and thought of
it, to drown sad news in sadder sin; this is to labor hard lest sadness and a
virtue should creep upon me, to search out means to assist me to keep Gods last
method from doing any good upon me: this is one cause of greatest judgment
Isaiah 5. 11, 12, 13, 14.

The second and indeed the great exercise of this duty in the text, is to mourn
for our sins; and

First for the infirmities of our nature, that stain that we were born with,
that engagement to death that we brought into the world with us, and which is a
clog and weight upon us throughout the whole course of our lives to disable us
from doing our duty as we ought.

Secondly for the sins of our habits, whereby we have advanced those
infirmities into customs, made a covenant with that death to which we were born
engaged, and our whole practice is the exercise of those things whose wages is
death eternal; or if we are not gone so far in vicious customs, yet for the
gross foul acts which men sometimes commit, those unkind stabs and wounds to
our own souls, those cruel self-murders, these all are to be daily mourned for.
Now I shall only name a few reasons why we should mourn, and so stir us up to
it.

1. Because only in this and in relation to this is grief of any use at all:
God and Nature, they say, made nothing in vain; now if it were not for our sins
grief would be almost in vain, a certain sign that this passion must be
emploi'd upon our sins, ut propter hujus tantum sublationem sit concessa, says
St Chrysostom. For does any man loose a child? why if he greive to death will
his mourning raise him? Is thy Estate taken from thee? why thou art sad upon
it, but will thy tears recover it? But have thou sinned, and do thou truly
mourn and greive for it? why thy tears do wash away thy sin and blot out thine
offense. So that mourning being every where else preposterous and unprofitable,
was clearly intended to be spent upon our sins.

2. What ingratitude is it to thy Savior not to find in thine heart to mourn
for those sins for which he did die; the Son of God did sweat, and pray, and
cry, and shed a torrent of blood and water, and suffer death for those very
sins of thine and mine which we think so slightly of, that we will not shed a
tear for them? O my Brethren, if there is in us any love of that our Jesus, or
indeed of our selves, we would now transplant the Agonies, and make them ours,
and sweat out a few drops of sorrow to cure us of those feavors of our sins.

3. Yea it is a very trouble to our God that we do not greive, he mourns to see
that we will not mourn, Hosea 13. 14. when God had complained before of
Ephraim, what a foolish child it was that it did not repent; he tells them
there, that if they had don so, I would have ransomed them from the power of
the grave, (not I will, for the very next verse contradicts that) I would have
redeemed them from death, O death, I had bin thy grave, O grave I had bin thy
destruction; but comfort is hid from mine eyes: (repentance we read, but the
word bears and the sense requires comfort,) as if the eyes of the Lord were
therefore full of tears, because Ephraim's were not, and he could not receive
comfort, if Ephraim did not mourn: and if we do not mourn, God will comfort
himself some other way concerning us to our grief, Isaiah 1. 24. Therefore thus
says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the Mighty one of Israel, ah! I will ease me
of mine adversaries, (...) the very word before I will be comforted by reason
of mine adversaries; how? why I will avenge me of mine enemies. Ah my Brethren
when God is to be comforted by his vengeance upon us, when he can find no ease
but in our ruin and destruction, and that he calls his comfort in relation to
the non-mourning impenitent, where shall we find ease and comfort then?

And then methinks this should scare us into the use of this, fright us out of
that stupid lethargy in sinning, which does so dull us in it, makes us so
senseless of it and the danger we are in by reason of it, that we cannot bestow
one day in weeping, mourning, and fasting, no nor indeed an hour of serious
sadness upon an age of sin, a whole life of iniquity: the very next step of
this into which we shall be sure to fall, is the greatest sin and judgment in
the world, it is that spoken of as a character of the foulest Heathens, Ephesians.
4. 18. 19. Having their understandings darkened, being alienated from the life
of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness that is in
their heart; who being past feeling have given themselves over to
lasciviousness, to work all uncleaness with greediness: rather because of the
brawny hardness of their hearts, which are become callous, insensible of any
admonitions, stings and grief, but dead to all sense of sin, and having put off
all fear of it; and who these are he tells you in the next words (...), such as
when they do the foulest acts, are not touched with any grief for having don
them, but like dead members of the body that are forsaken by the vital spirits,
if you lash or prick or lance them, they feel no pain: even so these whose
consciences are retired and a sleep, they do not mourn for any of their foulest
actions, which is the very height of impiety; for such do strait give
themselves over to all filthiness to work all uncleaness with greediness. This
is the effect of not mourning, and then how do they deserve and provoke this
judgment, who if at any time their conscience begin to twinge them for any of
their sins, they presently divert their thoughts, lest the mourning in the text
should creep upon them, and they should grow sad? These men dread their virtue,
they are afraid of becoming pious, and to avoid the way to heaven is their
design and contrivance; they come not so near duty as the wicked in hell, have
not so much repentance as the damned have; for there is sorrow for their sins,
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

I should 2dly encourage those that do thus mourn, but the text does that
sufficiently, they are blessed, and they shall be comforted.

First they are blessed for this mourning, it is the great effect and sign of
this Spiritual life; that man's sickness has not yet killed him, who is
sensible of it, who greives by reason of the anguish of it, and he is not dead
who feels the weight of it and mourns for it.

Secondly if it be true, it draws such a train of virtues after it, as it made
St Paul rejoice that he had made the Corinthians sad, 2 Cor. 9, 10, 11. and
then this very same verse will assure them of the comfort hereafter; for all
the Gospel-promises are assured upon the terms of repentance, which this Godly
sorrow is the first link of, and does draw after it: and then if there be any
comfort in the company of myriads of Saints and Angels, if we dare take
Christ's judgment, if he had any taste who suffered so many mourning fits, that
lived a life of tears here, that often wept but never laughed, yea a life of
horrid suffering, and yet thought those comforts a full glorious recompense to
him for all those sufferings, and therefore may well be to us for a few tears;
if there be any joy in the beatifical vision and in heaven, they shall be
comforted that mourn, when as I told you out of Revelations, all tears shall be
wiped from their eyes, there shall be no more trouble, nor sorrow, nor crying,
nor pain. And yet this is but the Negative part of their eternity of bliss,
which to conceive is to be as God, and to enjoy is to be one with him.

And O thou Blessed Jesu, the eternal Lord of all those comforts, be favorable
unto us thy servants, that turn to thee with weeping and with mourning, that do
with hearty bewailing for our hardness desire thee to teach our souls with some
compunction for those iniquities that did put thee to death and would ruin us,
to break our rocky hearts, that they may stream out tears for those our sins
which shed thy blood, and would cast us into eternal wailings; and as thou have
humbled us into the dust, and prostrated our very souls unto the ground, to
grant unto us to sit down in that dust and to bewail our own demerits, which
our very ruin can neither equal nor amend. O suffer us not to be so obdurate,
as to prove unmovable by all thy pressures, insensible of our own miseries and
sufferings, and such as amidst the pains of sin do still retain the malice and
the obstinacy, and then at last by these thy methods and our greifs recover us
from the follies of our lives, close our eyes and withdraw our affections from
the temting lightnesses and vanities of our conversations; and fix our thoughts
and appetites upon thy serious comforts, those heavenly refreshments after so
much sadness, that we being reckoned amongst them whom thou do chasten, put
into the number of thy mourners, whose share of sorrows are dispenc't in this
life, may have title to the inheritance of Sons, the joys of blessedness, and
the portion of eternal consolations in the land of everlasting pleasures with
thee the Lamb that were slain, and art therefore worthy to receive all honor,
power, praise, might, majesty, and dominion with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
now and for evermore.

SERMON VII. OF THE CLEANSING POWER Of Christian HOPE.
1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is
pure.
HOPE is of all others the most active passion, setting all the rest of them
and the whole man on work; for who would ever do or desire any thing, if he did
not hope for some good by it? It is this hope alone that employs all the men
and all the professions of the world: it is the wings of the Desires and
Actions, carrying them through the greatest difficulties with courage and
alacrity, with Confidence and an unwearied Constancy, Ad bonas spes pertinax
animus est. Never will a man leave so long as he does hope, and of all hopes
that of the Christian should be the most active; because it aims at the highest
good, in comparison of which all other good things are but shadows. For what
are the pleasures of earth to the things of God, not worthy to be the
expressions, no nor the foils of them? Now we see the greater the hopes, the
more active men are in the pursuit of them; for who is there that will take so
much pains for a Cottage, as for a Crown? And is it not then a wonder, that of
all Hopes yet this Hope of Heaven should be the least effectual in the minds of
men; and of all pleasures those of God should least invite, and least employ
us? For what one is there that does not with more eager and constant industry
pursue the hopes of profit or the hopes of pleasure, than he does the hopes of
Immortality and of Blessedness? How few are there that do not spend more time
and more endeavors, take more and longer pains in their Sports than in their
Religion? which could not certainly be, if they had not surer and greater hopes
of joy from their sports, than from Heaven; for the greater hope would
certainly set them the more on work. No, Heaven is a thing of no taste, carries
no profit, no pleasure in the meaning of it; for if it did it would employ them
in the gaining of it, and every one that had this hope, would purify himself as
he is pure, Matthew. 5. 8.

If the inheritance of the Kingdom of God were, as some were upon earth,
entailed, so that do they what they will, they could not be put by it, there
were then some reason not to wonder, wherefore we see men live in the broad way
to Hell and yet then hope to come to Heaven: and certainly nothing but such a
persuasion as that can possibly lull men into such a wretchless security as
they are possessed with, in a thing of this eternal consequence. For if we should
examine them, the most sinful wretch of them all has hopes to be saved, yea he
would not be able to stand under the burden and the horror of his own killing
thoughts, if he should but once despair of that: so that hope he will, and yet
if he believe one jot of Scripture, it is impossible for him to hope it. For
that bids him not 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
be deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. So that he dares not not hope, and yet if he do but ask himself, he knows
he cannot hope: and what then makes him do it? Certainly the opinion that such
and such the inheritance is entailed upon, and be they what they will, they
shall have Heaven. But alas! they are mistaken in the nature of the
inheritance; we may read of many that were cast off, and the Heir must be a
servant as long as he is a child, if he do not obey, no hopes of his arriving
at his inheritance when he is come to age. St John here will dash all those
vain hopes, and will tell them as they cannot justly hope, for none such as
they can be possessed of that inheritance; and therefore it is to no purpose for
them to hope it. So also that they do not indeed hope; for if they did ever
expect to arrive at Heaven, they would not run on in a course, that leads a
clean contrary way.

The Apostle here propounds five Arguments to exhort them to the study of
Piety, to press after Holiness, and to leave off their courses of sin. I shall
name them backwards. First in the tenth verse if we be Christians we not only
will not, but cannot sin. Yea secondly we are indeed Children of the Devil, if
we do v. 8. Neither thirdly have we any Communion with Christ possibly, or
interest in his Righteousness v. 6, 7. Nay fourthly they destroy the very end
of Christ's coming into the world v. 5. Lastly in the front of all these
neither can they hope to enjoy any of those glorious promises, that God has
made to his Children, those of giving them glory and immortality; For he that
has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure.

In the handling of these words I shall show you what it is to purify himself.
Secondly what kind of purity he is to strive after, as he is pure. Thirdly what
the Hope of a Christian is, this Hope. Fourthly how that Hope does set a man on
purifying, He that has this Hope purifies himself.

For the first what it is to purify I shall only name, it is to cleanse from
all mixture of pollution, and how far it is to extend, is set down by St Paul
upon the very same grounds with those in the Text, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness both of the Flesh and Spirit: and St James James 4. 8.
Cleanse your hands you sinners, and purify your hearts you double-minded: and
they both mean thus much; that for external actions, Christian purity tho it
will admit of slips and failings, yet it is not consistent with continuance in
any known sin. And therefore David tho he were said to be a man after Gods own
heart, and that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, (the very
description of pure) yet it is added save in the matter of Vriah. For first it
never does admit any filthiness of Flesh, but must be universal; and it is in
this true what St James says c. 2. v. 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole law,
and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all: God had before affirmed the
same expressly Ezekiel. 18. 10, 11, 12, 13. If he beget a son that is a robber, and
that does the like to any one of these things, and has defiled his neighbors
wife, has oppressed the poor and needy etc. shall he then live? he shall not
live, he has don all these abominations, he shall surely die. So that in Gods
sight he that has don any one of these things, he has don all these
abominations: for it is plain, that those he had not don he abstained not from,
because God had forbidden them; for then he had abstained from that which he
had don, God had forbidden that; so that his abstinences are not innocence, but
squeamishness or fear. Either he does not like them, or he dares not do them
for some worldly reason; and he does not only let God see he can abstain for
such considerations as these, but will not for his Promises or his authority. He
values these below the mode or fashion of the world, or his respect to some
other person, or any little interest or humor.

2. Neither does this purity admit any filthiness of the Spirit, we must purify
our hearts; and for internal purity the rule is, that to abstain from outward
actions of sin is not enough, but the heart must be cleansed also: this is
proved already. And indeed to deny my flesh the pleasures of the flesh, and yet
to let my mind dwell upon them and enjoy them; not to commit them, and yet
suffer my soul to do it, is to transplant the sin, to make my soul act the
deeds of the flesh, and my very spirit become carnal. This is at the best to
give God the worst part of my services, and the Devil the best: my heart and
soul the Devil enjoies; God has nothing but a few outward abstinences. What a
mixture is here, how far from purity; God and the Devil joined together, and
the Devil having the upper hand, the better portion?

Thus in general, but to tell you what kind of purity we are to strive after, I
shall touch at some few Scripture wordings of it.

1. Holiness. For pure and holy are often joined 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having these
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord. Now the true
notion of holiness consists in a setting apart, or discrimination from other
things or persons. And therefore holiness of life is the observing that
peculiar different form of life, which God has commanded those whom he has
called, not being conformed to the fashion of the world. As St James says pure
Religion, not to live after the common manner of men, common and holy being
every where opposed: so that when God is said to call us to holiness, he
requires us to consecrate our lives to his service, to look upon our selves as
things sacred. Hence Christians are called living Sacrifices holy to God Romans
12. 1. Temples of the Holy Ghost 1 Cor. 6. 19. and all names of Holiness are
set upon them to show how strict a necessity lies upon us to separate our
selves from all carnal wordly uses and defilements.

2. The Pure are expressed by Virgins 2 Cor. 11. 2. For I am jealous over you
with a Godly jealousy, that is, as a strict careful Parent over his beloved
maiden daughter, so that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. Every
gross impurity deflowers the soul, and when it sins it plays the strumpet. And
if a bride, that on her wedding day should play the harlot, and give away that
Virginity which she had but then promised to her Husband, would certainly not
dare to stand the wrath of her furious Bridegroom that should catch her in her
villainy: how will thou meet the jealousy of thy Spouse, when as thou spread'st
thy self to every temtation, committest perpetual whoredoms with the World and
flesh, and do continually act disloialty in the very eyes of his glory?
Certainly the same jealous care and earnest desires that are emploi'd in
seeking a wife that is not vitiated, this very expression of Virgin does direct
us to make use of in watchfulness over our selves, that sin do not devirginate
us, that we do not present a strumpet to Christ for his Spouse; but that he may
find us Virgins at the Marriage of the Lamb. Yea that we may see what kind of
ones also, St Paul expresses their Purity Ephesians. 5. 27. not having spot or
wrinkle or any such thing, but holy and without blemish. For as every gross Sin
does deflowr the Soul, and make it no Virgin; so every lighter fault is a spot
upon the cheek, a wrinkle in the forehead in Christ's eyes. And if chastity
shall be severely guarded out of a respect to future hopes of marriages, which
there is no hopes to be successful in, if that be blasted; if to please a
Suitor the glass shall be consulted with, every stain shall be adorned,
covered, made a beauty-spot; and all methods (sometimes more then honest) used
to keep the forehead smooth, the cheek full and plain, not content with the
Lords workmanship upon them they will outdo their Maker, and create to
themselves beauties that God and Nature never did intend them: if men do avoid
wrinkles in a Bride, as they would do a Deaths-head or memento mori in their
bridal bed, can we then think our selves, whom every day bespots, and stains,
every hour adds such wrinkles to, whose souls have more of those furrows than
our lives have minutes, who are indeed only bundles of deformities, besides
our gross whoredoms; can we, I say, think our selves a fit Spouse for Christ?
Is he the only Bridegroom to be thus provided for? Can we have confidence to
present a Strumpet to him for a Bride, and care not that he find us Virgins at
the Marriage of the Lamb? Or can we expect any thing but an eternal divorce
from him, whom we have thus used.

I have given you some expressions by which you may judge what kind of Purity we
are to aim at: I shall come a little nearer that of the Text by one or two more.

3. Purity and Holiness are expressed in Scripture by White Raiment, Revel. 3.
18. a White Robe, c. 7. 9. for the Rev. 19. 8.
Fine Linen is the Righteousness of the Saints, as it there follows. Now the
reason of this compellation is, it is called Raiment because it is to cover our
nakedness and our shame; for our sins are accounted such. In Gods eyes every
wicked person is the same thing as a deformed creature with his nakedness
shamefully uncovered and prostituted. This is clear out of those places Rev.
16. 15. least he walk naked, and they see his shame. Rev. 3. 18. Buy of me
White Raiments, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness
do not appear. For that it is called Raiment, and White Linen because of the
Purity. White is the purest color, the least spot or stain is immediately
discerned upon it: and if it be upon Fine Linen, makes it presently cast off
by them, whose glory it is to be neat and clean, it shall no more come near
them till the spots and stains be washed off. And Oh that we had but this pride
for our souls, that we were but as ambitious to have our immortal Spirits
neatly decked when we appear in Gods sight, as our putrefying carcasses when we
go in company: that when we slip or fall, and when a spot does stain this
Linen even of Righteousness, that we would instantly wash it in our tears and
the blood of Christ, the laver that is prepared for this Linen, for Rev. 7. 14.
they made their garments white in the blood of the Lamb: and that for the time
to come we would be but as careful of keeping it neat; of preserving it from
stains, as we are of finer linen. And God himself makes use of our pride in
that kind to be our exprobation Jer. 2. 32. Can a maid forget her ornaments, or
a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number. And
sure I am, the expression of Fine Linen aims at a great degree of Purity, when
it calls that careful conscionable duty the Ephesians. 4. 1.
walking worthy of the Christian calling, whereunto we are called, even the
walking diligently in all the Commandments of God; calls I say, this
Righteousness fine linen clean and white: for it is the very expression of
that pure clothing that we shall be dressed in at our wedding with Christ, it is
our spousal linen when we go to meet our Bridegroom Rev. 19. 7, 8. The
Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready, and to her
was granted that she should be arraied in fine linen clean and white, to teach
us that we should be always as careful of our ways, always dressed in mind, and
so prepared, as if we were to go and meet our Bridegroom. Yea it is the
expression of that pure Clothing, which we shall be clothed in Heaven with,
where we shall be pure as God is pure, perfectly holy: Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a
few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall
walk with me in white; to let us see that this expression by which our
Righteousness is called white clothing, requires us to have our conversation in
Heaven, even while we are here; to make our lives here but as a preparation to
that Marriage Feast, to be but the time of dressing our selves before hand. For
we must array our selves in fine linen, the very same dress in which we must
walk with Christ; for, they shall walk with me in white, says he: yea it is his
own dress also, for the garments of Christ, Moses and Elias in the Mount was
Mark 9. 3.
white shining Raiment. Holiness is transfiguration upon earth: so that this
compellation from our daily diligence in the cleansing and the keeping of our
linen does direct us to the same diligence in neatness of our souls, and
requires of us such a Purity as with which God is pure.

4. Purity it is called light, as also sin is called darkness Romans 13. 12. Put
ye off the works of darkness and put ye on the armor of light: and Matthew. 5.
16. Let your light so shine before men; and that very fitly, because nothing so
pure as light, so clear as shine and noonday, it is the most pure of all
visible creatures, it is not possible so much as to sully shine or to spot the
light; the foulest dunghill that it can shine upon, does not at all defile it;
you may put out the day, but you cannot stain it. And truly no expression comes
near the Purity of Light, for it is so clean as it is set to express the very
Holiness of God himself, 1 John 1. 5. This then is the message which we have
heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is Light, and in him is no
darkness at all. And therefore while our Piety is called light, it teaches us
that we labor to be pure as he is pure; the kind of Purity, which how it is, St
James has set down c. 1. 17. where he explains this very expression, Every
good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father
of lights, with whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. They
are Astronomical expressions belonging to the Lights of Heaven: God is not like
them that change often; not like the Moon that has its tides of light, now full,
and then dark; nor is he like the Sun, he has not any (...) Tropic, who when
he is come near to us and makes summer, then turns back again and goes fromward
us: neither must our Light have any such, our Holiness must have no Solstice;
our Devotion sometimes mounting with a bright and holy flame as it would breath
up into Heaven it self, sometimes fainting and sinking as it would expire and
die: now our endeavors strong and violent, we strive, pant and climb;
afterward we slacken and go backwards. Neither yet a waning Moon, Holiness
ebbing and flowing, now increasing, then again decaying; which tho it be
sometimes glorious with a full shine, is yet otherwhile the darkest part of the
whole Firmament. It must not be so with our Piety, sometimes at a Sermon, or
before a Communion, or upon some sharp rebuke of Gods in an affliction, cross,
or other occasion very high and shining; but then again at another time like
the New Mood no light at all; the Devotion is sunk and extinct, and our
vanities possess us wholly. No fits of Purity, Paroxysms of Piety, that come
like the heats of agues now and then, but with great intervals between, will
serve the turn; but it must give a constant shine. Devotion must be a fixed
Light, such as is not variable and turning; and so this expression shows how we
must purify as he is pure, with kind, I say, not with degree. For the Text does
not mean that we should be as pure as he; to aim at such a virtue were
Rebellion, and the hopes of such a Purity were Lucifers Ambition, and would
throw us down to Hell. Neither yet pure as he is pure, without any mixture of
spot or stain. For while we are made up of a mixed composition, we shall never
be so pure, neither is any such exacted of us. All the meaning is, if we have
hopes to be like God hereafter with glorious likeness, we must endeavor also to
be like him here; and that is don by endeavoring after Purity, forasmuch as God
is pure.

Here is then an efficacious motive for us to labor after Purity, it makes us
like God. To be a Child or a Son in Scripture is the same thing as to be like,
or do such works as the other does: Ye are of your Father the Devil, and his
works ye do, John 8. 44. and what in one place is said Matt. 5. 45.
That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven, in an other
place is, that ye may be like you Father. For whatever the Children of a
Natural Father be, Gods Children must be like him, or they are not his; and the
way to be so is but to labor after Holiness, to be still amending by little and
little, daily cleansing out some sin or other: he vouchsafes to call this
purifying as he is pure, he calls such a person like him and his Child.

But secondly whose Children are they and like whom, who go on still in their
courses of wickedness? and if they do not grow daily worse, as few there are
that do not, yet they never think of growing better, if we should examine them
by the expressions we have given.

And take them first to that of Light, by which we saw a holy Conversation was
styled, we shall in that see the sad condition of a wicked person, his life is
all darkness: that sore Plague of Egypt, which three days made intolerable, is
still upon the Sinners Soul, nothing but night about him. And indeed nothing
else befits his deeds of darkness, as sins are called; which how glorious and
splendid soever they seem to him, the only modes and gallantry, yet alas the
splendour of them is but like the shine of lightning, full of horror in it self,
and makes the darkness of the night also more irksom. And what can these men,
that have no light, whose deeds are all the deeds of night and darkness; what
can they expect but to be cast at last into utter darkness, where there is
only weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth?

2. If we take them to the other expression of White Raiment, how will they
whose open exemplary sins do strip them and expose them naked, have reason to
be ashamed, and to cover themselves with their own confusion, as with a clo^e?
How wretchedly stupid is the heart of this People that glory in their shame,
that count their sins the only gaudy bravery? when as poor souls they are
miserable, and poor, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. There was no such disgraceful thing
as to have the uncomly parts of the body laid open to public sight: so Hanun
used David's Ambassadors, whom he thought Spies 2 Samuel 10. 4. which was occasion
enough for a war upon them. And God expresses Isaiah 20. 4. He shall lead away
the Egyptians Prisoners, naked with their buttocks uncovered to the shame of
Egypt. And you may see what God threatens to adulterous Israel, Isaiah 3. 16,
etc. and much more at large in Ezekiel. 16, and 23. that she might be laughed to
scorn, and had in derision, and might be an infamous woman. And in one place he
threatens to discover her by throwing her cloths over her head. Now I have
showed you that Holiness is the only Virginity, and sin is the Souls whoredom;
and the expression that I have in hand tells you that Holiness is the only
garment, and the openest of sinning is the Souls nakedness; which if you put
together, you will see, that a profane person, an open sinner is the same
scorned thing, as a whore with her cloths over her head, a bare strumpet acting
naked lewdness in high ways, with her unexpressible filthiness exposed in
public to eyes and shame. And is such a thing as this fit to go to God, or to
be a Spouse of Christ? No his Bride must be arrai'd in fine white linen, that
is the righteousness of the Saints, Heb. 12. 14.
and without holiness no one shall see him: For he that has that hope, must
purify himself, as he is pure.

This Hope. What Christian Hope is: it is a patient and a comfortable
expectation of the performance of all Gods Promises. Patient expectation it is
Romans 8. 25. if we hope, then do we with Patience wait for it. Comfortable it
must needs be, because of the excellency of its object, Gods Promises; all the
comfort of the Scriptures are the very ground of it, Romans 15. 4. That we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: and it is therefore
called Coloss. 1. 23. The hope of the Gospel. Whatsoever mercy is included in
the whole Gospel, Remission of sins, and everlasting Blessedness, all those
rich and precious mercies which that does propose, and which God himself
thought to be the most temting baits to allure us, even all these our Hope does
fly at. You may find them every where scattered; the Resurrection from the dead
Acts 23. 6. I am accused of the hope and resurrection from the dead; and c. 28.
20. For the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain. Secondly Eternal Life,
Tit. 1. 2. In hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lie, promised before
the world began. Thirdly the Glory to come, Romans 5. 2. We rejoice in hope of
the Glory of God: and Col. 1. 27. it is called the Hope of Glory. Yea the being
like God himself in the Text, We know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, and then it follows, and he that has this hope purifieth himself as
he is pure; as also Tit. 2. 13. That blessed hope, the glorious appearing of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. All these the Christian does with
joy and confidence expect Heb. 3. 6.

And here you may see the price of your calling, whatsoever good things God
has prepared for them that love him; and they are such, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither can enter into the heart of
man to comprehend. Yea whatsoever good things he has prepared for himself, his
own glories, all these he has set out to bait our hopes with; these are a
Christians most assured expectations. Whosoever thou art, that art a careful
Soul, and with strict Religion followest after Holiness, thou may securely
give the Scoffers of the world and the wicked leave to call thee miserable, to
deride thy strictnesses and thy austerities, to say thy mortifications do make
thy life sad and uncomfortable: alas! they do not see the Hope that is laid
before thee, such a Hope as made thy Savior Heb 12. 2.
endure the cross and despise the shame. They look upon thy strict
performances, but they do not look upon thy expectations, they consider not the
Crown of those performances: for if they did, they would not certainly think
the present momentany pleasures of their sins could countervail that Crown. Be
the hardship what it will, it is a comfortable Hope, and that sufficiently
confirmed to us; full of assurance it leans upon the whole Trinity, 1 Pet. 1.
21. That our hope might be in God. and Tim. 1. 1. Our Lord Jesus Christ our
Hope. Romans 5. 5. That we may abound in Hope through the power of the Holy Ghost.
The Power of the whole Godhead engaged both to secure and to support our Hope.
A blessed Hope Tit. 2. 13. a Hope that is enjoyment. And if it be a blessed
Hope, what will the possession be; if there be happiness in the expectation,
what will there be in the fruition? O purify your selves and come and see:
which brings me to the last part, how this Hope does set a man on purifying;
for every man that has this Hope, purifies himself.

Now to declare and prove this to you I shall do two things. First prove that
this is such a Hope, as has in it motive enough to set a man on purifying.
Secondly that he that does not purify, cannot have this Hope.

1. This Hope has certainly motive enough to set a man on purifying: had we
laid the hopes of heaven near our hearts, were our thoughts but once set and
bent upon the joys above, we would easily persuade our selves to set upon the
mending of our selves. What will not hope do? All the emploiments of the world
do but serve this passion; They that plow, plow in hope, says St Paul, because
the heavens promise them a season of harvest; tho they do frown in seed-time
and storm against their labors with inundations of tempest, or freez the earth
into an untamed hardness, till it become iron as their instruments, yet will
they melt themselves or they will thaw those frosts, and toil as if they would
vie drops with winter clouds, in showers of sweat as well as rain, merely
because they hope to reap. And they that plow the sea are yet more slaves to
Hope; for they outface death with all its terrors for the hopes of a gainful
venture, they do charge through a shower, a deluge of waves that do assail them
with foaming wrath, and sustain an inundation of billows that fall like Gods
swelling cataracts, as if they came from heaven out against them, and are
fearless when they are but an inch removed from an Abyss of ruin that gapes
like hell; men of confidence, hard as those rocks which they despise for hopes
of a little profit. And what shall we say to the poor Soldier, who for hopes of
rags and roots will charge fire, whom the promise of, God knows, a thin salary
will make to run into as great a storm and tempest of flame, as the Seaman does
of water, even into a shower of death? The most active of our passions either
submit to Hopes, or owe their violence to an activity derived from them. Do not
men bridle in all their desires, and the furies of their passions to the
peevish will and liking, and become perfect compliance to the otherwise
intolerable humors of one whom they hope to please, or from whom they hope for
some inheritance or preferment? And the Tragedies of Ambition, which uses
towade through a sea of blood and sin, that does scorn Relations, defy God and its
own Conscience, reverse States, and confound all rather than miss its aim, are
but the issues of a most uncertain Hope. And then, my Brethren, would not the
Hopes of Heaven be able to do something with us, when the Hopes of a little know
not what is, will do all this? Would we not sow to the Spirit, where the harvest
is Blessedness? Would we not war against the Flesh, when he that overcomes
should have a Crown immortal and incorruptible? Would we not comply with Christ
and please him to get his inheritance, and have some ambition for the Throne of
God, if we did but hope for these, as we do for the other? Yes my Brethren. I
will give an example of one, who slighted all the most glorious satisfactions
of the most swelling earthly hopes, and when he had every thing brought to him
that ambition could gape for, yet threw off all upon these only Hopes, Hebr.
11. 24, 25, 26, etc. When he was co^^ to years, when he came to the age of
understanding the honors of a Court, and when his appetite was grown ripe for
the delights that do attend one, and he fit for the enjoyment of them, and the
opportunity of them thrown into his hands by being taken in Son of the Crown,
and so Possessor of all the advantages of pleasure which such a Relation can
afford: and when on the other side there was nothing in the other scale, but
the sorrows of a low vassalage, and the afflictions of a hard slavery; nothing
but a brickiln to be set against the Palace, and instead of the rich variety of
earthly entertainments not so much as Exodus 5. 16.
straw to make their brick of; that he should choose the afflictions; and as if
his will were not alone engaged that way, but his understanding also led, that
he should esteem that wanting, that contemtible condition, the reproach of
Religion to be greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. And indeed the very
reproach of Christ is greater riches, riches I shall carry with me to that
great Tribunal at the dreadful day, that will be the great Kings Badge, his
Livery upon me when I stand before his Throne, when all the spangles of your
pomps shall be fallen off and look as ghastly to the wicked as their own sad
carcasses or sadder expectations: as if there were more shine and splendour in
the dirt, which scorn does throw into the face of Piety, than in the Pomps of
Wealth. Now this must sure be from some strange consideration. Why all was upon
this score, he had respect to the recompense of the reward, he hoped for better
things: what is the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter to the Son of God? or the
succession to the Crown of Egypt in comparison with the possessing the
Inheritance of Heaven? It Is true the treasures of that Crown may furnish me
with the aims of all my appetites, what'ere my heart or what my lust can wish
that will get me the opportunity of having, it will allow me all those
pleasures which all the world gapes after, riches to procure for them; whatever
curiosity, or emulation, or sin does long for, they will prostitute before me.
But what are all those satisfactions in comparison with the joys of God? Is
there delight in the full affluence of those enjoyments? Has God indulged
pleasure to those things which he has allowed to wicked Egypt? and shall I
think he has not provided greater pleasures for his own self, and for those he
intends to make happy with him? Now let me have Gods delights, Heaven I do
assure my self has the more advantages, and therefore there I choose. And so he
chose rather the afflictions of this world, for he had an eye to the recompense
of the reward; and by this we are sure, if we had hopes, we should make other
choices than we do. If a sin come to temt me dressed with all its pleasures, and
clothed with all the bewitching arts it can put on, or fancy paint it out
with, if at the same time I can but look up to my Hopes, bethink my self of the
rewards of Religion, and recollect that there are no such pleasures in the sin,
as there are prepared for me, if I abstain from it, shall I not then reject and
scorn the temtation, think it impertinent and foolish, and wonder it should be
so unreasonable to desire, or think me so vain as to grant upon score of
pleasure in the commission, when I am sure of greater if I do not commit it?
Shall I not have reason to believe the sin very unkind to me, when it allures
me with some little delight, and I must part with all blessedness for it? No
surely nothing can withdraw him, whom a Christians Hopes do entertain. But
because temtations are apt to prevail, where there is no appearance of danger,
to come a little nearer to you, that you may with terror see that none can have
this Hope but they that purify, which was the last thing, I shall only ask
thee, whosoever thou art that hopest to have thy sins forgiven thee and to have
Eternal Life, upon what grounds thou hopest it? We have no reason to hope for
any thing, but what God has promised. Now has God any where promised that
thou particularly ^^alt be saved? Certainly no. What then? why do thou hope?
if thou can, answer me. Because he has promised to the Matt. 5. 8.
Pure in heart, that they shall see God, he has given assurance to them that
repent that they shall be forgiven; and I how sinful soever I have bin, yet I
am penitent, I endeavor to purge out that old leaven, to cleanse my self, I am
resolved not to allow my self any of my vicious inclinations or my customs,
I Will strive against my petty sins, and my soul is humbled in me, and therefore
have I Hope. If thou can answer thus, thou have indeed good grounds, thou
have proved that thou may hope: but withal thou have proved also that thou
do purify, and upon that score do hope. For if thou did not repent, and
amend, and purge thy self from thy filthy wickednesses, thou must then know,
that the same God that sealed all his promises with the blood of his Son, did
also represent and seal these threatenings in his suffering, Without holiness no
man shall see God. Luke 13. 3.
Except ye repent ye shall all perish. Matt. 3. 10.
The axe is laid to the root of the tree; every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. s 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
And, Be not deceived, neither fornicator, nor adulterer, nor covetous person,
nor rietous, and the like, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ or
God; Rev. 22. 15.
For without are dogs, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and
whosoever loves and makes a lie: and Romans 8. 13.
They that live after the flesh shall die; and Christ himself pronounced, Matt.
25. 41.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. Now if thou go on in a course of any of
these sins, do any of these deeds of the Flesh, I shall only ask thee, are
not these threats as true, and as much to be believed as his promises? And if
thou do believe them, how is it possible that thou that liv'st in any of
those courses which these threats belong to, can have any hope? When God has
so solemnly declared thou shall have nothing but everlasting ruin, how dare
thou, how can thou hope for Heaven? This is the same thing as to think to
anchor on the billows, or to lay foundations in a wave and on a storm; to hope
in threats at least in opposition to all Scripture and to all promise, to wage
war with the Gospel, and resolve to have them both against, and in despite of
God: and that certainly will very little avail thee. No he that does not amend
cannot hope; for he that hopes must needs purify himself.

And now should we apply this to the careless Sinner, if we consider first not
only what sad character St Paul does give of men in that condition, how it is
the description he gives of the Heathen, and he joins it with other most
comfortless expressions, Ephesians. 2. 12. without Christ, strangers from the
Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world: but also
look upon the experience, how to be in a lost desperate condition in relation
to so eternal a consequence as the world to come imports, is such a thing as
none was ever able to stand under the consideration of it; one hours despair
sinks them for ever: we could not bear the weight of it. Judas did choose all
the sad issues of it hereafter rather than the passion here, thought it easier
to go meet Gods fury than despair of mercy; and when he saw he had no hopes of
pardon, he ran to damnation. No we are resolved we must hope to be saved.

2. Consider that it is impossible for the wicked man, while he continues such,
to hope: he cannot choose but know that the promises concern him not, they are
conditional, they are made only to them that repent and believe, and God knows
that he has not don yet; so that nothing but the threats belong to him. And
then how shall we reconcile these considerations, if we put them both together
in the Sinners mind? How shall they be at peace and not tear one another and
the soul? It is impossible to endure not to hope, and yet it is impossible that
man should hope; and if this contest happen when he goes to die, then his own
thoughts will drag him down to the Abyss with more violence than the fiends.
Sure it is a very sad consideration to think that men that know the wretchedness
of being hopeless, that dare not not hope, will not yet industriously and
piously set upon the performance of that condition on which they may hope, will
not purify that they may have reason to expect the promises. And it is more sad
to see that men, who never purge themselves from filthiness of Flesh or Spirit,
but go on in their sinful courses, and consequently know, that while they are
such they cannot hope, yet will in despite of that knowledge hope, and do
notwithstanding all think to come to Heaven. Certainly while a man goes on to
sin, to hope for mercy is presumtion in him, and so another sin added to the
rest; yea it is a disbelieving of Gods threatening, an affronting him in his
veracity, an imputing falsehood to his menaces, and a putting himself almost
out of the possibility of repenting. For he that does hope for Salvation in the
condition he is in, has no temtation at all to change his condition, but is
likely to go on confidently and hopingly to eternal perdition: it were a mercy
to such a person to be struck into despair, that he may be taught the
wretchedness of his condition and hurried out it, in which as long as he does
hope, there is no reason to expect that he should leave it, but by becoming
hopeless in it may be frighted from it, and the gates of hell is the only
probable means to let that man into the way of heaven. O the Christians Hope!
it is the hope of righteousness Gal. 5. 5. Nothing else but holiness and
righteousness can give a man ground for it. And certainly, my Brethren, it is
such a Hope as would countervail the trouble and the pains of reforming our
selves. What will not a man undertake, which he can but hope to go through, and is
assured of a large recompense for doing? and surely Heaven is worth the
endeavoring after, and that blessed Hope worth purifying our selves for. For
it was worth the death of the Son of God; Christ was content to be crucified to
compass it, and cannot we be content to purify our selves for it? Will you see
what hope can persuade a man to do? See Abraham to whom God promised only the
Land of Canaan, and that not to be enjoied by himself nor by his Son, but only
by the Posterity of Isaac his Son, and his Promises were further off than
Heaven; yet after that, before Isaac had any Posterity, when he was but a
child, God Genesis 22. 2.
commands him to go and sacrifice his Isaac, and go to cut off all hopes of
ever enjoying it, yet Romans 4. 18.
against hope he believed in hope, says St Paul, and he that had received the
promises of God, offered up his only begotten Son Heb. 11. 17. i. e. having
entertained and embraced the promise of a numerous seed and people that should
spring from him, and having no other Son but this from whom they should spring,
nor possibility in nature, nor promise above nature that he should have any
more children, but a plain Genesis 22. 17, 18.
affirmation that this People, to whom the Promises belonged, should come from
Isaac; yet having once truly hoped that God would perform his promise, he
absolutely obei'd that command of Gods resolving to kill the Son, on whom all
those Promises depended. And now my Brethren, there is no such puzles in our
Hope, nor no such hard thing required of us, no Sons to be sacrificed but only
a few vices, no doubtful perplexed promise of a Canaan only, but plain assured
Heaven: and then had we but the least degree of his hope, as we have infinitely
greater reason, how would we sacrifice any thing to Christ's command? how would
we offer up a lust, and think a sin a good exchange for the hopes of Heaven?
and he that had this hope, would certainly purify himself as he is pure.

It is but now the Church has celebrated the Ascension of our Lord Christ, and
the great Proposal of the Angels Acts 1. 11. to all those Disciples that beheld
him going up to Heaven and gazed after him so wishly, was that they should see
him come again. Now the particular comfort of that coming so again is, when he
shall appear, we shall be like him 1 John 3. 2. and the hopes of being so St
John thought a sufficient motive to set every man on purifying, and that
himself: for this lustration cannot be performed by Proxy, and be remitted to
another; for even our Saviors Righteousness will not be imputed unto those, who
will have none besides; he redeems and saves none but them whom he has saved
from their sins.

Reveal, O Blessed God, some of thy Glory which thou have prepared for them
that love thee, some of that blessed Hope of a Christian calling to our hearts,
that it may stir our desires and longings, and heat them into hopes; and that
we having the hopes of seeing thee, may purify, and may escape that day of
fire, which shall melt the Heavens, and purge those glorious bodies which are
not pure in thy sight. Behold, O God, we tremble with horror of thy dreadful
Judgment. The Angels are not clean in thy sight, and the Seraphims cover their
faces, what then shall become of us vile filthy Sinners, whose daily impurities
have so defiled both our souls and bodies, that we are but one mass and heap of
uncleaness. Blessed God, we know that as long as we continue such, we cannot
hope to see thee in mercy; we know that if we repent not, we shall all perish;
we know that if we live after the Flesh, we shall die eternally; we know that
neither fornicators, etc. shall have any inheritance. O let this knowledge apply
it self to our hearts and consciences, that the terrors of it may fright us
from the vain hopes that we do cherish of being happy, notwithstanding we go on
in our sinful courses, for alas those hopes will perish with us; and that those
terrors may so work on us to set upon amendment. Cleanse and wash, we pray
thee, all our impurities in the blood of thy Son, bury them in his grave, never
to rise hereafter, and melt our hearts into repentant tears, that so our hearts
may become purer. O thou that did cleanse us with thy blood, baptize us with
thy Holy Spirit and with fire, that it may purge out our dross and filthiness,
and be an earnest to us of that glorious Purity, which we shall have in Heaven,
seeing thee as thou art, and becoming like thee, where we shall sin no more,
but for ever serve and praise thee.

SERMON VIII. OF THE HIDING PLACE From Indignation.
Isaiah 26. 20. Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the
Indignation be overpast.
UPON the Eve as it were and the Vigils to the day of Indignation, when we
cannot but look upon it as ready to be poured out on us in a full stream, when
we see destruction make close approches to us, work round about us, and
punishment like our sin lies at the very door, ready either to enter in upon
us, or seize us if we offer to come out; to offer at a way to prevent all this,
that should discover to you a safe retreat from those threats that pursue this
Nation in general, open a shelter from the present storm, cannot choose but be
seasonable; yet such a thing the Text does venture at, and if God himself knew
the best way to keep off his Indignation from us, then here it is; for he
prescribes, Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors
about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation
be overpast.

Before I do divide the Text, I shall tell you in what sense I interpret those
words, Enter thou into thy chamber and shut the doors about thee, which if it
be not according to the immediate and literal importance of them, is yet such as
is justified by a parallel place of Scripture dictated by our Savior himself,
and will afford us most wholesome observations. I take them in the sense they
have Matt. 6. 6. But thou, when thou praiest, enter into thy chamber and shut
thy door, so that here they will be the form of prescribing prayer: in
dangerous and sad times, when if thou Isaiah 8. 22.
look unto the earth, thou shall behold nothing but trouble, and darkness, and
dimness of anguish, why then lift up thine eyes to Heaven, go to thy Prayers;
in times of change when thou know not which way to betake thy self, go to
the Closet of thy devotions, take off thy thoughts from these sad objects here
below, and fix them on the comforts of Religion, divert thy thoughts from the
occasions of discontent, and employ them in meditations upon God, in converses
with him, in contemplations of his Promises and joys; in one word spend thy
time in Prayers and Devotions.

That Is the sense; the parts are 1. A persuading invitation, come my people;
wherein are the persons invited, my people, secondly the invitation, come.

2. Here is that they are invited to, set down by way of counsel, and that has
several branches.

1. Enter thou into thy chambers.

2. Shut thy doors about thee.

3. Hide thy self, with the duration of it as it were for a little moment; and
secondly the end of this and all the rest, that the Indignation may pass over
them; until the Indignation be overpast.

In the handling of them I shall take this course, first from the first general
I shall speak somewhat of the persons invited; that have this compellation my
people, and giving you some reasons of it.

From the second I shall observe that in times of storm or any sadness the
only way to withdraw our selves from the violences of discontents and
troubles, is to retire to prayers, and the only comfort then is in the
Closet-exercises of Devotion.

3. From the next part, hide thy self, that Prayers are in sad days the only
great security, and the devotion-chamber a sure hiding place from Indignation.

4. From the duration, that the sorrows of the afflictions, which God does
suffer to fall upon his own devout People, they last but for a little moment.

5. From the last there is none of Gods Indignation in them, all that
overpasses them.

First of the compellation my People, come my People. Now God may speak to
those here for two reasons; first to show us that in the times of storm and of
the breakings out of indignation God invites none to courses of security, puts
none upon ways of safety, does not take care of any but those that are his
People, and those in whom his People are concerned, as Kings, who are the
nursing Fathers of his Church; as for others let them take their own courses,
look to themselves, but come ye, come my People. My People is a word that
includes relation, and wherein it does consist you will find from the
correlative set together with it in the very making of the Covenant, Jer. 31.
33.
I will be their God, and they shall be my People; they who take God to be
their Lord, and assume to become his obedient liege People, such have indeed a
right and title to his Protections: to provide for and take care of them it is
his office, he undertook it in his Covenant, and not to do it were to renounce
his compact, which he bound himself to with an Oath, which it is impossible for
him to do. But as for others, they have no plea to these. Can Rebels claim
protection, and such who renounce relations, that put themselves off from being
his People, expect that he should look after and take care of them, be their
Guardian and Security? The different condition of these two sorts of People in
relation to Gods caring for them in time of judgment you will find Mal 3. 16,
17, 18. In the times of undisturbed abundance and of full prosperity, when the
God of this World is good to them that serve him, when the Lord lets men alone,
and the ungodly thrive, then indeed his protections are not much regarded, but
wickedness and wealth seem the strongest security: but when God sends his
Indignation abroad, and when his Judgments sweep away those confidences, then
this will be a comfortable consideration, come what will come I have one that
has writ me in his note-book, in his Book of Remembrance, to put him in mind
that he is to provide for me: and when the most flourishing ungodly shall be
stripped of all his hopes and trusts, no least relief from them, nor can he look
for any from the Lord, God has not so much as directions for him here, he has
no part, not in his persuasions, is not invited to his Coun^els; then have I
one that will make me up amongst his Jewels, have the same cares of me as of
his peculiar precious treasures, and calls me to security, Come my People.

Or secondly my People, to let us see what arts of invitation God does use to
persuade us to take good counsel; he gives us all the compellations of
kindness, and speaks us as fair as possibly, not to do him a courtesy but to be
kind to our selves. In other places, when he has no design upon them, then he
cries to Moses, thou and thy People Exodus 32. 7. but when he would do good unto
us, when he would entice us to be safe, then come my People. So he does
elsewhere use all the titles of love, and cloths his invitations with the
wordings of our most known Courtships, that that which uses to prevail with
us, may do his work upon us. So in the Canticles 5. 2. Open to me my love, my
dove, my spouse, my undefiled; and the whole book is but the Arts of Divine
wooing. Strange that the heavenly Bridegroom must court so much to be received
by his Spouse! Good God! that thou must be forced to give us good words to
prevail with us to be good unto our selves, that we must be soothed, temted,
and flattered into preservations and mercies, that we should refuse remedy and
Antidote unless it be gilded; that to lie hid in times of Judgment, and to
escape Indignation is not motive enough to us, but we must be wooed to do so:
safety it self must speak us fair or we will none of it, and God must flatter
us into the places of security, Come my People, enter into thy chambers, the
next.

Enter thou into thy chambers. Whence we did observe, that in times of storm
and calamity the only way to withdraw our selves from the violences of
discontents and troubles, is to retire to Prayers and Closet exercises of
Devotion. If I should go to prove this, I might read you the whole book of
Psalms, the Psalter being but David's Liturgy in time of sadness, the service
and the refreshments of his sorrows. To tell you that he says, In my trouble I
will go call upon the Lord Psalm. 18. 6. and when I was in trouble I called upon
the Lord Psalm. 120. 1. or again, for the love that I bear unto them they take
now my contrary part, but I give my self unto prayer Psalm. 109. 4. this would
be to no purpose, for the whole book is but doing this. And indeed to do it, is
the best counsel God himself does give, it is that he does invite us to in such
a discourse, come my people, enter.

And for the comforts of it, I shall enclose them in the application, which
shall pass by that strange mistake that is in some men, who seek to quench the
sorrows of calamity by the entertainments of sin, to divert sad thoughts by
vicious company, to refresh themselves with the jollities of iniquity, to choke
the remembrance of their afflictions with riot, and drown it in excesses. Alas,
it is not go abroad unto the open lodgings of intemperance and to the Inns of
pleasure, but come and enter thou into thy chambers.

And secondly it shall omit that very near as great mistake of them, who in
times of impending calamity busy themselves with the cares of the world, whose
hearts are then especially set on thriving, and they immerse themselves in the
ways of gain, looking on that as the thing that is to be their great security,
and that they shall provide against all sad events by that. Strange! that in
the time of pungent troubles, when they are encompassed with misery, to run
into the thorns and briars, as our Savior calls them, should be our only
hopeful refuge and retiring place, that men should be then most griping after
that, the cares of keeping which, and the fears of loosing it are the only
great things that make calamity grievous. He, who then makes himself Master of
possessions, gives pledges to Affliction. Shall I then put my self further out
into the world, when Gods discretion bids me enter thou into thy chambers.

But thirdly I apply directly to the calamitous, however destitute and unhappy.
When thou art brought at once low enough for pity, but so unhappy as to be
scorned, ruined, and contemned too, come here, and pour out thy soul into the
bosom of him, who thou art sure will not refuse thee, nor turn away his face
from thee, but stands here to invite thee with all the compellations of love.
Here thou may lay open thy case to him that had so much kindness to thee as
to die for thee, and mingle thy own tears with the blood of God that was shed
for thee. To have any friend whom to impart thy griefs to, is in good measure
to unlade and emty thy self of them: thou have here the most faithful bosom of
thy Savior, whom thou may behold in the same postures of affliction that thou
thy self art in, out of affection to thee and suffering for thee, in Agonies of
one and the other, sweating as much with heats of love to thee as of pain for
thee, hanging down his head upon the cross with languishments of kindness and
of weakness, and his arms stretched into the posture of receiving thee to his
embraces, and his side opened, not only to shed blood and water for thee, but
to receive thy tears and give thee passage to his very heart. Come then my
People, come to me; if thy sad expectations be like plummets at thy heart and
weigh it down, yet lift up thy heart together with thy hands in assured
confidence that that kindness, which did thus express it self, will never fail
thee. If notwithstanding this, the pressure make thy thoughts to sink and thy
soul to grovel, let it be but a bowing down in submission to my will, who
certainly know what is best for thee: come then and give thy self up into my
hands, as into the hands of a faithful Redeemer. Now the devout soul doing so,
by often betaking himself to God upon these occasions, becomes acquainted with
his Maker, and in all discontents he will strait run to his Acquaintance there
to disburden himself; and in all fears thither he hasts for shelter with the
very same complacencies that our Savior says the young one does to the wings of
the hen at the approach of danger: there the soul nestles, and is hugely
pleased with the apprehensions of its comfortable warm security. By frequent
converses of this kind and other practices of Devotion, and Meditations on the
mercies of his providence and his protecting kindnesses, besides the glories of
his Preparations toward his future Estate, the soul mounts up to great degrees
of confidence and familiarity with God: and God does use, when a heart does
thus ply and follow him and become intimate with him, to reveal himself also to
that heart in the midst of his devotions; when he is conversing with the Lord,
he will breathe into him the inspirations of Heaven, and with soft whispers
speak peace close to his heart, break in upon him with flashes of joy, warm him
with gleams of comfort which ravish the soul with delight in the emploiment.
Hence grow strange intercourses betwixt them, the Lord pours in of his Holy
Spirit, that bond and ligament of God and the soul, that maintains perpetual
commerce between them; they do nothing but close and mingle as it were, till
the heart mount up to those ecstasies that we read of in devout persons, that
entertain themselves to miracle in the enjoyment of those Contemplations, which
these exercises do afford them. The heart then melts no longer in the tears and
sorrows of affliction, but with the dissolvings of love; when through excess of
complacency in God and in his joys, the soul has a kind of impotency of
Spirit, so as it cannot contain it self within it self, but as a liquid thing
has its overflowings, and is poured out into the bosom of the beloved, and by
an outgoing faints from it self into an union with the Object of its
affections. And the Soul that by the practices of Devotion is brought to be
thus affected, has not only fulfilled the counsel of the Text, retired into
his chambers, but is also brought into Gods chambers, so the Spouse in the
Canticles expresses c. 1. 4. The King has brought me into his chambers, and c.
2. 4. He brought me into his banqueting house, and his banner over me was
love; and in c. 3. 10. she described the bedchamber whether she was brought,
the midst whereof was paved with love: and all this means but the
entertainments of devout Contemplations. And Christ in the Parable concerning
importunate continuance in Prayers says it Matt. 7. 8.
opens the bedchamber door and gets in thither. And then, my Brethren, what
need I be troubled how the world does go abroad, when I am entertained in Gods
banqueting house, and in his bedchamber? It were easy for me to produce
instances of them that were so taken up with the joys of Devotion, that they
had scarce any thoughts for any thing besides, they even forgot that which was
most necessary to their being, it made all other passions to languish, they had
no appetites for other things, at least there was no vigor in those appetites,
only decayed desires from which the soul was quite retired, and minded nothing
but the Object of their Prayers, being as it were in trance and swoons of
Devotion. Neither is this any strange thing or without reason, that the Soul
that loves should be so employed about and bent upon the Object of those
desires, as to neglect all other of its offices, so impetuous in serving them
that it abandons all its other business, attends no faculty but that which is
engaged upon that Object, does not so much as lend it self to any outward
organ, feeds and advances only that affection, but leaves the rest to decay
and languish, and being destitute of soul to die. Just so, if the love of those
Contemplations which Devotions afford take possession of the heart, it becomes
heartless to all other functions, careless and languid to every thing besides;
the Soul is so wholly bent upon the Object of those impatient desires, that it
does not animate any other inclinations, they have no spirit in them, but are
weak and faint, neither can they employ the heart so as to make him mind them:
but just as the enamored person, that may be called and wakened into some
other business, but let his thoughts alone, and they run to his desires, there
they unite and center. And to a Soul that is thus taken up, what is the world,
or the miscarriages that are therein? Are there fears abroad? They do but make
me then withdraw into my chamber, where there are all these joys. Does judgment
threaten an utter desolation, make solitude about us, and drive us into Psalm
44. 19.
the place of dragons, in David's words? I will retire that way into Gods
bedchamber. Is the dimness of anguish, and darkness as of the shadow of death
coming upon the Land? yet I am sure, that in the little Oratory there is the
light of Gods Countenance. Does Calamity rifle all, plunder the very bosom,
breasts and bowels; the bosom of its dearest guest, the breasts of their dear
burden, the bowels of their daily food, and rob necessity? Yea, but how stands
my Praier-chamber? It is not quite so ill, if they have left me the food of
immortality, the Body and Blood of Christ; it cannot plunder me of my
Devotions, and there is always blessed entertainment in Gods banqueting house.

If these comforts do seem too subtle and too notional for any, tho this do
happen merely by being unacquainted with the things that give them, and I have
showed you the way how you may certainly arrive at them, of which this is the
sum. The devout Soul receives in times of discontent not only liberty, but
invitation to go and bemoan his case to him that has God-like compassions for
him, so much love to him as to die for him, and to cast himself with confidence
upon such a kindness, submitting to his all-wise, all-loving will. These
submissions are secondly rewarded by him with the great contents of having Gods
will don upon him, with the comforts of finding that it is indeed best for him.
And sure I am there are that have experience, that never any sad thing happened
to them, but they found that it was for the best. Thirdly the custom of this
repairing to God, and giving themselves up to his guidance, begets a great
acquaintance, an intimacy with the Lord; he reveals himself and his comforts to
that soul: it does enjoy strange refreshings from enlightnings, breathings,
inspirations, evidences, and assurances, even tastes of promises and
preparations. Lastly the contemplations of these, and familiarity with God
begets transcendencies of love and joy, which when they are once entertained,
their desires languish to all other things, they seem low and of base alloy,
and consequently they take no content in them, being swallowed up by the other.

Yet let others lower souls take the comfort of this consideration; when things
are so, that if they look into the world they can see nothing round about them
but the prospect of trouble, and if they go on, besides the loss of all the
opportunities of Religion, the labors of their whole life will but serve the
ruins of an hour, that they have provided only for spoil, heap't up for
rapine, and gathered but a prey; when the affliction of such an hours
consideration shall have made them forget all their prosperity, so that in the
whole compass of things they cannot find one occasion of comfort: why then
those hours they have spent or shall go and lay out on devotion and the service
of God, they shall be sure will turn to their account, both here as to the
preservation of those opportunities and of their Church; for sure if God be
likely to be moved to the continuance of them, it is to those that will make use
of them, and it is for them, (for what should others do with them, that do not
value them nor use them?) and will also turn to their account hereafter. That
Prayers and those other exercises go up for a memorial to God, as the Angel
told devout Cornelius, and prepare them mansions there, when they shall be
divested of all other habitations, and that with Mary here is the better part
that cannot be taken from them, that when their Riches have forsaken them,
taken the adverse party, and gone to their enemies, these will stick by them, go
along with them even up to Gods Tribunal, and take their part at the day of
Judgment, when nothing dares appear for them but Christ and Piety. Oh my
Brethren, when you or I have spent one hearty hour in humble zealous devotions,
the hopes of the issues of that hour, the confidence that God has heard your
and my Prayers, and does accept this our service, and will eternally reward it,
if we continue thus, tho we be not able to raise our selves up to those heights
of joy and love and complacency before recited, yet those lower hopes and
confidences have more comfort in them than all the hours of pleasure in my
life; for what have I of that, when the frolick's over. I may as well look for
the footsteps of an impression on the water whose gliding streams instantly
smooth themselves, or search for the tracts of birds in the yiedling air that
shuts and closes up it self in a little moment, as seek for relicts of joy
after the pleasure is past: alas the delight did vanish with the laughter, and
the comfort died as soon as the smile, the very memorial of them is perished,
and there is nothing of them left alive, but that now all is don, I am never
the better for them. But the comforts of my devouter hours shall never die, but
when I go to die my self, will be like life and immortality to me. O the
strange acquiescencies of soul in the Consideration! the few hours that a man
has spent piously, how they will calm death, assist in agonies, and relieve
from pains! how such a Soul anticipates his Heaven! The truth is, to such an
one death is welcome, and life, tho it have on it the shadow of death, is full
of comfort. For when all the world about is Egypt, a devout man, tho he have
but his chamber to retire to, and his doors be shut upon him, he lives in
Goshen; when the consuming fire did run upon the ground throughout the land,
there was no storm in Goshen Exodus 9. 26. and when flashes of judgment do burst
in upon other persons, it is calm in the Praier-room. When the destroying Angel
had overrun every house in Egypt with death, when there was nothing but
carcasses and crying in each dwelling, there was not one sick in Goshen Exodus
12. 30. When a thick darkness dwelt upon the Nation, the Israelites had lights
in all their dwellings Exodus 10. 23. and when a sad dark cloud does sit upon
Gods Countenance and pour down inundations of tempest on a people, yet then his
face does shine in the Closets of devotion, there he breaks in and does reveal
his comforts; God is so there, as his Angel was at that time, a Pillar of light
to them, and of cloud to those others, Exodus 14. 20. and when in this their
pilgrimage he takes off their chariot-wheels, v. 25. that they drive heavily,
pressed with the weight of afflictions and the heavier encumbrances of the World,
striving against the tide and torrent of troubles, encountering nothing but rubs
and crosses, and having on no wheels, none of Gods comforts to bear them up,
they march heavily till at last the waters overwhelm them: when as to those
others the waters were a wall on the right hand and on the left; and to the
devout persons the troubles of their times, by making them retire into their
chambers, prove an occasion of security, which brings on the next observation
from the words, hide thy self.

Whence we draw, that Prayers and the exercises of Piety are in sad days the
only great security, and the Devotion-chamber a sure hiding place from
trouble. And indeed where else should we take shelter, but in our Sanctuary?
Where should we seek for refuge, but at the horns of the Altar, where we offer
up the incense of our Prayers, and the lifting up of our hands is as the
evening Sacrifice? I have told you to retire thus into your chambers is to
enter Gods bedchamber, and where is safety to be had, if it be not there? Is
there not full quietness and calm in the Lords withdrawing rooms? Not to tell
you that David placed his Rock, his Fortress, his Castle, his every word of
safety upon this foundation: not to reckon up an infinity of places besides
Psalm 27. 5. and 61. 2, 3, 4, 5. I shall only say, that it is impossible for
any Sermon to say better what I have to say for him that betakes himself to
these secret rooms and nestles there, nor more pertinent to a time of sickness
and distress, than the 91. Psalm has spoke v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
and to which 'twere vanity, if not Tautology to add. Should I labor to evince
this further, I could prove strangely to you, that good hearty devout Prayers
are in time of danger a Security even to a Miracle. Security from the fury of
men, when single Prayers did resist an Army, when Moses's hand lifted up in his
devotions slew more Amalekites than the armed hands of Joshua and all his
Regiments stretched out; for when Moses lifted up his hand, then Israel
prevailed Exodus 17. 11. Security against the storm of Gods assault; for a
Prayer of Moses is called a standing in the breach against the Lord, when he
came to destroy the People by a plague, Psalm 106. 23. so God said he would
destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach to turn
away his wrathful indignation, least he should destroy them. They are terms of
war, and do express the desperatest act of Valor which war has occasion for;
when wall and rampart could not resist the storm of shot, but the Assault made
its way through stones and bulwarks, then must courage become the Rampart,
maintain the breach, and repulse the Assailants. This is the danger and the
glory of Valor, and this very expression does Scripture make use of to declare
the force and courage of a zealous Prayer. When Gods indignation had stormed
the People, when it had made a gap, a breach to enter and overrun them in a
moment, and the Angel with his sword drawn was assaulting, had began his
deaths, in steps Moses, armed but with single Prayer maintains the breach, and
turns away the Indignation. Neither was this all, for it did not only beat off
his fury, but assailed him also, as it were took God captive, and held him that
he could not fall upon them. For in the 32. Exodus 9, 10. he cries to Moses, it
is a stiff-necked people, now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot
against them, and that I may consume them in a moment: let me alone Hebr. (...)
dimitte me, (...) permit me ut invalescat, Sir. and nunc si permiseris mihi,
invalescet, Arab. dimitte deprecationem tuam a facie mea, Chald. Loose me, and
let me go, suffer me, let me alone that I may destroy them; do not pray to me,
thy strong desires are as bonds and cords upon me, loose me, and do not hold
me: I can do nothing if thou pray, my arm of power, my stretched our arm is held
in, it is restrained by thy strong cries, thy violent sighs they cool my wrath
that it cannot wax hot against them, thy zeal it is irresistible; do not
therefore make use of it, do not hinder me, do not pray now, let me alone, and
I will make of thee a greater Nation; I will bribe thee to silence, because my
fury will not withstand thy Prayers; if thou maintain the breach, I shall not
take this People now by storm: be hired then to withdraw, let me alone. But
Moses he would take no bribes from God, but he besought the Lord his God, as it
follows there, and the sudden effect of his Prayer was, the Lord repented of
the evil which he thought to do unto his people. Here Is the power of a fervent
Prayer, it has a kind of force on the Almighty, a force that he does seem as
it were afraid of, and would have prevented; and so does often, warning his
Ministers the Prophets, Jer. 7. 16. cap. 11. 14. cap. 14. 11.
Pray not for this people, I will not have you pray least you should prevail
upon mine indignation and overcome my anger. And see then if you can find out
such another security; many defenses may be made which will hold out against
the fury of men and their armed indignation, but notwithstanding those defenses
they lie open still to Heaven, no walls or bulwarks to be made against that;
upwards they are all gap and breach, and God may storm them where they have no
works. If we be strong enough to keep out all our foes, we are not fortified to
keep out plagues, have no guard against Gods hand, his arrows fly over any
defenses. But behold here defenses against his Indignation, a line which he
cannot enter; Prayers will keep him off, and in the chamber of thy devotions
thou may hide thy self from the storms of Heaven: when God turned Engineer,
this was the direction he gave to keep out himself, Come my people enter into
thy chamber, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self.

I shall not stay to give you the qualifications of the Prayers that are likely
to prevail, how first St James says James 1. 6.
we must ask in faith nothing doubting, not wavering in our purposes, praying
for what we esteem the truth, but not resolved if things should otherwise
succeed whether we should not comply with them; and how secondly when we are to
pray we must be such, as God has not resolved against, and so he will not hear
us: but now returning to my subject.

Now briefly to apply this, and here I will not say this Counsel was indeed
intended for days of persecution, and that not so much in regard of the malady,
as in the nature of the prescription, when he that will go to his prayers must
indeed enter into his chambers, and hide his devotions too as well as himself;
if thou desire at such a season to secure thy self, enter into thy Closet,
being not permitted to go into the Church: but this I will say, that even then
when the Altar is no Refuge, and the Temple wants a Sanctuary, and the Holy of
Holies an Asylum, even then the Closet will give shelter. Devotions are a kind
of Omnipotent Securities, they are shields against the arrows of the Almighty:
if for want of prayers to make up the breach it come to pass that a people is
destroyed, and God says it is for that as much as for the demerits of their
guilt Ezekiel. 22. 29, 30, 31. The people of the land have used oppression, and
exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy; yea they have oppressed
the stranger wrongfully, and I sought for a man among them that should make up
the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land that I should not
destroy it, but I found none: therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon
them, I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath, their own way have I
recompensed upon their heads, says the Lord God: if the performances of it be
a making good the gap against his wrath, methinks it should a little move us in
all our exigencies to stand upon our guard, to know our own strengths, and not
lazily to suffer our selves to perish, when we may contend and strive with God
to save our selves. Or if the line of destruction be stretched out upon our
Nation, if it have filled up the measure to the height, that God have sworn tho
Noah, Daniel, and Job were among his people, yet should they save but their own
lives, that is, their Prayers should not prevail with him for an impunity unto
the land: however if we our selves desire in that great spreading ruin yet to
escape, to lurk so that the Angel of destruction may not find us out; here is a
place of Gods own choice to hide thee in. His fury will not search there for
thee to destroy thee, where his own self did bid thee to retire for safety. He
that commanded thee to enter into thy chambers, did not mean to come there to
seek thee out to ruin thee; he that bid thee shut thy doors, intended that the
indignation should not call in, but should pass by thee, which the Text does
tacitly promise in the last words, until the indignation be overpast. Some of
the storm may fall upon a devout man notwithstanding all his careful Prayers,
but there is no anger nor no fury in that storm; that he reserveth for the
wicked, those who do take no care for the averting of his wrath, but resolve to
enjoy their pleasures and their sins, till indignation overtake them, and sweep
them and their delights away at once. To these indeed every affliction is
vengeance and judgment, and their fiery trials here are but tastes and
prelusions of Gods fearful wrath and fiery indignation; but to the careful
devout souls they are but the strokes of love, chastisements of a father, there
is no indignation in them; Hosea 2. 14.
I will take her into the wilderness, says God by the Prophet Hosea, and I
will speak comfortably unto her, (...), I will speak unto her heart, in those
desolate lonely places I will woo her, and those dark solitudes of affliction
shall be my opportunities of courtship, I will take her into the wilderness,
and speak unto her heart, and give her the valley of Achor, the vale of
trouble, for a door of hope. It Is not his indignation this to them, but his way
of love, his way of making jointures; he puts them in the vale of Achor: or if
vengeance be gone out against the people, yet devotion in the chamber is like
Exodus 12. 13.
blood upon the Israelites door posts, the indignation does go by it, makes a
Passover, it enters into the houses of the Egyptians only, but when it finds
thy doors thus shut (...), the indignation does overpass, especially if it find
such a (...) as the blood of Christ. The Angel of destruction could not enter
the doors, where but the type of it was dashed upon the door, the Paschal blood;
how then will he fly the truth, the blood of Christ our Passover? Come then my
people, enter etc.

SERMON IX. OF THE REST TO BE OBTAINED By them that labor and are heavy laden.
Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.
WERE there no other difference betwixt Law and Gospel than what these words
hold out unto us, yet had we abundant reason to rejoice and glory in our
condition, who are invited to the news of Gospel-revelations. The way that God
revealed himself by Law was by lightnings and thunders on Mount Sinai, the Pomp
of it was a Mountain not to be come near unto, that burnt with tempests of
fire, things that were not only mazes but omens, that typified those storms
and tempests that were to be the portion of transgressors, that limn'd out that
unquenchable brimstone, and denounced that dire thunder of Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, which is the sentence of the Law in its own rigor. Yea and
besides that blackness and darkness too, so that notwithstanding all those
lightnings and those revelations God was still in the thick cloud and in the
dark, and Christ might well say in the verse before the Text, No man knows
the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him; and when
he comes to do that, he does it in another strain, with words of another
nature, all invitation, Come unto me all ye that labor. The strain of Gospel is
not to thunder us into obedience, but I beseech you Brethren by the tender
mercies of God; and tho there be laboring and burden in the words, yet those
are the effects of Law, and there is ease and rest for that labor and those
burdens in the words too, and to them it is the Gospel that invites us, and it
is Christ that gives them; for it is he that says, Come unto me.

These words the Church makes use of for her call unto the Sacrament of the
Lords body, and certainly it is impossible that they should signify with
greater Emphasis than upon that occasion, when he does bid you come to him,
that is, to the communication of his body and his blood; for the bread which we
break is the communion of the body of Christ. You come to him not only for the
emty kindness of a visit there, but to partake of his body and his blood, all
the redemtions, graces, mercies, which he purchased on the cross. If ever
Christ do call with passion, it is sure when he pours out that blood for us and
says, every one that thirsts come, Come unto me all ye that labor.

The words are an invitation of Christ, in which we may observe

1. The Persons invited, All ye that labor and are heavy laden.

2. The invitation it self, Come unto me.

3. The entertainment at this invitation, Rest; I will give you rest.

In the handling of these I shall show, first who those persons invited are,
who they are that are said here to labor and to be heavy laden.

2. What is meant by their invitation, Come unto me.

3. How those persons come to be qualified for this invitation, so as to be
invited, and none other; how the laboring heavy laden persons are the only fit
persons to come to Christ.

4. I shall touch the advantages those persons shall gain by coming. Of these,
and

1. Who they are that are said to labor and be heavy laden. The words express
extremity of burden and labor under it, and weariness by reason of that labor;
they are translated, fessi estis and bajulantes onera Sir. labor attriti and
gravati onere by the Arab. And indeed they signify pains such as to make us
pant and blow (...), yea through weakness not be able to stand (...), so as that
the joints are loosed (...), and the very soul fails and faints, and we become
as it were in the shadow of death (...), all this (...) signifies. Now this
excess of pains may denote two things.

1. Either the sinner under that notion as a sinner; sins themselves being in
Scripture expressed by words that signify labor, trouble and weight, and
therefore the word in the Text translates (...), which means all those,
especially iniquity, Mich. 2. 1. Woe to them that devise iniquity, (...), that
devise labors; and the very next words will warrant it, and work evil: it being
a most familiar expression with the Prophet David, the Workers of Iniquity, not
only because it is some men's emploiment and trade, here lies their skill,
their managery, they are not Artists in any thing besides; but the secrets of
sin, the mysteries of filthiness, the Magisteries of Iniquity, these they are
Professors of, in these chair-men: but also Workers of iniquity because it is
their toil, they sweat under it, it is the vanity and vexation of their lives,
which are rackt in designing, contriving, and acting the sins of their
complexions and ambitions. Will you see our Saviors sense of the vexing
painfulness of sin: he calls your sins of the least size, peccata levia, as
they are esteemed, motes in the eye Matthew. 7. 3. Why beholdest thou the mote
that is in thy brothers eye? that is, why do thou look so severely on the
light faults of others? Our escapes that we make slight of they are of such a
nature in themselves, as to cause the anguish and fretting, that dust and
splinters do in the tenderest part, the eye. And if our souls were not all
corneous, our consciences seared and dead, we should with the same impatience
bear them as our eye does dust, with restlesness work against it, never quiet
till it force out tears to wash away the dust. Yea worse than that, for the
word which we translate mote (...) signifies a spill of wood, a little shiver
or splinter, a thing absolutely insuppportable to that part, which if suffered,
does not only threaten it with intolerable pains, but with absolute
extinction. And truly every one of our slighter sins is (...) a shiver in the
eye; and then the grosser iniquities will bear both the words of the text, of
labor and burden, and are in the same verse by our Savior entitled to an
expression that has enough of both, even a beam in the eye: And considerest
not the beam that is in thine own eye, that is, thine own vaster crimes. Every
designed and gross wickedness is (...), a thing whose agony is as much beyond
imagination as endurance. For how shall the eye bear that which the shoulders
must sink under, which only pillars can support? Yet such is that burden; and
therefore the expression is frequent of bearing iniquities; cap. 2. 24.
St Peter says it of Christ, He himself bears our sins, and the Prophet Isaiah
said it before him c. 53. 11. For he shall bear their iniquities (...), bear
them as a great burden, as the word expresses, and as event did more express, a
burden indeed which made the Son of God to sweat blood, and roar, and sink, and
die. It Is true there are of those that do delight in life, only because it is
the opportunity of sin, it has no more pleasure in it than is spent in vanity
or iniquity, without that (...), that (...) life would be a burden, they would
labor under it; all their other time is wearisom and perishes, and
notwithstanding in our Saviors character they are the only drudges, yet in
their own opinions they are the only light hearted creatures, the only
persons whose life is but various ease and diversified pleasure. Yea and the
only great prejudice they have against Religion is, it makes men heavy, sad,
and melancholy, hangs plummets upon the soul, plucks down the thoughts and
countenance, and does that which no burden can effect in them; whom weights do
but exalt, elevate, and in their own expression a load of sin and drink, that
sinks their bodies to the earth, does but heighten imagination and delight.
Alas these men do no more discern the true labor of their own sins, than they
do the ease and the refreshments of the pious souls. They see his fasts and
abstinences, but they discern not how he feeds upon Psalm 63. 5.
marrow and fatness, as David says, and finds all the words of their luxury in
his religious performances, how he tastes of the heavenly gift, and of the
powers of the world to come, Heb. 6. 4, 5. how he has the antepasts of
blessedness. These men do not consider that the pious man's weights are as the
other bucket, which the heavier it is the faster it lifts that up that is
against it: a burden theirs like that of wings, that does but poise their
flight and help them up to Heaven, whereas their own lightness shall sink them
into the deep of that pit that has no bottom. It Is true indeed those very
sins, that make our Savior style the man a laborer, are in other places called
sleep, as if they had the ease of rest, as if to him that were wearied with
duties of calling or devotion, to take vicissitudes of sinning would be a soft
refreshment and a pleasant reward, as if a little return of iniquity would
restore him, as sleep does the weary laborer. And how shall we reconcile these
expressions? Shall we attribute them to the unhappy contradictions of this
thing sin, which is at once ease and pressure, sleep and yet heavy labor? or
rather shall we gather hence the extremely toilsom condition of the sinner,
whose very rest is (...), and whose refreshments tire, and are most wearisom?
where shall he look for ease, whose ease is misery and anxiety. Tho his life be
all sleep, yet he is all that while one of the (...) here in the Text. And so
those very wickednesses, which are here called heavy burden, are in other
places called our own body, our selves. And what shall lighten him whose very
self is weight? What shall disburden him who is his own immense pressure?
Wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from these burdens of our
selves? Burdens indeed with which the expressions seem to labor as well as the
sinner, (...) We have not words for them, the mineries, the Galleys, the Mill,
or dungeon are words of ease to the service of sin. No such slavery in the
world as his that is bound to serve his lusts and passions; he must adventure
through all black designs and blacker hazards to attend ambition or to wreak ones
malice or some hasty choler; adventure upon rotteness, embrace a Purgatory but
to please an itch; must be the Martyr of his lust, run upon quarrels, qualms,
headache, hazard, desperate misfortunes to quench not thirst, but a little
custom. If you would see the labor that is in sin, behold your Savior in the
Garden; it made the Son of God to sweat like clots of blood, it squeezed that
very person who was (...), it made him faint, not able to stand under that tree
on which he was to bear the Iniquity. At such hard rates man buyeth damnation,
as if he envied himself ease in Ruin; (...) he does extremely labor, till he
faint, to get to Hell. Have you read in Scripture the pains and anguishes of a
man possessed by a Devil, how it speaks of such a one that was intolerably vexed
and tormented, how the spirit rent and tore him, and often cast him into the
agonies of death, and from it did revive him still only to throw him back
again into them? It were no hard matter to show that the Scripture does express
every gross Sinner to be one of these Demoniacs, to be possessed and inhabited
by a Devil, Matthew. 12. 43, 44. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he
Walks through dry places; then he says, I will return to my house from whence I
came out, and he enters in and dwells there. And what does all this mean, but
describe a person that after seeming amendment returns back again to his
courses of sin? Of such a one the Devil says, I will return. A wicked person
is the Devil's house, Satan dwells there, and is not his house Hell? And then
are not all the miseries of Tophet, the torments of the vale of Hinnom in a
Sinner? Yea experience is fair enough for this, that the habitually wicked
person is a Demoniac. Look upon the wrathful angry furious man, and you would
think the man possessed were but his picture: his passion swells and tears him, he
stares and foams, he cries out and is not so innocent as to say, Mark 5. 7.
what have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God; for he has to do with
him in blaspheming him with oaths and execrations, and his spirit rends not
himself only, but the wounds of that Holy one of God, and if his passion could
speak plain, it would surely say his name also were Legion. The debaucht
Drunkards they have the Epilepsies, the falling sicknesses, the dead Apoplexies
of men possessed, and there the Devil is again entered into swine. The lustful
person may find also a spirit of uncleaness, and an unclean Devil in the
Gospel. And thus our sins do treat us. And who then but wretched man would buy
damnation at so hard rates? who would (...), extremely labor, tire himself till
he faint to get to hell? as if he envied himself ease because he is to go down
the hill thither, that he may think he has an easy descent, facilis descensus;
he will therefore load himself with a most heavy burden to make his passage the
more troublesome. Of what a profligated choice are we, that refuse Heaven with
ease, and choose Hell, tho we must labor hard to get it.

Or secondly, letting the heavy laden stand as they do, in the sense we have
now given, we cannot excuse the Sinner from that expression there (...); those
that labor may signify such as groan under the sense of that burden, such as
labor to rid themselves of that weight, that pant and blow after a liberty and
ease from that heavy pressure, under which they find themselves sinking into
the horror of that deep, the very imaginations of which does cause faintings of
soul in them and Apoplexies of fear; that tire themselves to find out any way
to escape from that eternal weight of torments that is prepared for them below,
and the weight of indignation and vengeance that hangs over them above, and
from that heavy burden, themselves, that sinks faster than either of the other,
outvying God's threats with multiplied accumulated iniquities. The sweats of
soul under the sense of the burden of sin, the labors of mortifying the flesh
and crucifying the affections, of putting the body of sin to death, will
justify this sense. The new Birth also has its pangs, and the Child of God, as
he is not engendered by weak purposes, faint resolutions, so neither is he
brought forth in a sigh or wish of mercy, there is a labor in it. In this
expression you may see the nature of repentance, the dawnings and first flashes
of that Catholic Duty; it is not that easy thing to change my mind only, and
begin to believe. That that is not the best course I have hitherto trod in, the
way of Sinners not the safest and most pleasant path, tho few of us will
believe that: neither is it that easy wish, I would I had not don this act; for
when the pleasure's gone and dead, the memory of it is so unsatisfying, if not
loathsome, that a man can hardly not wish it. Nor yet is it that easy desire of
mercy, that saying Matt. 7. 21.
Lord, Lord. The Penitent they are the (...); here they are such as even faint
under a sense of the horror of their sins, whose hearts are broken and wounded
with that heavy galling weight of them. If I should gather up the racks and
tortures, the Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum, that self whip in the
dark rooms and recesses of our thoughts, conscience dealing with us by the
discipline of mad men, as knowing the sinner is not only Solomon's fool and
David's man without understanding, but even St Paul's (...) and (...) madman,
the tacita sudant praecordia culpa, which a Heathen can reckon up to us. And
add to these the Scripture expressions, the (...), the pains of travel, the
labor of a woman in childbirth, the agony of the Cross, and the pangs of
death; the word repentance would bear them all, and they would let us see that
the Penitent is truly one that labors under a very heavy burden, and so is
invited here by our Savior, Come.

Thirdly those that labor and are heavy laden may signify such as groan under a
burden of afflictions, and look upon them not as chastisements only but
inflictions, and are even wearied and affrighted by them. Thus those judgments
which God did by his Prophets threaten to the Nations, are in those Prophets
called the burden of those Nations; and the cross and calamities are often
called (...), the labor in the Text 1 Timothy 4. 10. and generally all the
troubles and difficulties of this life, Rev. 14. 13. of which death is there
made the rescue. And I need make no application of this interpretation, the
words labor and heavy laden do in these days sufficiently apply themselves; I
shall only tell you, that the whole sense of those words sum'd up make thus
much, Those that are heavy burdened with sins, and the punishment of those
sins, afflictions, and groan under the sense of both of them, laboring
earnestly to be rid and be delivered from both, these are bid to come to
Christ, which is the invitation, and what it means I am secondly to show.

Come unto me. And first in general the word used (...) Come is not only a
word of exhortation, but of great encouragement also in the doing, so often
used, Matt. 21. 38.
Come and let us kill him, and then the inheritance shall be ours; and (...),
Cap. 22. 4.
Come ye unto the wedding. And indeed such is needful to the persons here
spoken to, the laboring, heavy laden: for them to take a journey, if there be
not the encouragement of some great advantage, it will not sound like an
invitation, but an infliction; and therefore our Savior besides the rest he
promises, used animating words even in the very call (...). Therefore the whole
invitation come unto me, tho it be used in the Gospel, and may very well
signify come to me as to a Teacher and Instructor, so Nicodemus is said to come
to Christ, and they are said to come to the light as that which was to reveal;
yea and that place in Isaiah 55. 3. whither our Savior does much reflect, when
he uses this expression, seems to import but so, Incline your ear and come
unto me, hear etc. yea and may so signify in this place, the words going before
being all things are given me of my father, and no man knows the father, but
the son, and he to whom the son will reveal him, it then follows come to me; as
if he should say, therefore if you desire to be instructed in the way to life
come to me, and tho you do labor under the load of many sins, yet I will show
you a way how you shall find ease and rest, and that way follows in the next
verse, take my yoke upon you and learn of me, and ye shall be sure to find
rest: this is very natural, yet because to give you rest is more than to show
you a way to it, and so may seem a promise and a reward very apportioned to the
duty, rest to coming; therefore it is most probable that come does not only
signify come to me to learn your duty, but that the come should be it self a
duty, and so I shall consider it: and the expression come to me does in the
Gospel signify a twofold duty.

1. It signifies to obey and serve. Thus very often most expressly in the
Epistle to the Hebrews to come to God is to serve and worship him c. 11. 6. For
he that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that seek him: and c. 7. 25. He is able to save them that come to God by
him, that serve God as he commands and enableth: c. 10. 1. The sacrifices
which they offered year by year could not make the comers thereunto perfect,
could not perfectly cleanse them that served God by them, (...); and the 22d
verse there Let us come with a true heart, worship him with unfeigned piety and
obedience. And the sense will be fully clear from the expressions that relate
to it, Seek the Lord, draw near to him, and then come to him. To seek him is to
enter upon such a course of life by which his favor is to be obtained, and what
it is you will see Isaiah 55. where when he had bid them come to him, that they
may do that he bids them, seek him v. 6, 7. Seek the Lord while he may be
found: let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and let them return unto the Lord. Deuteronomy. 4. 29, 30. But if from thence thou
shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if thou seek him with all
thine heart and with all thy soul, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shall
be obedient unto his voice. Nor indeed can we seek God in any other path. The
broad way, that goes down the hill, can never land us in God's Habitation,
Heaven; and while we do go on in them it is not possible we should draw near to
God, the second, which is but to go on in the same paths. And this expression
is our own experience, it being the custom of those that are averse to one
another to avoid the sight one of the other, but those that are friendly to
seek each other, and delight in drawing near and in society. Thirdly then to
come to him must needs be to proceed in those very ways wherein we sought him,
till we are in his favor, and to walk with him is accordingly to please him:
for so the LXX. renders Enoch's Genesis 5. 24.
walking with God, and the Author of the Hebrews c. 11. v. 5. expresses that
testimony which the Scripture gives of Enoch, that he walked with God, and
which the Chaldee words he walked in the fear of God, thus, he received the
testimony that he pleased God; and that very walking is the same word with this
coming (...) and (...), and here also made the same; for v. 6. of that chapter
Without faith it is impossible to please him, for he that comes must believe,
that is certainly; for he that pleases him must believe, or else it does not
prove. To walk with God therefore in his Laws, in his fear, and in his favor it
is but the progress and the life of this very thing, we are here exhorted to
come unto him.

Now if this be to come to God, and coming to him be the end of duty, thither
we drive in our whole Pilgrimage of life and piety, to arrive at our Country,
to come to our Fathers house, to walk with God, to enjoy his society is the
very business and delight of Heaven. Why then this duty of conversion and
obedience, this piety of life seems like its own reward, crowns it self. This
coming is like that they say of the moving of the Heavens, which being in its
own place, tho it be still in motion, is still in termino, every parcel of
agitation is its own rest, and they have a most perfect acquiescency in that
their turbination. And if to lead a good life be to walk with God, it is to be
in heaven here; and piety is a translation upon earth.

But secondly there is yet another sense of the invitation Come unto me, and in
that sense it is very often used by our Savior, even of believing in him John
6. 35. I am the bread of life: he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he
that believes on me shall never thirst. Where he that comes shall never
hunger is he that eats this bread that gives life, and he that believes
shall never thirst is he that drin^eth, to let us see that eating him and
drinking him, coming to him and believing on him are all the same. So in v. 40.
and 44. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees the
Son, and believes on him, should have everlasting life, and I will raise him
up at the last day. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me
draw him. So c. 7. 37, 38. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink:
He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. So
that to come to Christ is to believe in him, yet so as to obey him, and to
frame our lives according to his prescript and example. For to come to him does
comprehend the duty; we come to him to do, as also to believe in him must be to
do that which we cannot but believe he requires. This is clear out of the
forecited place, I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall never
hunger. It is not coming to the bread that satisfies, for then would Tantalus
no longer hunger or be thirsty, his hell would be his meal; but doing that
which people that hunger and come to bread cannot but be supposed to do, even
to eat. Why the same is to believe; for if coming to him and believing on him
be the same, and coming to him signify not only that, but doing that which
they that come cannot but be supposed to come to do, then to believe must be
besides believing the doing that also which they cannot but believe they ought
to do. So that come to me here is believe me, devote your selves to my
obedience, and trust, and devolve your selves on me.

And if this be to come to him, belief then is no longer expectation, but
enjoiment; it is (...) in the highest sense, the giving us the very substance of
those things which we believe we shall receive: it seems more than the evidence
of things not seen, even the arrival at them and vision of them. It Is, says
the Wise Man, (...) the beginning of our cleaving to him, of our being glued
and fixed upon him, Ecclesiasticus 25. 12. And by faith we may both taste and
see how gracious the Lord is, how (...), the word following here, how sweet,
how pleasant he is even to the eye and palate. If to believe be to arrive to
eat and drink, Faith is now all sense, as verily as Christ is all enjoiment,
all satisfaction, and happiness.

And to this happiness they that labor and are heavy laden are the only persons
that are called; which is the third thing, to show how this laboring and heavy
lading come to be the qualification for this Invitation, how it come to pass
that they that are such, are the only fit ones to come to Christ.

And first, in the first sense as all those words do but signify the grievous
Sinner. These sins may in one sense given by Christ be a qualification to this
coming, because Matt. 9. 12.
the whole need not the Physician, but those that are sick. Do not wounds
require, and qualify for a Surgeon? The corrupt habitual Sinner is full of
wounds, and swellings, and putrified sores. Does not weariness and burdens
dispose a man for ease and rest? The Sinner he is the tired laden man, he
therefore has the most need of this Invitation, which makes our Savior say, I
came Luke 5. 32.
to call Sinners; which is no more than saying, I came to say Come unto me all
ye that labor and are heavy laden.

And hence we learn the all-abundant kindness of our merciful Savior: he needs
no other motive for his helping of us, but our want of help: thou do fulfill
his own direction, when thou Cap. 14. 13.
make a feast, invite not the rich, but the poor and needy. So here he makes
the only cause of his invitation of us Sinners, our necessity. Except he do
invite us, we are miserable, must sink under a perpetual burden, and therefore
he will call us to give us rest. David was well acquainted with this Attribute,
and therefore prays, Help me, O Lord, for I am weak. Our want is argument
enough to those bowels, whose business is to extend and diffuse themselves. Yea
the Gospel expresses in that manner also; the Ruler there says Matt. 9. 19.
My daughter lies at the point of death, (...), that thou may come and lay
thy hands on her, as if our wants were nothing else but his opportunities. Yea
Christ himself has taught us ground for this confidence, in the very Prayer he
has taught us, (...), Give us our bread: if it be ours, what need we go to beg
and pray for it? Why our bread? Why certainly because we are in extreme need of
it, we cannot live without it, therefore we go to pray for it; so that want is
possession in Christ's esteem, and when we are in need then we may go to Christ
and call it ours. He observes that himself here, when he makes our sinful
misery the only motive to his Invitation, Come unto me all ye that labor.

But then secondly in the second sense of the words those that are affected
with the sense of their sins, that groan under and are humbled and brought low
with the weight of their iniquities, that discern them to be truly heavy loads,
and to be the true cause of faintings and languishing of Soul, these are the
only disposed persons to come to Christ in both the senses of that phrase of
Coming. First as it signifies to turn from their evil ways and walk in those
paths that lead to him. For as long as men apprehend no danger in their
courses, how can we expect that they should leave them? While they only taste
the sweets and pleasures of sin, whilst the Devil smooths and strews their
way, and makes one temtation receive another, and by the perpetuated vanity
makes one sin a divertisement to another; so that none can clog, but each does
recreate, and one iniquity refresh him whom another has wearied: how is it to
be looked for, that these men should quarrel with their pleasures, and forsake
these delights and advantages of iniquity? Nay alas we see, when iniquity is
become so cruel as to punish it self, and sin is its own Executioner, as
adultery, drunkeness, covetousness and ambition often are so just as to severely
torture them that serve them, if notwithstanding that we see men choose and
embrace those sins that bring their Hell with them, are of such desperate
appetites as to long for torments, how can we hope that any will forsake their
sins before they find them toilsom burdens, before they begin to see them in
their own deformed infernal shapes, to discern their hooks and prongs, their
brimstone-flames and worm with which they will eternally torment us? They must
be scared and mated, before ever they will forsake those things that flow with
wanton delicacy and luxuriant delight; and therefore we see very few ever begin
seriously to repent before their last deathbeds, when the evil day is come,
then that time is in which thou shall say I have no pleasure in them, when the
keepers of the house shall tremble, i. e. the hands shall shake with guilt or
with infirmity, with palsy or with fear, thou will then hate their gripings,
the bribery that they have bin the instruments of: how will men contemn their
former excesses, their full riots, and their draughts that overflowed like
seas, that had their tides and refluxes, when the grinders shall cease, because
they are few, when the mouth is toothless, as unable to chew as the stomach is
to digest meat; and the pitcher shall be broken at the fountain, and the wheel
at the cistern, the bladder ceases to do his office, stopped up by stranguries or
leaky with diabetes: punishments that old age, and living faster than nature
designed, bring along with it, very proportionate to that sin, if you
understand it. Or how will they hate the foul inordinacies of unchaste beds,
when the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail, rupture and
hernias and ulcers shall seize the lower ventricle. But these are all
expressions that belong to that last day, and made use of by the wise Preacher,
that had tried the vanity and emtiness, and the vexation and burden of them, to
make us take up a little sooner, Ecclesiastes 12. the 6 first verses. And when
those that look out of the windows shall be darkened, when the curtains of thy
bed and of thy eyes shall be drawn, and that utter darkness begin to represent
it self with which our Savior paints the lower region, when Hell from below is
removed at his approach opening her mouth wide to swallow him, whom the vast
weight of his iniquity is ready to sink into it; O then his sin is his greatest
sickness, and his horror does more disjoint him than death it self. O for a
little lifetime now to spend in piety, which before he counted the most
unpleasant impertinency that could be, nor could be rectified till these
apprehensions, which only sense will work in most too late, be wrought in him,
there being no other way to make us leave and come, but by looking upon death
in the iniquity, which certainly is there, that having bin a murderer from the
beginning. In the second sense as to come to Christ signifies to rest and
devolve our selves upon him, this laboring is a necessary preparative, it is
the sense of our misery without him that must drive us to him: the weight of
that Legal curse that lies upon us all that must make us run to him, that was
Gal. 3. 13.
made a curse for us. Who would either value or fly to a Savior, that is not
first convinced that he wants help? Can you persuade the mad man in the fever
to betake himself to the Physician? He thinks you have more need, that counsel
him. It is the drowning man that clings and grasps, and when he sees himself
ready to perish, rather than want something to catch hold of, his roming hand
does even catch that water that does strangle him, and he does grasp his own
ruin. Any rest to a falling man: and we never truly and seriously can depend
upon Christ, till we thus apprehend our selves sinking, and find our selves
tired and fainting under the load of our iniquities.

No nor secondly on Christ's part, will he receive any that are not thus
qualified. For will he, think you, forgive the sins of those that do as yet
love those sins? or will he strive to ease them of their iniquities, that find
no burden in them, but rather that of a full pleasure? No surely he will not
envy them so much their delights, but let them enjoy their beloved ruin. Is it
fit Christ should invite those men who do yet cherish those sins that slew him,
or that he should receive into his bosom those iniquities that put him to
death? No certainly, till we can hate those sins which he could die for, and
till we find weight in those iniquities which he found death from, till we
labor under that which he sunk under, we have no regard of his mercies to us,
but renounce all relation to him, and close with his mortal enemy, and cannot
then hope to be received by him. And thus you have the reason why these (...)
are the only fit persons to be invited by him, because till we are so, we
cannot truly come unto him, depend upon him; and till we are so, we are not fit
to be received by him.

And now for application. But what? cannot we truly come til we find our selves
to be heavy laden, till we labor and are tired and wearied with iniquity? We
see the perverse conditions of man, whom nothing but misery can persuade to
Heaven; Heaven is no bait, tho it prostitute all its glories; Happiness is a
word that has no music in it; the pleasures with which God entertained
himself from all eternity, have no temtation in them compared to those of sin:
Come unto me is not an invitation till we labor; till we find our selves
perishing in our choice, ruined in those sins we have embraced, we never will
uncling, nor come to Christ: we must have our happiness inflicted on us and be
goaded into bliss. But then

2. Learn hence how willing Christ is to have us come to him, when he makes use
of Hell, not to punish only them that will not come, but to drive us to come
to him. Had it not bin enough for him to set before us life and death, and bid
us take our choice? No, he knows our blind and unadvised appetites would choose
the guilt poison, the painted, the pleasant death, and make a Covenant with
Hell; and therefore he lets us feel part of that Hell to fright us, and yet
then receives us. To force us to love ease he lets us travel under the burdens
of our own desiring, and yet after that invites us to rest: he does not only
accept them whose choice he is not but refuge, when as he might reject us. You
would none of me, but chose weight, load, and labor; go and look for ease
thence. But alas! if I should bid you seek refreshment from your pleasant sins,
what comfort would you find, when you are tired with those sins, and the
pleasures of them do forsake you, and leave you nothing but the stings and
horror of the after expectations? No no, come to me yet, I will receive you
after all your refusals; and tho you come to me but as to a last hold having
nothing else to trust to, tho you have already tried all other, and slighted
me, you shall yet be welcome: my pierced side is yet open to receive all of you
that will yet come, and let you into my very heart; my arms are yet as wide as
on the Cross, at their full length to take you into their embraces. Ah my
Brethren, Christ does not send us back to our beloved miseries when we come to
him, but he makes those miseries a part of his Rhetoric to invite us, uses our
labor and weariness to persuade us to come, makes those burdens the indearment
of, and provocation to his ease, and Hell it self a part of his wooing. And how
will he receive and embrace us, who does thus desire and court us? The story of
the Prodigal is hugely evictive of this, and so indulgent, that it would almost
invite a man to sin; but then it does far more invite a man, that will repent
him of his sin, to be secure of God's acceptance. He that had so villanously
betrayed his Father's dearness to his own beastliness and ruin, to whom all
kindness would seem lost, and to receive him in again and to assist him would
be but to encourage him, and to furnish him for a return back to the
prodigalities of sin and to the former riots of iniquity; yet when he does
repent, he does obtain far more than he desires: he is received to feast and
bosom, is entertained much more than the first born, and had he never gone away
he had not bin so dear. Do but consult the story Luke 15. When weary and
fainting under the burden of himself, which his languishing spirits were scarce
able to sustain, he came at last to himself, v. 17. and began to wonder that he
chose to stay with husks, with famine, rather than to go to daily plenty, and
chose to dwell in the unclean, uncomfortable company of swine before his
Father's household, and then strait to think of leaving that condition and
society, and to resolve on a return. When he began to put those resolutions
into act, and his impotent starved limbs would scarce serve his desires, at
least he was unable to make have in the pursuit of his intentions, for he was
yet a great way off v. 20. yet then his Father had compassion, and ran and fell
on his neck and kissed him. His compassions did not keep state, or stand
expecting till his ungracious son should come and humble himself, and deprecate
and beg; but he ran to meet him, and made far greater have to receive and
entertain, than the other could do to be received; and as if the humiliations
or weaknesses had bin on his side, he fell, at least the impotencies of his
affection did vie with those of the others condition, for he fell on his neck
and kissed him. And whereas his repenting son did resolve to become prostrate,
and low in condition as well as posture, I will go to my Father, and say unto
him, Father, I have sinned before heaven and against thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants v. 18, 19. I
dare not hope for favor from any tie of nature which I have broken all; I do
not beg thy kindness as the issue of thy Relation, but as the wages of my
labor; I will serve for thy affections, and let me have it as the hire of my
repentance and endeavors: but 'twas enough it seems to have resolved thus lowly
in earnest; for when he comes to act it v. 21. as he had said I am unworthy to
be called thy son, his Father cuts him off, and calls for the best Robe, and
for a Ring, and for the fatted Calf, will not let him so much as beg to be a
servant, but if he once acknowledge himself unworthy for a son, he puts him
strait in such an equipage as he may own him in with credit, in the best Robe;
and he rejoices, quickens and sets out his joy with Feasts and Music. Now says
Tertullian, Quis ille nobis intelligendus Pater? What Father is this in the
story? Why certainly it is God. No one so much a Father, no one so
compassionate, if the Sinner once come to himself, as the prodigal son is said
to do; for while he does go on he is indeed beside himself and in a fit: and
when he has collected sober thoughts about him, and does compare his wanting
husks with the full plenties of his Fathers house, the unsatisfying transient
delights of sin, that have filthy toil and noisome drudgery in the gaining, and
instantly when they are gained put out themselves, are gone, and leave nothing
but snuff or stink behind, offense only and trouble of mind; compared those
with the gladsom expectations of blessedness, with the comforts that are in all
the promises of Christ, and the feasts of our Fathers mansion, Gods
entertainments, the glories he has studied for those that love him, and being
satisfied these are the better pleasure, resolves to leave the swine, his
unclean beastly courses, and betake himself to his Father, he shall then find
this fiction experience, and God outdoing all the Parables of himself. He will
run to meet him that does but set himself to come in earnest, not only, as the
proposition says, accept his service, but prevent it; and however miserable,
poor, and naked he do meet him, as the Sinner is Rev. 3. 17. he calls for the
best Robe, even the Robe of Christ's Righteousness to put upon him, and puts a
Ring upon his finger, he does espouse him to his Son, he kills the fatted calf,
makes ready the supper of the Lamb for him, and it is the poor repenting
Sinner's wedding supper with his Savior. It is a chapter full of comfort to the
Penitent, and has a greater advance for it than this story v. 3, 4. The Sinner
he has straied into bypath, gone away from the Shepherd of his soul, is a
lost sheep; but yet when he is gone his farthest, and is in his mazes, knows not
which way to betake himself, then this good Shepherd does not invite only to a
return, or as the Father in the Parable run to meet him in his coming back, but
he does go himself to seek him, seems to mind the recovery of each single one
that is lost, and contributes as carefully to his return, as if that one were
all his charge, and the whole flock is not dearer to him than that one. He
leaves the ninety and nine to seek that one, and he seeks till he finds it, and
when he finds it he lays it on his shoulders. The wandering sheep was wearied
it seems with straying, and had tired it self with running from its shepherd;
but this too is provided for, he could not come home, therefore he is carried.
It is not now, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, I will not
refuse you. Nay when you are so lost in Labyrinths of guilt out of which you
can see no issue, when you have so labored in the paths of error that you are
not able to come home, if you will but be found, I will seek you, yea and carry
you home too. That no one, how far soever he have gone away, may yet despair of
coming home, this sheep had wandered to such a distance and to so much
weariness, that he was fain to be born back when he was found. And he lays it
on his shoulders rejoicing, was glad of such a burden. How willing is our
Savior to find out a straied Sinner, when after such long errors he does seek
him till he finds him, and carries him, if he be weak and fainting; yea and
rejoices in that carriage, as if that rest he gives the Sinner were such ease
and refreshment to himself, he joys in it! And that joy spreads it self to
Heaven, for there is joy in Heaven at that sight, and v. 10. There is joy in
the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents. Heus tu
peccator, bono animo sis, vides ubi de tuo reditu gaudeatur: Thou poor
disconsolate Sinner, that lie grovelling under the sense of the burden of thy
sins, thy soul sinking under that heavy weight, and sinking also in the waters
of thy fears, drowned in thy sorrow, be of good cheer. Do thou not think
there is some joy in this estate of thine, when it can make a joy in Heaven?
Those tears assure thy self have comfort in them; for God, and Christ, and all
the Angels do rejoice at sight of them. And do not dread thy burden, if thou
do truly labor under it, and do but faithfully desire and endeavor to throw
it off thee. Do thou not see him that laid the lost sheep on his shoulders as
ready to take thee up? He that would not reject thy Cross when it was laden
with thy guilt, will not reject thy self when thou art lighted from that guilt.
He that would receive thee on his shoulders when thou wast fainting under the
burden of thy sins, when that is cast away into the sea and buried in his
grave, will certainly receive thee into his bosom. He that would carry thee to
give thee ease when thou were wearied with running from him, when thou do
come to him and faint into his arms, will give thee everlasting rest; a rest
whose blessedness to understand were to enjoy it, and to be able to conceive
were to be infinite as it self is; a blessedness which to behold is beatific. O
cast away your burdens and make have, and come and see.

Lastly learn hence the method you are to take in coming to him, how you are to
begin your journey. The first advance is by this conviction of the burden and
horror of sin, till this be in us we will never move a step toward him. The
Church has taught us, when she invites us to come to him in Sacrament, to make
the first step this confession, We be heartily sorry for these our
transgressions, the remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of them
is intolerable. And Christ has told us here, that we must find the very same
things in our selves, an intolerable burden that tires and wearies us until we
faint, before we come to him; we are otherwise no part of his invitation, will
be no part of his retinue. And then whosoever thou art that art so far from
finding them intolerable, that without them thy life is hardly tolerable, so
far from burden, that thy very days are burdensome that are restrained from
conversations of sin, that do account them thy delight, not weariness, and
art refresht, not tired with them, and can not think of parting with them: or
if no very vicious company or custom has brought thee to this necessity and
height of sinning, yet thou look upon them as slight regardless things,
mistakes and oversights that slip from thee, all whose repentance is but Lord
have mercy, and never think more of it, do not apprehend that every such
gross fault has an eternal weight in it, and do not humble thy self under
that weight; bethink thy self whether thou art yet in the way to Christ, or
whether thou indeed be called to come. Oh no, the (...) are the men; for thou
especially that take pleasure in them, do thou think Christ will call thee
to do worse with him than the damned do in Hell? There they indeed nourish
their sinful appetites, their lusts advance, but their lusts are their plague
and torment them, and they extremely hate and curse those things which they do
passionately desire. Now that habitual Sinner his sins they are his emploiment,
his delight too, he longs as those other, but he satisfies also and finds
pleasure in them: and then, if those others be fit company for the Devils
only, can thou believe thy self fit company for Christ, that he should bid
thee come to him? No, begin to act thy Hell a little sooner, account them here
thy torments, hate them in time, perceive them to be burdens while they may be
laid down, and then come unto Christ, and he will give thee rest.

And evermore, O Lord, give us of thy rest, a rest from sin here, and a rest
from misery eternally. Yea, O Lord, give us to labor, and to find trouble under
that intolerable burden of our guilt, that we may with eager have fly to the
refreshment, that we perverse obdurate Sinners, whom thy mercies cannot invite,
our own miseries may force to be happy: and tho our wickednesses are multiplied
into an infinite mass and weight, yet despise us not, when we fall under them;
for thou did invite us to come, and bring all that load to thee: despise us
not, tho heavy laden; for thou thy self did bear this weight, and did die
under it. And O thou, who did thy self thus suffer by reason of this load,
pity us that labor with it, ease us of the burden of our former guilt, free us
from the slavery of our iniquity, from bearing any longer Sathan's loads; then
shall we at last sit down with thee in the Land of everlasting rest, delivered
from all weights but that eternal weight of glory, and resting from all labors
save that of praising thee, and ascribing all Honor, Power, Praise, Might,
Majesty, and Dominion to Father, Son, and holy Ghost for evermore.

SERMON X. OF THE CHRISTIANS VICTORY Over Death, Sin, and the Law.
1 Cor. 15. 57. Thanks be to God, which gives us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.
THE words are the close of an (...), or Song of joy and triumph for a victory.
Now a victory supposes Enemies, and the verse before names them, and the Text
shows us the means that they art conquered by, and who they are, that are
partakers of the Victory. I shall declare and treat of both.

1. The Enemies here mentioned, and we may account them three, if that which
gives both aid and strength to, fortifies our Enemy, be so; as sure it is. 1.
Here is Death, which sin arms with a sting and does envenome it. 2. Sin it
self, empowered and strengthened by the Law. 3. That Law also.

In the second place here are the means by which the Victory is gotten, and for
whom -- us the victory through Jesus.

In handling all which I shall show

First, that the Law gives Sin all its strength, and how it does so.

2ly That Sin is the sting of Death, and how it is so.

3ly That by Christ both the Law which is the strength of Sin is taken away,
and Sin which is the sting of Death pulled out; and so both Sin and Death so
weakened that they cannot hurt now; and they shall be swallowed up in perfect
victory: and who they are all this is don for. Of these all in this order,
which I crave leave to speak to directly without any least diverting from the
Text or Subject.

First I am to speak of the first preparations that are made against us in
behalf of our Enemies; and that is to show you, that the Law gives all the
strength to Sin which it has, and how it does so.

Sin has its very being from Law, it being (...), the transgression of the Law
1 John 3. 4. and Sin is not imputed where there is no Law Romans 5. 13. yea where
there is no Law there is no transgression c. 4. 15. But this is not all, for in
the Law besides the Precepts there is also Sanction, and it lays a twofold
obligation; first to duty, secondly upon transgression to punishment.

1. To duty, and that perfect and unsinning strict obedience; for the terms are
these, Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is he that continues not in all things which are written in the book
of the Law to do them. And to this the whole man is obliged, the soul as well
as body: and caro and spiritus Dei res est, says Tertull. God made the soul as
well as body, one's his creature as much as the other, and the one has as much
reason then to pay him honor and obedience as the other: if indeed the spirit
has not much more to obey him in its own motions and actings, than in those of
the body, which are only under it, and guided by it. So that thoughts are
criminal against this Law, as well as doings; by them the Soul fulfils its part
of the transgression, more it may be than its own share, while it robs the
Flesh, seizes its satisfactions, and makes them her own against her nature. And
indeed whatever part the Law is broken and transgrest by, it is transgression
and sin still, whether by the mind, for lust when it has conceived only, sin
is then begotten James 1. 15. or by the tongue, for of every idle word we must
give an account at the day of Judgment, Matthew. 12. 36. and by thy words thou
shall be condemned. Or lastly by the works. So that according to the Tenor of
this strict and severe Law whatever we can do, or indeed whatever we do not is
Sin: besides commissions that are sinful there is still defect, and so
transgression in our thoughts, our words, and deeds even in the best; and in
not doing also there is omission, and so failing. But besides this severe
obligation of the Law to duty, upon this our faileur there is a severer
obligation

2. To punishment; for every sin is cursed, as we saw. Upon this account the
Law, says St Paul, works wrath, Romans 4. 15. we are children of wrath, Ephesians.
2. 3. whose inheritance is destruction, and who are of right to possess only
the sad issues of God's indignation: for to this the Law condemns us all, by
reason of our Sins; and upon that account the Law is said to be the strength of
Sin. Because by force and virtue of this threatening of the Law, we that have
sinned are therefore liable and obnoxious to the condemnation of it. And this I
take to be the meaning of that place Romans 7. 7, 8, 9, 10. I had not known sin,
but by the law; for I had not known concupiscence, except the law had said thou
shall not covet. But sin taking occasion by the commandment wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence: for without the law sin was dead, -- but when the
commandment came, sin revived and I died, and the commandment which was
ordained to life, I found to be unto death. The Apostle's drift here is not to
evince how the commandment begets sin, but how it makes sin condemning, begets
death: and therefore I believe they are mistaken who expound, sin taking
occasion by the commandment wrought in me all manner of concupiscence, as if it
meant the Law only prohibiting, but not quelling sin in me; the more it was
restrained, the more it wrought all manner of concupiscence in me, especially
since there was no punishment assigned to that sin in the Law; it took
advantage thence more powerfully to engage me in the pursuit of all my lusts,
since thence I might have hoped without any fear of punishment to pursue them.
For this seems perfectly to thwart his aim, which was to show us how the Law
wrought condemnation, and inflicted death by threatening it. It seems to mean, I
had not only not known sin to be so dangerous, but I had not known some things
to be sins, and by consequence condemning things, but by the Law: particularly
I had not known concupiscence to be so, had not the Law said thou shall not
covet. The next words do not seem intended to declare how the Commandment work
sin, that being brought in by the by, as it were thus, but sin the corruption
of my nature (...) had wrought in me all manner of concupiscence, all actual
lusts and wickednesses (...) got advantage over me or strength against me by
the Law: which he there proves, for without the law sin is dead; not as to
stirring in us by its sinful motions sure, corruption would not fail to do that
and more if there were no check; but dead, had no strength nor power to condemn
me. For it follows, when the commandment came, sin revived, got strength to do
that, and I died, was sentenced to death by it, and the commandment which was
ordained to life could I have obeyed it, I found to be unto death by condemning
me to death for my transgression of it. For sin by the Commandment (...)
getting advantage over me slew me; not only made me liable to death, but by
its guilt envenoming that death: for the sting of death is sin, which that it
is, and how it is so, is the second thing I am to speak to.

Sin is the sting of death, which I could make appear two manner of ways in
relation to two senses that may be given to the words, both pertinent, and the
one but the Anticipation of the other. The first is this: Sin is the sting of
death; it is Sin makes the thoughts of death pungent and stinging; the wicked
man cannot think of his last dying day without horrors, the only imagination
of a sickness stings him, because he is conscious to himself of sin, and he
knows that that after Death comes the Judgment, and he dares not think of
beholding the face of his Judge with his guilt upon him.

To prove this to you I shall not need to fetch any heathen Testimonies, that
call the Conscience of Sin a whip, a sting, a goad, a lancing knife, things
that gash and prick, and gall and fret, all words of all kinds of terrifying
punishment: but if there be any gross customary Sinner that now hears me, I
shall need no other way of proof, but by appealing to his own conscience,
whether, when he comes hot from his iniquity, he dares entertain the thought of
dying. And why not? Alas he is too deep in arrears to venture upon account with
so impartial a Judge; books must be laid open if he come there, the closet
curtain sins, nay the bosom villainies must be displaied, and every one receive
his doom; he has heard, that all the Luke 23. 30. Rev. 6. 16.
refuge of a deplored Sinner at that great and terrible Day of the Lord is but
to fly unto the Mountains to cover him, and to the Rocks to hide him. A
wretched hope; for how shall the Hills hide him, whose iniquities are like
Mountains? or how shall the rocks cover him, whose rebellions are like the
great deep, as the Scripture words it? To such a person Death and Judgment are
words of too dangerous a sense, and it is easier for him (as many do) to resolve
there is no such thing as one of them, than to think of them, and go merrily on
in sinning. For tell me, what is the design of that variety of iniquities in
which thou do ingulf thy self, that circle of sins wherein one relieves and
succeeds another? Sure by such a perpetuity of diversified delights to stave
off those severer thoughts, which if there were an intermission of sinning, or
a nauseating of one sin for want of variety, would creep in, the noise of our
riots is not to please the ear, but to drown the barking of our consciences.
When the Sinner's candle is put out, if weariness in wickedness do not at once
close up his eyes and thoughts, if the dark solitary night do but suggest some
melancholy thoughts into him, how does he tumble up and down, as if he thought
to role away from his imagination? and he does ransack his fancy, and call up
the memory of his past sins about him to entertain himself with all, and keep
out the torturing remembrance of that sad Day, which the Scripture calls Amos
6. 3.
putting far from them the evil day: for the truth is he dares not give it
place, least it should happen to him, as to a man upon a pointed precipice, (as
himself is indeed situated) to whom the apprehension would be as mortal as the
danger, and he would tumble down for fear of falling. So here his sin adds such
sharps to the imagination of death, that he dares not entertain the thought.

And if Sin be such a sting in the only thought of death, that the mere
remembrance of it is insupportable, the use is very natural by the frequent
calling of death to mind to stop the current of sin. For if the wicked cannot
endure to think of death, he that does think on it, cannot well go on to be
wicked. Remember thy latter end, and thou shall not do amiss. I would give this
counsel, Think thou art to die while doing it. The original of the Turks
Turbant, which was but by continual wearing of his winding sheet, by wrapping
his head in his grave-cloaths to have always a shroud and death upon his
thoughts; and the Philosophers defining their wisdom to be but contemplatio
mortis, are not such pregnant inforcers of this use, as this practical
apprehension of it. The man that lived among the Tombs, tho he had a legion of
Devils in him, yet when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him, Mark
5. 6. The sight of graves and conversation with monuments will make even
Demoniacks Religious, and is so far from thrusting Prayers out of the Liturgy
of Burial, that it brings the very Devils on their knees.

But there is yet another and a fuller sense of these words, which St Paul
repeats out of the LXX. translation of Hosea 13. 14. tho not verbatim, for
there instead of (...) is (...) and signifies, O Death, where is thy plea by
which thou did attaint men before God's Tribunal? where is the right thou
had over all men to seize and take possession of them? what is become of the
sentence that was awarded thee, by which all of us were adjudg'd to be thy
bondslaves? where is that punishment which thou did inflict upon us all, and
by it ruin us? To all these rights Sin did entitle thee, O Death; or as it is
here in the Text Sin is thy sting, whatsoever power thou have of hurting man,
as the Scorpion's venom lies in his sting, that power Sin has given thee, and
in that it lies: without Sin Death were no plague, and it is this that makes
Death insupportable.

Now to prove this I need not urge more than what I have already said; for if
Sin be a sting in the very thought of Death, much more pungent will it be, when
Death it self approaches: when the Fever shall lay hold upon the blood, not
only to revenge the former heats of that lustful or that riotous blood, but to
be dawnings of those eternal Burnings which do await the Sinners, and shall do
more than represent unto thee the heats of that unquenchable brimstone which is
to be thy lot, and which already does begin to flash in upon thee. Which part
of thee does labor with the more intolerable Fever, thy Body or thy Soul? Alas
the frost of the Grave would seem to thee a Julip, a cool refreshment only, if
Sin did not make thee look upon the grave as a downlet to that bottomless pit,
which is the lake of fire that is not quenched. Nothing possibly can keep an
unrepentant Sinner, that on his deathbed apprehends his guilt, from the horror
of despair, from being his own Devil, and suffering his own Hell in his own
bosom upon earth. I shall demonstrate this invincibly to you, that Sin does,
and nothing else does make Death most insupportable, when it approaches.

Now to evince this, my Argument is none other than our Blessed Savior himself,
in whose Passion the only imputation of guilt seems to have raised the
greatest contradictions imaginable. If you look upon him preparing for his
Passion, it seems his only and most pleasing design; as he came into the world
for that end, so his whole life before it was but a Prologue to it, only a
walk to mount Calvary, it was his extreme desire. I have a baptism to be
baptized with, baptized indeed with fire and his own clotted sweat of blood,
yet this Baptism how am I streightened till, it be accomplished, Luke 12. 50.
He had longing throws after it, he did as much desire it as a woman to be
delivered of her burden. Nay it was his contrivance, he did lay plots that he
might not escape it; for when a glorious Miracle had broke from him, that did
extort the confession of his Deity from Men and Devils, he charges these to
hold their peace, and bids the other tell it no man: one reason of which was,
least the knowing him to be the Son of God should hinder him from suffering. He
gives it himself Luke 9. 21, 22. he straightly charged and commanded them to tell
no man that thing, saying the Son of man must suffer many things, and be
rejected; now should they know I were the Son of God, 1 Cor. 2. 8.
they would not crucify the Son of glory. You see what care he takes least he
should not suffer: and just before his passion he come in triumph to Jerusalem,
with songs and joy about him, as if Death were the only pleasant thing, and
his passion so desirable, that he would go ride to meet it, which he never did
at any other time. And add to all this that the person was the Son of God, to
whom nothing could be truly insupportable; yet when this person comes to meet
it, see how he entertain it, his soul is exceeding sorrowful, he fell on his
face to pray against it, and while he was in this condition an Luke 22. 43, 44.
Angel from Heaven came to strenthen him, yet he is still in an agony and prays
more earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood. Now 'twas the sense of
Sin upon him that made his blood run out in clotts, as it were flying from that
sense; it was the apprehensions of the guilt imputed to him, and the wrath
which he knew was due to it, did make him apprehend his God (who was himself)
was gone from him, made him cry out, Matt. 27. 46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Now to say that all this dread were
from the mere apprehension of death, were horrid blasphemy; the meanest Martyr
was never guilty of so much weakness. No 'twas from the sense of the iniquity
that was upon it, 'twas because he was made sin for us; he was a man of
sorrows, says the Prophet Isaiah, because in representation he was a man of
sins, for he bore our iniquities, says the same Prophet c. 53. The Lord had
laid upon him the iniquities of us all, and therefore he was oppressed. And so
I have made appear, that Sin is the sting of Death more than if your selves did
feel it by an experimental despair: for it is more that Sin should make Death
terrible to the Son of God, than that it should make it insupportable to you.
And therefore before Death seize you, and prostrate you into his dust, this
consideration may humble you into the dust and ashes of Repentance; this I say,
if Sin were a sting that made Death so insupportable to Christ, what will it be
to us? If the apprehension of it, when it came armed only with the imputation
of our guilt, (for he himself 2 Cor. 5. 21.
knew no sin) was so terrible to the Son of God, how shall we stand under it,
when it brings all our own iniquities to seize upon us? If he that was a person
of the Trinity could not bear the weight, how shall we sink under it? That
which made our Jesus in an agony, as if he meant to pour out his soul in his
sweat, and pray, and roar, and die, will certainly be to us most infinitely
beyond sufferance. Alas! what then will be our hope? We have certainly none,
except we can by Faith and Repentance rid our selves of this Sin, which is the
sting of Death, and makes it to be thus intolerable; which how it comes to pass
I must now show.

2. Why, and how Sin is the sting of Death. Sin may seem very properly to be
called a sting of Death, for it was the Serpent that brought Death into the
World, and Sin was that by which he did inflict it; now a sting is a Serpent's
proper instrument, and a venomous sting it was, that could blast Paradise, and
shed destruction there where the Tree of life bore fruit. But that is not all
the reason why it should be called the sting of Death because it makes us
obnoxious to Death, but it is that which makes Death a miserable condition: as
it is the sting of the Serpent that makes him a poisonous creature, so it is
that which makes Death destructive. For were Death the expiration of that
little spark in the moving of our heart, and if our spirit utterly vanished as
the soft air, and were it as the Atheist in the Wisd. 2. 2.
Wise man says, we are born at all adventure, and shall be hereafter as tho we
had never bin; Death would be so far from all sting, that it would be perfect
rest, and the end of troubles: but Sin makes it only the beginning of sorrows,
it changes the very nature of death, by making that which seems to be the
cessation of sensible function, to be the very original of the sensibility of
torments. Then the Sinner does begin indeed to feel, when he dies. Death were
but the term of a miserable life, did not Sin make it the birth of a more
miserable life or death: I know not whether to call it; for it is of so strange
a nature, that the very uniting of a Sinner's body and soul, which is the only
thing we call life, God calls death, Rev. 22. 13, 14. And the sea gave up the
dead which were in it, and death and hell, or the grave, delivered up the dead
which were in them, that is, the bodies to be joined to the souls, and they
were judged every man according to their works, and in that case all are cast
into the lake of fire, this is the second death. Sin makes Resurrection to be
dying: and it must needs be so, because as afflictions are in this life called
death, as St Paul says 2 Cor. 11. 23.
in Deaths often; so much more then may those torments of hell be called death.
So that in that death that Sin engages to, it is necessary to live always, that
we may for ever die: and it must be so, because this makes us liable to the
eternal indignation of the offended God, which we were not capable of
suffering, were it not a death of this nature. This is indeed death with a
sting in it, and it is the sense of this approaching that wounds the dying
soul; when it does at once call to mind the wickedness of its past life and the
wrath that does await it, when he recollects how sinful he has bin, and
withal how hateful sin is to God, (so hateful that it was easier for God to
send his Son to suffer death, than to suffer sin to go unpunished) then his own
expectations sting and stab his very soul; for if God did thus use his own Son,
how will he use me, that have both sinned and trod under foot the death of that
Son by going on wilfully in my sins? Would you then, my Brethren, find out a
way to make death easy and familiar to you? you must pull out this sting. The
Jews say if Adam had continued righteous he should not have died, but after a
long happy life God would have taken up his soul to him with a kiss, which they
call osculum pacis, he would have received that spirit which with his mouth he
did inspire, a kiss of taking leave here to meet in Heaven. Would thou have
thy death to be the same thing? It Is but becoming righteous with the
righteousness of Christ, through whom we have this Victory here in the Text, the
other part I am to speak to, who gives us the victory through Jesus Christ our
Lords where we have those that are partakers of the Victory, and the means through
Jesus Christ our Lord, and as to both these this I shall demonstrate over all
those enemies in order, who the us, and how the Victory is gotten.

First the Law. Now that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, is
said expressly, and that by his being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. and what
that curse of the Law was, is set down in the tenth verse, cursed is every one
that continues not in all things, that are written in the book of the Law to
do them; which no man besides Christ did ever or can do, and consequently all
mankind lay under that same dreadful curse, obnoxious to the wrath of God, and
the effects of everlasting indignation: but Christ by undergoing that curse and
by that means satisfying that strict Law, procured an easier to be set us upon
gentler terms, not perfect and unsinning strict obedience, which was
impossible, but instead thereof the Law of Faith, obsequious Faith that works
by love, endeavors honestly and heartily, and where it fails repents, that is,
grieves, and amends, and perseveres in doing so. For as St Paul assures us, we
are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. tho we be under the
directions of it, the duty of it is most indispensable virtue always; yet we
are not under those strict terms of it according to the tenor of that curse,
but in a state of favor, under terms of grace, where there is mercy, pardon to
be had upon repentance through faith, and where there is encouragement and aid to
work that faith and that amendment in us. And thus far the Victory accrues to
all mankind; for all that will accept these terms of this remedying Law of
grace, the other killing strict Law has no power over them. For the Gospel was
commanded to be preached to, and its terms offered every creature under heaven,
all mankind: a victory this, that could not be obtained, but by Christ's blood;
the grace and favor of these easier terms for our obedience valued equal with
his life; for to take of this curse, cursed is every one that continues not in
all things, that are written in the book of the law to do it, these strict
terms, he himself was made a curse: and 'twill be certainly a most unkind
return, if that which he thought worth the dying for to get us, we shall not
think worth the accepting, slight these blessed terms, and do not care unless
we can be free from all necessity of an endeavor, freed from virtue too as well
as Law.

But secondly the Law being, as we have showed it is, the strength of Sin in
giving it a power to condemn us, that Law being taken off, that power also
cannot but be taken off from Sin, and by that means the great strengths of that
Enemy defeated. Accordingly St Paul does tell the Romans c. 6. v. 14. Sin shall
not have dominion over you, that is, it shall not have by virtue of the Law a
power to condemn you; for you are not under the Law but under grace, are in
that state where men are not condemned for every gross or heinous sin although too
long continued in, but there is pardon to be had for them that will but
faithfully endeavor to amend, turn from their sins, return to Christ, receive
him and his pardon: and where there is also help to do this, it is a true state
of grace; so that unless men will resolve to force their own guards that are
set about them to preserve them, and break through the strengths of grace, and
conquer all the strivings of Almighty God's compassion and goodness to them,
and beat off the very victory that Christ has gained for them, refuse all the
kind offers of the Law of grace, and choose sin with damnation, they are safe;
There is now, as St Paul says, by the Law no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, to them who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans
8. 1. in which words we have both an assurance that the strengths of Sin are
broken, and the persons too are partakers of the Victory, that are in Christ
Jesus: for as it is by him the Victory is gotten, so it is in him that we must
get an interest in it. Now to be in Christ, if, as most certainly it does, it
mean here as in other places, where it is said of Churches, households, and of
single persons, then it means the Christians: so in Gal. 1. 22, the Churches of
Judea that are in Christ, i. e. that have received the Gospel and the Faith of
Christ; Romans 16. 11. greet them that be of the household of Narcissus, that are
in the Lord, i. e. that are Christians; and the seventh verse, who were in
Christ before me, i. e. were converted e're I was. But it means Christians not
in judgment and opinion only, but in life and practice; such as are in Christ
by St Paul's character and description of it in the 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be
in Christ he is a new creature, he lives the life of Christ as a member does
the life of that of which it is a member, and so he walks not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit. For as members live by the virtue of the influence of
spirits from the head into them and walk after its directions, so those that
are in Christ, his members, they must walk, live, act and practice by the
Spirit of Christ, guided not by carnal appetite, the lusts and the desires of
the Flesh, but by Christ's directions. Such they are who have this Victory, to
whom there is no condemnation. For as he adds Romans 8. 2. The law of the Spirit
of life that is in Christ Jesus, sets us free from the law of sin and death:
and so there is through him a Victory over the third, last enemy Death: in which
freedom from Sin and Death two things are intimated.

1. That Sin the sting of Death is taken away, which being once removed, Death
is the softest thing that can be, it is but falling asleep; so it is called v.
18. of this chapter, fallen asleep in Christ: it is so far from being hurtful,
that it is the first great happiness that does befall us.

2. That Death it self also shall be swallowed up in Victory, that we shall be
recovered from its powers, and triumph over it in Immortality of blessed life.
For if we be in Christ, his members, and so live the life of Christ; and
consequently when we die, die in the Lord: then tho the body be dead and
corruptible, yet if the Spirit of life that is in Jesus be in us, he that
raised up Jesus from the dead shall also quicken our mortal bodies by his
Spirit, Romans 8. 11. It is this life in him that verifies the saying of St Paul
Ephesians. 2. 6. He has raised us up, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ, as sure as if we were already there: for there we are already as his
members in our head. And to the full and personal enjoyment of the blessings of
those heavenly places it is death that lets us in; that vale of Achor is the
door of hope and Canaan, the grave the avenue to God's right hand: that death,
it is but the Pascha in St Bernard, it is our Passover, a repast of bitter herbs
indeed, but at the going out of Egypt from the house of bondage. And tho the
body seem in death a piteous despicable thing, sown in corruption and dishonor,
as 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43.
St Paul expresses, yet death gives that a relation too to Christ: the Prophet
Isaiah brings in the Lord calling His dead (...) cadaver, they my dead body
shall aris^, says he c. 26. 19. So that the corpse of a good person is so far a
member, that it is called the very body of his Savior, into such a title Death
translates it; to such not to live only, but to die is Christ. And sure if
they that die in him, did live in him, (as none can die there where they did
not live at all) that is live as his members, they that die in Christ must die
his members. But in the expression of the Prophet they do also die himself, and
are Christ's own dead body. Death to such is as it were transfiguration, and
does not so much strip and make them naked, as cloth them, and that with
glory; the shroud may seem but their white wedding linen, and their dress for
the marriage of the Lamb. Whoever is a faithful sincere Christian, if Death
seem to make approaches to him armed with all his instruments of cruelty and
terror, charge him as assuredly as a Prophet could to set his house in order,
for he must die; if he can say with Hezekiah in Isaiah 38. 3. Remember now, O
Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart and have
don that which is good in thy sight, then if he have not fifty years, yet he
shall have a numberless Eternity added to his life; and notwithstanding the
dark solitude of the Grave to which he is retiring, he shall have that which
will accompany him to his infinite joy: when he is torn from friends, and all
his dearest things do leave him* yet he shall not be alone, his faith and
piety, his virtues all go along with him, and appear for him at that tribunal
on the Judgment day. All his relations, even his bosom-guest, the other half of
his own soul forsake him, bring him it may be to the grave, and tho they carry
blacks upon them to refresh and keep alive the memory of him, yet in a while
take comfort and forget; yet the true conjugal affections of an untainted,
undefiled bed shall go along, present the Soul white, as a Virgin that is
unspotted. And after this it is in vain to say his riches will forsake him, they
go not so far as the grave, afford nothing of themselves but the price of a
sheet and coffin. But then Charities will mount, Alms will ascend as fast as
the Spirit; the wealth one piously bestowed will meet him, he shall eternally
possess that which he gave away, and tho his place know him no more, they shall
receive him into everlasting habitations. 1 Cor. 15. 58.
Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, which is the real way of giving thanks to God, who gives
us the Victory.

SERMON XI. OF THE CHRISTIAN'S BLESSEDNESS In beholding God's Face.
Psalm 17. 15. As for me I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall
be^^atisfied when I awake with thy likeness. Or as the other Rendering reads it,
very little different from that. But as for me I will behold thy presence in
righteousness, and when I awake up after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied
with it.
THE words import an express opposition between the satisfactions of the person
in the Text, and those of them that are described before here in the context,
^^amely of the men of the world which have their portion in this life, and
whose belly thou, O God, fillest with thy hid treasure, v. 14. of whom he had
also said v. 10. they are enclosed in their own fat, their mouth speaks proud
things, i. e. the satisfaction of these wordlings lies in this, that they are
great and rich, abound with all things, that they and their children have their
fill of their desires, and they leave plentiful remains to their posterity;
these advantages of this life are the only good things which they value and
seek after, they receive them as their portion, and the having them so
plentifully makes them proud of the possession, insolent in the use: but as for
my part I will serve thee faithfully, truly and justly, and with all sincerity
and diligence in the performance of my duty; I will seek thy face, mercy and
favor, and so doing wait till thou lift up the light of thy countenance upon
me: and then whatsoever my condition be on this earth, where I would not have
my good things, I expect other sort of portion from my Heavenly Father; yet
when I awake out of the dust at thy appearance in thy glory, since 1 John 3. 2.
we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him, then at my rising it
will be impossible that any thing which is to satisfy me, can be wanting to me:
for my satisfactions cannot but be Glorious, Divine, Infinite, and Immortal, as
thine are, if I awake up in thy likeness. So that we have here

1. The nature of that state, and the certain satisfactions of it, which King
David did propose to, and assure himself of: to awake up after God's likeness,
and he knows he shall be satisfied with it.

2. The sure means of arriving at this state, beholding of God's face in
righteousness.

3. His peremtory resolution as to the use of these means, I will behold.

4. With the courage of resolution, which is taken up against the almost
universal practice and the as great contradiction of the World, that generally
minds far different satisfactions, I declare publicly and confess, But as for
me, I will.

1. The nature and the certain satisfactions of that state, which holy David in
the Spirit did propose to, and assure himself of. The state the Psalmist does
suppose expressly here: a state to which he shall awake out of the sleep of
death. For however some expound his words another way; yet from his opposition
of himself as to his own expectations, to the men of this world as to their
enjoiments, and declaring of them that they have their portion in this life,
it is plain he sets his not in this life; in that therefore which he says he
shall awake to. That state also which St Paul assure us Heb. 11. all the
Patriarchs did look for, and which all the Nation of the Jews had such a faith
of, that the Sadduces were always from their first appearance counted Heretics
for their denying it. That I say there is such a state now, after so much
signal revelation, after so much miracle of Resurrections from death, is not to
be made the argument of a discourse to Christians, who can be such no otherwise
nor further than as they believe and are assured of it. And it seems altogether
as absurd to undertake to treat upon the nature of that state, which 2 Cor. 12.
3, 4.
St Paul, after he had a taste of it, says is unspeakable and not possible to be
uttered; which he was so far from knowing after he had bin in it, that he knew
not himself in it, knew not whether he were in the body or out of it, when he
did enjoy that state: which St Peter when he had a glimps in our Saviors
Transfiguration, and in the astonishment by reason of the light, attemted but
to speak of it, it is said Luke 9. 33.
he knew not what he said, it put him so beside, out of himself. And it is no
wonder if we cannot pertinently discourse of it, if, as 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Scripture says it cannot enter into the heart of man to comprehend it, while
he is in this animal and mortal state. And indeed it were the same thing as to
comprehend what is the Incomprehensible God himself; for it is the nature of
that state that we awake into his likeness, the Text says, and St John has
said the same more expressly 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, now we are the sons of God,
and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he, or it
shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. I do not
find it said in Scripture of the Angels in what ever rank of Principality they
stand, that they are like God; rather to be like the most High is believed that
very ambition that destroyed all those that fell. But as when man was made out
of the dust he was the only creature that was said to be made after God's own
image and similitude; so after he is fallen again into that dust, when he
awakes out of it, he is that only thing that is said Cap. 15. 49.
to bear the image of the Lord from Heaven, to be like God. And it is not
strange if that nature, which God did assume to himself, come at last to be
glorified with some endowments which transcend all those of Angels; yet it is
said of them, they always see the face of our heavenly Father Matt. 18. 10. To
see God therefore as he is, does seem more, than to see his face continually,
and is such a sight as if it do not causally produce a likeness to God in us,
which yet possibly it may, and the Schools think it does, yet it is certain that
it consequentially proves it is absolutely necessary that we shall be like him,
otherwise it were impossible that we should see him as he is. Which evidently
follows from the Argument of our Apostle, we know we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is; so that such a sight of him is that which either makes
us or concludes us like God: yea and that to such a degree that in St Peter's
words we are made partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. I shall not
undertake to be interpreter to the Apostles as to this expression, or to give
the meaning of those words; but whatsoever more it may imply, surely it
signifies that those Attributes that are essentially natural to the Divinity,
as the Omniscience of his understanding, perfect rectitude and purity of his
will; and not to enumerate particulars, perpetual, blessed, infinite delight in
the unwearied, uninterrupted exercise of his understanding in the utmost
latitude of its comprehensions, and the undisturbed enjoyment of his holy will
in all things, all this unchangeable, because spiritual and immortal; of all
these, so much as is communicable to a creature, man shall then partake of, be
exalted into: yea so far partake in all of it, as he is exalted into an estate
to see God as he is. And this is certainly enough to make good David's
expectations, that when he shall awake up after God's likeness, he shall be
satisfied with it; and truly 'twere great simplicity to go about to prove so
far as any one is like to him, who is the Fountain of Eternal Blessedness: and
so far as himself is happy and unchangeably is so, that he must needs be
satisfied; for it imports a contradiction at once to be happy and unsatisfied,
since so far as any person is unsatisfied, wants any thing that he would have,
so far he is uneasy and not happy; either sure unhappy in not having it, or
else most certainly unhappy in desiring it, which cannot be in any one that is
like God. But King David seems wary in his expression here, when I awake up
after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied with it; as if he did not count them
satisfactions at the present, to the state and condition he was then in, or at
least the apprehensions he then had. And indeed St Paul, who tasted the joys of
it, says he knew not whether he were in the body or no, so that it seems that
half of him was not concerned at all in those transports of those joys: and it
is no wonder therefore if most men, that never had a taste of any thing but what
is sensual and worldly, have bin entertained only with satisfactions of those
appetites that rise from body, have no apprehensions, or at least no relish for
those other, which not only to enjoy but understand, men must be spiritual to
some degree; for 1 Cor. 2. 14.
they are spiritually discerned, says the Apostle, and the natural man that
has no other guide but sense, or what is wholly founded upon sense and
imagination, cannot taste or fancy them with any life at all. Yet
notwithstanding this how dim soever and faint the images of those things were
in David's time, before Mal. 4. 2.
the Sun of Righteousness was risen, and had brought to light that blessed
Immortality and Glory of that state, the very expectation was so satisfying,
that it could engage him to pursue them, and attemt to compass them: and that
he might, after he should be awaked from death, see God as he is, and by
consequence be like him, he resolves he will behold his face in righteousness
here in this life, as being satisfied that Psalm 16. 11.
in his presence there was fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for
evermore. When alas after all the advantages, the force and beauty which the
Gospel-revelations have enricht the draught of that state with, yet now men do
not apprehend any such satisfaction in it, as can quicken an affection or
endeavor after it; they will not move a step nor a desire toward it.

And here as to this I will neither wonder at, nor instance in the men whose
minds the pomps, the gauderies, the heights, the state, and what does furnish
all, the wealth and riches of this world have seized; if such men be not taken
off from the pursuit of these things by invisible Treasures, and by spiritual
Thrones and Scepters; or if they whose souls have dwelt long in their dishes
and their cups, who drink to create thirst, eat to hunger, are not pleased
much with a state whose happiness is said to be, that men shall neither hunger
nor thirst in it; or if they whom all the pleasures of the flesh sawc'd with
variety have made loose and dissolute, will not be temted to restrain
themselves in those bounds that are set to chaste tongues, chaste eyes, or chaste
bodies; or tho they may be moved it may be to dismiss a while, yet cannot be
made willing to divorce their lusts by notions of an happiness for Spirits that
have no sex, where they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like
God. I will not call in here for evidence that most men have no satisfying
apprehensions of the Blessedness of that state, since although they had, yet there
are appetites in the constitution to those other satisfactions that are
opposite to all these Blessednesses, and these appetites are hot and fierce,
have bin long pampered, and now will not be denied, being grown too strong for
any notions of the understanding to make head against them. But here is one
fatal instance that will certainly evince men have no pleasing sense of the
condition of that after-state, they do not fancy it with any takingness at all,
and it is this, that in those duties of Religion which have nothing opposite to
any carnal appetite, which of themselves retrench not any of our sensual
satisfactions, yet most men have all unwillingnesses to them, deadness in them.
To name one of them, Prayer for example, which is rather privilege than duty,
a most blessed, merciful indulgence, such as if God had not only not commanded
but not given us leave for, we must have thought our selves most wretchedly
unhappy, since it is but giving us leave to pour out all our wants into the
bosom of our Father who is both Almighty and most Merciful, to beg those
things which if we have not, we are miserable here and everlastingly, and which
Christ's blood that purchased them does join in intercession with us, when we
pray in earnest for them, and our sighs mix with his agonies and the merit of
his dying groans to his and our Father for us. Now there is not one appetite in
our making that is adverse to praying, as there are many to strict virtues; it is
not uneasy to the flesh, nor yet repugnant to its satisfactions; it is not
possible to find a ground on which one can mislike it: and then to see men
backward to it, languid and dead in it, weary of it, suffering little
avocations to divert them at it, wandering, going from it while they are about
it, engaged in it; glad to make quick end of it, seeking out occasions to
pretermit it; yea more, out of an insensible stupidity long omitting, not at
all performing it, as if that men had nothing at all to desire of God, or at
least nothing they desired so much, that they will take the pains to ask in
earnest for it. Now it is impossible to give an account of this, there is no
imaginable reason but that men have no concern or value for, nor apprehensions
of the things they pray for. It Is plain men perform cheerfully what tends to
those things they affect and fancy, especially if it be not uneasy nor at all
distasteful: they have no sense therefore of the things above, that should give
life and heat and motion to their Prayers; those Blessednesses have no taste or
relish to them, are so far from being matter of concernment, that the very
asking for them seems to them an unkind interruption of their divertisments,
any the least trifling thought of which is sufficient to call off their hearts
from the desire of Heaven, from the object of their prayers; of so little
regard it is to them, and so mean a satisfaction to be like God. Mahomet was
aware this was the temper of the most of mankind, and he therefore baited his
Religion with delights of their acquaintance, joys that should not need a
revelation, miracles, or faith to make them apprehended pleasant; but he dressed
his Paradise with immortal sensualities, strong and eternal lusts made up his
heavenly delights; and then although their pleasures are but in reversion (as the
Christians are) after a life, yet his Proselytes grew upon Christianity, are
still very numerous, and they bear restraints and practice that which
Christians cannot be invited to, and what with love to their Religion and those
expectations will charge fire, and run upon cannon to be shot into their
Paradise; when after all that God has don to prepare Blessednesses for a
Christian, and all that Christ has don to purchase and secure them to him, he
finds no attractiveness in them.

I shall not bring the one and the other satisfactions to a vie, not only that
I may not entertain you with a common place, but the comparison would be
shameful, and indeed would serve no ends: not the conviction surely of a
sensual person; for an Epicure that was born blind, and never had any notice of
any of those beauties that surprise astonish, and transport men, but what their
discourse can give him, is not certainly by that to be convinced the pleasures
of the eye transcend those of the palate, it is a thing at least they cannot
judge of: nor can they, whose souls are filled with all the images of the
delights of sensuality, and who have no apprehensions of God's spiritual,
blessed satisfactions, compare or judge between them, nor can therefore be
convinced by our comparing of them: yet if these men would but reflect a
little, this consideration here might serve to help, if not their imagination,
yet their faith of those joys. Namely that if we think God made these comforts
here below, and fitted them just to our making, so as that we cannot fancy or
imagine pleasures more appropriate to our present state, and we could think a
long untroubled age of them great happiness; and if we think too, when these
comforts and our selves are dead, that he will raise us up into another life, a
world in which he has prepared rewards for those that lived here as they ought
according to his will, that used the pleasures of this world by those rules and
at those calm rates that he allows them: then we must conclude that it is
certain he both can and will make some as good at least, and as appropriate to
that condition in which he shall place us. He that can raise us up out of the
dust of death, can he not also quicken joys and make a resurrection of
delights, and as he alters the condition of our being, temper pleasures to it,
as he fitted those here to our present state? What tho you know not how to
fancy satisfactions of another frame than those you now enjoy which you could
like to change for? Think you the infant in the womb, while it enjoys ease and
content in its close dark cell, can fancy the cheerfulness of a lightsom world,
which the Sun guilds with comfortable shine? or that the child has any notion
of the strong contents of riper age? or can he possibly imagine there are any
such delights as those his babies and rattles afford him? have any savor of the
manly pleasures which mere reason gives, and humane knowledge entertain us with?
And so may not men grow past their babies? God has we see proportioned
satisfactions to each state of being, to their own degree still in an excellent
order; and shall his knowledge or his power fail to do so, when we drop out of
this life into another, and are born to spirituality and to immortality? or
will he not be so good to his Select ones as he has bin to all mankind, yea to
the beasts here; give us joys as great as those of sense are, which the beasts
possess, or which is more, the wicked have in greatest affluence? He that will
let these satisfactions stream upon the men he hates so, does he not know how,
or can he not, or will he not provide greater for his beloved ones, for those
which he has studied happiness for? Would he give his own Son to die, shed his
own blood to redeem us into a worse estate? or will he work a miracle of power,
create a resurrection, that he may reward us to our loss? All this is most
unreasonable to imagine, so that although we cannot comprehend the blessedness of
that state, we cannot paint the glory that we shall be clothed with, cannot
fancy the delights God has prepared; yet we are sure they must transcend most
infinitely those of this life. The truth is all discourse is but reproach to
them, if ever any person had bin truly satisfied with any one or with all the
enjoyments of this life. If there were ever any one of those, who in the
transports of a passion that possesses their soul so entirely, that they cannot
entertain themselves with any other thought, and really believe that their
felicity is bound up in the possession of the object of it, that they cannot
ever be content without it, so that they dare undertake to vow they never shall
or can have other sentiments, in whom the passion when they had their wishes,
did not grow more quiet and not so opinionative, and find some allay so far
that they were forced to seek to be relieved sometimes from their felicity by
variety of divertisments, and inconstancy of appetites: if so, it were not so
intolerable that men should think they might be satisfied here, and should not
much consider any other. But it is not sufferable to set satisfactions that do
either go out suddenly or clog and become wearisom, that either die or we
distaste them, or else are not fit for them, against the satisfactions of being
like God, whom there is no one ever did believe to be, but he assured himself
he must be blessed for ever; a state which made Angels venture to be Devils
rather than they would not strive for it, and might therefore well temt David
to resolve he would behold Gods face in righteousness, the sure means to attain
that state, and my next particular.

The very same means are insinuated by St John in his first Epistle where he
said, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; add this, Every man
that has this hope, purifieth himself as he is pure, does righteousness, in
the words following, and so is righteous even as he is righteous. But that we
may know what King David means by beholding Gods face in Righteousness, we must
know that first by Righteousness is meant uprightness and sincerity of a
religious, holy, virtuous life: and as for the beholding of Gods face, we may
take notice that although God says he spoke to Moses face to face, yet he tells
the same Moses that he cannot see his face and live, Exodus 33. 11, 10. so that
David's beholding of his face is not seeing him as he did hope to do, when he
did awake up after Gods likeness, but

1. As for God to lift up the light of his countenance, Psalm 4. 6. and to make
his face to shine upon a man Psalm 31. 16. is to be favorable to him; and to
hide Psalm 30. 7. or turn away his face 2 Chronicles. 30. 9. is to withdraw his
favor and to be displeased; so also to seek his face 1 Chronicles. 16. 11. is to
endeavor to obtain his kindness, and accordingly to see or behold his face is
to be in his favor, to be in a state of enjoying it. But besides this also

2. As those that are said to behold the face of Kings, are those that minister
about them, do them service of the nearest admission, and that stand in their
presence, and are ready still to execute whatever they command. So 2 King. 25.
19. and he took five men of those that saw the King's face, of those that
served him in ordinary; and so very often Ester 1. 14. etc. And as secondly the
Angels, that are ministering Spirits, sent forth by God to minister perpetually,
are said to see the face of God always, Matt. 18. 10. so when David says of
God, thou set me before thy face, Psalm 41. 12. the Jews expound set me,
that he might serve, minister unto him: for that is to stand before the face of
one, 1 Kings 1. 2, 4. and c. 10. 8. and c. 17. 1. etc. as he had said, do
appoint me for thy service; and by consequence to see his face or to behold his
presence, is to wait upon him in all duty and obedience to his commands whom
they attend: accordingly to walk before him, or walk with him in his presence,
is to serve him constantly with all uprightness Genesis 17. 1. and to please him
Heb. 11. 5. cum Genesis 5. 24. But particularly in the acts of Worship and
Religion, his House, the place that is dedicated to his Worship being called his
Court, his presence Psalm 95. 2. and 100. 2, 4. because he sat upon and spoke
from the Mercy-seat Exodus 25. 22. Numb. 7. 89. and the Ark is therefore his
presence and his face, those that serve there are said to minister before him
in his presence, those that come there to appear before him Psalm 42. 2. those
that pray, to seek his face 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. and to entreat the face of the Lord
1 Kings 13. 6. and our King David did desire one thing of the Lord, which, says
he, I will require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my life to behold the beauty of the Lord, Psalm 27. 4. So that to behold
God's face in righteousness here does signify all this, I will serve thee
truly, faithfully attend thy commands, and wait upon thee in a constant
diligent performance of my duty, live as always in thy presence holily and
righteously, especially in attendance on thy Worship, when I come to seek thy
face, to put my self before thee in thy presence; and so doing I make no doubt
but that thou will lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, and I shall
behold thy face to shine upon thy servant.

And indeed that this is the means, and that there is no other way to arrive at
this state, is not difficult to prove; for the righteous Lord loves
righteousness, says the same David Psalm 11. 7. his countenance will behold
the thing that is just, whereas Heb. 12. 14.
without this no man shall see the Lord; and thereupon the Prophet Micah after
strict inquiry in the peoples name what they were to do that they might find
God's face look pleasingly upon them, and see his favorable countenance, Micah
6. 6, 7, 8.
wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, and how myself before the most High
God? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old?
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams? If his favor be to be bought,
tho at the greatest price, 'twill be abvisable to give it: and the dearest
purchase would be a reasonable one. Or shall I give ten thousand rivers of oil,
thereby to make his face to shine, and look upon me with a cheerful
countenance? This sure were to be don. Or farther yet, shall I give my
firstborn for my transgression, or the fruit of my body for the sin of my
soul? Time was indeed when men would do that; offer up their tender infants in
the fire to Moloch to preserve themselves from those sins of the other Tophet,
as if the burnt child were to expiate the foul heats that begat it. I know not
whether men believe now such transgressions can deserve so severe atonements,
that a sin of theirs is valuable at the life of their own firstborn, tho they
take upon them to profess the faith, that they were valued at the life of the
firstborn of God: however there our Prophet shapes this answer to that
question, wherewithal shall I come before the Lord? He has showed thee, O
man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And truly if we come before
the Lord to behold his presence in the duties of Religion, we must see his face
in Righteousness; otherwise he will either turn away his Face, or else our
prayers will but call his frowns upon us, and endanger us to perish at the
rebuke of his countenance. The Prophet Isaiah speaking as from God to that
vainglorious nation of the Jews, says c. 1. v. 12, etc. When ye come to appear
before me, who has required this at your hand to tread my courts? Bring no
more vain oblations, incense is an abomination to me, it is iniquity, even your
solemn meetings, Sabboths, and your appointed feasts my soul hates; they are a
trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. And when ye spread forth your hands,
I will hide mine eyes from you; yea when ye make many prayers, I will not hear.
Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes;
cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, right the oppressed, etc.
And surely if men do not put away the evil of their doings from them, when they
come before his face, how loud soever their petitions cry for mercy and
remission, their crying sins will call as loud for vengeance: such Worship sure
cannot possibly be grateful to him, we cannot think he will accept that which
he nauseates, like that which his soul hates, and reward that which he cannot
bear. Indeed such Worshippers do plainly rally him in praying to him. He that
has not faithfully endeavored to reform his manners, what does he in his
confessions, but tell God Almighty solemnly that he is wicked, but in truth he
shall continue so, as not at all as yet intending to be otherwise. He that begs
God not to lead him into temtation, but goes on in impieties, minds not the
keeping of himself out of the opportunities of it, but loves occasions, and
converses with the provocations, plays upon the brink, does all that is to make
it unavoidable for him to sin; mocks God in praying that he will not lead into
temtation him that leads himself into it. What use were it to him God should
hear his prayers, and not do that to him which he does to himself? Or if he
beseech God to grant, for example, he may live a sober life, yet never
purposing to fail one assignation, not resolving to abate one meeting nor one
draught, he is so pleasant with Almighty God to wish, if he wish any thing when
he is praying, that he may be as immoderate as ever, but that God would keep
him sober, may have all the drink he went for, but not the drunkenness; this he
desires God would preserve him from, and yet it may be not that neither, for
that may be useful to him, but however for the rest let him do as he did. Now
sure it is our interest God should not hear such prayers, and therefore tho in
all our actions we had need be careful, since God is always present, yet we
should especially in our Religious Worship; semper enim praesentamus and
ostendimus nos quasi facie ad faciem cum Domino loquentes, we present our
selves to him, and speak face to face with him. Now if we lay not down our
sins, but bring our crimes thither with our Devotions, and so make our very
Worship an abomination, to present our provocations to himself and to his face,
is such an affront that will not easily be pardoned; no, if we will behold
God's face, we must do it in Righteousness. Indeed the Psalmist's joining these
in the expression does insinuate, that the only hopeful means to make men be
Religious, not at their Devotions only, but in all their actions, to live
holy, virtuous lives, is to live always as before God's face, I will behold thy
presence in Righteousness. He that in every thing he goes about would teach
himself the custom to look up, to behold God's face, and see his eyes over him,
he would be careful that there should be no unrighteousness in what he did.
King David was acquainted with the influence of this, Psalm 119. 168. I have
kept thy precepts and thy testimonies; for all my ways are before thee. Indeed
the presence of whatever person we had reverence for, to behold his face
toward us inspecting our actions, would make us wary and fearful of a vanity
or folly, much more of a gross action. Martials Lucretia blushed, says he, laid
his Epigrams aside when Brutus came in, Brute, recede, leget, but as soon as he
was gone, she took them up and read them. Few vices hurry men with so impetuous
a ferocity, but they can check themselves before a virtuous grave person. One
of them that pretends to stings as sharp as any, would send off a boy, and tho
it be as impudent a sin as any, cannot suffer a spectator: and then would I but
consider always, I were always in God's presence, shut my eyes and see his face
intent upon me, marking not my actions only but my purposes and deliberations;
I should start most certainly at the approaches of a sin, and no more dare to
close with it, then a Cutpurse temted by an opportunity which he was going to
make use of, would proceed if he discerned the Judge upon the bench beheld him,
saw his eye upon him watching him; it is such a guard this, nothing can be
greater or securer. I have set God always before me, says King Psalm 16. 8.
David, therefore I shall not fall. Nor would this contemplation only make us
cautious, but it would excite, encourage our devotions: if we saw our selves
before him, we would be humble and attent, as people really concerned, they
would be full of reverence and godly fear; indeed we would be righteous, just
and upright in all our doings; our whole conversation seeing who is present,
would not dare to be unclean or rude, it would not be vain or uncomly; in fine
the business of our life would be to do that which is well pleasing in his
sight, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, always looking up to him whose
face is toward us. This must needs raise all our affections and our aims, and
place them upon him, on whom our eyes and thoughts are set, especially if there
be resolution in the use of this means; most of all, if the resolution have the
courage of King David's in the Text, a resolution which was taken up against
the almost universal practice and the as great contradiction of the world,
which generally minds far different satisfactions, But as for me I will behold,
both which considerations of the resolution and the courage of it I shall join
in my last particular.

And indeed there is nothing else but such a resolution that can set it self
against the practice of the world, will serve our turns: for, as Seneca says,
vice is but common madness, and we see that very often against their temper,
inclinations and their principles, and the conviction of their heart and soul,
men will do vile and shameful things, because they will be mad, if others be
so; it seems so difficult a thing to endure to be singular in any company. And
tho to be so, singular I mean, in any the advantages of this world, either as
to goods of mind, of body, or of fortune for the most part is more valued far
than the advantages themselves, we would enclose and be alone in every such
thing, and as if we thought an excellency lost its virtue if another had it,
it is the rarity that takes with every body; yet the advantages of Heaven, and
the real true goods of the mind, Religion, Piety, and Virtue it is far
otherwise, as to those there are none of those emulations in their practices
and manners. Be the the consequence never so dreadful, men will do and be as
others; it is impossible to resist the tide of custom, go against the torrent of
a crowd and multitude, or bear the being singular. And there are two great
obstructions to it, the solitude of singularity, and the censures, scoffings
and disreputations that use to attend it. For example that I instance not, as
well I might, in many of the great duties of our Christianity, which are scofft
and ridiculed, but in the very case that makes the opposition in the context
here betwixt the Psalmist and the men of this world; their excessive, rich,
full way of living. If I do not live up to the heights and vain pomps of
condition or the mode, indeed tho my condition will not bear it, if I be not as
expensive, as luxurious as others; I am then concluded sordid, near, short
handed, slighted by all those that do exceed me, and by all that judge by such
appearances; so that here is disreputation lights upon me. And besides if I
retrench, not superfluities alone, but all licencious conversation and the
other evil uncomly entertainments of societies, retire out of them, allow my
self none of these liberties, grow more severe than others, and consequently
singular in my behavior; then I must keep company with no body, must withdraw
from every meeting, be a Recluse, as if the world were but a Cloister, or
rather Hermitage: so that here is uncomfortable solitude attends this. 'Twere
very sad if only vicious conversation could cement societies or make
acquaintances, and licencious folly sauce their meetings, give them relish.
What comfort is there like to be in such companions that have nothing to endear
themselves to one another, but that they will not refuse to sin, be sick or mad
with one another? In truth it were no very eligible thing to be counted good,
pleasant company, if to be so a man must hazard his sobriety or modesty, make
bold with his Religion and good manners. Even common decency can scarce
entertain without extravagance or detraction, either they must be ridiculous,
or sharp and bitter. Now it is ill to be engaged by reputation, to play the
Satyrist, or to play the fool, and have no other recompense or satisfaction but
to make others laugh. But God be thanked it is not thus, but men that have some
little latent affections to their sins or follies, still frame these objections
against reformation of their evil customs; the age is not so vitiated, such ill
conversation, unless it be by those that like and use it, is not every where to
be found: but if it were, and so far as we meet it, David's resolution is most
necessary. They may take their course; but as for me I will retire into God's
presence, and behold his face. And what if by withdrawing thus I frequently
deprive my self of the society that I was used to, and was friendly and
delightful to me? It Is better by denying my self and reforming to make joy in
Heaven in God's presence among Angels, than assist in making sport with such
men; and 'twill be but little comfort to go merrily and with good company to my
damnation. Let them enjoy themselves in such society, but as for me I will seek
other, will live always in God's presence, I will behold his face.

As to the other obstacle, the scoffs and the disreputations that are cast upon
those that are singular on this account, comply not with the modes and evil
customs of the age according as St Peter tells his Proselytes 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4.
The time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentile World, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
revellings, banquetings; wherein they think it strange, that you run not with
them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you. It cannot be denied but
that the world does put disreputation strangly upon things, and most
unreasonably. Some virtues are the most reproachful things that can be: a man
can scarce live under the disparagement of being guilty of obeying God, and on
the other side one of the greatest and most sinful injuries in the whole world
is, if not laudable, yet not blamed in the man that does it, while the innocent
sufferer of it is contemned, and is branded because he is wronged. Indeed if
Christ's discipline were in force to censure every vicious person (...), if
every open contumacious Sinner were rendered as contemtible as a Publican was
to the Jews, as Matt. 18. 17.
Christ left order; disreputation then would lie where it ought, and the
objection would have no force. But as the world is, singularity in good things,
and in not comporting with modes and customs, tho it may derive upon it self
the scoffs of vain licencious men, cannot want esteem enough to bare it up
against that. There is indeed no reputation like that of a discreet, well
managed virtue; for many men that will not practice it, will yet commend it.
For to pass the great things, and to name that which there is scarce any, that
is, none sensible of, the instance which I made of this out of the context,
where the Psalmist sets himself against the custom of those men, that pride
themselves in ostentation of the plenties, and the gayeties, and the excess of
this world; a mode which may be grown to such an height even in the lower ranks
of people also, that they are so undervalued who comply not with it, that most
cannot bear the shame of not having that which others have, tho their condition
will not bear the charge of it, and this is almost universal. But be it so, yet
they that do not see thy pomps like others, thy estate spangle, glare about
thee and thy rooms and thy retinue, do not see it spilt about thy table; if
they see thee live up to thy own condition, only taking care not to exceed it,
and resolving not to owe thy plenties to thy debts, that is, thy abundance to
the needs of others, make their dues, their wants and nakedness to dress thy
vanities; and if they see thee furnish those that need with what thou sparest:
they cannot count this lower stricter sort of living Sordidness, but discreet,
just, charitable Piety; and the others gaudiness proud lavishness, yea unjust,
unchristian folly, which at last will fall, and that unpitied. But at once
suppose to set our selves against the evil customs of the world and to be
singular in duty should be likely to create us sleights and scoffs and
disreputation; yet consider what our Savior says Mark 8. 38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes
in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels. He couples these, and makes it
the same guilt to be ashamed of him and of his words, ashamed of obedience to
his word and ashamed of his person; to be afraid of, loath to do ones duty,
because possibly some will speak meanly of it, is not only not to to dare to
go to Heaven because some men laugh and scoff at those that do go thither, but
it is reckoned the same thing as to be ashamed of the Son of God who required
that duty, and think meanly of him, scorn to own that their elder Brother, God
Almighty's Firstborn, as some do by their poor mean Relations: but this shame
will be returned severely, when the Son shall come in the glory of his Father
with the holy Angels. And then compare the disreputes, to be ashamed of virtue,
because debauchees that are as far from knowing what is true repute as they are
from being virtuous, will think meanly of me for it, or to have the Son of God
in glory with all his Host of Heaven think contemtibly of me, when I shall be
ashamed so as to call out to the mountains and the hills to cover my confusion
at the valley of Jehoshaphat before all the world. Let them delight, and
satisfy themselves with their choice of their commendable vices, sins that are
in reputation, rejoice with glory in their shame; But as for me I will behold
thy face in Righteousness.

And what remains but that we take up this resolution, and put on the courage
of it, firmly purposing to do it, tho by doing so we should go against the
general customs of the world. To make a resolved, open, avowed profession of a
good life, provided that we do it without ostentation or hypocrisy, is a great
advantage toward living so, makes it much easier. For however some, it may be
the prime ministers of hell, Satan's chiefest agents in temtations, such as
cannot bear that any other should be virtuous, it is such a reproach to them,
will the more endeavor to betray such, it is their luxury; yet generally
speaking, most men will not offer it, but rather fear them, having an aw of
them, and will themselves avoid the doing ill before them in some measure.
Indeed since none can promise themselves that such will comply with them if
they temt them, nor think it probable that they will; most men, however forward
in assaulting innocence, will let them alone. Besides that such have put
themselves, by having publicly professed, whatever the world does, they will
live righteously, under a necessity of avoiding all their evil practices; and
it is a happy and great advantage toward a good life, to be under a known
obligation of well living, such as they themselves have taken on them out of
perfect aversation to ill actions. Do not you think that most men miscarry out
of want of that which resolution would be able to effect with its own strength?
We see in other things it does attemt, it go's through with much greater
difficulties, than lie in the way to virtue; which is so known, so every day an
object of men's eyes, that I should be ashamed to go about to prove it. But when
this resolution secondly shall be taken up, and be avowed against the open
practice of the world out of a dislike and abhorrency to it; when it is made
eager too by aversation, sharpened by much opposition and by being publicly
professed and owned as a peculiar concern, since the very shame of being foiled
in the contest, and proving false to ones own solemn resolution would have
stings in point of honor to push it forwards, for to that shrine even Atheists
are contented to pay homage: this must prosper, and unless men have a mind to
be conquered, think it easier to retreat, and sordidly desert their
resolutions, they cannot fail. Especially thirdly if men consider all this is
managed in Gods presence, to his face; if they set the Lord always before them
as the object and the end of all their resolutions and their actions, and do
this with all sincerity, as seeing his eyes over them as witness and judge of
their behavior, and behold his face too with all hope and confidence
imaginable, knowing he looks over them to encourage their endeavors, to behold
their needs of help, and to give them grace sufficient, and to crown their
fidelity, then such resolutions cannot possibly miscarry. What success soever
they may have in that war which the world here, that is at enmity with all that
love and serve God, wages with them, and tho it do not only frown on them, but
humble them into the dust of death, yet keeping firm to their resolutions of
beholding Gods face in Righteousness, when they awake out of that dust after
his likeness, they shall be satisfied with it.

SERMON XII. OF CHRIST'S BEING LORD and GOD.
John 20. 28. My Lord and my God.
THAT which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands
have handled of the word of life, declare we unto you, says St John Epist. 1.
c. 1. v. 1. And truly these same senses did declare to Thomas the richest
Article of the Christian Faith, the Resurrection, and helped him to conclude,
that Christ was therefore Lord and God. For when he had beheld Christ's hands,
and thrust his own hands into his side, he answered and said, My Lord and my
God. We have another sense comes in to evidence, and makes the application; we
have this day not only seen and handled, but also tasted the Bread, that is,
this Lord; and if we have received it worthily, and being become one with him
we may upon our own most sure and close experience cry out, My Lord and my God.

The Text, you see answers both the Solemnities of the day. The Resurrection
evidenced him to be Lord and God to Thomas, and so also to us; and our faithful
receiving him will evidence him to be our Lord and our God, and in order to
both these I shall handle them: for there be in the words these parts.

1. A Compellation given to Christ upon his appearance at his being risen, Lord
and God.

2. The Relation of these applied, My Lord and my God. I shall show

1. That the Resurrection did instal him to that title Lord.

2. Show what that title does import,

1. By way of requiring, what kind of relation it has to respect and homage.

2. By way of promise, what it holds out for hope. Then as to a word of
application I will show how the Sacrament applies both those importances.

1. How it is an assurance to perform what that title requires.

2. How it does confer what the title does promise.

To the first, that the Resurrection did install Christ to the Title Lord. As
Christ was God he had indeed all Power and Authority from everlasting; that
comes not under our consideration. But as he was the person sent and
commissioned by God to bring mankind to Salvation; he was first to die for
them, then to rule over them; and first to be their Priest, and then their
Lord. After his crucifying when he was risen again, then he says All power is
given to me both in heaven and earth, Matt. 28. 18. or in more express words
Acts 2. 36. Let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made that
fame Jesus, whom they have crucified, both Lord and Christ. His Cross was a
step to his Throne, it merited that Authority for him, and was in part
undertaken for it Phil. 2. 8, 9. And then for the importance of this Title as
to that it does require is very obvious, Lord is a word of power and authority,
it requires service and obedience. Nothing more frequent in the Prophets, than,
when they have from God severely worded their commands, to add this sanction, I
am the Lord: and as applied to Christ St Paul does say, I serve the Lord
Christ. A servant is the necessary relative to a Lord, and truly doing what he
does command was the use he assigned of all that power he had given him,
teaching them to observe whatever I have commanded. And truly if those
Scriptures be remembered which secure his Authority thus, let us know that Power
was the reward of his sufferings, and he endured them partly for the Title's
sake; therefore says as much, and Heb. 12. 2. For the joy that was set before
him, he endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right
hand of God; did all this, that he might gain that place: or if that be not
plain enough, then this is most express Romans 14. 9. For to this end Christ both
died and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and the
living. Verse 8. That whether we live, we live unto the Lord: and whether we
die, we die unto the Lord: that is, that both our life might be consecrated to
him, our lives spent on his service, and our deaths be at his command; and this
was part of the end of his death. And then I appeal to your own hearts, for
what end, think you, he did so desire, and obtain this power? Do you think,
when he was set at the right hand of God, he was exalted only to a name, that
by all those sufferings he did acquire but a bare title, to be called Lord of
Lords, as he is called Rev. 19. 16. but neither to look after our obedience,
nor indeed to set us any law to obey, as some would have it? Was this power so
dear to him, as that he would suffer all those torments to compass it, and yet
when he has it, that it should be so little regarded by him, as to suffer us
to neglect and contemn it, to go on in a continued course of disobedience to
all his precepts, to rebel against his Power, and never submit our appetites to
it, but let every lording passion fly in his face, and every lust defy his
Authority, let us be proud against that Lord, be higher than our duties and all
the temper of virtues, and let every ebullition of our proud wrath trample on a
statute backed with hellfire, yea and so believe that his death should procure
us an impunity in doing this? What a wretched mistake is this, to think his
blood, which purchased him a power to command us, should purchase us a leave to
disobey him? This is to make Christ's blood divided against it self, and to
make it spill and dash it self. That we should go on in a course of iniquity,
or allow our selves some peevish vices, and stop our own consciences and a
Preacher's mouth with saying Christ died for us, when as it is clear he died
that he might be Lord, that is, that we might live and die to him, do both at
his command; and can thou think that that death will excuse thee for not
obeying, which was undertaken for that very end, that thou might obey him?
Christ died to be thy Lord, and thou will have that death a plea for thee, when
thou obeyest sin and the Devil his greatest Enemies. His Cross was his very
Ensign and Standard against these Enemies, his Passion was his grappling with
them, and his death his Victory. And yet thou do again submit to their
authority, becomest a subject to their power, and set them Lord over thee,
and fetchest the justification of this thy defection from that death and
victory; and that is the same thing as to make them of no authority nor power,
yea the captivity and ruin of those Enemies to be the reason of thy obeying
them, to excuse thy disservice to Christ by saying he is thy Lord, and for thy
rebellion and waging war with him pretend thou do it under his own standard.
No certainly his Title claims Obedience, and does assure thee thou must serve.
This is the first thing what thou must do.

The second what thou may expect from it, is easily discovered, that is
wages: For he will recompense every man according to his deeds, Romans 2. 6. To
them, who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life, v. 7. And glory, honor, and peace to every man that
does good, v. 10. For he is the Lord of glory, the Prince of peace, and Lord of
life, the Scripture says: in a word to sum up both what his Title does
require, and what we may expect from it, it says Service and it says Wages,
and both are set down in that to the Heb. 5. 9. He is the Author of eternal
salvation to all them that obey him; and both here are applied to him who does
in earnest own the relation to this Title, and can say in truth My Lord: the
next part, and first of the applying what it does require, Service, as it is
the assuring of performance.

My Lord. And truly had we not entered any voluntary obligation, and had we not
contracted formally to take him for our Lord, and not only owned all that the
relation does import to be due from us, but engaged also to render it; yet he
is to us both

1. By an Original right: he made us, and there is not a workman in the world
has so much right to require the uses of his own handiwork, to dispose of
that same utensil which himself shaped or framed, as the Lord has to require
our service. Did I perchance furnish the Lord with some materials for my self,
or did I find any piece toward my making, contribute any least thing to my
being, then let me claim something for my share in my self, and by the rule of
fellowship with God have some use of my self to my self, and as to that let him
not be my Lord. But there is no such thing; he called me into being out of the
infinite resistance of vacuity, and nothing. He gave me body, soul, and every
power and faculty, and he upholds every motion and inclination of those
faculties, and gives me opportunities and objects for them. There is no
considerability of any thing within me is from my self, but entirely owes its
being from his store, and comes from the Almighty: and then what least
imaginable pretense or plea can I have, why every motion and inclination both
of soul and body should not be bound to look toward his service, and every
action and thought acknowledge him My Lord. And

2. By purchased Title. He did redeem us from the service of those cruel Lords,
Sin and the Devil, whose service is unreasonable and unmanly slavery, and whose
wages is eternal ruin; and he bought the right and title to our service at a
price, he became our Lord, Ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 7. 23. They that
do not acknowledge this, are in the number of those men of whom St Peter speaks
Epist. 2. c. 2. v. 1. denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction: and you may judge what kind of Lord he ought to
be by the price he paid for the Title, what service he expected by the rates at
which he purchased them, even at the blood of God Acts 20. 28. He died, I told
you, that he might be Lord. And now Lord, what is thy servant that thou
should thus value him, or what are his performances that thou should buy
them at these rates? And shall I give to Sin or Satan those services, which he
thus values, and thus buys? No, if thou art content to purchase that so dear
which was thy own just due before, surely now by all rights thou art My Lord.
But

3. He is so also by my own most solemn contract and engagement. And to pass by
all the rest, and to stick to that of this day only, we did contract so in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and in receiving that we did most solemnly
assume to do him faithful service, and took him for our Lord. And this would
easily appear from hence, if Christ's blood be the price with which he bought
the right to be thy Lord, and this day thou did come and here did take that
blood to all those ends and uses it was given for, then in so doing thou did
ratify the contract, and take possession of the relation: but to do it more
solemnly, and here I will not stand upon that proof which I have formerly made
to you from the account that Pliny gave to Trajan the persecuting Emperor, tho
truly it be strange that a Heathen should discern this was the meaning of their
Sacrament, and Christians will not believe it. He, when he was employed to
persecute the Christians, tells him what he had found of them by racking some,
and by confessions of others at their death, Soliti stato die convenire, seque
Sacramento obstringere, ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent,
etc. to take an oath (they knew no other sense of the word Sacrament) to do
what their Lord had commanded them. What have you don this day? Why Christ was
sworn your Lord this day, and you have taken an oath of service, entered into a
bond of duty and obedience; and if you wilfully shall fail of doing this, your
Worships will be brought against you, your Communions will come in as so many
evidences that you have forfeited, so many oaths that you have broken. No sure,
I will henceforwards tie my self to better performance; for I have hampered my
self with obligations, entangled my self with one other engagement, I have
again sworn at the Altar, Thou art my Lord. But I have a more solemn proof of
this, that he who comes to the renewing of a Covenant with God (now Christ we
know says Luke 22. 20.
that that cup is the new Covenant in his blood) he does enter into an oath of
God, Deuteronomy. 29. from verse 10. to 15. Ye stand this day all of you before the
Lord your God, your captains of your tribes, your elders, and your officers,
with all the men of Israel, your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that
is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water, that
thou should enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath,
which the Lord thy God makes with thee this day; that he may establish thee to
day for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he has
said unto thee, and as he has sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob: neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath, but
with him that stands here with us this day before the Lord our God, and also
with him that is not here with us this day. Now out of this they who are not
convinced that our first entering Covenant with God by Baptism is a vow, although
the Church require that we should look upon it under that Solemnity, and tho St
Peter call it (...) a stipulation, or if they think it something like it, yet
it is a vow but in the childrens name, and so it does not strike those
apprehensions of so sacred an engagement into them, themselves may see here at
an entering Covenant little ones entering into an oath: and this was not the
first giving of the Covenant, that so any thing might be thought peculiar to
that, but only a repeting of the Covenant in their presence, verse 1. and
least that we should think their standing there in solemn manner, might imply
something more than ordinary verse 14. 15. take us that stand here this day
before the Lord our God, but also with him that shall be born hereafter. Many
expositors, and the Jerusalem Exposition says with all the generations of you
that are to come (...), as if they stood with us this day. And the Targum of
Jon. Vziel says, they do stand, that is, as to this intent and purpose, that as
soon as they are admitted into Covenant by Circumcision, they are within this
oath. Littles ones therefore that can be admitted into a Covenant by receiving
of the sign of it, they then enter an oath of keeping it. And then, my
Brethren, we have entered an oath to continue Christ's faithful Soldiers and
Servants unto our lives end, and that is, thou, and I, and every one have sworn
he is my Lord. O my Savior I was baptized, and at that time did swear service,
and then if I should fail thee now, I renounce my Allegiance, I go from my
fealty, and I throw of my Covenant. Every evil action I deliberately commit,
brands me with the dishonorable base style of one that slights his oaths; there
is no hold of his vows, not his most sacred ones, those that he makes to God.
Every vain or passionate oath, how true soever, speaks me perjured; the
draughts of intemperance would wash off the water of my Christendom; every
unclean lust, every impurity of Flesh or Spirit does as it were bemire and wipe
out my contract with my Lord. For I covenanted to be pure and clean, for I was
washed into the very name of his retainer. I could not have that title of that
relation without being cleansed. There I did swear defiance against all his
Enemies, the Devil, World, and Flesh, and all worldly and carnal lusts, that I
would neither follow not be led by them; and if I should serve them now, I
should be a Rebel and a Traitor to my Lord against my bond, and covenant, and
oath. No, my Lord, I will not serve these, where death must be my wages, the
Fiends my Comrades, and my Conquest Hell; I Will not do homage to destruction,
engage to be true and faithful to my own ruin, pay allegiance to my perdition.
Thou have my worship and my service by bargain and by oath, I have sworn Thou
art my Lord. Now all this is of much more force in the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, where I do formally and knowingly seal to this Covenant; and when we do
this on our knees in the most solomn manner that is possible, this must needs
be a more express entering into Christ's oath, than that there of the Jewss was
the entering God's oath, which was in probability only coming and standing
before the Lord to hear the Covenant, which God had struck with that nation
before in Horeb. Or if it were performed with Sacrifice, which may seem
probable in that it is expressed (...), that thou should pass into the
covenant. So your Margent reads there verse the 12. alluding to their manner of
confirming Covenants by dividing the beasts, and setting one half against the
other, and passing betwixt the divisions: so we see Jer. 34. 18. This is
passing into the Covenant, and therefore the LXX. read here Deuteronomy. 29. 12. That
thou should enter into the Covenant of the Lord thy God, (...), that rite of
dividing and passing through being only the Symbol of curses against them that
shall break their Covenant, and imprecations in Hieroglyphics: so that in Jer.
34. 18. it is most literally, if we translate the words (...) according to their
importance, I will make those men, that have transgressed my Covenant, the
calf, or as the calf, as the Syriac reads; I will divide and separate them
among the Nations, and give them to the sword, and cut them in pieces, the
ceremony signifying to be don to him that does not stand to his Covenant. Now
surely this is don to more advantage in the Sacrament, where Christ's body is
torn, and his blood poured out no doubt with the like commination implied, that
being the very meaning of pouring out blood in Covenants; so that we entered
there the Lord's Covenant and imprecation, swearing that he shall be our Lord
with a most threatening sense. And surely if we be not careful to observe our
oath, we have vowed agonies to our selves, and sworn our own condemnation, when
there I curse myself with all the curses of the Covenant, if Christ be not my
Lord.

And now it will be needless for me to go on and prove, that if we be not
careful to fulfill the importance of this relation, my Lord, in order to what it
requires, 'twill be in vain to expect the benefit of that relation, in what it
does import. He that has not don service as to his Lord, must not look Matt.
25. 21.
to enter into the joys of his Lord: he that has not don his will, 'twill be
in vain for him to cry at the last day Lord Lord, although he come with never so
applying Titles, and cry my Lord, and tho he call upon any other Title of his
Jesus. He died indeed for our sins, but he rose again for our justification.
His Resurrection did entitle him to be our Lord. If he be risen to thee, he is
thy Lord. But these two make up the confession of a Christian Romans 10. 9. If
thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine
heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved: and look
not for it from any other relation to him. Thy Priest may sacrifice for thee,
but Christ thy Lord must pardon thee: thy Jesus on the Cross must pay thy
ransom, but if the Lord make you free, then are ye free indeed, John 8. 36. Do
not deceive thy self with looking no farther than to thy Jesus in his
sufferings; thou must relate to him also in his Power and Authority, thou must
depend upon thy Jesus dying and risen too; not only on thy Jesus on the Cross,
but on thy Jesus on the Throne: thou must cry out My Savior, and thou must cry
My Lord; and if thou can in truth and in reality, he is the Author of eternal
salvation to all them that obey him; that is, he is an everlasting Savior to
them, to whom he is a Lord. His all Authority will be employed in thy
deliverance, he will show himself a Lord to thee only in pardoning, saying and
rewarding thee, and his all-power both in Heaven and Earth will be to thee
Omnipotence of mercy: for he that is thy Lord, he is thy God also. The third
thing, My God.

I must take the same method here that I used before. First see what the
Resurrection did contribute toward this Title God, and what that Title does
imply, both as to what it does require, and as to what it imports by way of
promise and encouragement.

Secondly see what the Sacrament contributed toward making the application, My
God, and what that imports in order to both the other things.

1. Although this Son of God according to his Divine Nature was Everlasting God,
and, as the Nicene Creed expresses, begotten of his Father before all worlds,
God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, and was called so in
Scripture John 1. 1. and the Word was God; yet it is sure this person Jesus
Christ was declared to be the Son of God by the resurrection from the dead,
Romans 1. 4. And this text is the first place in the New Testament, where this
person is expressly called God. Thomas upon the evidence of this Resurrection
crying out, I do acknowledge that thou art my very Lord, and that is a most
certain argument to me that thou art the Omnipotent God of Heaven; and this his
Resurrection did contribute to his Title God. Now I enquire what this implies,
and that will be made clear from Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18, 19. This day the Lord
thy God has commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments: thou shall
therefore keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul. Thou
have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to
keep his statutes and his commandments and his judgments, and to hearken unto
his voice. And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people,
as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his commandments:
And to make thee high above all nations which he has made, in praise, and in
name, and in honor, and that thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy
God, as he has spoken. So that you have there the certain meaning of that
mutual relation My God and My People as to what it requires: and so we see it is
but the same engagement that the other Title did import, only with an higher
inforcement and ground of obligation; and therefore God himself that by his
Prophet Malachy c. 1. had used the other-argument of Master or Lord (...) v. 6.
and Governor v. 8. Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee
or accept thy person? makes use of the like climax and gradation; as if he had
said, Had thy obedience to thy Ruler no more care nor endeavor in it, had thy
services to thy Lord no more devotion nor zeal, were thy performances to thy
Governor so slight and so regardless, so full of supine negligence, to say
nothing of transgression and contemt; were thy presentiments to thy Prince so
unhandsom, slubber'd and heedless, so unchosen, unprepared and so trivial,
would they be content with them? And must I? No surely, Cursed be the deceiver
verse 14. that mocks me with his imperfect, lame, sick services, with outsides
of attendance, yea with irreverence, with casting of my words behind him, with
polluted offerings; for I am a great King, says the Lord. But afterward in
case of an higher affront he breaks into an higher resentment c. 3. 8. Will a
man rob God? This is such a thing as the Lord's Rhetoric could lay no greater
aggravation on it, than by asking the question, whether any man could heat
himself into such a mad impiety, and not be confounded at the thought of such
an enterprise, to abuse his God. Now such an obligation of obedience to the
Lord Christ he owns, that does acknowledge him his God, this it requires.

Now as to what the Title does import by way of promise; here to be the God of
any body signifies to be their Almighty Benefactor, him from whom that person
may expect, and shall receive all good things, that the power of a God
includes. So it is clear it does, when God proclaims himself the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and says, that is his name and
his memorial to all generations, Exodus 3. 15, 16. From whence our Savior
concludes Matt. 22. 31, 32. that Abraham and the other must have a life after
this; for otherwise how is he yet their God? How can he be a Benefactor to the
dead? And in the tenor of the Covenant, where it is past, it means, I will
bestow upon them all the mercies of the Covenant. So in the Old, that place of
Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18, 19. so in the New Heb. 8. 10, 12. where it is explained, I
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities
will I remember no more, So that my God does mean, first he that I vow all
worship and service to, and secondly he from whom I claim and challenge all
those glorious things that are contracted for us in Christ's Covenant, the
happy issues of the whole chain of methods that he works for us, the designed
mercies of his Predestination and the privileges that he calls us to, the
comfortable condition in which his Justification does instate us, the graces of
his Sanctification, and the incomprehensible blessedness of his Glorification:
yea and all the preservations and mercies of this life, all these are
challenged in this, Thou art my God. For so Jer. 31. 33, 34. which is repeated
in the Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. whatever both parts do contract for, man's duty and
God's promises, is all sum'd up in this, I will be their God, and they shall be
my people. By which words also he assures them all deliverances from evil, and
enstates upon them the securings of his Providence, both to themselves and
their posterity. And if God mean all this, when he does say I will be their
God; then man he vows and claims all this, when he does say my God.

Now let us see how this days performance does both these. First how it vows
and swears all duty, worship, and service, all that Christ requires by his
Covenant, I have already shown, so that that part is don; only we may take
notice Whose belly is his God, in St Paul's words Phil. 3. 19. the man who does
mind nothing but his sensual appeties, and notwithstanding Christ's commands
contrives all satisfactions for that, and enjoys them: that either casts the
body of Christ into a stomach filled with late surfeit and drowns his blood in
such intemperate draughts as are yet unrepented of, or else within a few days
after overlaies that body with some riot, or spews that blood out in the
overflowings of his woeful draughts. These whatsoever they have don to day,
cannot yet say, my God; not only because they so defy his Worship which they
vowed, but because they set up an Anti-God against him, and while they vow upon
their knees he is their God, yet at that same time they adore their appetites.
Nor if Covetousness, or rather inordinate lusting, as the word bears, be
Idolatry, as St Paul often expresses, and surely without taking in the Heathen
uncleanesses in Religion: and it is ill for some persons of these days, that
they had not the luck to be born Heathens, that so they might have bin unclean
devoutly, committed in obedience to their Gods, presented their bodies living
sacrifices to be kindled by the flames of lust, and whose whoredoms were their
pieties; for many live now, as if they did not only wish, but almost think so.
But abating this, there is sure more Idolatry in the courthips and the practice
of that sin than any other. There is no other thing does cast a man into such
base degenerate and unworthy submissions to atchieve or to cover his
transgression, lower than any thing but the unclean commission it self. Now if
this be Idolatry, the lustful person has an Idol, and then he cannot say to
Christ my God. And thus they in whom the God of this world has blinded their
mind, in St Paul's words 2 Cor. 4. 4. they who serve Satan by going on in any
vicious custom of the World; or in a word, they that disobey Christ for this
God of the World, this Prince of the power of the air, the Spirit that works in
the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. they cannot say to Christ my God;
tho they bow at his Altar, they obey the Devil, and he will not be a partner
together with the Devil. So that every one of these is perjured, when he says
my God; much less can he plead the claim, my God, the last sense.

Now in that sense My God does challenge as a right and a peculiar all the
Blessings temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, all that the promises of Christ do
offer, or that the hopes and expectations of a Christian fly at: all these, I
told you, God included, when he said I will be their God; and therefore all
these he does truly challenge, that can say my God. It is an huge Confidence
that a poor soul may take, when he can go to God as David does Psalm 119. 94. I
am thine, save me; secure thine own, O Lord, or else it will be thy loss what I
shall suffer. For I am thine, vindicate thine own right, let neither Sin nor
Devil rob thee of thy own peculiar. Behold I commit thine own charge with thee,
and then take care of that. Shall that miscarry that is a part of thy custody
and care, a part of thy possession and inheritance; for all this is implied in
that challenge, my God. For they whose God he is, they are his People, that is
the correlation. Now that means a special People, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. a peculiar
People, 1 Pet. 2. 9. a peculiar Treasure, Exodus 19. 5. his People of
inheritance, Deuteronomy. 4. 20. his Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. the Jewels of his Crown,
Zach. 9. 16. If I am his, I am so under all these precious notions, and then
how dear, how valuable am I to my God, who make up his inheritance, who do
enrich his treasury, who give a luster to his Diadem of glory, and am a Jewel
in his Crown? How secure may I be? For will God wretchlesly lose his
inheritance, or will he not take care of his especial things, or will he throw
away his treasure, or will he throw his own Crown to the ground so to dash off
the Jewels of it? That place of Malachy expresses the different condition of
those that are God's People from the others that have no relation to him, in
respect of God's carings and protection, Mal. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Ye have
said, it is in vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? And now
we call the proud happy: yea they that work wickedness are set up; yea they
that temt God are even delivered. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often
one to another, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance
was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make
up my jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves
him. Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. In times of
undisturbed abundance and of full prosperity, when the God of this World is
good to them that serve him, when the Lord lets men alone, and the ungodly
thrive; then indeed his protections are not much regarded, but wickedness and
wealth do seem the strong securities. But when God sends his indignation
abroad, and when his judgments sweep away those confidences, then this will be
a comfortable consideration: Come what will come, I have one that will care for
me, one that has writ me in his note book, his book of remembrance to put him
in mind, that he is to provide for me: and when the most flourishing ungodly man
shall be stripped of all his hopes and trusts, so that there remains no least
relief from them, nor can he look for any from the Lord, he is not of his
People; then have I one that will make me up amongst his Jewels, have the same
care of me as of his precious and peculiar treasures; I have a right and title
to his protections, to provide for, and to take care of me: it is his office,
he undertook it in his Covenant, and not to do it were to break his compact
which he has bound himself to with an oath. For I am his, therefore I can with
confidence go to him. I am thine, save me. Therefore the words afford me
greater grounds of confidence, when they give me authority to challenge him, and
tell him, Thou art mine, my God. All the securities that his preserving mercies
signify, all the watches of his providence, all the blessings that fulfill his
Attributes, as goodness, they are all mine, for he is mine. Can I fear the
malice of Adversaries? shall I doubt the fury of that spoiler that even robs
necessity, will rob me even to a perfect desolation? Ah my poor soul, Nunquid
sibi Christianum. I am sure it cannot take all from me; it must void Heaven
before it can disfurnish me of all, it must commit a rape upon my Jesus; for
while they leave him, I have my God. Can I want any thing for this life or the
life to come, if there be a supply in Christ? I may be sure to have it, if his
Divinity can effect it; I need not want, for I have right to him, he is my God.
What one thought can afflict or trouble me long, unless it be such an one, for
which there is no help for in God? If such a one indeed do seize me, there is
danger; but till that happen Psalm 42. 5.
why art thou so troubled, O my soul, why art thou so disquieted within me? O
put thy trust in God, in Christ, for he is my God. Can I desire indeed, when I
have him? Sure I am strangely greedy, if the Almighty be not enough for me,
more unsatisfied than Hell if Christ, that is God, cannot suffice me, if I am
not content when he is my God. O my soul, Christ never failed to pay his debts,
he is a happy Creditor to whom he owes, especially where he owes that debt, and
where he owes himself. Now if thou be a faithful and Religious Soul, he is thy
debt, as due to thee as thy own portion. Psalm 119. 57.
Thou art my portion, O Lord, says David; thou have as great a right to him as
thy inheritance: Psalm 16. 5.
Thou art the lot of my inheritance, says he again, as St Thomas here He is my
God.

But never has a faithful Soul more right to lay this claim than at the
Sacrament to both the claims that I have treated of.

1. To be his Treasure, his peculiar Treasure; for the Church tells us, If with
a penitent and true heart we receive that holy Sacrament, then we spiritually
eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, then we dwell in him and Christ
in us, we be one with Christ and Christ with us; an Union which fulfils what
Christ has prayed for John 17. 21, 23. I in them and thou in me, that they may
be made perfect in one, and as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee, that they
also may be one with us. Here Is Unions and interests enough, and all cemented
and assured by the worthy receiving of this Sacrament. I am certainly his, if I
be made one with him, and dearer than his Jewels, and more peculiar to him than
his Treasure; for I am him himself. And the same thing will prove that he is
mine; for certainly if I have a title to him ascertained, if I be made one with
him, I may well call that mine to which I am united. So when he dwells and is
in me, then I may say He is my Christ, my God. And then, he that there
faithfully performs worship and service to him, and so does take him for his
God, then if his God be his inheritance, there he does make his entry: if his
God be his portion, there he receives his portion. The Priest there gave thee,
if thou wast a good Communicant, the Body and Blood of Christ, and his Body and
his Blood is he himself. Therefore thou did receive him as verily as thou
did those, and if the Sacramental food be thine, then Christ is thine, and
thou may say my God.

My Brethren it was the Blood of Christ that purchased all the glorious mercies
of the Gospel, all the blessed expectations of a Christian; that was the price
of all the joys of Heaven, that reconciled God to us, bought us an interest in
him, and the happy enjoyments of himself for us: and then if in the Sacrament
Christ do give me his blood, when I can show God that, bring him the price of
the remission of my sins, the value of those glories, even the blood of Jesus,
come with the purchase-money in my hands that bought my interest in God, cannot
I say those are mine, my Heaven and my God? Yea when I can say, O Lord Christ,
whom I have undertaken to obey, my God whom I have vowed to serve and worship,
thou art even my flesh; for there I ate thy flesh, and thou becamest flesh of
my flesh: Thou art the portion of my cup, when thy very blood does fill full my
cup, and so thou art my flesh and my blood, then surely I may say with Thomas
here my Lord and my God.

O Holy and Eternal Savior, who art made both Lord and Christ, and by thy
Resurrection did manifest the Omnipotency of thy person, the truth of thy
Promises, and open a way to the everlasting glory and salvation, which thou
have prepared for them that give themselves up to serve and worship thee their
Lord and God; pour down that blessed influence of this thy Resurrection on our
hearts, in raising us from the death of sin to the life of Righteousness. Be
thou our Lord and Christ, ruling us by thy laws, saving us by thy grace, and by
thy Spirit applying the mercies of thy death, and so making us partakers of thy
Resurrection; therein turning us from our iniquities, hereafter in raising us
to Glory. O Lord we have this day made a Covenant of this with thee, and signed
the Articles of it in the blood of our God, swore to them at the Altar: give us
grace, we beseech thee, to use the strictest care and watchfulness in our
endeavors to perform with thee. Regard not how we have in times past only
mocked thee sacredly in these performances. O let it from this day be
otherwise. We have bin only on a stage of Religion, when we are at our
devoutest performances; and having turned our backs unto the Church, turned
them also to our duty, put off the vizards of Religion, and we untired our
selves of all our Piety almost as soon as the exercises of it were don; and
howsoever we tied our selves, our froward wills have bin too strong for all our
obligations, and burst out of them, broke all thy bonds asunder, and cast away
thy cords from us: although we tied them with all things that were most solemn and
most sacred, vows and oaths, and tied them before the body of our crucified
Lord and Savior, with the body and blood of Christ in our hands, as if we had
no other desires, no other cares that should do us good, than as we were
careful to keep those resolutions and vows; and yet. O Lord, we did let them
instantly loosen and slack, pass by and fail. Yea we did break them wilfully,
and would not be held in by thine or our own bonds. O Lord, if thou look upon
us in this guilt, sure thou will have no more to do with us, such false and
perjured vow-breakers. But O look upon us in thine own blood, which thou have
bid us pour out still to establish and renew our Covenant with thee; and let
this Covenant, wherein we have now taken thee to be our Lord and God, and taken
thee who art so in us, remain inviolable: be there then with thy Power and
Authority, subdue our hearts and our desires, and bring them under the obedience
of thy laws. Thou that art God Almighty, that did conquer Death and Satan,
bring it to pass that none of them prevail against thee now in our Souls, where
thou art: but use thy strength, O Lord, to drive their power thence, that thy
servants and thy people may not be enslaved to corruption and ruin, nor thy
Enemy gain souls from thee, which thou have purchased with thy blood, that we
having attained thee for our Lord and God, may claim the privileges of thy
People here, have the watches, and cares, and securities that thou laiest out
upon thy Treasures and the Jewels of thy Crown; and by thy body and thy blood
being made one with thee, and thou being ours, all things may be ours, thy
grace here and thy joys hereafter; thy Spirit may be ours, and thy Heaven ours;
and we in thee and thou in us, may all enjoy thy Kingdom, Power and Glory for
ever.

SERMON XIII. THE BELIEVERS CONCERN to pray for Faith.
Mark 9. 24. Lord, I believe, help thou my Unbelief.
WHICH are the words of a poor parent passionately earnest and afflicted sadly
for his child, that from his infancy had bin tormented miserably by a Devil,
for which having sought help every way, but finding none, no not from Christ's
Disciples, at last he repairs to him himself, beseeching him to have compassion
on him, and if he were able to relieve him. To whom Christ replies that if he
could believe, then he could work the miracle, and help his child, all things
being possible to be don for him that could believe, but nothing otherwise;
whereupon strait way the father of the child cried out, and said with tears,
Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

In which words we have, first the necessary Qualification that is to make all
that had ever heard of Christ capable of having any benefit from Christ, that
is belief in him, I believe. And since Christ has made this qualification
absolutely necessary, and by consequence must be supposed to have provided
means sufficient to work in us that belief that he requires so peremtorily, we
shall then

In the second place enquire how it comes to pass that they so often fail; that
men do either not believe, or their Faith is so weak that much unbelief does
mix with it, as in our Confessor here in the Text, who tho he did profess he
did believe, yet withal acknowledges his unbelief.

And thirdly to prevent and remedy all that, here is discovered whither we are
to betake our selves for help, and where alone it is possible to find it, and
that is Christ himself, who alone is able to repair in us whatever degree of
true belief is wanting in us, Lord help thou my unbelief, and how he does
repair it.

And fourthly when it is repaired to that due height, what that degree is can
make us capable of those benefits which he has promised to bestow on true
Believers; and whether such believers can say with our man here, I believe, yet
say too, Help my unbelief.

First of the first, the qualification believe; which is absolutely necessary
to make men capable of any benefits from Christ. For in all benefits of this
kind the Text mentions, such as were to come by miracle, it is well known what
St Matthew says of Nazareth, his own country, that he did not many mighty
works, there because of their unbelief, c. 13. 58. St Mark expresses it, that
he could there do no mighty work, c. 6. 5. that is, he could not be inclined to
work them, so as that he could or would be willing to do any, saving that he
laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them. For tho signs are not, as
St Paul says, for believers, but for them that believe not, 1. Cor. 14. 22. so
that infidelity seems rather prerequir'd to them than belief, since they are
don on purpose to convince and work men to the Faith, on which account some
were always wrought first where he was not known, to raise men's opinions and
expectations concerning him which if they were heeded, so that they did work
some but beginnings of Belief, he used to add more to increase that Faith and
confirm it. But where the first Essays were ineffectual, and got no credit,
there he did forbear; for such rendered themselves unworthy of them altogether,
Miracles were lost upon them, not attaining that end which they were intended
for: which was not for compassion to their sick to to heal, or their dead to
raise them, for then, as St Chrysostom observes, he would have cured or raised
them all; but was for their Conviction, to make faith of the Divinity of his
Person and Doctrine, and prevail with them to give themselves up to him, as to
the Messiah: and therefore all those who by the knowledge or the fame of his
great works were drawn to come to him for help, he still requires profession of
the faith they had concerning him, and just according to the measures of that
faith so he dispenses aid. Thus Matt. 9. 28. the blind men that cried after him
and followed him for sight, he asks, believe ye that I am able to do this? and
when they affirmed, yea Lord, he yields no more but this, according to your
faith be it unto you, v. 29. But when the Canaanitish woman did believe even to
importunacy and trouble, and her faith was such as would neither be shaken nor
receive repulse, but was full proof against Christ's arguments and his seeming
reproaches, yea made use of his upbraidings, urged them to her own advantage,
and in spite of all resistance persever'd, Christ could not then contain, but
cried, O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will, Matt.
15. 28. And on the other side, as while Peter's courage seeing Christ his
master walking toward them upon the water made him desire to meet him on the
water too, accordingly it suited: while he did resolvedly obey his Master and
rely on his assistance that commanded him, he was sustained, that confidence
did buoy him up: but when a turbulent strong wind once shook his faith, when he
began to fear and then to doubt, immediately he sunk, Matt. 14. 30. And all the
reason in the world, that when he doubted whether Christ would or were able to
uphold him in obeying him, tho he had present experiment of both, he should be
then left to himself; when in the height of the success and the securities of
miracles he was afraid and staggered: since 'twas the whole design of miracles,
and by consequence of that, to work faith, and it is the very essence also of
faith to assure us of God's power and his readiness to perform whatever he has
promised howsoever difficult. It was this very faith that gave denomination and
acceptance to the Father of the Faithful: for when Abraham was bid to offer up
that Son in whom he had received the promises that he should be the Father of
many Nations, that faith by which against hope he believed in hope, that it
would come to pass, and staggering not, considered neither difficulty, rather
natural impossibility of what was promised, (...) nor was curious to satisfy
himself, or indeed examine how it should or could be, as if he would model God's
performances or his own expectation by the measuress of his comprehension of
the means and method; but accounting God was able, if all other methods failed,
to raise him up from death, although he had no instance of that power, Heb. 11.
19. and being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able also to
perform, therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness, Romans 4. 21, 22. Now
as this faith that God was able, was that faith which made Abraham approved;
and the like faith in Christ we see was that which made them capable of his
miraculous assistances: so (those cures and miracles being emblems, and indeed
pledges of that greater cure, that far more comprehensive miracle he undertook,
and came to work on mankind; the healing of their bodies not only shadowing
out the healing of their souls, but also restitution of sight to the blind,
movement to the lame, and the like being partial essaies of that Resurrection
which he promised, that was to restore all those to all, at once giving life to
the dead) the like assurance of his power and readiness to do all this,
together with a full trust in him, that whatever difficulties we encounter or
imagine, yet in the performance of his promises he will never fail those who
seek after, and pursue them in the ways that he has chalked out to arrive at
them. This faith, I say, is the first qualification that can make us capable of
benefit by him: indeed as it is the first, so it is the most intimate, and only
active Principle of all Obedience, Religion, and Virtue.

For when all impressions both of God himself, of good and evil, and their
after-recompence were defaced, and tho the lineaments of these things were
wrought into men in their making, and the study of Philosophy had refreshed the
dying images, yet an inundation of corruption and debauchery had overspread
all, so far as that Almighty God did think it needful that his Son should be
incarnated to revele again our duty and teach virtue, and to give us an example
of it in his practice, even in the most severe and fatal instances, and after
having suffered for it, and by that means ransomed us from suffering for
transgressing of our duty, then to rise again and ascend into Glory to assure
the blessed recompenses of Religion and Obedience, and the infinitely miserable
returns of impiety and vice; if after all we either shall so far abhor the
duty, as that we renounce these glorious obligations to it, turn away from the
very proposal of all those advantages that are to crown it, and defy that
ransom paid for them, disbelieve all, count them dreams, cheats or illusions:
or however, if we cannot satisfy our selves that those rewards or punishments
are possible or likely, certainly it is most impossible there can be a temtation
of force to invite men to Religion or to any virtue: this method of proposal of
such infinite after-recompences to our faith demonstrated by such Miracles to
evince the power and their certainty, being the most vigorous struggle of
Divine Compassion toward man, the utmost attemt of mercy, which alone was
hopeful since all others failed the trial, 'twas his greatest strength
apportion'd to the full-grown wickedness of the World.

At first in one thousand six hundred years from innocence the whole World was
grown so bad, that God could find out but one whole family to save alive; and
he destroyed the rest for warning to all future generations: and yet in less
than a quarter of that time immediately ensuing there was again only one
family, that of Abraham, which out of all the World he could think fit to take
into his favor and his care. In whose Posterity, although he exercised them with
strange prodigies of sufferings and reliefs, and in the midst of Miracles
renewed his Law to them, trained them up in that by all arts of punishments and
rewards, kept them as it were in constant discipline with present visible
returns of plagues and death for every act of disobedience; so that the whole
sacred History is nothing but a recurrent Tide of God's mercy, and Isreal's
provocations, their sin and his punishing it. When famine, pestilence and war,
all the separations which might be expected from the furnace of affliction,
were utterly ineffectual, and the People were so settled on their lees, that
all attempts to purify only fretted and disturbed, and it was necessary to
rack them from those lees, and emty them from vessel to vessel, so that the
Nation was carried captive into Babylon. Even this digestion of seventy years
together had no more prosperous effect, than the preceding frustrate methods;
the return of the captivity brought also back the former disobedience and
infidelity. And when the fullness of time was come, that the Messiah should
appear, and restore all things, Matt. 17. 11. he came, as the Baptist called
it, to a generation of vipers, Matt. 3. 7. When the light shone in darkness,
the darkness comprehended it not. When he came unto his own, his own received
him not, John 1. 5, 11. So that, as St Luke expresses it, When the Son of man
came, he did not find faith in the earth. Where the fairest steps were made to
belief, 'twas exceedingly faint and imperfect; his very disciples were of
little faith, as our Savior Complains Matt. 6. 30. -- 8. 26. -- 14. 31. -- 16.
8. Nor was this frailty superseded in the more established growth of
Christianity. Tho we hear in the book of Acts of multitudes of them that
believed c. 4. 32. yet we hear also of some that opposed themselves,
contradicted, and blasphemed, c. 13. 45. others there were who made shipwreck
of the faith 1 Timothy 1. 19. and of others that doubted, and were wavering, and
weak in faith, Romans 14. And so it is to this day: what St Paul said to the
Corinthians 1 Epist. 3. 1, 2. every Preacher of the Gospel has to say unto the
greatest part of his flock, I, Brethren, could not speak to you as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you
with milk and not with meat, for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither
yet now are ye able. The Christian flock more partakes of the folly and
weakness of sheep, than the innocence. The faces of both tend to the earth,
intent on their pasture where they may range and feed with plenty and delight.
In the greatest part of Professors with their faith there is mixed unbelief, so
as sometimes to preponderate, for the most part to alloy and weaken it.

And here I promise not to prosecute those grounds of unbelief so far, as to
show how they make men able to resist and conquer all Christ's methods, how
they work them up into the confidence of professed infidelity and Atheism; that is
not my design, but plainly and in brief to name some causes of it, not in this
or the other party or persuasion, but in general, even in minds not ill
disposed, but such as our Confessor here in the Text, who tho he does profess
he did believe, yet withal acknowledges his unbelief, Lord help my unbelief.

Now tho it should be granted that the motives and the means of Christian Faith
are of themselves sufficient to convince the minds of men, that the Revelations
of the Gospel are from God, so far as that there can remain no place for any
reasonable doubt or scruple, nor by consequence plea for excusing them who give
not up their faith to it; yet notwithstanding all this evidence arising from
those means and motives, still many of the things to be believed are so
inevident, for they are Mysteries, and are wrapped up in such obscurity that they
astonish and affright apprehension, and while the mind is swallowed up in the
abyss of such dark contemplations, whatever light strikes in from motives, yet
the mind is mazed so, that, if it assent, it cannot be without suspicion and
some fear and tremulously: and difficulties often so distract the
understanding, that it cannot settle, but is loose and wavering.

Now as in the contests that often happen in us betwixt the temporal interests
and pleasures of this world and the eternal blessednesses of the next, in those
that are sincerely satisfied of the real infinite disproportion betwixt them,
yet if any present object that does flatter appetite with strong delight or
other satisfaction, chance but to surprise a man so far as that his present
whole attention be engaged upon it, and it be not called off, nor the will
apply the understanding to consider and compare the other interests, the
everlasting ones, and weigh them both together, it is certain he will yield
against his conscience to satisfy his sinful inclination; for to that his
surprised appetite applied him, and that application did determine him; there
being no way to resist the forcible assaults of present things that strike the
mind with vigor, if the will (some way excited) do not frequently engage the
understanding to contemplate on, advert to with intenseness, even with all its
might those blessednesses which God's promises propose to our belief, that so
the mind by reason of its constant conversation with them may not fail to call
them up on all occasions, and bring them into the comparison, and vie with any
present thing that does allure, and then those will preponderate without fail.
So in the other Objects of our Faith, the Mysteries, and generally in all
Objects whatsoever, where the understanding does not reach the nature, so as to
discern and look into the truth of them, if there be arguments that make a fair
show and flatter natural reason by complying with its principles, which opposes
that truth, and with their difficulties maze and appale the understanding, its
assent cannot be settled firmly on the truth, unless the will cause the
understanding to busy and apply it self so to the arguments and motives of its
credibility, that it find a principle whereon to bottom its persuasion, such as
that it can compare with, and oppose to those objections, and find reason to
adhere to it against them, such as this, God has said it: so that although on one
side subtle reasonings seem to commit a rape upon my understanding, and against
belief almost force my assent, yet on the other side God's own authority, of
which I have no cause to doubt, (if I advert sincerely to the motives of its
credibility, for we supposed that) is of strength sufficient to secure my
faith, and will never suffer it to faint at such objections, as I know arise
only from ignorance and want of principles to judge by, and from the
incomprehensibility of the Object. Now if the will do constantly engage the
understanding thus by frequent application to such principles, humane reason,
howsoever apt to be rebellious, will be easily subdued and brought into
captivity to the obedience of faith and our belief, will be unshaken; so that
the will is justly said to have a signal interest in, and influence on our
faith. To make which good I might produce Councils and Schoolmen, but it shall
suffice me that the Scripture says, that with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, Romans 10. 10. and it is required that man believe with all his
heart, Acts 8. 37. and it is called an evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God, Heb. 3. 12. and for that reason to believe is amongst God's
precepts, Faith is strictly commanded, and a great blessed reward proposed to
it, and Infidelity is threatened with eternal torments. Now commands, rewards
and punishments are such things as cannot be proposed but to the will, and are
not at all made to move the understanding, which must needs assent exactly as
it judges, and must judge according to appearances of objects; and you may as
well desire a stone to fall up to heaven, or the Senses to perceive that which
they have no sense of, as the understanding to believe against its judgment, or
to judge in contradiction to what appears to it. Now this being granted, that
the heart has such a vital influence upon our Faith, and that the will
contributes so much to believing, by prevailing with the understanding to
contemplate on, and frequently converse with, and with great advertency attend
to those Divine and Heavenly objects and the motives to believe them: it does
therefore follow

Secondly that whatsoever does engage the heart and take the will off so, as
that they do not cause this application of mind, that must needs weaken and
enfeeble Faith;for it withdraws that that should nourish and give vigor to it,
and makes way for unbelief. Now here alas, if I should only name the several
impediments upon this account, the avocations of the heart, it would be
endless. But to say nothing of particulars, whose state of life either through the
necessities of their condition or the troubles of it, or through a disorderly
uneasy temperament of body, or diseases, tho all or each of these may keep the
mind almost in a perpetual disturbance, or at least in great inaptitude to such
Spiritual application, if there be not strict watch kept to seize all lucid
intervals. But to pass these, and only touch at two Occasions in the general.
And the

First is the understanding, which if it be apt to be religiously scrupulous in
little things, as for the most part scruples rise about such only, whether
through weakness of judgment, credulity, and either little probabilities that work
upon that, or the arts of seducing Teachers, or else especially which is most
consequent upon any close affliction, scruples rise through applications of God's
judgments or interpretation of the incomprehensible procedures of his
providence, if these scruples come to work the understanding, so as that it
usually entertains the will with no proposals else, which happens very
frequently, and if it does thus even till the will delight it self in these its
self-tormentings, and engages the whole man in a continual converse with them;
so that he comes to love to aggravate his fears against himself, and wilfully
retains them, and dwells on them, will not be diverted from such thoughts,
which do not only with these their envenomed darts stab and wound the mind
perpetually, and the poison of them drinks up his spirits, but they wound his
Faith. As when those scruples are in great measure and grown strong, they use
to break out into blasphemies and desperation: so all less degrees also in
their proportion raise doubts in men, not as to their own condition only, but
God's Attributes, and works, and dealings with mankind, which corrupt and
ulcerate and poison their belief, and it becomes languid, feeble and unsteady.

But secondly that which universally takes off the heart or will from causing
this so necessary application to the objects and the motives of our Faith, is
the lower appetite with its passions. For in man's life that is so perfectly
dramatic, and in which the world is always shifting scenes, there happens such
an infinite variety of either prosperous delightful, or cross sad accidents,
which so goad and stimulate the affections, raise such ebullitions in the
blood, and such impetuousness in the motions of the appetite, that the will is
hurried along with them with a blind precipitation and a headlong fury; and by
consequence it fares so with the faculties upon the satisfactions of those
appetites. Now in this rout and confusion it is not possible the understanding
can attend to Spiritual applications, and if this happen frequently, then thus
it being frequently diverted, and its conversation with affairs of Faith much
broken off, seldom reflecting on them, and so being very unaccustomed to those
thoughts, all the impressions grow faint, languish and decay, the motives have
no force, and consequently the belief it self is loose, and scarce has the
assurance of a thin opinion, if it were examined: and of all this the
experience is so dreadful, that we daily see, if men go on so far as to indulge
their appetites habitually, that their minds being thereby taken altogether off
from the other contemplations, they come to have no love to them, no regard at
all, cannot well endure to think or hear of them; and are therefore given up by
God's just judgment, such as was foretold long since 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. to
strong delusions to believe a lie, even a lie of that eternal dismal
consequence that virtue and religion and the blessed expectation of it are mere
trumpery, and renounce those truths whereby they should be saved.

But I promised not to prosecute this to that height; it suffices we having
seen how the heart being by such means engaged, and ceasing to employ the
understanding upon heavenly things and on the motives to believe them, and the
faith of them does come to lose all vigor, not to be recovered if there be not
some assistance to the will, that may be able to take off that ravenous
inclination which it has to present satisfactions, and that gross torpid
stupidity it labors under toward future things, and withal excite and inflame
it with desires after that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, and
besides remove all those other impediments of our belief which I have
mentioned. Which assistance from what hand it is to be expected, and how it
effects all that, I must declare in the third place from those words, Lord,
help thou my unbelief.

Now that the birth and growth and strength of Faith (that Faith, I say, that
is effectual to salvation) is all from God, from the preventing and assisting
graces of his Spirit, is a Doctrine which the Scripture is abundant in. It is
the gift of God, St Paul says Ephesians. 2. 8. and Christ says, No man can come to
me, that is, believe in me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him John
6. 44. i. e. those preparations of the heart by which men are disposed to come
at God's call and receive his Gospel, when as others whom it is equally proposed
to, and who alike understand it, will not come, are the effects of his good
grace; and in that respect such are said to be drawn by the Father, and to be
taught of God, verse 45. and v. 64. speaking to his Followers, and telling them
that there are some of you that believe not, tho they had all the methods of
conviction, having heard his preaching, seen his miracles as well as others;
yet some of them notwithstanding not believing, he adds, v. 65. therefore I
said unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it be given him of my
Father. All the other means and motives, if alone, prevail not. I have planted,
Apollos watered; but it is God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. I need not
say this is the Doctrine of the Church of England, it is so of the Latin and the
Greek Church, and on this account of the necessity of Grace and the assistance
of God's Spirit in believing, the whole Church of Christ has universally
maintained a war against Pelagius and his Followers. It Is more expedient to
show what he does, and how he does proceed in doing it, how he removes those
hindrances of Faith I mentioned in each faculty both of the will and
understanding.

First as to the understanding, that he does enlighten and clear it into the
discerning of those Heavenly truths, appears, since David therefore prays, Open
thou mine eyes, that I may behold the wondrous things of thy Law, Psalm 119.
18. and the like v. 27. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts. It
should seem he apprehended wonderful miraculous dispensations in God's
discoveries of himself and of his will to man, besides those of his nature, his
transcendent goodness also in the pardoning our sins, in giving us such
excellent Precepts, in assisting us to the performance, in accepting our
imperfect Obedience, and in preparing everlasting blessed Glory to reward and
crown it. Now that he might discern all these so sensibly as to be ravished and
transported with them, so as that he might be wrought on to adore the blessed
Donor of all these, and cling to him and them with the close and inseparable
unions of Faith and love; he therefore prays that God would open his eyes,
enlighten and remove all those degrees of darkness that remained within him,
quicken and enliven all his faculties, give him a vital sense and relish of all
those things, make him understand them, that believing them he might adhere to
them. And since the Scripture says (I told you) that with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, so it also therefore says that God does give an
heart to understand, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. and the Lord opened Lydia's heart, that she
attended to the things that were spoken, Acts 16. 14. thus preventing unbelief,
which comes for want of such advertency, as I showed you.

And as to the Will (which has its influence, I proved to you) that God works
in us to will, is express Scripture Phil. 2. 13. And if we should but only put
the understanding in that case, wherein, as we before demonstrated, it is
needful that the Will engage it to make applications to these Spiritual
objects, when the man is not as yet biased or corrupted, but is only languid
and indifferent and unconcerned, yet then there is an absolute necessity the
Spirit cause it: for if the Will be it self a faculty indifferent and free,
there must be some prevenient proposal, thought, or motion, that may determine
or fix it; and to will what it ought, it therefore must have some good motion
or proposal, such as will prevail with it. Now such proposals and motions come
not from it self, the Will does not propose to it self, it cannot think or make
the motion, and the Understanding, which, as the case is put, does need a
resolution of the will thus to engage it, is not therefore qualified to make
the motion sufficient and of force; for then it could and would apply it self
without the Will's engaging of it: much less is it qualified, when the Will
drawn in by the affections of the lower Appetite has applied the
Understanding, as I showed you, to converse with sensual objects, and by doing
so it is altogether stein'd with their impressions and images, and has few
others to excite or entertain it self withal. In neither case, since neither
Understanding nor the Will is able, there is nothing therefore but God's grace
that does it by presenting objects and occasions, and disposing circumstances
so in soft and congruous seasons, as with the assistance of his overshadowing
and incubating on them, may be sure to hatch some inclinations and desires that
way in the Understanding and Will both. He does all by these means upon all
occasions of Divine truth heard, or read, or meditated on, by his applying
intimately to the mind the motives of believing, and to help the evidence by
breaking in upon it with his own illuminations, which discover to the Soul the
beauty of God's promises, make it see how infinitely advantageous they are to
it. Thus he fills it with those beauteous images, then backs the thoughts with
their allurements, so as that they love to hover and to dwell upon them; this
animates them into cheerful practice of all performances that tend to them:
then he scatters as it were some gleams of future glory, shedding flashes of it
in the joys of Conscience arising from the sense both of God's encouragements
and assistances to duty, and of the delights resulting from the faithful,
sincere practice of it: and by this joy quieting the Conscience, if it either
raise fears from the apprehension of God's dealings in these outward things, or
else if it be scrupulous in little things to the disturbance of his Faith, as I
declared, convincing it that conscience is not to accuse or else excuse but by
the measures of sincerity or insincerity in known real duty, not from the
events or dispensations of God's providence on one side, nor on the other, in
little things wherein there is no Law to guide us, and which only prejudice or
seduction can make doubtful, assuring us the Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, indifferent rites, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Thus, as St Paul says Heb. 6. 4. they that have tasted of
the heavenly gift, the comfort of the pardon of their sins, and consequent to
that the peace of Conscience, and v. 5. tasted of the good word of God, and of
the powers of the world to come, have intimate experimental relish of the
Gospel-promises; those powers of heaven, those omnipotent forces God has
prepared to cast down every reasoning or imagination that should rise against
the Christian Doctrine, and bring every thought to the obedience of it, 2 Cor.
10. 5. All which are said to be effected there in them who had bin made
partakers of the Holy Ghost.

By these means therefore he enflames the Will, sets it all on fire with ardent
love to God and his rewards, and consequently to his service in all the works
of Piety and Virtue, and endued with firm and settled resolutions of adhering to
him in faithful constant practice of all this. And thus Christ by his Spirit,
as he was the Author, the Beginner of the faith, by which he is styled Heb. 12.
2. so by the same he is the Finisher and the completer of it.

He was the Author, as that Testimony which the Spirit gave by miracles, did
evince the infallible certainty and the Divinity of the doctrine to the world;
for the Spirit is said to bear witness to it by those signs and wonders Heb. 2.
3. and those signs are called the demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
that which did irrefragably prove and demonstrate all the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and make certain Faith of it; and in this sense it is that Faith is
truly said to be resolved into the testimony of the Spirit. So also by the same
he is the Finisher, by the graces, the preventings and excitings,
overshadowings and assistings of that Spirit working in us, as we showed, a
firm sincere adherence to that Faith, and the obedience of it; which when it is
wrought, Faith has attained that height, and in that degree, that is to make
us capable of those benefits which Christ has promised to bestow on true
believers. The last thing I was to show, and withal whether such Believers in
that true degree can say with our man here, Lord, I believe, yet say too, help
my unbelief.

Faith, as the Son of Syrach does define it, is (...), the principle of
cleaving to God, that which knits and joints us to him: and St Paul says as
much, when he makes the formality of an evil heart of unbelief to consist in
departing from the living God; and to Faith by which the just must live,
opposes drawing back, slinking away for fear of danger or affliction, Heb. 10.
38. So that according as that cleaving and adherency must be firm and
indissoluble, so we are to judge of Faith.

But secondly it is certain this adherency must be without waverings, James 1.
6, 7. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for let not that man (him
that wavers) think that he shall receive any thing at the hands of God. A firm
and infallible assurance of God's promises, a confident expectation of a grant
to his petitions, tho the power of Prayer be almost omnipotent on that account,
What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and
ye shall have them, Mark 11. 24. yet those are not meant by Faith here; for the
person that is bid not to expect a grant is here supposed to think and to be
confident he shall receive it, but the Prayer here spoken to is for wisdom, how
to behave ones self in times of chance and danger or affliction for the truth's
sake, in these trials of his Faith, v. 3. Now that he may obtain that wisdom,
he is bid to ask for it of God, but he is also bid to ask it in faith, nothing
wavering, i. e. he must come to God for it with firm adherence to him, with
dependence on him only, and a mind resolved, whatever happens, to stick fast
to him and his commands and methods, not to labor or accept deliverance on
terms not allowed by God and a good Conscience, must not waver betwixt duty and
security, nor be double minded, so as to apply now to Christ and Religion, now
to worldly carnal politics. Such double minded men that have a mind to God and
their duty, but a mind also to safety, interest, or some other satisfaction,
are unstable, are divided betwixt two, not knowing which to turn to, now taking
one, now the other, do not stick to God, they are not faithful. It is not sound
Faith, where there is not a resolved and settled cleaving; such false-hearted
wavering ulcerates and gangrenes all.

But then thirdly, where there is that firm, sincere adherency to God and duty
with such a dependence on him, there is Faith that is effectual to the ends of
Faith; for this is true Faith, that works and is consummated by love, and that
begets an efficacious Hope, by that hope works out the purifying of our selves
as God is pure, and consequently does entitle us to see God, i. e. to the
beatifick Vision.

I know there are some, who besides this certainty of adherence do require an
absolute certainty of evidence, affirming there is no true Faith, but such as
stands on a clear resolution into Principles more evident and certain, than
those Propositions are which are made out to us by Demonstration, than any
Principles of Sciences, which Principles since they are more necessary than
that first one, that which is, is, and the contrary to them more impossible,
than for the same thing that is to be and not to be at the same time while it
is: by consequence they cannot but infuse greater necessity and certainty into
our Faith, than there is in the knowledge of those Propositions; so that it is
impossible for him, that is a true Believer, to say, Lord, I believe, help thou
my unbelief.

I shall not put it to the question, whether the Rule of Faith be firm and
immovable, or the Principle which true Belief must be resolved into, is most
infallible and necessary: for all those which resolve their Faith into God's
Revelation, and that make his Word the Rule, must needs assert all that; and
where it is affirmed, that the motives laid in second Causes by God's
Providence to persuade men to embrace the faith, must be such as of their own
nature cannot fail to conclude points true, if they mean they cannot choose but
be sufficient to conclude that they are such as ought to be believed, that is
assented to as true, I shall allow it; yea so far and in that manner as God
intended that they should conclude, that is by the assistant grace and
influence of his Holy Spirit, so far in that manner I will grant they could not
fail to be conclusive. But that God intended they should be conclusive to us
themselves with the evidence of such Metaphysical necessity, so that by
consequence they cannot but infuse a greater certainty and evidence into that
assent that must be given to the points of Faith, than there is in the Science
of those Propositions that are first in Science; and where there is not such
necessity, certainty and evidence raised by clear resolution into Principles
more evident, certain and necessary than those are, there is not that Faith
which is alone, is true; and consequently that all true Faith must assent with
the highest evidence, necessity and certainty. This, I say, may be granted,
when it shall be made appear how it is possible that God can variously deal to
men the measure of Faith, if every true Believer must needs have the greatest
fullest measure; or how any man that has Faith, and by consequence is certain
most infallibly, can be weak in Faith, or have his Faith increase, so as that
it may grow exceedingly and wax very strong, even till it come to full
assurance and plerophory: how all this, I say, is not impossible, if all true
Faith have essentially this plerophory, that highest, most infallible certainty
and evidence. But it is certain that God variously deals the measure of faith,
Romans 12. 3. that there are those who have Faith, and yet are weak in faith,
Romans 4. 19. -- 14. 1. that have their faith increased, Luke 17. 5. so as that
it does grow exceedingly, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3. wax very strong, Romans 4. 20. even to a
full assurance, Heb. 10. 22. Is it not therefore certain, but that he that has
true Faith may say here with our Confessor, Lord, I believe, help thou my
unbelief?

Moreover if those Principles and motives blazed with such an evidence, so
bright a luster, of so cogent a necessity, can any man believe that God would
think it needful to arm that necessity with strict precepts, fortify it with
the aids of his own Holy Spirit, and eternally reward Obedience to a most
invincible necessity? Dare any man imagine God could be so sportive in
commanding, as on pain of everlasting torment to engage us to believe, that
that which is existent is existent, or that the Sun does shine at bright
noonday, when we behold it so as that we cannot see it, ('it is our Author's own
instance?) or to assent to these must there be the graces and assistance of the
Holy Ghost? or to believe the Sun shines, when it does, is that a Faith that is
fit to be rewarded with eternal light and glory? In fine, since that the only
certainty of Faith which is effectual to the ends of Faith, is the certainty and
firmness of adherency to God and Christ, and to our duty, without which all
other certainty, however infallible, can but help toward our condemnation; and
since where the Holy Spirit and his Graces intervene not, howsoever evident men
fancy that their principles and motives are, their way of resolution
demonstrative, there will be no true Faith; and where he works with his Graces,
tho they were not so infallible and bright, yet the adherency is firm, the
Faith true and saving. Therefore there appears no evident necessity of such
pompous principles and ways of resolution of our Faith. For I would only ask,
for whose sake, and on whose account it is so needful that these motives,
principles and ways of resolution should be so infallibly certain, evident and
necessary? Those that do embrace the Faith sincerely and are saved, or those
that do not give their hearts up to it, and so perish in their unbelief? As to
these, since besides all arguments internal to the doctrine, outward testimony,
(the only argument in matter of fact) and that in behalf of Christians, it is
far greater and more pregnant than there is for any other fact that ever was,
such as humanely speaking, is impossible not to be true; nor could there ever
yet be found a rational exception or just ground of doubt against it: so that
it is impossible but they must be convinced in reason, that it is most irrational
not to assent. Those therefore that do wilfully resist their understandings and
their reason, and withal God's ordinary methods of conviction, and so put a bar
against his Graces and his Spirit, since much more than was enough was don for
them, they are without excuse; and since they did defy what was more than
sufficient in it self, and so resist God's methods also, there is no pretense
or reason for more helps of evidence on their account. As for the other, those
that give themselves up to the guidance of their light and reason and Almighty
God's convictions, and are made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, it is most certain
that his Holy Spirit will do all that is needful to complete their Faith, and
make it certain to salvation; so that there is no need on their behalf of such
self evidence of principles and motives to infuse such metaphysical certainty
into their Faith. And yet this certainty of Faith not only is the ground on
which alone is built Infallibility, wherever that is to be placed, for they are
not agreed about it and indeed there were no great need to assure their Faith
into such certainty; but besides poor we, because we do not take upon us to
assert dogmatically the necessity of such most infallible certainty, not only
are unchurch'd, but unchristen'd, concluded beyond all possibility of evasion,
not to have true Faith, nor be truly Faithful. An heavy imputation: therefore I
crave leave a little to consider it in one word, not desiring to reflect on
others, but to justify our selves; for in truth God knows, we would as
willingly go to Heaven as our Neighbors, where we know we cannot be received
without true Faith.

Now tho it looks unlucky that we should be doomed thus upon grounds, of which
the Founder is himself under censure for them, and his books that laid them,
damned even by his own Church, tho we are by virtue of their Principles
condemned as Heretics, because we come not into their Church which condemns
the Founder of these very Principles on their account; yet since however any
thing does serve their turns, provided it condemns us, it is not therefore to be
passed by. Now the ground not only of their Faith, but this their Confidence,
whereby they so exalt themselves and censure us, is the absolute certainty of
the living voice and practice of that Church, which resolves her Faith by this
Rule or Principle, not to believe, or teach, or practice any thing as of Faith
but what they did receive from their immediate Forefathers as of Faith, and saw
their practice of. For if this Principle were their Rule always, (and if it be
now, it must, they say, have bin so) then the Faith of each succeeding Age must
needs have bin the Faith of the preceding, and by consequence there having bin
no change, the Faith of this Age must needs be the same with that of Christ and
his Apostles. Now since in the resolution of our Faith we proceed not by this
Rule, upon this Principle we have no Rule of faith, nor certain resolution of
it, and by consequence no Faith. Now it appears at first sight fully evident
that this Rule of theirs does supersede and quite evacuate those Doctrines that
maintain either the sayings of the Fathers, or Decrees of Councils, or the
Definitions of the Popes, or the infallible Authority of the Church, whatever
that Church signify, has any part or interest in the Rule of faith, and very
justly so: for Fathers are but eminent Members of the Church, Popes can pretend
to be but Heads of that Church, Councils but the Representatives, and what
infallible Authority soever can be in the Church, that Church being the
Congregation of the Faithful, and those only being Faithful that hold the true
Faith: therefore till it be known which is the true Faith, it cannot be known
who are the ture Faithful, nor by consequence which is the Church, nor
therefore which is Head, Member, or Representative of it, or has that
Authority: and therefore before all, those men must have a Rule for their Faith,
whereby they may try which is the true. But when we say we have God's own
Revelation of his will what he would have to be believed, his Word, the
Scriptures, they add that since we cannot know which is the Scripture but by
the continued testimony of those that recommended it from the beginning,
neither can that be the Rule, which needs another Rule to establish it; nor can
that which is believed upon that other Principle of universal testimony be any
part of the Rule, since what is believed is the Object of Faith, and so
presupposes the Rule of Faith: and therefore we who make that to be the only
Rule, have no Rule, no not a part, tho the Trent Council do allow the
Scriptures to go shares with Tradition.

It Is easy to reply, that that which is the Object of that Faith, whereby we
assent to it, as a book written by such inspired men, or as a true historical
Narration, of which Testimony does assure us, may yet be the Rule of that
Faith, whereby we assent to Doctrines as revealed from God, which we believe
those are, that we find there recorded. And it were as easy to retort, that if
this arguing were good, men could not know that the Doctrine which Christ and
his Apostles orally delivered to them was from God, but by the testimony of the
Miracles they taught; therefore neither could Christ's or the Apostles oral
tradition, living voice, be a Rule of Faith to those Ages, since they were the
Objects of belief, and presupposed those Miracles as the Rule by which men did
believe what Doctrines came from God; nor can the Succession of Doctrine be the
Rule, for we know not the whole Succession but by the living voice of the
present Church, that does deliver Doctrine by the foresaid Rule or Principle.
But not to reply to this Scholastically, but suppose for their sakes, that
Scripture could be known to be the word of God no otherwise than by testimony,
yet that it might be the Rule one short familiar instance shall evince
irrefragably to the meanest understanding. We know the Books of Scripture are
entitled Books of the Old and New Testament, both Scripture it self and
Fathers giving cause for that expression. Now in making a man's testament, the
Testator's last bequests, or that which he last of all wills, as to the
disposal of his goods and possessions, is the primary rule, we know, by which
they are to be disposed off: and when that disposition and will of his is put
into writing, signed and sealed, that writing, or that Instrument is
secundarily the rule by which Legacies must be demanded, and upon performance
of conditions the Inheritance entered upon. Now possibly they that either demand
Legacies, or the Executors, yea the Heir indeed himself it may be know not
either hand or seal; however that the writing was in good deed honestly
subscribed and sealed by the deceased party, none can know, but who were
present, and saw or heard him declare and publish it: and if any are concerned
to be assured whether it be a true will, neither forged nor altered or
depraved, they can no otherwise be satisfied, than by their testimony. It is on
that account that men give credit to that will, from thence it is of force, and
afterward continues to be so as to all ends and uses of a Will, by being
witnessed and sworn to, that is, proved, and then enrolled and laid up in an
Office for that purpose, and by that becomes a firm Record, and as such is
there conserved. Now certainly no man is so far destitute of common sense to
say either the Witnesses or their Testimony, or the Office that conserves the
Instrument, or the Clerks and Registers or Judge of that Office is the Rule by
which the man's goods must be distributed, or the Rule of those things that the
Heir or the Excecutors must perform: for the man's last Will, I showed you, was
the prime Rule, that Will put into writing, signed and sealed, that is that
Instrument the secondary Rule of all that; and the Testimony, Office, Clerks
and Judge are but only means of bringing that Will to the knowledge of all such
as are concerned, the way of assuring the truth and uncorruptness of the
Instrument, and of conserving it entire for after uses.

The Application of this to Christ our Savior's Testament is easy. If by
Penmen, which himself inspired, he caused his last Will in disposing the
Inheritance of Heaven to be written, and what things he would have believed,
what don, all which he sealed with his own, God's Seal, with Miracles: and if
those Penmen and the other Witnesses, before whom he declared and published it,
did attest it, and gave it to the Church to be conserved there, and her Pastors
are perpetual successive Conservators of the integrity of these Records: it is
plain our Lord's Will here is primarily the Rule of Faith and Action, and
secondarily the Testament, that authentic Instrument is so: and the Testimony
is no more that Rule here than in the man's Will, nor yet than the prerogative
Office, nor the Pastors or the Head (if such an one there were) than the
Clerks, the Judge of that Office; nor all, nor any of these are the Rule it
self. The Testimony is but the means of conveying down to us the knowledge of
that Testament, and of the uncorruptness of it; and as far as that Conveyance
and that Testimony is assured and certain, so far they must grant the Faith we
give, that that writing is the Rule, must be assured and certain. And since all
the means and kinds of their Tradition make that very Testimony and Conveyance
of that Book, therefore all that certainty and that infallibility their faith
can have from those grounds, the same certainty and infallibility the faith we
give to that Book must needs have too on their own grounds. But it has more;
for since the ground of all faith must be testimony, and by consequence none
but Divine Testimony can be ground sufficient for Divine Faith, and that
Testimony was, I showed you, Miracles, wrought by the Publisher to confirm the
Doctrine, both which are in this Rule of ours. Therefore although that universal
Testimony, all their Tradition for it, which is merely humane, may be a
sufficient method of conveyance to derive all notice; as the first men's eyes
and ears that saw the Miracles and heard Christ, tho they be but humane senses,
were sufficient to them also, they suffice not yet to a Divine Belief, they
cannot ground that Faith which must be given to Divine supernatural Doctrines
upon a Divine Testimony, which Tradition is not, but our Rule has. So that the
resolution of our Faith is made by a Divine Rule, such as theirs pretends not
to be made by; and the mere conveyance of that Rule to us has all that
certainty and that infallibility, that they pretend their Rule it self to have,
and so we may have Faith, and may be Christians. But we are never the nearer
however: for if the Rule of Faith, if true, must be a means to make our assent
more infallible than Science upon Demonstration, and there can be no other such
Rule besides the living voice and present practice of that Church, which does,
and always did resolve her Faith into it by this Principle, not to believe or
teach or practice any thing as of Faith, but what they did receive from their
immediate Forefathers as of Faith, and saw their practice of, which most
undeniably renders their Faith impossible to be erroneous; therefore we that
own neither such a resolution, rule or principle, can neither have true rule
nor Faith.

But yet how fine soever and self-evident this Principle and Resolution appear
to them as speculators, if it were practically inquired into, it would appear
the weakest of all other. For first I might evince, that ever since the first
beginnings of Religion and mankind, while either they had no other rule at all
but this of oral, practical tradition, as in the first times before the Law was
given and Scripture wrote, their faith and practice grew all false and
diabolical; or when they had another rule, so far as they made use of this
rule, thereby that they did make void their own Faith and God's Laws, as the
Pharisees among the Jews: or lastly, when they had not an entire rule written,
as in the first Age of Christianity, while the Scriptures were not spread
amongst Believers, but they had the living and inspired voice of the Apostles
to resolve their Faith into, and by that Rule and Principle of oral practical
Tradition most perfectly, yet then the most execrable Heresies that ever
infested the Church, had their rise and growth.

Secondly I might demonstrate their Church did not always so resolve their
Faith, and by that Principle. Look through their Councils all from the beginning,
where their Church, sometimes the whole Church met together, either to confirm
the true Faith, or confound the false, and you shall find no footsteps of this
oral, practical Tradition, but of doctrinal enough. The Sayings of the Fathers,
and Decrees of Former Councils, and the Texts of Scripture, these they call
their Demonstrations.

Thirdly where there is most need still of a certain rule and resolution, there
this is unpracticable wholly; namely in all great divisions of the Church in
points of Faith. To instance in the Arrian contentions, where the World was
against St Athanasius, and St Athanasius against the World, and the Pope
himself Liberius was then Arrian, who could then hear and distinguish the
living voice of the Church? When the whole East was so universally and bloudily
divided in the matter of Images, one Greek Council defining against them, and
another for it; and the West as much, the French, Italian, German Bishops
presently in a great Synod declaring against them, and the British Church
particularly. Now I will not ask how it was possible the greater parts of the
whole Church should so at once have laid aside their infallible self-evident
Rule, and chanced together to forget it, should not once bethink themselves
whether they had seen their Forefathers practice that Worship or no, and heard
them teaching that they had received it too from their Forefathers: nor ask how
it was possible their Enemies should not mind them of it, if it were the
Churches rule, and had bin generally taught and practiced, and assure them by
their Principle how impossible that it should be erroneous. But there is not a
word of this in the whole two Nicene Councils, but some Texts of Scripture and
some Sayings of the Fathers, which no more evince the practice, than Tentordin
steeple does cause Goodwin Sands. But I will ask, how in the noise and the
confusion of both States and Churches, while wars and Anathemas thundered in
the quarrel, how it was possible poor souls could hear and distinguish what the
living voice and present practice of that Age was, which was so extremely
various and contradictory? Those that were then to be instructed in the Faith,
what could they hearken to? How could they guide themselves by that Rule, when
as in their Doctrines they condemned each other, in their practice murdered one
another? And when each party pleaded that theirs was the Faith delivered to
them, which should they believe? The major party. How should they know
infallibly which was? How be assured the major party is required? Why truth
must be on that side where the most are? What self-evident Rule had they to
judge of these by? Surely none. Accordingly it was not by this Rule, but by
being overpowered they received that Faith and practice.

Fourthly that it may appear in no case useful in the calmest Sunshine of the
Church, and when, if ever, they were all of one mind; namely before Luther,
when if ever there were any Article that the Latin Church was possessed of an
explicit belief of, it was that of Purgatory, as it is now held amongst them:
there was all expresses of an oral practical Tradition for it, and if there
were not, it is impossible to know when any Doctrine is received upon that
Principle, so that the Rule is frivolous as to practice; yet, as if that
Principle had owed the very Founder of it a great spite, he must go write a
Book against that Purgatory, which stood by his own Principle, for which he is
under censure by his own Church. But least this should seem only an Argument
ad hominem, I will urge only one instance.

There was a time when the immaculate Conception of our Lady stood by oral
practical Tradition, for in the public Liturgies of their Church it was
expressly owned and celebrated. For in their See also in the end of the Roman
Missal printed at Paris in a large 40. in the Prayers at the later end for the
Cloisters. etc. upon the Feast of the Conception, there called Immaculate. L.
Hor. Beat. 6. M. Paris 1534. p. 85.
Liturgy printed 1551. after a devout Prayer to the B. Virgin there is added
Ave, Hail Mary, full of grace etc. Blessed also be Saint Anne thy Mother, out
of whom thy virgin flesh came without any stain, immaculate. And again, Hail
etc. woman, blessed be thy Mother Anne, out of whom thou did proceed a Virgin
without any stain or sin. Once more in another Prayer, All hail thou most chaste
Mother of God etc. and blessed be thy Parents Joachim and Anne, out of whom thy
virgin flesh proceeded without stain, immaculate. The same too was defined
expressly in their Ecumenical Council at Basil in a session on purpose for it
c. 36. after long debate decreeing that she never had Original or Actual sin,
but was immaculate; and tho the Pope for other reasons, and not this
definition, would not confirm this Council, yet besides that by the way of oral
practical Tradition his Holiness is declared to have but one vote and no
negative; yet if his vote signify, Alexander VI. a little after gave ten
thousand years of pardon for all mortal sins, twenty for venial toties quoties
to all that said devoutly in that Worship of our Lady and St Anne the former
Prayer, Rubr. Now if the Church did not believe what was thus in her public
Prayers, in her definitions, which was the judgment of her Pastors, of the
whole Church Representative, but if somewhat else must intervene to prove what
is of Faith, the Rule is insignificant, it is impossible to know their Churches
Faith at any time. But we are bound to think they would not in their Solemn
Divine Worship own what they did not believe, and they could not believe any
thing by this Rule but what they did receive, and so their Faith and Practice
consequent must have bin always, and must be infallible. Yet we know that was
defined the Doctrine taken up merely to countenance the Worship that had
formerly bin given to the Blessed Virgin in the celebrating her Conception. For
since it always was the Churches Rule never to solemnize with a Festival but
what they did account was Holy, according to that saying of Epist. 174.
St Bernard, quo pacto festus habetur qui minime sanctus est? And accordingly
the present Church that does still celebrate it, also in her new Reformed In
Breviario Monast. Paul. V. P. M. auctoritate recognito verse. ad finem tertiae
lectionis in Festo Conceptionis ita se habet, sentiant omnes tuum Juvamen
quicunque celebrant tuam sanctam Conceptionem.
Breviaries calls it Sanctam Conceptionem; having therefore entertained the
Festival, they must needs entertain the Doctrine. And the forenamed Council
does expressly own this in defining it ut consonum cultui Ecclesiastico, in
that it was agreeable to that Worship which the Church performed in the
celebration of it. But if you would know how the Solemnity began, you may
receive it from themselves thus. A Canon of a Church in France greatly devoted
to the Blessed Virgin, returning home over the large mouth of the Seine in a
vessel alone from the other side, where he had bin committing Adultery with
another man's wife, and as he sailed singing the Hours of the Blessed Virgin, a
great troop of Devils drown his vessel and himself in the deep, and his soul
they dragged away to torments. On the third day, while they were tormenting him,
the Mother of our Lord came thither with a train of Angels, asking why they did
unjustly so torment the soul of her servant? Whom they answered that they had a
just right to it, for it was taken in its being about their employment: she
replies, if it ought to be theirs whose service it was in, then of right it is
mine, for you seized it as he sung my Mattins, so that you are guilty. Upon
which they fled and left it, and the Blessed Virgin brought his soul back to
his body and himself alive to shore, where falling at her feet he said, Dear
Lady, what shall I render unto thee for so great benefits that thou have don
unto me? she replies, I desire that henceforward thou commit no more Adultery,
least the later end be worse than the beginning; I desire moreover, that thou
would devoutly celebrate the Feast of my Conception yearly on the eighth day
of December. Good Lord! that singing Mattins to our Lady should atone for him
whose Vespers had bin offered up to a foul shrine, to his Paramour, celebrated
in the vile Embraces of his Neighbor's Wife? That the Blessed Virgin should be
so concerned for her own immaculate Conception, so indifferent, so easy, or
indeed indulgent to the gross Adultery of others? However, as it well became
him, he obeyed her and observed it: and upon two other such like visions so did
several others. But the Worship by all this was only private men's particular
devotions; therefore there was one more made to Anselme, who immediately began
it in his Priory, and being made Archbishop afterward of Canterbury made it
public, and then Innocent the III. did so in France, and so the Worship became
universal in their public Services; and to justify that Worship too, the
Doctrine of immaculate Conception was received into those Services, and then
defined in that great Council above mentioned. Had this but bin in one of the
dark Ages, it had certainly prevailed, but something checking with the doctrine
of the whole world that was more awake then, the Popes afterward, although they
kept the Worship up, durst not vouch the Doctrine for a point of strict Faith,
tho sought to by two solemn Embassies from two Kings of Spain, Philip III. and
IV. Now truly by the equipage, pursuit and carriage of the business one would
think they came to crave an Audience for some new Faith, as they were wont for
any extraordinary grant or dispensation: that at Rome they could decree
Divinity as they did Acts of the Conclave, and give out Articles as they did
Cardinals Caps, and make a new Creation for belief; for sure they did not send
that Embassy to enquire whether their own immediate Forefathers had so taught
them, and so forwards that there had bin always a perpetual succession. But tho
that would not do, it is evident there was a doctrinal Point defined by the
great Representative of their whole Church, and for some Ages received with the
Devotions and the Worship of their whole Church, and by consequence into their
Faith; for otherwise they gave Worship upon that account which they did not
believe: and it is also evident to sight, how doctrines did come in into their
Faith upon all least pretense of Visions, (the known way) some that were devout
men began a practice, after other some in power adopted and gave credit to it,
and then gave authority; by this means the practice in a while grew universal,
then became their Doctrine and their Faith.

Now I would know whether it was so, it came along to them by the way of oral
practical Tradition. If it did, it is not a sure infallible Rule of conveying
Faith; if it did not, then that Church did not still receive their Faith upon
that Rule and Principle or by that method, tho that they did so is their first
great Principle: and the great Master of that Scheme assured his Holiness it
was not possible to maintain their doctrine otherwise against the subtlety of
the English Heretics. And truly they that make the greatest noise amongst us
now, are fled to the last hold of it: but that indeed it does alone protest
Infallibility whether of the Church or the Succession of their doctrine by that
way of practical Tradition, and that is the infallible most necessary certainty
of Faith. But I shall say no more to this than what the grand Abettor of the
Principle has said in answer to himself, objecting what was to be said to them
that could not penetrate into his demonstrations, see the force and evidence of
that Rule and Principle, and yet have that Faith that is necessary to Salvation,
I shall give it you in his own words, as near as I can put them into English.
He says, there is a certainty derived into the understanding of these men out
of their will; for since they think themselves assured these truths were
brought down by the Church from Christ to them, and stand convinced of that
act, this is sufficient to cause their wills firmly to adhere to them, and by
that adherence to repel all difficulties and objections to which curious wits
are subjects. And whether the man see that the Authority of the Church which he
follows is of more force at least to him than particular objections in those
truths; or whether he thinks nothing at all of it, but rests steadfast in that
assent which his very ignorance caused, it is plain he has a certainty of will,
which in its way extends it self to the Government of his whole life answerably
to that his persuasion, and by consequence he has a certainty exclusive of all
doubt, and such as moves him to direct his actions all to God, that is, there
is in him that Faith which works by love. So he. Now hence it is evident by
his Concessions, first that there may be a saving Faith which has not that
infallible certainty arising from the motives, Guide, or Principle, or way of
Resolution. And that secondly a Certainty derived into the Understanding from a
Will that is piously disposed suffices. Thirdly, that there is this certainty,
where the Will firmly cleaves and adheres to God, relying on him with a
vigorous hope and trust, directing all the actions up to God and to his
service, and persevering in it to the life's end. Now this is all that I am all
this while contending for. It is not by self-evident or demonstrative methods,
or by an infallible Guide that he provides against men's unbelief; but when with
preparation, like our man here in the Text, in weeping earnestly we betake our
selves to him, crying out for help and direction, and applying our
understanding meekly to attend his methods, he disposes piously the Will to
entertain the gracious blessed Proposals of the Gospel with complacency and
heartiness, and from conversing with the experience of them to prefer them
before all worldly carnal things that used to bait our lusts, ravish our
hearts, and carry us away from God and from our duty: and it is against this
unbelief, in thus departing from the living God, that his assistances are
mainly levelled, and our Prayers chiefly are to be directed. For it is most
infinite madness to persuade and satisfy our selves we are of the true Church,
have the only true certain Faith, if yet our practices be such as set us at as
great a distance from Almighty God, as Hell is from Heaven; and while we do
commit such things, it is as impossible we can adhere to God, as it is impossible
for Christ to have communion with Belial. It is a Contradiction by ungodly
actions to defy God and turn our backs upon, and depart from him, yet to cling
and adhere to him; it is, as I say, a Contradiction to believe that we have
Faith, while we do not cling to, and adhere, but depart from him. Lord, help
thou this our unbelief. And if his grace but once dispose us to prefer the
blessed expectations of a Christian, he does easily prevail with us to cling to
them with such certain assurances, as will carry us through all the stages of our
life and duty, with all cheerfulness and constancy. This is that certainty of
Faith by which the Martyrs cleav'd to, and embraced at once the Cross and their
Religion, firm in dying as believing; and when with arts of torment they broke
all their joints and their limbs piecemeal, scattered all their parts asunder,
tore their souls out of their bodies, still they kept their Faith whole, and
their Tormentors could not tear one Article of their belief or Christian
practice from them: and when their Wills were once inflamed with the desires
and expectations of God's preparations, then no other martyring flames could
make them shrink. Those seemed to them but brighter Emblems of, and speedier
Conveyances to that Eternal Light and Glory, which their Faith had given them
the evidence and the first vision of: they knew by them they only did expire
into Everlasting Life and Glory.

SERMON XIV. THE CHRISTIANS LIGHT is to shine before men.
Matt. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
THE words have two parts, a command and a reason of it: the command, Let your
light shine before men; the reason, That they may see your good works etc.

The command affords to us this instruction; the life of a Christian is to be
fruitful and exemplary. Both these are commanded not only in the command it
self, but proved in the reason, That they may see your good works: there must
therefore be works, which are the fruits of virtue. Yea and fruitfulness is
every where required by Christ, and if we look upon the current of Scripture
and our duty, we shall find that it will not serve a Christian's turn not to
bring forth ill fruit, to be only barren ground, not to have vices bud and
sprout within us and grow with an increase of sin; but we must do good. In the
Parable of the Sower Matt. 13. 23. But he that received seed into the good
ground is he that hears the word and understands it, which also bears
fruit, and brings forth some an hundred fold. We are gods Husbandry, 1 Cor.
3. 9. Now is any of you satisfied with his field, because it plows well and
receives the seed most kindly, if it bring you no increase or crop, yield you
no harvest? No, says the Author to the Hebrews c. 6. 8. such ground is nigh to
cursing. Why your works they are your crop, your harvest; and when God shall
send forth his Reapers, the Angels, if they can find no returns of all God's
cultivating you, but all his husbandry, his seedness, and his pains too have
bin lost upon you, no increase, but only barreness, your end is to be burnt;
or only tares, they are to be cast into a furnace of fire, where there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matt. 13. 42. And in like manner by the
Parable of fruit trees Matt. 3. 8, 10.
John Baptist, Bring forth fruits meet for repentance; for the ax is laid to
the root of the trees, therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit
is hewn down, and cast into the fire. And David describing his blessed man
Psalm 1. does it, first by showing he does not bring forth ill fruit. But
neither will that serve turn to hear and meditate and talk of the word of God,
and not to do it. It is the very same thing as a wilderness upon the water
side, a dead barren tree upon the River's bank. No his man is like a tree
planted by the rivers of waters, that brings forth his fruit in due season. We
are God's Vineyard, Isaiah 5. and he tells us there, what pains he has
bestowed upon us, v. 2. He fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and
planted it with the choicest Vines etc. v. 4. What could have bin don more to
my Vineyard, that I have not don unto it? Now if we do not bring forth grapes,
Go to, says God v. 5, 6. I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard, I will
take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; break down the wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down. And I will lay it wast, it shall not be
pruned nor dug, but there shall come up briars and thorns: I will also
command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. Yea God did not only lay
wast his Vineyard in that Isaiah 5. because it brought forth sower and wild
fruit, but our Savior in the Gospel cursed a Fig Tree, because it brought forth
no fruit. And indeed that barren Fig Tree was the only thing upon the earth
that ever Christ did curse, all his Miracles were mercies, but that. An
unfruitful Christian is such a thing a Savior has no mercy for; a mere
negative virtue has so little claim to Heaven, that it cannot escape the curse
of a Jesus.

And shall we apply this, first to the conviction of their opinions, who think
if they lie under no gross customs, if they be not tainted with any foul
commissions, they are then in a safe condition? What if they forgive no wrong,
why they will do none, and so who shall lay any thing to their charge? Pardon
they will not any minute offense, because they avoid the wanting it from
others; and they will not hate nor malice, tho they cannot have the bowels of
of love, no fellowship of Christian kindness: they have no foul unclean heats,
nor no devout ones; no ardencies of lust, nor yet of zeal: so they do not
blaspheme God by daily oaths, make no matter of worshipping him by daily
Prayers; and if his holy name be not in their execrations, it is well enough tho
he be not in their Petitions. No tho they go a little further, and besides
their doing no gross ills have great Professions of Religion, they have all the
leaves and foliage of a Christian, they make a fair shell of Piety, take
abundance of pains to do all those things that are to style them great
Professors, plenty of hearing, and abundance of talking, but no doing: if you
search the leaves you find no fruit, no constant tenor of good works in every
kind of Christian duty; these are but too obvious stratagems of Satan and our
deceitful hearts to make us satisfy our selves, either with our condition, tho
our Piety look no further than to do no ill, and the positive part of Religion
be altogether unregarded by us; or tho we have no more of it, but the
Profession. O my Brethren, as to these last remember that the cursed Fig Tree
had leaves, had fair show enough to bait our Savior's hunger, and promise him
refreshment, and temt him out of the way to it: and to the other, has God
authority only to forbid, can he command nothing from us? Are we content only
to abstain from something for his sake, but will not do any thing for his, nor
Heaven's sake? Is not his Worship as dear to him as our lusts are hurtful to
him, and has he not as much reason to require that we should be devout and
holy, as that we should not be profance and filthy? Can all his mercies, all
his rewards neither procure nor deserve more of us, than only not to serve the
Devil? Surely, my Beloved, both these sorts of Christians shall find, that in
the catalogue of sins to be accounted for, omissions shall be reckoned, when
our Savior comes to pass his sentence at the dreadful day of Judgment. See the
tenor of it, Matt. 25. 41, 42.
Go ye cursed, for when I was hungry, ye gave me no meat. It Is not ye shall be
damned because ye stripped me, and because ye starved me, but because ye did not
relieve me. And it is so in the other, not bringing forth fruit, not doing fills
up the sentence of final malediction.

But the sadder conviction of this is for the practice of those that are
nothing but commissions, whose vice is positive, men that cleanse themselves
from holiness, and go on daily perfecting filthiness. If the man, Matt. 25.
that received the one Talent, and laid it up safe in a Napkin, and did no ill
with, yet because he did no good, was therefore cast into utter darkness,
whither, think you, had he bin cast, if he had made that Talent the instrument
of his sin, if like the Prodigal he had spent it upon harlots, or upon
excesses? And whither shall they be doomed, who do so? If it be not enough to
abstain from sin, what will become of them that do little else but act it? If
not to do pass sentence, how will to commit condemn? and if the half righteous
shall not be saved, 1 Pet. 4. 18.
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? If the tree with leaves, that was
green in foliage be cursed, shall not the dry and rotten one be burnt? Alas for
these men, what a long stage of duty have they to go through (if they do intend in
this life ever to be better) who have not yet set forth, have entered upon any
part; who have not Romans 13. 12.
cast off the works of darkness, which yet, when they have don, they have but
half, they must put on the armor of light, such too as will shine: they must be
fruitful and exemplary.

And this second quality is indeed the great design of this Text, which has
more force in it than that of a single command; for the verse is a conclusion
following upon the three former. He tells them that they are Salt, and Sun, and
a City, and a Candle, things that are visible or else diffusive of their
virtues, and then concludes Let your light, or rather, So let your light, as a
candle gives light unto all that are in the house; So do ye, Let your light
shine hefore men.

Light is set here for Christian Holiness and Purity, as I shall show you; and
that most fitly, because nothing so pure as Light, clear as shine and noonday,
nor nothing so diffusive, it shows it self to all: so that the thing meant by
it, is an open visible Holiness of Conversation.

Or secondly more especially to represent the Purity of a Christian Life; Light
is so clear, that it is set to express the very Holiness of God himself 1 John
1. 5. This then is the message which we have heard of him and declare unto you,
that God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all. And indeed Light was the
very first emanation of God in the Genesis 1. 3.
Creation, he said first, let there be light. And it is the most spiritual and
pure of all visible corporeal beings, its motions seem instantaneous, and by a
kind of omnipresence it fills the medium, and appears entire in every part of
it: yea farther, it is not liable to stain or sulliage, sunshine is as bright
upon a Cottage as a Palace, a dunghill as a bed of Roses; you may extinguish
light, but not defile it. No expression comes near the clearness of light, and
this our Holiness is to strive after.

But thirdly, most of all to represent the open visibility of Christian virtue.
Nothing is so easily seen as Light, for indeed nothing can be seen but by it:
in a moment it will scatter it self over the whole Hemisphere; yea Heaven it
self does not bound the Sunshine, and it passes through the Firmament. Even so
diffusive should our Piety be, shining before men, and like the Sun's light too
spreading into Heaven, shining before Angels, and making them rejoice. A
Christian is not to suffer any man to walk in the dark either of ignorance or
of sin, whom his knowledge or example may recover; he must instruct and
enlighten the mind, he must reform and enlighten the will and the affections.
His pious actions must be always shining in his eyes to guide and stir him up,
and every one must be Christ's star to lead to him. They that be wise, says
Daniel c. 12. 3. shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn
many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. Yea they are to shine so
as they may turn many, that shining being both their glory and their duty. And
St Paul tells how they are to shine Phil. 2. 15. Be blameless and harmless, the
sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation,
among whom ye shine as lights in the world. All men look upon you, and
therefore you are to give them good example. They are as watch-towers upon the
sea, that have lights placed in them to guide the Mariners into safe harbor, to
teach them how to shun the rocks: and this they are to do both by their own
practice and by reproof. Ephesians. 5. 11, 13. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reprove them. But all things that are reproved,
are made manifest by the light. When those foul acts that are don of them in
secret, are reproved by a man that has this Divine Light in him, then it
appears how foul and wicked they are, which the darkness of their souls would
not let them see. John 3. 20. it is set down as the property of light to
reprove evil deeds by discovering to them the ugliness of their courses, and
showing the fair example of a contrary life, to turn them from the evil of
their ways. This is to let their light shine before men.

Another expression is of a Candle v. 15. of which the ground is the same with
that of the other, the Light of the world, only the Type sinks a little. The
Light there had a larger Sphere; for the Sun gives shine to all the world, but
the Candle here gives light but unto all that are in the house, as our Savior
words it, or at least that are in the room. Now this Emblem was also very
necessary: the greatest part of men are of a lower rank and emploiment than
their example should have influence upon very many, or that their actions
should be called Sunshine; the acts of their calling are low, and so are those
of their Piety and Religion, not considerable enough to be viewed or looked
upon by many others; they are not any thing notably, and how then can they be
exemplary in their lives? They are too much clouded both in their fortunes and
their emploiments and their faculties to send forth any Rays, they cannot
shine. Why yet for these our Savior has a Type here in his Sermon, as also a
great part of his life was the very practice of this exemplariness in a very
low and ordinary condition. From the time that he disputed with the Doctors at
twelve years old, the shine and glory of which action may seem enough to have
temted one to show forth his light in an eminent manner, to have presently
undertaken emploiments, wherein he might have bin seen; yet till the time that
he was thirty years old he retired himself, and was subject to his Parents,
living with, and serving them privately at Nazareth Luke 2. 51. who, God knows,
were of a very mean condition, and consequently so was he, working with his
hands in a mean trade. Now all this while how did his light shine before men,
when it was immured in a Carpenter's workhouse? Why even then it did in
exemplary humility, great obedience, pious carriage, and virtuous diligence,
ordering his conversation in that very mean condition, so as that made him
gracious in the sight of God and of men v. 52. So that from his behavior in
that low estate men accounted him a very good person. And then, whosoever thou
art, be thou never so low, Christ has showed thee how to shine before men, as
he did, tho he were the Son of Righteousness. Thou can not be too mean to be
obedient, to be careful in thy service, to be harmless, never doing or speaking
ill of any body: thou can not be too low to be abased, nor consequently to
have occasion to show forth patience, meekness, and longsuffering, and
gentleness, those glorious, however humble, virtues. And this is truly to make
thy light shine before men. Tho thy example be not big enough to be looked upon
by a whole Shire, nor yet a Parish, nor a Township, thou can not be accounted
the light of the world; yet be thou never so little, thou may shine forth as
a Candle, give example to the Family in which thou art by those virtues of
being harmless. If thou have not so much Piety, so much Light as will shine
abroad and make a day, yet give a roomful of example, let none grope through
ignorance, or fall into sin in the house where thou do dwell, if thy small
light of knowledge can instruct, or thy good carriage and encouragements can
persuade him. And this especially concerns them that are set out to be Lights
to walk before them in knowledge: Husbands, Masters, Parents, or any others,
whose emploiment is to instruct or govern, of whom whosoever he be that by any
evil carriage of his own gives ill example to those he has to deal with, if
they follow it, (as it is not to be expected but they will) he multiplies his
guilt, and derives on himself all the sins that are his imitations. The vices
of all that follow him are all his retainers, his is a family of sins, and the
imitations of his Children are to be imputed to him; he is Father of villainy,
and has a whole offspring of guilt too: and all the sins that are don by his
example, will appear the same thing as the Devil at the day of Judgment, and
claim their Father; there the brood of iniquity will come and challenge him,
and there alike curse their Parent and the Devil to whom they equally, and as
accursedly relate, as those that joined to beget their vices, that have
destroyed them eternally, both Parents of their destruction. This is certain
hence, for he that but puts out the Candle, is accessory to all the falls and
hurts that the darkness causes. Now thy good Example is the Candle, which if
thou do not show forth, thou leavest them in the dark. And then if not to walk
holily in all thy actions be a thing of so much guilt, it would be worth the
sad serious consideration of every man, whom any others do but hear or look
upon, especially if those whose age makes them capable of little else but
imitation, to bethink themselves that every oath or curse of theirs may teach
some others, every obscene word may stir up others lust, and instruct others
what to learn hereafter: every passion, every drunkeness may make the ignorant
believe those sins are not so foul, which are so customary with those that know
more than they do, and by often seeing them may be invited to them; and so for
other sins. And if they do, how many sins shall they have to answer for,
besides their own, which, God knows, are an infinity, too many? What an
invitation may one take for this from that happy consideration, that an
innocent carriage, an holy Example does contribute to the blessedness of all
the Souls that look upon me? Let others take delight to entertain the desires
of those that keep them company with the pleasures of sin or vanity, to furnish
them with instruments of delightful folly; but let me be instrumental to their
being happy to eternity: I had rather be a lover of their Souls, than of their
mirth. Let me be useful to the glory of my God, and the Salvation of those that
are about me; which certainly I am in a good measure, if I can but have a care
of approving all my actions so, as may give others no occasions to sin, but may
effectually attract them to my profession. Then I do cooperate with the Blood
of Christ; for that was poured out to buy men from their vain conversation,
from which if my Example will but help to reduce them, I shall save Souls, and
in my Light they shall see a Light of everlasting Glory on themselves, and my
Light also will shed Glory toward God; for so I glorify my Father which is in
heaven, the reason of the precedent command.

And this is incumbent especially in a dark season, such as this to which we
are condemned; wherein to say nothing of those mists of error in which the
generality of us are lost, engaged in a confused crowd of Religions, tossed up
and down with a tumult of pretending opinions, and either wholly in the dark,
or having only false lights that do misguide us, so that we know not which way
to get out. Omitting these, there is a grosser darkness does inhabit with us,
such as that which makes Hell the Region of utter darkness. It Is not ignorance
but wickedness that dwells there, and that is the Region not of mistakes, but
of impiety, and we go on in such a constancy of works of darkness, as does
require an everlasting night to cover, and go on in such a fearlesness, as if
that night could hide us from that God, who clothes himself with light. And
what is the duty in relation to such a season? You have it Phil. 2. 15, 16.
That ye may be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke,
unblemished in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom shine
ye as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life. A severe harsh
injunction, that man must therefore have the stricter care that his life be
blameless and unblemished, must therefore be more forward in devotions and holy
performances, because most men about him are far otherwise, because he lives
among loose people. The contrary indeed might prove a good encouragement to
live a blameless life, because I live amongst harmless holy people; for then
what provocation have I to be otherwise? Besides the shame of being otherwise
among such would abundantly restrain me, when if I did commit any enormity I
must be looked upon as a stain and blemish in the very beauty of Holiness, look
like a Negro in the midst of glorious beauties, as a dash of Hell in the
Landshape of Heaven: besides this, it is easier to be harmless among those that
are so. If the generality of persons were truly pious, how could any one almost
be otherwise among them that are so disposed, as neither to provoke, nor give
admission to a sin, where every one is so truly meek as to bear any thing, and
yet every one so virtuously just as to offer nothing unfit; such humble
patience as to entertain any cross, any vexation quietly, and yet such meek
true-hearted charity as not to give any? Indeed if every body that one has
occasion to converse or deal with were a full Christian, there could be no
discontent at all, Heaven would be upon Earth: and then if I were in the midst
of such a Nation or People, there were Argument enough to make me harmless,
both because I should have no occasion to be otherwise, and because I must be
so, that I might be unblemished. But a perverse and crooked Generation as it
deserves no kind of dealing but its own, to return them the like is but just
dealing one would think, and only recompense, not injury. So not to do is
almost impossible: perverseness is so great a goad, that with the froward thou will show thy self froward, says David to the Lord Psalm 18. 26. and then to
tell me I must be harmless, because I live in the midst of a perverse and
crooked Generation, looks like a very unreasonable reason. This is the sense of
men. But truly this is to discourse against Text, and perfectly to go against
that duty which the Scripture does so strictly enjoin upon those very grounds
for which they refuse it. This is so far from doing without disputing, that we
would reason our selves out of our obedience with those very reasons, for which
God says we should obey. And truly very justly; for when is any use of light
but in the dark? It Is then most time for us to shine, when there is nothing
else but works of night about us. When thou art engaged in the conversation of
those profane people, or by any occasion cast into the company of them; when
either custom, or passion, or carnal inclinations make them without regard of
God and Piety transgress or break one or more Commandments, if thou be a
Christian, and consequently pretend to those things here which Christ says
every Christian is, if thou be a Light, then God has cast thee where there is
some business, some emploiment for thy light; and truly that has several
things to do in such a case. One is to reprove Ephesians. 5. 11, 13. And truly as to
this duty of reproving, that is if the persons offending be such, as either are
my charge, or such; as preserving that respect that is due to Authority and
distance, I may speak to freely, then clearly to reprehend them; or if they be
otherwise, then by some humble gesture or other meek manner to give them to see
that sense I have, and every Christian ought to have of their sins, and that
tho I respect their persons, yet I dislike and detest the crime, is such a
piece of Piety, as if there were no other engagement to but that of Friendship,
methinks it should prevail with me. For should I see my company that I pretend
a kindness to, or any of them that I call friend, going to drink a cup of
poison either heedlesly or in an humor, or stab himself in a frolic, when
probably by speaking I might hinder it, at leastwise I may hope to do somewhat
toward it, if I but beg them to be kinder to my friend, and not to stab or
poison him that I have a kindness for, not to destroy my friendship; shall I
think I have a friendship for him, if I would not so much as make essay to
hinder it, but let him take this course of ruin? Shall I say, I have a kindness
for him, when I would not so much as mind him of that precipice he stood upon
the edg of, nor offer to desire him back? Or is it indeed more friendship to
pledge him in the dagger or the poison, or when I see him at the brink of
headlong destruction to thrust him forwards, and to throw my self down with
him? This is indeed the way of the world's kindness, but God deliver me from
such a friend, I can have legions of such as those in Hell: the Devil has bin
showing me such kindness constantly ever since I did know what sin was,
offering me the company and the delights of sin, urging me forwards to them. No
sure I that should think that man had scarce affection for me, who would not
tell me to prevent a little danger, or a mischief; or that should but see a
great unhandsomness about my habit, or foul stain upon my face, which probably
would make me laughed at by the company I was then going into, and should not
care to give me warning, should much less think he loved me that would not tell
me of a spot or deformity, which would render me hateful to God and all the
holy Saints and Angels, nor come to keep me from eternal condemnation. I think
he loves me most that labors heartily to do me most good, and he that endeavors
to make me blessed, does that. And truly can you tell me what other very great
use there is of friendship (which yet is one of the greatest desirables in this
world) besides this of having one that will heartily mind the making of me
better, and so helping me forwards that which is infinitely and everlastingly
my greatest concernment? All other uses may be had without it, but a faithful
Monitor, a Reprover cannot be had without it. The benefit of such reproof,
where it is followed, is the worthy issue of such an excellent thing as holy
friendship, God-like love. And indeed the kindness of reproving befits well the
most bosom-friendship, that it tied by the utmost engagements of this world.
This where it did speed (and they that love in earnest will desire and labor
that it may) would be sure to breed a kindness as lasting as their Souls, they
need feel no decay of it, while there is an Heaven to reward the good success
of such Reproofs. And a much greater kindness too 'twould be than any little
carnal endearments, and the merits of mutual delights beget common interests,
and common pleasures, and common children are not like common salvation; when
one of these pairs shall look upon the other as the Angel that watches over him
to keep him from from falling into evil, as Lots two Angels that took him by
the hands to hurry and to force him out of Sodom: as one to whom he does not
only owe his share of the comforts of this life, but the comforts of Religion
and the Hope of Eternity. This must cement beyond all carnal Unions; and he
that evermore has a friend whom he dares trust, and has no interest
disjointed from his own, would give a commission, and desire that friend to
reprehend him in whatever thing he sees amiss: however I may be passionate at
the time, yet let this be your warrant; do it, I may think on it afterward; do
not let me be ruined, because in that hot moment I would be angry to be saved;
if you love me, love my happiness, and not the satisfaction of an instantaneous
passion, or the letting me enjoy that present folly. Rather than see me hot
with anger, will you see me dwell with everlasting burnings? When I come to my
self, the heat will change into devout, and into loving warmths; and if I do
recover by it, both our Souls at last in one close Pyramid of zealous and
affectionate Flame will mount to Heaven.

Now I have said all this, and do consider that by almost all the world
reprehensions and kindnesses are thought two very distant things, I know not
whether all this will signify much, nor may be would it more, if I should press
this property of Light, this kind of shine that a Christian is bound to,
reproof of whom them he sees sin from the reason of the Text, the glory that
will accrue to God by it. When in a loose and vicious company a Sinner does run
on in a full carrier, transgress without a rub, if there be no one there that
is fit, and dares own Piety and the Lord of it, they are quite put out of
countenance, and vice becomes creditable in that company; and accordingly you
may see many that otherwise are not very apt to sin, yet then they will offer
at little Atheistical beginnings of it: they will endeavor, because they will
be in the fashion of the company. And this is one of Satan's advantageous
seasons, when as we see if there be but one by of a sober and discreet virtue,
that dares speak meek reason, or dares when they do swill their Souls in filthy
folly of one or other sort, or are loud in the rants of vice by disliking
gestures, let them know that such unclean entertainments are detestable to a
sober person, or withdraws abruptly, and by such a departure shows, that he
scorns to stay to behold or hear such impurities; this often does not only
hinder those beginners, take them off that would have bin dabbling, but does
sometimes a little damp the progress of the most professed Sinner. It is a
bridle to his neck, he will not march so furiously in his carrier of oaths, or
of obsceness, or whatever other sin; he does not indulge himself so full a
license: and so by this means God gets some respect, and Religion a little
repute, when they see it has some followers, and God has some that will not
see him dishonored. And truly, my Brethren, do but consider what a storm it
does use to raise in any man to hear an absent Friend or Relation abused, or
evil spoken of. If we be in any degree of them the world calls Gentlemen, then
nothing but the sword must make return to such a word, nothing but life and
soul can answer, nothing but blood and death repair: and it is this resentment
we, in whose company the disgrace was offered, think ourselves more concerned,
than that Friend that was the subject of. And then methinks you should not
think it strange, if there be some that do believe they have so much relation
to God, and that he has approved himself to be so much their Friend, they
cannot but take it unkindly, and speak, when they hear him affronted, and see
him dishonored. And methinks too it should not be unreasonable to expect this
from all of us to whom God has bin Friend enough, that we should do this
handsome, this noble glorious thing, as to right the Lord in companies where we
are, and to credit our Maker; and not let vice exalt over him, where we shall
chance to be. Truly, my Brethren, this is the least that God has reason to
expect from us, even the reproof of our words, that of our open holy lives, by
which as the wicked say in Wisdom 2. 12. The Righteous do reprove their
thoughts, and upbraid them with their offending the Law, and object to their
infamy their transgressions. This is strictly and to an high degree required by
God of every one of us, that we may have influence upon others, to be open and
exemplary, to shine before men, that they may see our good works, and glorify
our Father which is in Heaven, which was the reason of the command, and the end
of our very being. Now to God the Father etc.

SERMON XV. OF THE ACCEPTED TIME, the Day of Salvation.
2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of
Salvation.
THE words foregoing, of which these I now read are the application, run thus:
for he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation
I have succored thee; which God saying in the 49th of Isaiah 8. signified as
in the type, and in relation to the Church and Nation of the Jews he had days
of Salvation, fit and proper seasons to deliver them from their affictions and
calamities, (for Salvation often signifies that) had his (...), tempus
placentiae, time of grace, wherein he was well pleased to hearken to their
cries and wants, and in those he heard and succored them: so in the Antitype,
and in relation of the Christian Church and all the Members of it (for of these
St Paul here uses it expressly) he has his accepted time, days not only for
such temporal deliverance, of which some will have the Salvation meant here,
but much more for Salvation Eternal. But then as Kings, when they publish acts
of grace and oblivion, do not only set and appoint, but limit out the time for
Subjects to come in, submit and return to their fidelity and allegiance, which
if once elapst, they are incapable of benefit by any such grant, cannot at
least plead it: so it seems God does too, and it is not sure that whosoever, at
what time soever, calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10. 13.
but, as King David told him, they shall make their prayer to thee in a time of
finding Psalm 32. 6. in a time when his good pleasure it, the very word here
Psalm 69. 13. and this time St Paul restrains here to the present now, meaning
not only in the general now in times while they are under grace, are in the
Covenant of it, and when the dayspring from on high has visited them, and
while they had the Gospel, that word of this Salvation: for whilst men live
under this gracious dispensation, they may let the opportunities of laying hold
of it go by them; while the light of the Gospel shines upon them, yet the day
of Salvation may be quite gone out, of which St Paul here seems sollicitous for
his Corinthians who had received the Gospel, least yet they may have received
that grace in vain, and the Salvation should escape them. To prevent which,
says he, there is no other sure way but by seizing on the present, Behold now
is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation: so that the words afford
these subjects of discourse.

1. There is a time wherein we may be certainly accepted if we come to God, and
there is a day of Salvation offered us.

2. This time is limited, it is a day of salvation, consequently we may possibly
outstand it, and may suffer it to pass irrecoverably.

3. The only sure way to prevent that, is to lay hold on the present, to begin
now.

1. There is a time wherein we may be certainly accepted if we come to God, and
there is a day of Salvation offered us.

The Text does make sufficient proof of this, for if the accepted time be now,
and if now be the day of salvation, then there is such a day and time, which
our Lord commanded to be preached to every humane creature in the world. Indeed
the preaching of the Gospel is nothing else but publishing this truth, the
Gospel being but a tender of Salvation upon pardon of whatever we have don
amiss, and the accepting us, whenever we repent and truly turn to God,
believing on him, and resolving to continue faithful to him, and all this
assured to us by Covenant, such as God himself both made and ratified in the
blood of Christ; and to prevent exception, since he gave command to have this
Gospel preached to every creature Mark 16. 15. and our Church does teach us in
her Articles, that we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be
generally set forth to us in Holy Scripture, there is no pretense for
controversy with a Preacher of the Gospel, who shall publish there is such an
offer of Salvation made us all, a time wherein we may be sure to be accepted.
Yea more, not only to ascertain but to work effectually this acceptance,
howsoever wicked and rebellious we had bin, he sent his Son, the Son of God to
be incarnated to treat a Reconciliation; for so chapter 5. 19. it is said, God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself not imputing their trespasses.
For this he made him shed his blood upon the Cross, and die and live again; for
thus it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, that Repentance and
Remission of sins might be preached in his name to all Nations Luke 24. 46, 47.
Yea for that he gave this crucified Jesus all the Glory, Majesty and Power of
Heaven; for him has God exalted to his right hand to be a Prince and Savior to
give Repentance and Remission of sins, Acts 5. 31. A wonderful Economy if we
reflect upon it, and sufficient to astonish both our faith and apprehension
also, that the Great Creator and the only Lord of all things should make God
man, and then ignominiously suffer a most cruel death that he might mediate and
purchase for us terms of this acceptance and salvation, and make that
ignominious sufferer, that dead man God, and give him all the Power of Heaven
and Earth, that he might make us fit for, and bestow it on us. This strange
transaction is no argument at all most surely, that to be at peace with us can
be of any consequence to him, to whom felicity is most essential. Lord, what is
man that thou art thus mindful of him, and the son of man that thou so
regardest him? in whom, if we look through him, we can find nothing in the world
that is very notable, but only that he can defy his most Almighty Maker, so as
nothing but the blood of such a Mediator could be fit to satisfy for, nothing
but Eternal Hell fit to revenge; and can defy his own concerns and interests so
far, as to make that Eternal Hell his choice, his most deliberate option. But
however the Economy of this so strange a mediation, tho it cannot prove God is
concerned at all to have this Reconciliation wrought with us that we should be
accepted and be saved; for Job 22. 3.
is it any pleasure to Almighty God that thou art just? or is it gain to him
that thou make thy ways perfect? Job 35. 6, 7.
If thou be righteous, what give thou him; or what receives he of thine
hand? If thou sinnest, what do thou against him; or if thy wickedness be
multiplied, what do thou to him? yet of how much the less consequence we are
to God, it is so much the greater demonstration of his infinite benignity and
goodness, who when he had no one motive in the world but pity to our lost
condition, was so bountiful, that when all the compassion of Divinity would not
serve our turn for the provision of a ransom, he took in Humanity, that God
might give somewhat besides himself to purchase us a time of Grace, and a day of
salvation.

Yet more, if we should trace him in his several ways of mercy which he
constantly pursues those wretchless creatures, miserable us, in, that all that
may be effectual and succeed to our Salvation, we should find he uses all means
possible to engage us to accept of it: for not content with all his Son had
don, he ordered a Succession of men to solicit the same suit to the world's
end. What God was in Christ doing, that he has committed to us the ministry
of; Now then we are Embassador^s for Christ, as if God did beseech you by us;
we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. a little
before my Text (...), says Tom. 3. p. 611.
St Chrysostom, when he that had obliged us infinitely, our Almighty
Benefactor, and had bin as infinitely affronted and provoked with all
ingratitude imaginable and all possible defiance, gave his own Son to be
reconciled, and when they murdered that Son when he came to mediate, and were
so far from kearkning to him, that they crucified him, (...), one would think
'twere time to leave such to themselves, and give them over as things hopeless
and irreconcilable.

No, he sends others on the Embassy and will not let it fall; with all the soft
and lowly arts of invitation they must pray you, and in Christ's name beg of
you, and God does beseech you by them. Now did he please out only to
expostulate it with us, why we will resolve to be at enmity with him and
Salvation too, why we will die for ever; it would argue a concern for us, the
apprehension of which ought to be very comfortable to us: but when God descends
to beseech us, (the expression looks uncouth indeed, but yet it is not strange
he should entreat that which he died for, beg of us what he asked for not with
importent weak tears, but with strong cries on the Cross, with the bloodshed of
his own onely-begotten Son;) when he thus conveighs his importunate entreaties
to us, that we would endure his kindness a (...) own eternal Blessedness, would
suffer ourselves to be saved, it is impossible there can be more assurance
given he would have us be so, that it is offered us and we may be accepted. Nor
did he send these his Ambassadors as bare petitioners with emty importunities
and mere entreaties of this, but they strengthen these proposals with exceeding
great and precious promises, as St Peter calls them Epist. 2. 1. 4. promises
both of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, St Paul says 1 Timothy
4. 8. yea and these as sure as that there is a God that made them. Neither are
they wanting to inform us of the dangers we most certainly incurr if we refuse
him, merely to affright us to him, to incline us to admit Salvation rather, and
prefer it before everlasting misery: and all this by his express commission,
they being set by God as watchmen to give warning to the wicked from him, as
he tells Ezekiel c. 3. 17. And least their discourse should be too faint, and
not have force to move us, God does frequently step in himself by providential
acts; when unsubduable by Reason or Religion, deaf to our very interests we
pursue our sinful satisfactions with ungovernable fierce carrier, he lays a
Cross on us to trash us, or lets loose a fever at us so to bring us low and
make us sensible; or else he suffers our own evil counsels to entangle us, we
are caught in our own machinations and designs, he lets us taste the bitter
fruit of our own doings, and our sins pull down calamities or mischiefs on us
so far sometimes as to scare us with the landshape of their after expectations;
having thrown us on the brink of destruction, laid us at the gates of the
grave, at the very mouth of Hell, where if God had left us, we had bin sealed
up, determined to the irreversible retributions of our iniquities; but he
interposed to snatch us thence and set us further off, so to enlarge our time
to be accepted in, and to lengthen the day of salvation to us. I challenge
every man's experience to attest this, there is no man but his heart heart
witness to it; and to this too, how when we have thrown our selves upon
temtation, he is pleased to blunt or turn aside the edge of it: how often have
we put our selves into those circumstances, wherein thousands have miscarried
as to all considerations both of this world and the other? And inevitably we
had don so, but that he was pleased to temper the malignity of the occurrences
and divert the mischief, merely that he might preserve us for his
opportunities. It is for this he watches over us, as he tells Jeremy 31. 28.
when as, God knows, we are so far from importuning him to do it that we think
not of him nor of our selves, do not so much as ask his cares, indeed neglect,
affront them, yea deny them; yet he spares us for these blessed purposes, and
is long-suffering to u^-wards, not willing that any should perish 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Spares us that if possible he may find softer seasons wherein we may be more
pliant, take impression more easily; therefore also he provides often such a
state of things as may be more effectual, more prevailing with us, as if indeed
he waited for the time of our good pleasure, when himself should be acceptable
to us, and his motions received by us. Yea and that they may be so, with these
external methods there are also inward excitations and assistances afforded us.
That he may both find and make these congruous seasons, he is either trying or
soliciting and importuning frequently our very hearts, Behold, I stand at the
door, and knock, says he Rev. 3. 20. if any man bear and open, I will come in
to him. It Is he, it seems, that waits to be admitted, and waits long too,
(...), I have stood knocking, and am there still doing so. Your hearts however
barred against me by your contumacy, otherwise I that have the key of David and
that opened Lydia's heart, could not be kept out; but although it be so, yet I do
not pass by or stand at them unconcerned expecting whether you will open and
admit me, but I knock importunately and unwearied, by disquieting men in their
Lethargick state of inconsideration and insensibility, by exciting apprehension
to reflect upon their duty and their practice that is so distant from it and
the danger of that; I attemt to rouse their Conscience, if so be when that is
waked and troubled and affrighted, it may possibly prevail with them to be
content to let a Savior in. Nor is he satisfied with standing still so, and
expecting; for God is that very Father in the Parable, who when the Prodigal
had wasted among riotous men and harlots all his portion, all the obligations
of his Father's kindness, but at last made sensible by the extremity of want
and hunger, and not able to find any sustenance elsewhere, then resolves on
returning and acknowledging his fault, when he was yet a great way off, saw him
and had compassion on him, did not stay his coming, but ran out to meet him,
and fell on his neck to kiss him; yea fell lower in his kindness than the Son
in his humiliation and acknowledgments, accepted him to all the dearness that
relation enhanc'd by the recovery of what was lost and hopeless could pretend
to. He is that Shepherd who went out to seek that lost sheep that ran from him,
and that thought not of returning, who sought till be found it; and when it was
wearied so with wilful straggling that it could not come back, carried it on his
shoulders rejoicing. And now judge* I pray, between God and the Sinner, whether
he have not Salvation offered him, and whether there be not a time wherein he
may be certainly accepted if he come to God; when (in fum of that which has
bin said) it is plain, to preach the Gospel to us Sinners is to proclaim this
acceptable year of the Lord, it is to tender us Salvation purchased for us, and
confirmed to us by the blood of the Son of God, which Son of his, God, was
incarnate, crucified, raised, and exalted to be Lord of Heaven and Earth to
work it out, and to bestow it on us; and to direct us in attaining it he keeps
a standing Embassy of men commissionated to advise, premonish and solicit, to
encourage to it, represent the dangers, if we follow other, our own counsels,
and he suffers us to run our selves into some of them, that the taste may make
us sensible: and however we pass him by scornfully, and make no applications to
his Providence, but despise his cares of us, yet he delivers us to give us more
time that we may not perish, yea diverts temtations when we seek them, or
defeats the mischief of them when we throw our selves upon them and himself
invites, beseeches, temts us, finds or else makes congruous seasons, and
contrives such circumstances as may press, in fine, importunes, knocks and
calls on us, and runs out to meet us, follows us, seeks till he finds us,
carries us home to him. And what could have him don more to the Sinner, that he
has not don* And what we thus have seen him doing for particular persons, that
he does much more unweariedly for Nations, in whose undisturbed tranquillity
and good righteous Government the Godliness and honesty, as well as wealth and
quiet of particular men, St Paul says, is concerned: since in careless and
loose Governments, and disturbed and broken ones men equally grow vicious,
dishonest and ungodly; and in too great calms as well as tempests are apt to
make shipwreck both of Faith and of good Conscience. Therefore God expresses
his concern for Nations in most passionate words, He rejoiceth over them to do
them good with his whole heart and with his whole soul Jer. 32. 41. and when
the importunity of crying National enormities, and that are so far from being
punished, they are not discountenanced, enforce him that he can forbear no
longer to endeavor by some chastning to reduce them, yet in all their
affliction he is afflicted Judges 10. 16. Zech. 2. 8. Acts 9. 4.
Isaiah 63. 9. and tho he correct them, yet he suffers, having all the bowels
of a tender Parent to them, and cries out in most lamenting wishes, O that my
people would have hearkened unto me! for if Israel bad walked in my ways, I
should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries, Psalm 81. 13, 14. And our Savior in like manner, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee,
how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, Matt. 23. 37. Although thou will endure no Envoies
from me, no reconciliation, but against all Laws of Nations, which men do
observe to all men, murderest all those Ambassadors that come from me, thy God,
to treat it with thee, yet how often would I my self have saved thee at the
approach of imminent dangers? God does beseech the liberty of doing it, however
obstinate they are against it. All the day long, says he, I have stretched
forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people, as St Paul expresses
it Romans 10. 21. and himself says, I have spread out my hands all the day to a
rebellious people, Isaiah 65. 2. spread them out in entreaties and assistances,
to give them help and to beg of them they would receive it. We know when Exodus
17. 11.
Moses stretched forth his hands for Israel, (in Prayer says the Chaldee) God
still heard, and Israel prevailed against their Enemies; and when his hands
were heavy and he weary, yet while others held them up stretched forth to God,
they still prevailed, he heard still. But when God spreads out his hands to
them all day long, as beseeching them that they would accept of his
deliverances they gainsay it, and continue disobedient. Yea although they make
him serve thus with their sins, and weary him with their iniquities, as he
complains by the Prophet Isaiah c. 43. 24. yet by the same Prophet he assures
them, therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you, c. 30.
18. and if all his waiting by their obstinate perverseness be made ineffectual,
then he seems inconsolable. In Hosea 13. 14. he tells Ephraim, I would have
ransomed thee from the power of the grave, I would have redeemed thee from
death, from those calamities and enemies that threaten ruin and extinction to
the Nation, O death, I would have bin thy plague, O grave, I would have bin thy
destruction, would have brought to nothing every thing that did endanger or
look fatal to thee; but now consolatio abscondita est ab oculis meis, comfort
is hidden from mine eyes, and since there is no further application, remedy or
help for thee, there is no consolation for me. As indeed comfort was hid from
the eyes of Christ, and they were capable only of tears, he could not see
Jerusalem but he wept over it, Luke 19. 41, 42. when once the things that did
belong to the peace of that City were hid from their eyes, their day being
ended, as he there tells them; for to that it may come, since this accepted
time and the day of salvation being God's own chosen time and the day of his
grace, it is also limited by him, we may outstand it, may suffer this day of
Salvation to pass irrecoverably, the second thing I am to speak to.

I shall not undertake to prove it is limited, because it is here expressed but by
a day, a very narrow scantling; yet our Savior so bespeaks Jerusalem, as if it
had but that its day, when he spoke to them, O that thou had known in this
thy day, Luke 19. 42. and St Paul bids the Hebrews c. 3. 13. exhort one another
while it is called to day. Yea more, as if that day were limited to one point
of it, here it is worded so as that now is the time, now is the day; as if it
were only that point of time that stabs it self, that present instant which
expires the same first moment that it is: and yet our Savior when he had told
Jerusalem of that their day, as if that their day were no longer than the
Apostle's now, which as it now is, so now perishes, even while it is; so did
their day, for even in that their day, he tells them, now they are hidden from
thine eyes. But passing these, that it is so both as to Nations and particular
persons, Scripture will make evident. And my first instance shall be made in
all the Nations of the Earth at once: God limited the time of his forbearance
to the whole world, beyond which he resolved to be so far from using his
endeavors to reclaim them, as that he would suffer them no longer Genesis 6. 3. My
Spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he is flesh; yet his days
shall be an hundred and twenty years. He was so wearied by their obstinacy,
that he positively does determine that he would not still continue to be
earnest with them, struggle to reduce them, since they were so stupid, wholly
sensual, mere flesh. But before he would destroy them utterly he was content to
try them yet so many years, and then he brought the flood upon the world of the
ungodly. Again he tells Genesis 15. 16.
Abraham, that his Posterity, however it should be afflicted many years in a
strange Land, yet in the fourth generation they shall come hither again, for
the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. Four Ages therefore they had yet
allowed them to return in, and prevent their ruin; but if they neglect that and
go on to add sin still to sin, by then the measure will be heapt and the
iniquity will be full. Again the Jews, God's own peculiar People, and Jerusalem
his holy and beloved City had yet but its term, Dan. 9. 24. Seventy weeks are
determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City to finish the transgression,
and to make an end of sins, to complete that which shall bring full ruin on thy
nation: and of those weeks it should seem as if the day on which Christ weeping
over them wished, O that thou had known in this thy day, was the last of
them; for he says, Now they are hidden from thine eyes.

Once more, the City Niniveh was yet more straightened; Yet forty days and
Niniveh shall be destroyed, Jonah 3. 4. It Is true this sentence was not
executed, for the mere denouncing of it gave them such a true sense of their
own condition, made them so consider how they had deserved it, that the
Scripture says they believed God, heartily acknowledged it would be just
dealing with them, that they could expect no other. Whereupon they cried out
mightily to God, and put themselves into a state of such humiliation, as
whether for the severity or the universality of it, it is possible the world
has never seen an instance like it. And if he that did command all this were
King Sardanapalus, as most of the Learned do conclude, a man whose name alone
was set to signify all sensuality beyond whatever other character, was the
expression of it to a Proverb, if he became so sensible upon one Sermon to
require and practice such Mortification and Repentance, it is no wonder if God
would not execute his sentence upon them that so severely executed it on their
sins and on themselves. And truly those few that allow it not Sardanapalus, and
yet place the Prophet Jonah not long after him, must be put hard to it to find
out then so great a City, as he tells you Niniveh then was, and so great a King
of it. But he, although (as men of his vice possibly are apt to be sometimes) a
little tender hearted, easily affected on some sudden passionate occasion, yet
that being, as it mostly is, a fit of penitence, returning to his old
abominable practices, after a short Reign his Kingdom was quite rent in pieces,
and the City utterly destroyed, himself beginning it. He had before inflamed it
with his lust, then he set fire to it, and left nothing after him besides his
Epitaph, a greater and more lively character of sensuality than his whole life
had bin: and so that City, tho it did lay hold upon the time of acceptance,
seize the day of salvation, yet it quickly let it go again.

And as for persons I shall need to give one only instance, since it is of more
than six hundred thousand men, and each in their personal capacity. All whom
Number. 1. 2, 3.
Males, able to go out to war God brought from Egypt with a mighty hand on
purpose to conduct them to the Land of Canaan, and possess them of it; every
one of whom saw more of God's immediate presence and his Glory, had more express
miracle of grace and favor and forbearance also, than yet ever any People in
the world had: yet these had their time of favor limited, had their day for
God's performance; which time while it lasted he endured their provocations of
the highest measure, even when they made another God to lead them. But when
that day came, and they were at the point to enter, and De^t. 1. 21.
he bid them go in and possess it, and they would not make use of it, being
scared with news of Enemies taller than they, and so distrusting God's help
they repined they had not staid in Egypt rather; then as I live, says God,
because all these men have seen my glory, and my miracles which I did in Egypt
and in the wilderness, and have temted me now these ten times, surely they
shall not come into the Land concerning which I swear to make you dwell
therein; neither shall any of them that provoked me, see it Number. 14. 22, 23,
30. And of all that number but two only who provoked him not, Joshua and
Caleb, entered it. This very instance, and the Prophe David's application of it
also Psalm 95. to the Jews of his time, that they would not be as their
Forefathers, stubborn and untractable to all God's methods, standing out
against them till it was too late, but that to day if they would hear his
voice, they should be flexible and plaint: this, I say, St Paul in the third
chapter to the Hebrews urges to the Christians, that they should also be so
while it is called to day, while that their ^odie, their day that was allowed
them lasted, least they should outstand it, and they also be excluded from the
everlasting rest in the Heavenly Canaan. And he presses further in the sixth,
how God does finally withdraw his grace from those who in the day of it resist
it, and makes no more tender of it to them; and illustrates this in the twelfth
chapter with the history of Esau, who to satisfy a present appetite did sell
his Birthright, and the Privileges and the Blessing that of course attended
it; and although he sought it afterward he was rejected, and ^ound no place of
Repentance, nothing that could make his Father change his mind, although he sought
it carefully with tears: and with the Parable of ground, which if when it is
long watered with the dew of Heaven, and has drank that fatness which the
clouds drop down, it shall bring forth only briars, or continue barren, it is
no longer cultivated, but rejected, reprobated, no more fit to be watered with
the shours of Heaven, but burnt up with scorching heat. Our Savior's Luke 13.
7, 8, 9.
Parable about the Fig Tree too has the same Apologue, which if with three
years husbandry it bear no fruit, and in the fourth too, being manured more
expressly, it fail also, cut it down then, least it cumber the ground.

Whether the term that limits this accepted time be meted out by years and
months, so much time I will bear with them and expect, as the instance of the
old world gives some color for; or whether it be not set to days and hours, but
measured by their reckonings of iniquity, when they have made up and filled the
Epha, their time shall be out, as the Amorites example and the Israelites in
the wilderness would evince: or whether both ways, as Jerusalems and Ninivehs
seem plain for, it is not for me to determine. Each or any of them does assure us
that the time is bounded, beyond which there is no term, no day left if we do
outstand that. O that thou had known in this day, says he, but that being
expired, then is the hour of darkness, now they are hidden from thine eyes; nor
are they only hidden from their eyes, but God also shuts their eyes, sends
them the spirit of slumber on them, that they may not see, not perceive, not
understand, nor be converted, least he heal them. The Predeterminations that do
limit out the Age of men's Repentance, seem much more unalterable than those are
that bound the Age of Life. Good 2 Kings 20. 5, 6.
Hezekiahs tears and prayers got him fifteen years accession to his days, time
did go back for him, and he lived part of his Age over again. But when the life
that is allotted for the possibilities of Repentance is spun out, when the day
of God's expectation is once gone, we have no instance to produce that he will
call back, or protract it to us: death may let go its hold, but obstinacy in
sin does not; marble Monuments have heard and bin obedient, yielded up, but the
stony hard heart will not. And indeed to be innexible arises from the very
nature of that course and progress in sin that does weary out God's
forbearances, outstands all his offers, wastes the whole day of salvation. For
to pass by the instances of the old World and of the Amorites, of which we have
no more account, but that these Amorites were given up so to unnatural sin and
uncleanesses, that the Lev. 18. 28.
Land spued them out; in the other, that the Daughters of men had effaced all
the thoughts and knowledge of God out of the very Sons of God, that the
wickedness of man was so great that Genesis 6. 5.
every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. But
in Israel, whom St Paul represents to us for caution, thus their state was;
they had set their hearts on present satisfactions so eagerly and impotently,
that whenever there was the least want of any, they repined that God had
brought them out of Egypt; that their Jehovah should be at that distance from
them as in Heaven, and their sustenance come thence too, quite discouraged
them, broke all their confidence and faith: they must have their Provisions and
their Deity too nearer, cry out for Number. 11. 4.
Fleshpots and the Exodus 32. 1.
Calf of Egypt, that their meat and God too may be present. And although God
always answered their complaints by satisfying of them, miracle sustained them
constantly; yet, as Moses told them, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3, 4. Ye have seen all that
the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all
his servants, and unto all his land, the great temtations which thine eyes have
seen, the signs and those great miracles, yet ye had not an heart to
understand, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day: they had no sense
of them but what brute beasts were capable of having; only gazed as lookers on
them; did not mind, consider, and much less discern how great he was that
wrought those wonders, and how able, ready and desirous to supply whatever they
could need or he had promised, and that whatsoever they might want 'twas sure
they should not want a miracle to furnish, and by consequence had all
obligation that could be imagined to believe in, trust upon him and his
promises. But of this they were not sensible, made no such reasonings; but when
ever any thing they had a mind to was not present, or when any danger looked
upon them, disbeliev'd and murmured still, flew in his very face, insomuch that
God says Number. 14. 11. How long will this people provoke me, and how long will
it be ere they believe me? Now after all those strong, most operative ways of
making faith, they still persisting in their incredulity and most unreasonable
and senseless doubtings, not believing him is but consequent they would not
hearken to him, and be wrought on or persuaded by him; but resisted his will
always, and, as it must follow, grew more and more stubborn and inflexible,
that is, stiff-neck'd, as God calls them, having their hearts hardened. For it
is the nature of things hardened to be such intractables. And being so to that
degree that Miracles, God's most effectual method, could make no impression on
them, that he labored in vain with them, he must needs abandon them, and give
them over as incorrigible: and so having worn out all his methods, and by
consequence all his forbearance, he swore they should not enter in Canaan; and
however he endured them to live forty years, their opportunity was dead and
their day ended.

I might tell you how the same ill temper of that Nation, looking after present
earthly satisfactions, consequently for a temporal Messiah, made them
disbelieve, and hardened them against Christ's miracles and teachings, but that
former instance serves my turn; and when St Paul proposes this Example to the
Christians as a warning that they suffer not their day to pass them, least they
be shut out of their eternal rest, their heavenly Canaan, he expressly cautions
them against the same two things, that they fall not by the same ensample of
unbelief Heb. 4. 11. and that their hearts be not hardened by the deceitfulness
of sin Heb. 3. 13. Christ's Miracles, if they did not make faith of his person
and commission, of the duties, promises and threats of the Gospel to the Jews,
when present with them, we may fear their efficacy may be fainter in men at
this distance: and if strong inclinations to the present, howsoever sinful
satisfactions of their appetites, together with long practice and converse in
them, have got a great love to them, it is most certain that this will not
suffer them to receive the love of the Gospel; no not of its promises and
blessednesses, all which are so averse and opposite to those satisfactions: and
not loving it, it is impossible they can be willing to give credit to it. Yea
those sensual affections blind the Understanding so that indeed it discerns not
the truth of it, and engage the heart so that it gives no great heed to it; and
then as Attention to it does, the belief of it must decay. The man is only
such a stupid Auditor of what is recorded in Scripture, as the Jews in the
wilderness were Spectators of it, without faith or reflection; he considers not
himself concerned much in whatever it proposes, whether by injunction, threat
or invitation, whether it do promise blessedness or denounce judgment, and so
grows insensible of his condition as to either: and then coming thus to have no
sense of his condition, therefore neither has he any fear by reason of it, i.
e. so far his heart is hardened, and so going on continuing in that state, it is
so perfectly. And what that is, Pharaoh can inform us. It Is such an heart as
admits no compunction, tho you let fly all God's arrows at it. No respect to
God, what grounds soever of experienced goodness he have for it, softens it: if
you beseech him on God's part, he is not moved, nor yields although you threaten
him; if God invite him by prosperity and kindness, he is ungrateful, and he
grows more dissolute; but if he scourge him, he grows either senseless or else
furious and desperate, shameless here, fearless of hereafter, of all humane
things regardless, of Divine contemtuous: all past things are most perfectly
past to him, he remembers nothing of the good or evil, so as to consider or
make use of either; and although he throw away the present, yet as if the future
would never arrive, although you lay before him certain death and the ensuing two
Eternities, it is not possible to move him to provide for that Futurity. And
then, when neither present, past, nor future can work any thing upon him, how
is it possible to change him? Now it is no wonder if God give him over, when his
state is thus unalterable. Indeed as this condition when it is grown thus
irreversible, makes the state of Hell here as to sinning, so it seems to make
the state of it hereafter as to suffering, adding weight and in some sort
Eternity to its torments; for with the other grounds that show it just for God
to plague the little transient satisfactions of our sins with an immortal worm
and everlasting burnings, this also is one, that the Sinner's appetite and
resolution to sin is endless, and as much as in him lies eternal, and were he
not cut off from the commission, his iniquity would be immortal. And it does
appear so certainly, when if God set him out a time for his Repentance and
their Reconciliation, and how great soever he have made his heaps, if he do not
seal up the sum with this hard-heartedness and persevering obstinacy, if while
there is yet any sand to run, he will consider and take up, then God will pass
by all the rest, and cancel the whole reckoning; if yet he will refuse this
mercy, will go on to fill his Ephah, and commits even while the life of his
Repentance is breathing out its last, while the possibilities of mercy are upon
their deathbed gasping, the accepted time and the day of Salvation just
ending, there is no doubt, his will, his appetite and resolutions to it are
immortal, and it is therefore also fit his worm should be so: and there is no
security against this, but by laying hold upon the present; for behold now is
the day of Salvation, the last thing I am to speak to.

I shall not press this from the common place of the uncertainty of this life,
of which whatever we have past as death possesses, so the succeeding moments
Judgment may lay hold of; we are sure of nothing but the present. But if we had
not only the assurances which constancy of health and strength of constitution
give but a lease of years, as Hezekiah had from God himself, we have no
assurance of the time of acceptance. Many men, tho they live fast, furiously
spend the stock of Nature, sin yet with a much fiercer carrier, as the horse,
Jer. 8. 6.
in Jeremies expression, rusheth into the battle, and they spend the day of
Salvation faster. Men may deceive themselves by reckoning to repent hereafter.
We cannot conclude with reason we have space left for it while our life lasts,
since those opportunities are not always, and perchance not frequently,
commensurate with the life or being of a profligate man or Nation: and when
they end together it is not that their whole life or being was allotted to those
opportunities, but when these are forfeit or extinguished, God cuts off the
other. Thus indeed he did destroy the old World, when the one hundred and
twenty years for their repentance were expired; and several men are cut down
out of time, as Job says c. 22. 16. men that shall not live out half their
days, as Psalm 55. 23.
David says of the deceitful and the bloody men, that drink their own Blood
when they thirst for others; men whose time for their acceptance went not out
while their life lasted, because when it went out God cut off their life. But
it is not always so. Not first in Nations: four Generations filled the measure
of the Amorites iniquity, but five were past before destruction made approaches
to them. Judah had its sentence of excision in 2 Kings 21.
Manasses reign, but its execution was suspended till the time of Zedekiah near
a hundred years. And again the things that belonged to the peace of Jerusalem
were taken from them when they killed the Peacemaker, their day of Salvation
too was darkened at Christ's Crucifixion, but the City lived yet forty years.
Nor secondly in persons: Pharaohs time was out at the sixth plague, but God at
once upheld and hardened him until the tenth was past. And those six hundred
thousand, that were doomed for murmuring, were afterward near forty years in
dying, lived so long to rebel against more miracles. Now all that time the
state of all these, whether men or Nations, was irreversible, as to the doom
past upon them. Did we know indeed our measure of iniquity, how many crimes we
wanted to fill up our Ephah, make an end at once of sin and the day of
Salvation also; 'twere no wonder if we did not think it necessary now to seize
the opportunity, having yet so many sins good. But there are commissions of
great bulk, few of which will do it; the men that sin post, soon arrive at the
end of the race that is set before them. There are whose life is nothing else
but perpetual variety of wickedness, and they will quickly make up their
account; the constancy inflames the reckoning, and the sum does advance
mightily: how know they but the next of any of these greater magnitudes may
fill up the score? To such now only may be the accepted time. However

1. They that, whenever such considerations are suggested, will not at that
present, even now resolve to attemt to break their sins off by repentance, it
is plain they are entangled in them, love them so, that they resolve expressly
not to part with them yet, tho they are made to consider by the course of all
God's several workings for them and their own provokings, that they may have
wasted almost all the stock both of God's methods and their own opportunities,
and will venture doing it completely, rather than forego their darling customs.
Now such a love to sin, as it works induration, (as I showed you) hardens men's
hearts; so it does betray it, and evince they are in some degree so. Such a
resolution is sufficient not only to provoke God to contract the measure and
cut short the account Romans 9. 28. but it self bids fair to fill it up. The
present therefore must be their accepted time; and they do all that in them is
to put out the day of Salvation, who do thus put off from them this Now.

2. Of this that has bin said, whether Almighty God be now about to make the
application, either as to what concerns the Nation or particular persons, is
not may part to determine or debate; Acts 1. 17.
It is not for us to know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in
his own power. Many seem indeed to have uncomfortable expectations, great fears
both as to the Nation; and I must say they have reason, we may justly fear
those judgments which we have deserved most justly, and provoked most
heinously, wilfully, impudently; and great fears too as to Religion, nor
without good cause, yet not because those men that earnestly desire a change
talk of it as at hand with comfort. False, ungracious, treacherous Sons to
their poor Mother, who do what they can to blast and weaken her, that they may
have color to forsake her. But this they have talked often with great confidence,
and he that sits in Heaven always laughed their confidence to scorn, and we hope
he will do so to the world's end. Sure I am there could be no fear of what they
expect and wish so from comparison of the Religions; or if we would answer our
Religion by our living. But there is great cause of fear we may provoke God to
desert that reformation we deform so with our manners, and put out the Worship
we unhallow. And inded a flood of Atheism and contemt of all Religion and
Virtue, or the having a Religion that is next to that itself, looks like just
dereliction of them, who would not let God be in their thoughts, nor Piety or
Morality in their actions. Now if this be so, and by consequent these fears be
reasonable and just, there can be no prevention but by closing now with the
proposal of my Text by laying hold upon the present. Any least forbearance may
make our state irreversible, and does certainly provoke God toward it;
whereas, if now, when God shows us the rod, we would break off our sins, reform
our selves, live up to our Religion, there would be no cause to fear
destruction, since God's work were don, and whatever shall happen, all would
work together for the everlasting good of those that did so. This, if earnest
also, must preserve Religion to us. The certain and the only way to keep
Religion is to practice it; it is impossible that they can take it from us
while we live it, and without that no Religion, however current, can be useful
to us. But this must secure our Faith here, and secure us of the end of our
Faith, the Salvation of our Souls.

SERMON XVI. OF THE EVIDENCE of Faith.
2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed.
THE words do need no other explication than the reading the whole verse: it
runs thus, For which cause (for the Gospel's sake) I also suffer these things;
nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against
that day. Let those that suffer for ill doing be abashed and troubled at it, I
am neither ashamed of the Gospel, nor the least discouraged by my sufferings,
how great and ignominious soever for its sake, and for doing my duty in
relation and obedience to it; for I trust and depend on one that will secure
me, and will bless and crown my labors. That he wills and intends it I am sure,
for he has promised, and in what he has promised I know he is faithful, and
he is also able above all that I can ask or think; and consequently whatever in
pursuance of his promise is entrusted to him, must be safe in his hands I am
sure, for I know whom I have believed. So that the words direct us how to quiet
and secure our selves in what estate soever affairs, whether public or our
own, are; namely in a close dependence upon God: and in the handling them I
have but these three things to speak to.

1. Who this I is, I know; and in what respect qualified for such secure
dependence.

2. What those cases are, wherein dependence does admit such confident
assurance, as is here expressed by the word know, I know.

3. Who this is on whom the person that is qualified thus does so depend, and
upon what account, especially in relation to him, has the man that does depend
upon him such assurance that he can profess, I know whom I believe: to all
which I shall make plain answers, and shall only give you God's word for them.

1. Who this I here is, I know? and in what respect, and how qualified? This I
here is St Paul, whom I do not mean to speak of in that narrow notion as an
Apostle, but as one in such circumstances as do make him fit to represent the
state of any one that is qualified to commit all his concerns into God's hands
with a perfect resignation and with full assurance. Now as to this, first it is
certain every person is not qualified for such dependence, cannot trust on God,
rely upon his promise, as not having any right that it should be fulfilled to
him. No not where the promise being general, for example, made to the whole
present body of a Nation, by consequence concerns most of the individual
persons of that Nation, even there it may not be sure to them: and of this we
have a pregnant instance Number. 14. 30. Doubtless ye shall not come into the Land
concerning which I swear to make you dwell therein, and ye shall know my breach
of promise, v. 34. And that very justly, they first having broke with him: for
there being some, at least tacit, condition still implied in all such promises
as well as threatenings, therefore as to one and the other God sets this down as
a general rule in his proceedings, and not only with particular persons but
with Nations, Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. as at what instant I shall speak concerning
a Nation, or concerning a Kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy
it, if that Nation against whom I have pronounced turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them: so whenever I shall speak
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom to build and to plant it, if it
do evil in my sight that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good
wherewith I said I would benefit them, that is will not do it. And accordingly
the Prophet Daniel, tho it be said c. 9. 2. He understood by books the number
of years, that God would after seventy years restore Jerusalem, yet says
Theodoret (...), he did not stand still and expect the fulfilling of God's
promise of it, but v. 3. sets his face to the Lord God to seek by prayers and
supplications, with fasting, and sackloth, and ashes, as knowing (...), tho he
had promised it a thousand times, if we render our selves unworthy of it, (...)
we put a bar against God's performance, do not suffer him to make it good: and
in those solemn supplications and addresses to Almighty God thus he bespeaks
him v. 4. O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping covenant and mercy to
them that love him, and to them that keep his commandments; whereupon St Jerome
says, non ergo quod pollicetur Deus statim futurum est, sed in eos sua
promissa implet, qui custodiunt mandata illius; what God does promise any, is
not therefore sure to be fulfilled; those are they whom he performs with, who
keep his Commandments. With the rest that do not but transgress, the Prophet
Zachary in an emblem shows God's way of dealing c. 11. 10. And I took my staff,
even beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had
made with all the people: and we see the real practice with that Nation for
their wickednesses Neh. 9. from the 30th verse. Now this being thus in general
declared that all men cannot trust God, we are therefore as to this particular
person, this I here to find out how he was qualified for this dependence.

It is certain first that St Paul had bin a great Sinner, a Blasphemer,
Persecutor and injurious person: it is true he says 1 Timothy 1. 13. he was so
ignorantly, out of unbelief, he knew not nor believed that he did ill in doing
what he did; yea more, he said that he lived in all good Conscience before God
all that time also, had don nothing which he was not persuaded in his
conscience that he ought to do. But although this good conscience might prepare
him for a readier and more sound conversion, than profane, presumtuous,
habitual Sinners are disposed for; (for the will of such a one is true to God
and right already, and you have but to remove the ignorance of his
Understanding, a little better information must reform him, and will turn his
persecuting and whatever other factious or injurious heats into true zeal, holy
devout warmths, as it did in him,) yet while he was mistaken, that his good but
erring conscience could not possibly excuse, much less could it sanctify his
actions; 'twas injury, 'twas blasphemy and persecution, tho 'twas conscience,
guilts these of a bloody and deep scarlet, and this very conscientious man
found cause to call himself the chief of Sinners v. 15.

Howbeit secondly he tells us v. 16. for this cause I obtained mercy, that in
me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering for a pattern to them
that should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting; that in me the worst
of men might have example and encouragement to depend upon him for eternal
mercies, if they will but come in to him, he was pleased to show me mercy, call
me in the very flagrancy and execution of my crimes.

Whereupon, as he says thirdly, he not only was not disobedient to the
Heavenly Calling, but (as if by owning himself chief of Sinners he had set
himself a standard for his service, put upon himself an obligation to be chief
of all Christ's Votaries) he became more laborious in his duty than all others;
and particularly so sincere, faithful, resolute and constant, as nothing could
remove him, neither opposition stop him, nor temtation divert him. Now it is
this faithfulness, this being honest-hearted to Almighty God; it is the firmness
of this purpose to go through with duty in a constant tenor of obedience in
whatever circumstance we are placed, whatever happens not to be allured nor
frighted, neither biased nor forced out of it, with the conscientious
pursuance of this resolution that particularly qualifies for this secure
dependence upon God for success, it does dispose a man for perfect resignation
of himself and full assurance. It was St Paul's case here, for this I suffer,
says he, (and indeed he lived almost in constant martyrdom) yet all this does
not in the least discourage me, but by God's gracious assistance I will do my
duty, come what can come. Now discerning himself thus resolved and thus
assisted, he concludes that he has ground enough for trust, for he that is
thus faithful to him may trust on him; then he says, I know whom I have
believed.

And that we may not think this is an instance solitary, in the third of
Daniel, when Nebuchadnezzar told the three Children, If ye worship not the
Image I have set up, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning
fiery furnace, and who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered and said to the King, O
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter; if it be so,
our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and
he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King: but if not, (i. e. but if he
would not) be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor
worship the golden image which thou have set up. The being conscious to
themselves that they were thus resolved in earnest not to offend against the
Lord, but to obey how dear soever their obedience cost them, and so casting
themselves on him to do what he would with them, gave them confidence, made
them know and say he would deliver them; and so he did. It is according to the
measures of discerning the integrity and faithfulness of our own hearts that we
assure our hearts before him, as St John expresses 1 Epist. 3. 19. and then
tells us, if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows
all things, v. 20. If we find not that sincerity within, if any thing be false
there, if our conscience accuse us, our own hearts condemn us, it is most
certain God will do so too, because he knows all those things of us that we can
know of our selves. But if we truly cannot charge that insincerity upon our
selves, we need not fear that God will charge us with the things we are not
guilty of. No surely, as he there goes on, Beloved, if our heart condemn us
not, then have we confidence toward God, v. 21. And this is the confidence
that we have toward him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us; and if we know that he hears us, whatever we ask, we know that we
have the petitions that we desired of him, c. 5. 14, 15. And whatsoever we ask,
we receive of him, c. 3. 22. Thus by assuring their own hearts to God they know
this, have this confidence toward him, i. e. have the trust and the dependence
in the Text, which in what cases it admits this strong assurance, that is here
expressed by the word know, is my next inquiry.

I know. Now by the last words it should seem as if in every case, in every
thing that he can want or does desire, the person that is qualified so, had a
ground to trust with full assurance. We know, says St John, that whatsoever we
ask we receive of him; and accordingly in all the Spiritual needs of the
Thessalonians both in particular and as the Church, St Paul, when he had blessed
them and prayed for them thus: The very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I
pray God your whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. adds in the 24th ^erse,
Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it. And here in this Epistle
of himself he says, The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 18. Nor did good men want this
confidence as to the things of this life; for in times of public
consternation, in the want of all things Habbakuk does thus assure himself c.
3. 16, 17, 18. When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quiver'd at the voice,
rottenness entered into my bones, when he comes up unto the people he will
invade them with his troops; but in that state he adds, Although the Fig Tree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive
shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from
the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. The exstasy of trust, the rapture
is too elegant and gay, too high and full of transport to admit of any descant.
Holy Job went yet a little farther, Tho he slay me, yet will I trust in him, c.
13. 15. In a word at once, in whatsoever God has promised, there the Faithful
Christian has a right to trust. I will not be so rude as to suppose my
Auditors so unacquainted with the rich and precious Promises, those Christian
Treasures, which God's Book is the Repository of, that I should need to mind
them of them; and indeed to do it were to read a very great part of that Book.
It Is sure in every case of every, whether public or particular, real just
concern, whether in temporal, spiritual, or eternal things, in some indeed more
absolutely than in others, but in all these there are promises; and promises
were made to be believed, and every faithful Christian that trusts to them,
does know whom he has believed.

But yet it cannot be denied, since God has threatened Ezekiel. 14. 13, 14, etc.
When a Land sins against him by transgressing grievously, then he will
stretch out his hand against it; and if he say, sword, go through the Land, and
pour out fury upon it in blood, and break the staff of bread thereof; he
swears, tho Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should but deliver their own
souls: then if we chance to see wickedness overspread a Nation, vice and
profaness grown so universal and habitual, that it is almost natural; when
impunity has made it safe and upon that account familiar, and then familiar
practice made it necessary, yea and great examples made it honorable, and by
this all virtue is made mean and contemtible, and insolently domineered over or
derided petulantly; when a people looks so like the thing God threatened so:
it is hard to apply the promises of safety to it, or with confidence rely upon
God for its preservation. And yet there is the resolution of a case so like
this in the Prophet Micah c. 7. as is able to revive a dying hope, and give it
vigor and security: Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the
summer-fruits as the grape-gleanings of the Vintage, there is no cluster to
eat: the good man is perished out of the Land, and there is none upright among
men; they all lie in wait for blood, they hunt every every man his brother with
a net. That they may do evil with both hands, the Prince asks, and the Judge
asks for a reward, and the great man utters his mischievous desire, so they
wrap it up. The best of them is as a briar, the most upright sharper than a
thorn-hedg: and then he adds, the day of visitation comes, now shall be their
perplexity; but he recollects himself and says, Therefore I will look unto the
Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me. Rejoice not
against me, O mine Enemy, when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in darkness the
Lord shall be a light unto me. So that when we cannot hope well of the
Commonwealth, yet we may hope in God still. And I pray you tell me whether way
looks quieter and safer, has more comfortable expectations, to confederate,
make factions, lay plots, dark, sometimes illegal, and unjust contrivances, and
sow the seeds of trouble and dissension, and think with these to carry all
their own away, not enduring to submit to Providence, or be contented with
God's dispensations, but will help him, as if he had need of such arts or
instruments, and could not govern except his commands were broke: when it is
certain such contrivances, if they do not thwart his counsels, (which if they
comport not with, he laughs at and defeats,) yet they do his commands; and then
he will punish them, however he may let them give a while some trouble. And
then whether is this better, or to do our duty faithfully and trust God? when
we are assured, if Matt. 10. 29.
one sparrow, two of which are worth yet but one farthing, fall not to the
ground without our Heavenly Father, a Church and State shall not fall without
him. But yet it is certain Governments are sometimes broken or else fall in
pieces, and while the fury of the sword does ravage all, the innocent as well
as guilty suffer the same miseries, and the same carnage does devour the
righteous with the wicked; yea Religion has bin swept away too by the
inundation, and whole Churches have bin quite un-Christian'd; and no doubt
there was all reason in the world for this. Yet tho I will not take upon me to
mark out the lines by which God moves either in his ways of mercy or of
judgment, nor to give the reasons of them; yet when plenty has brought in all
sorts of luxury and dissoluteness, and (as it must needs) that corrupts all,
loosens all the bonds by which Societies and Government consist, the very bonds
of common right and justice, those that either men's propriety or their security
and lives depend on, and besots men so, as that they take no other rule or
measure of their interests than as things serve the ends and satisfactions of
luxurious appetites; and if Religion also, while it is trampled on, despised and
scofft down by such sensual persons that have no Religion, and so not having
countenance, being injured, and cut short by others, does decay; or else, if
willing to comply and save it self, it grow it self debaucht in some measure,
learn by formalities to serve worldly purposes; yea possibly learns to adopt
principles and consecrate some practices which are enemies to the very nature
of Religion, wound, destroy Christianity, and dishonor the God of it: if every
thing does thus seem to provoke and call for present ruin, and God stir himself
up, as he did in the Jer. 5. 9.
Prophet, Shall I not visit for these things, shall not my soul be avenged on
such a nation as this; yet in such a Nation if there be enough remaining of
those that can stand in the gap and maintain the breach against him, as once
Moses alone did, he will turn away his indignation, so as not to stir up his
whole wrath; and, although he leave them not altogether unpunisht, he will not
destroy them utterly. Now he knows what the numbers are of faithful Christians,
such as wrestle day and night with him and do not let him rest. If the hairs of
our heads be all numbered, sure the knees are, that cleave to the ground in
humble adorations and petitions to him. Yea and so they are; for when Elijah
brought his charge in against Israel, whose condition looked so desperate, that
he thought there was no servant of God but himself, I, even I only am left, 1
Kings 19. 10. God tells him v. 18. he had seven thousand knees in it that had
never bowed to Baal: and when those three Noah, Daniel, and Job are not able,
seven thousand men yet may prevail. Indeed if once Religion grow so low, be so
defiled that it is not worth preserving with all those corruptions that get into
it, when not only the Professors of it are depraved, but its very constitution
in its vitals, in the doctrines both of faith and manners vitiated; and it is
hard to show where God did ever overthrow a Church and a Religion wholly, where
it was not so; and then it was not he that did destroy it, it destroyed it
self. If also in a state Judgment be turned into Wormwood, and you find
oppression for Justice, and for Righteousness behold a crying; in a word, if a
Church and State sink by such proportions as Sodom and the rest of the Cities
of the Plain, when in all Pentapolis there was not ten Righteous, for whose
sake five great Cities might be spared: in fine, when once they have wrought
out the measure of God's mercies, and their iniquity is full, it is no wonder
if the measure of their Judgment be full too, and it self irreversible and
utter. But yet tho in all these Judgments, whether partial or final, Innocent
and Righteous persons suffer with the wicked, All things come alike to all,
there is one event to the clean and to the unclean, to him that sacrifices and
to him that sacrifices not, as is the good so is the sinner, and he that
swears as he that fears an oath, Ecclesiastes 9. 2. So as that it should
seem the sincere Christian can no more depend than others, or if he do his
trust will fail him; yet to omit the reasons of this dispensation of God's
Providenc which are many very just ones, that alone suffices good men in the
midst of all such Judgments to depend upon, which St Paul writes on the very
account of such distresses and necessities Romans 8. 28. We know that all things
work together for good to them that love God; even those afflictions working
for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory 2 Cor. 4. 17. They
are God's words, and so trusting and depending on them we know whom we have
believed, namely God, the person, and my last part, wherein I am to enquire on
what accounts especially he that does depend upon him in these cases has
assurance, such as that he can profess, I know whom I have believed.

Now there is scarce that Attribute in God which is not a firm ground for
resignation of our selves to, and of reliance on him. But to pass all those,
which are every where in God's Book to be met with, and are urged with all
advantage, and to name two other only. First it is certain that we may with the
most comfortable hope and greatest confidence rely on him, who, when we have
most need, is readiest to relieve. As we read in the Scripture of an accepted
time, of the day of Salvation, to let us know that it is not to be caught in
every season, as if whenever we shall have a mind to be delivered and ask for
it, God must hearken and command deliverances; no sure there are proper set
times, and we must be unwearied in waiting for it: so also ordinarily that the
time of greatest need is God's opportunity, and the day of extremity the day of
Salvation, is obvious. All other times he tries us and does exercise our
virtues, but when we are past all other help, then he relieves us. Therefore
David is most peremtory with the Lord on that account Psalm 102. 13, 14. Thou
shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion; for it is time that thou have mercy upon
her, yea the time is come. And why? thy servants think upon her stones, and it
pitieth them to see her in the dust: and Psalm 9. 9. The Lord also will be a
refuge (...), LXXII. in opportunitatibus, in tribulatione, in the true
opportunity, that is, when trouble comes. And we shall find a reason for this
way of working in his Prayer Psalm 109. 26, 27. O save me according to thy
mercy, that they may know that this is thy hand, and that thou, Lord, have don
it. When we are in such distress as is past man's aid, then if deliverance come
we cannot choose but know the hand: when we are in darkness and dimness of
anguish, and if we look unto the earth behold nothing but darkness as of the
shadow of death, then if any light arise we know it is the dayspring from on
high that visits us.

And if besides this reason and those Texts we but consult the Annals of God's
actings, we shall find it always thus: and not to mention those that refer to
particular persons, of which Joseph's single story is a manifold instance,
which also gave birth to those great events which shall make up a demonstration
that this is the way of God's procedure. In Egypt when the design was laid so,
that the People of Israel could not have lasted longer than one Age, (for
posterity was forbidden, and the Nation was to be murdered by a prohibition of
being born,) and when they could not to avoid this persecution get out thence,
except the sea would at once make a passage for them, and a wall and rampart to
secure that passage; and if it also should do so, it would but land them in a
wilderness, and they but fled from water to perish for want of it, and escapt
being drowned to die with thirst; a place too where unless the desert can bring
forth the bread of Heaven, unless Flesh and Manna can grow there where nothing
grew, they have but changed their fate, and brought themselves into a more
unavoidable and speedy ruin: when this state of exigence was come, then God
comes in by weak means, a stammering tongue and little rod works all
deliverance.

And again afterward in the captivity of that Nation, a state which Jeremy the
Prophet when he had bewailed in sorrowful eloquence, in lamentations that live
still, yet Jer. 9. 1.
wished his head had bin a fountain of tears to weep for it; when in seventy
years the people was so mixed, incorporated with their Conquerors, as must needs
be very hard to separate and tear them asunder; and as for their Temple it was
ruined and despoiled of all its holy furniture, which was not only robbed but
desecrated and profaned, so as not to be likely nor scarce fit to be returned,
the vessels of the Sanctuary being made the utensils of their Idol-feasts and
their own riots, and those holy bowls made up their drunkeness as well as
sacrilege: yet when these conquering Robbers were enjoying their spoils and
crimes, as if wine in those holy bowls did stupity men past all sense, they and
the great Babylon are taken ere they knew it, and the Jews return strait
followed.

Again, when Cestius Gallus had sat down before Jerusalem at the Feast of
Tabernacles, when the Nation being obliged by their Religion was all in that
City, and the Christians of the Land were there too, after several assaults,
and when he might have taken it, he on a sudden raised the siege (...), says
Josephus, without any reason, no body knows why, but only as God put it in his
heart to do so to give way for the Christians to obey that voice, which the
same De Bello l. 6. c. 31.
Josephus says was heard in the Temple at the Feast of Pentecost, (...), let
us go hence, and upon it all the Christians went to Pella, not one staid, but
every one escapt that ruin which Titus sitting down before that City, brought
upon that People, (the great Enemies of his Church) to a final utter desolation.

Once more, when after the nine Persecutions, which like so many torrents of
fire had swept away the Christians in flame, Dioclesians like a tenth wave came
as if it meant to swallow not the relics only of Christ's Church, but also
all the memory of the other cruelties; when in one small Province in a month he
put to death one hundred and forty four thousand Christians; banished seven
hundred thousand more, and proportionably so in other places through the Roman
world with such success, that he took confidence to write on his triumphal
Arches, Deleto nomine Christiano, as he had blotted out the very name of
Christians, then at the last gasp of his Church it pleased the Lord to raise up
Constantine, and strait the whole face of the world was Christian, and
Dioclesian himself lived to see it. I might have instanced in our own so fresh
deliverance, but that it would not look like an encouragement, it may be, to
rely and cast our selves again upon him, if so soon we call upon our selves the
same needs by the same wretchless methods; and there are some, they say, that
apprehend so. And God knows the ruin of the Reformation and our Church has
from its first beginning bin still working by her restless indefatigable
Enemies, and has often bin preserved only on the account I am now speaking,
that when things are past all humane help, then is God's set time for relief. I
know the Churches Adversaries brag of multitudes, and they come up on every
side close to her; yea and which is worse, we seem to labor to make God himself
our Enemy, or at least provoke him to desert that Chutch and Reformation we
pollute so, put out the Worship we unhallow and profane so by ill lives, make
those that will have nothing of Religion but some forms it may be loose them
too, and let them die for want of substance, and the show go out, not leave so
much as the hypocrisy of piety. Indeed a flood of Atheism and contemt of all
Religion and virtue looks like a just dereliction of them who would not let God
be in their thoughts, nor Religion or Morality in their actions. Nay may it not
look like a kindness to remove the Gospel which proves only the savor of death
unto death, put out that light which men are but resolved to sin against? Or
can there be a greater mercy than to refuse all the means of mercy to such men
as only make them work out condemnation to them? Dan. 9. 8, 9.
O Lord, to us indeed belongs confusion of face, but notwithstanding to the
Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, tho we have rebelled against
him; and as he knows how to reserve the ungodly to the day of Judgment to be
punished, he knows too how many thousand knees do bow to him in secret, reckons
all those tears that are poured out in Religion's and the Churches cause; and
how wicked soever the Professors of Religion, the Church Members may be, if the
constitution of Religion and the Church themselves yet be not vitiated or
defective, there is hope still. And truly whereas many blame the Reformation
that it did not keep more hold upon the Consciences of the Community, did not
retain some power, which although not of Divine Institution, but things warily and
by degrees brought in as seeming to work toward piety, and most certainly in
humane ways of judging serving to procure more veneration and outward security
of the Church and Religion; to work out which the other consequential worldly
interests we see the very scheme of some Professions, not their discipline
only but their faith too is contrived: I think on the other side, if our
Reformation instead of doing thus, as it consulted not at first with carnal
Politics, but Christ's institutions as the Scripture and other primitive
Records conveied them, and designed no more to themselves than those bare naked
Spiritual doctrines, rights and powers which Christ gave them, left to Caesar
whatsoever was Cesar's, knowing God had promised Kings should be their
Nursing-fathers; and to be so, is part of their Office: trusting therefore God
and Governments with their protection, and defense of Church and Religion. So
also if through all succeeding times, whether of flourish or depression and
calamity, Religion it self, whatever its Professors are, have retained always
the same simplicity of principles, be it self untainted, not new modeled to
serve ends or interests, then whenever men shall begin to clip it, I do not say
in maintenance, seizing what their Father's sacrilege had left them, but I
mean because ours did not so as other Churches, grasp some usurpt power to
secure their own, shall therefore cut her Spiritual powers short, so that they
cannot serve the ends of piety; because they know her Children will not, cannot
by their principles resist, i. e. if they endeavor to destroy them for this
reason, that they make men the best Subjects and of the most Christian
Principles; that is, persecute their Christianity it self, and martyr that; I
must profess that it will look like God's set appointed time to arise and to
have mercy upon Sion; when it is exposed a naked Orphan, left to his protection
only, then he cannot pass it by; but when he sees it in its blood thus, he
will say unto it, live: and tho he plague her wicked and ungracious Sons, and
possibly take away many of the good ones from the evil to come, yet the
Religion will not die. Let them believe it hopeless who desire a pretense to
leave it, who do what they can to stab their Mother, and make it a reason to
forsake her then, because she is so desperately wounded; and let them declare
it, who design to betray men out of it. But whether is wiser to believe these,
or the God from whom we have these promises, and these experiences, and the
other grounds of trust? Sure we know better whom we have believed, especially
since the very trust to him is an engagement to him not to fail us: that is my
last ground.

It Is it self a means prescribed us by himself, Isaiah 50. 10. Who is he among
you that fears the Lord, that walks in darkness and has no light? Let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. There is nothing in the
world that more engages any man that is not profligately false, than trusting
to him; and for God, there is no other piece of piety or virtue gives such
honor to him and his Attributes, as sincere dependence on him does. It does
acknowledge his Omniscience, that he knows our needs, and be they never so
perplexed and intricate, knows how to help them; his Omnipresence, that he is at
hand on all occasions; his Omnipotence, how he is able above all our
possibility of want; his Mercy, Goodness, and Benignity, in that he
condescended to be willing to relieve us; his Faithfulness, and Truth, and
Justice, in observing his good promises and never failing them, and his
Immutability in all these and his other Attributes of loving kindness. Now
truly as our miseries required all these, so our trust to him gives him the
glory of all these; and therefore it is no wonder if some men made this reliance
or dependence, trust or faith our whole condition of the Covenant. But tho it is
true the Covenant does require some disposition in us that we also may be
trusted, for those that are not faithful to him, cannot have faith in him; for
us he knows our needs, he knows our hearts too, and if they be false he sees
it, and the trust is broken on both sides: such hearts cannot trust him, for it
is impossible that one can trust upon another, if he know that other does
discern that he is false to him* for he knows that he is not in condition to be
dealt with by the rules of trust. Yet the sincere and honest-hearted person may
cast all his care there, Faith does his work, and he knows well whom he has
believed.

The sum is this, however grievous Sinner one has bin, if he return, and with
entire submission to God's will become faithful to him, and assure his own
heart toward him, he may commit himself and all his Spiritual and Eternal
interests with all assurance absolutely into his hands, and his temporal so far
as they shall be succesful in all cases, except those wherein God sees it
necessary for his more advantage to determine otherwise. All his concerns too
for Religion he may put into the same safe hands with all assurance; for God
will never destroy his own Religion, if it do not change first, vitiate and put
out it self. And in whatever Judgments God at any time shall bring upon the
public, he may perfectly ass^re himself, that whatsoever happens, shall be for
good to him; for how sad soever the necessity be, he knows both it and how to
remedy it, and is able and has said he will, he is true and just and faithful
in his promises, it is his very Nature that he cannot change or fail him; and
how desperate soever his condition seem here, that state is God's opportunity,
and that time his set time, and depending on him is yet a further engagement to
him.

Yet in all this I have said very little, all these grounds for trust and
reliance the old Covenant afforded. Thus far the Jew knew whom he had believed;
but sure the Christian knows more comfortably, has more cause to trust on God
as on the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And certainly we may rely upon that
Father, that he will deny us nothing, who denied ns not his son. It Is St Paul's
argument Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us all things. We may resign
our selves into his hands that loved us at these rates, and cannot but be
confident as the Apostle was v. 38, 39. that neither death nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which he has to us in and through Christ our Lord and Savior* or
shall hinder him from preserving and delivering us in and from the hopes and
fears, the terrors and allurements of them all, the temtations that either fear
of death or hope of life, or malice of the Devil and his Angels, or of
Principalities or powers, whether earthly Potentates or infernal, or distresses
present or to come, or heights of honor or depths of disgrace may assault us
with. How can these hinder, when sin could not hinder? Or what possibly can
separate, when God chose to be divided as it were from his own Son, rather than
any thing should separate him from the love of man? And then what may we not
expect from this, the Eternal Son of God, who became one of us, that so he
himself suffering by being temted might be able to succor them that are
temted? Heb. 2. 18. Able to succor? Sure he could have don it ere he took upon
him weak flesh, being God Almighty; he was not less able, when he was
Omnipotent: yet being, when he was made man himself, afflicted, having the
experience of our infirmities, in all points temted like as we are, he is
enabled to be much more sensibly compassionate and touched with the feeling of
our weak condition, which himself felt: so the ability which he has gained, is
the Omnipotency of kindness. One would have thought indeed it had bin large
enough before, when to show mercy to us seemed more dear to him and more
considerable than to enjoy Divinity, when he emtied himself of this, that he
might be qualified for the other. How infinitely willing then was he to be
compassionate to us, when he takes flesh to learn to be compassionate? How
desirous was he to succor us, who lays down Heaven and glory above, and life
here below, that he might be able to succor us? To whom can we betake our
selves for mercy with such confidence, as him who made himself like one of us,
that he might be a merciful High Priest to expiate and make reconciliation? We
that are the sheep of his pasture, what hands can we possibly resign our Souls
into with such assurance, as to those of this Bishop and Shepherd of our Souls,
this good Shepherd who not only seeks the lost sheep that is run away, but who
also lays down his life for his sheep? 10. 15. And what may not his poor Church
depend upon him for, who purchased to himself his Church with his own blood?
What design can he have to fail us possibly, who would be crucified for us? In
a word, if one that for us men and for our Salvation would come down from
Heaven, be incarnate and made man, a man of sorrows and afflictions, and would
suffer want shame and reproaches, agonies, a Cross, a bitter passion and a cruel
death for us; and who is sat down on the right hand of Majesty and Power, has
all power in Heaven and Earth, the keys of Death and Hell; in whom all the
promises of God are yea and Amen, faithful and true, faithful to immutability,
Jesus Christ yesterday, to day, and the same for ever: if, I say, he that is
all this, can be trusted, we know whom we have believed.

And now I have no more to do but only ask, whether we are assured of any
other whom on more or safer grounds we have or may believe? I will upbraid none
with that Irony which Eliphas insults on Job with c. 5. 1. Call now, see if
there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn
thee? There are that do with all the evidence imaginable of a strong confidence
and cheerful hopes to speed in doing so, pour out their needs, their whole
Souls to a fancied, or it may be true Saint, whom they have adopted as the
object of their invocation, which it seems they cannot do so feelingly, with
such a close and intimate dependence, with such comfortable expectations upon
Christ himself. Now I would only put the question of f St Paul to such a one,
was that Saint crucified for thee, that he should be more concerned for, and
more sensible of thy condition, and that thou should have a greater
confidence of his good will, than of his that did and suffered all that for
thee, that he might be merciful and faithful, touched with thy necessities, that
I mention not the rest of those qualifications that do make one fit to be
relied upon? It Is to be feared such persons do not know well whom they have
believed. But I pass them. There are that trust their being here to Policy and
Prudence, to their own contrivances, that is, trust to themselves, and give
credit only to what interest or their ambition suggests, and accordingly
design ends, and devise means, weave plots, spread their nets abroad with
cords, and lay snares, and do all this with that confidence of success, as if
they did believe they were fulfilling Prophecies, and moved by the directions
of Heaven; for many times they seem to do this in the fear of God, and in
subserviency to Religion: but whatever fair pretenses some of them may have to
wash or color their intentions, God, you may be sure, has no hand there in
those designs, where his Commandments are broken. Where you discern either as
to particulars, treachery, or fraud, or falseness, undermining and supplanting
to serve interests, or pride, or malice, or revenge; or as to public,
interverting justice and the due course of Laws, or mutiny, sedition, raising
discontents, and making breaches, it is not he on whom they have believed. And
did they but consider what they see perpetually, how false interests are, and
how unstable high place; how this tumbles men down headlong, those change
daily; and although men thrive so that they wash their steps with butter, they are
only so much more in slippery places, where God also leaves them, sometimes
overturns them suddenly. Or did they consider who the great Patrons of interest
and ambition are, Mammon the fomenter and encourager of almost all the
mischiefs upon Earth, and Lucifer that was discontent in Heaven, had ambition
to be greater there too, mutinied and stirred sedition up against God, and got
by it to be chief of Devils only, Prince of Hell. Did these designers but
reflect on these things, they would know then whom they have believed, a
deceitful world, a false glistering light that mocks them, and a treacherous
malicious Devil that has bin a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning.

I might ask the sensual person, whether he that hearkens to the cravings of
the one or other of his inclinations, and is so persuaded, overcome by their
insinuations, that whenever any of his appetites is high, he thinks there is no
joy that is like the satisfaction of that appetite, and is mad till he have it;
yet has found himself betrayed, fooled, cheated every time he served it, but
still courts and embraces the false treacherous mischief, and will not be
disenchanted, whether he considers whom he has believed, whether he knows that
he lets his horse ride him, and is guided, animated by, and believes the beast.

Once more, whether he knows whom he has believed, that ownes being an
Infidel, any one of those that with great seeming gravity, or wit and railery
declares dissatisfaction at the proof of those things, which the world for many
hundred years continued so convinced of, that they chose to die rather than say
that they did not believe them: when as for them, good Souls, they think they
can believe nothing but upon demonstration; yet if a man consider but the men
themselves, the method and the means of their conviction into that their
unbelief, he would find that themselves are always vicious, and that they
examine little but converse much, and keep company with them that in the heat
and confidence of drink and vice swear it is impossible those things can be, and
rally them that give heed to or profess them; and then themselves give easy
credit to this and their own inclinations, that would have them all impossible;
for it is their concern, they are eternally unhappy if they be not: so that we
know whom they have believed, their debaucht company and their evil
inclinations; and these stupid Infidels are the most credulous, we see, on the
least grounds of any in the world. It is not my emploiment at this time to make
comparison betwixt the one and others grounds, the several motives of belief
and infidelity; it is plain, Christ Judged the arguments and grounds of faith
were so sufficient, that he positively gives his charge thus, Mark 16. 15, 16.
Go and preach the Gospel to the whole world, he that believes is saved, and
he that believes not is damned. And if his threats are as inviolable as his
promises, 'twill be but ill knowing him, whom we would not believe; the
conviction will be very fatal, when their unbelief will become vision. And this
gives me yet occasion to ask, what temtation Sinners can have not to believe,
to be willing to come in to Christ and be saved? They cannot choose but see all
others whom they have believed, betrayed them and will fail them: all their
satisfactions must go out, their expectations die and perish, and why will ye
not take up here then, why will ye die for ever? Is your case, think you,
desperate, and have you gone too far to be received if you should turn? Why our
Saint here, the person of the Text declares, he was the chief of Sinners that
obtained mercy for encouragement to all that would believe and turn: and if you
did but know whom he believed, you must know one that went to meet the Prodigal
in his return, when he was yet far off; that sought the lost sheep while he
straied and ran away still, till he found him, and when he was gone so far that
he could not return, he carried him. And will you neither be invited into life,
nor carried into it? Why will ye die? Can ye not help it? Have your
inclinations and customs, think you, so prevailed upon you, that to leave them
looks impossible? Then it is plain you know not whom you have believed. Is any
thing impossible for him, that is Almighty, whose grace is sufficient? Or can
he command too hard things, who enables to perform what he commands, who, as
Phil. 2. 13.
St Paul says, works in us both to will and to do, if we will suffer him? He
never prayed and tried in earnest, watched, endeavored, and comported with
God's workings, that complains thus. You cannot but believe indeed they are too
hard while you hearken to the cravings of your lusts, your customs and your
inclinations; but why will you believe them still? Why will you die? Is it not
in fine worth while to strive against it, but even go on with the stream,
abandon all consideration of concern for that life? Indeed if that which God
thought worth the concern of all his Attributes, the contrivance of his Wisdom,
the assistances of his Almightiness, the invitations of his Promises, the
engagement of his Justice, Truth and Faithfulness; worth all the issues of his
Goodness Mercy and Benignity, worth the Incarnation, Death and Passion of his
Son, worth Christ's Blood to purchase, worth the giving him all Power in Heaven
and Earth, exalting him to his own right hand a Prince and Savior to give us
repentance and remission, that we might be capable of that life, and then to
bestow it on us: if this be not worth the while to strive for, not in
opposition to Hell eternal, then indeed we know not whom we have believed.
Consider how it is this issue that such put it to, a most fatal issue, but the
sure one of all those that will give credit to the suggestions of their flesh*
and this world; Lord Christ, we believe thee, help our unbelief.

SERMON XVII. THE CHILDREN OF THIS WORLD are wiser than the Children of Light.
Luke 16. 8. The Children of this world are in their Generation wiser than the
Children of Light.
BY the Children of this World are meant those that look after and take care
for only the advantages and satisfactions of this World, have no thought of,
or at most design for any other: by the Children of Light all those that see
farther, into one to come, and who look after that; accordingly all Christians
are called so, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5. of whom howsoever some are more and some less
Christian, all yet are supposed to have bin visited by that dayspring from on
high, enlightened in some measure by the Gospel, which brought Life and
Immortality to light.

2. Those former are said here, in their generation, in their own affairs of
this World, (which alone they busy and concern themselves in,) or in their
contrivance for their Age or time in this life, to be wiser than those others.
Now Wisdom, tho it import many offices and of highest concernment, which have
place in every serious action of our lives, it weighs interests and
obligations, and considers circumstances, which do sometimes make necessities,
and sometimes void them, and which cannot all fall under Rules and Precepts, and
are therefore left to the decisions of Prudence which does judge of them, and
then accordingly direct and steer the actions; yet these offices of Wisdom do
not come directly into this comparison of our Savior. Its main office in the
general is Arist. Eth. l. 6. c. 5.
(...), to consult and counsel well and rightly, which acts, since they cannot
be emploi'd but about things that must be don in order to an end; therefore

1. The Wise man always looks at, and intends some end; and

2. He pitches on such means as seem most useful, and directly tending to that
end: yea

3. Since this Wisdom is not speculative, but Ibid.
(...), is Ratio agibilium, deals in things that must be don; it therefore sets
the man upon the use of those means in pursuit of that end, it applies him to
it and guides him in the execution, and does all by Rules proper to each one of
these Offices.

Now as to these three Offices of Wisdom, we will try to find out how far, and
in what respect the Children of this World are wiser than the Children of
Light, the Worldling than the Christian, than the most of them, yea than the
best, and how this comes to pass; that so if men will not be wrought upon by
any Rules, not by God's Precepts, nor by means examples, yet comparing
themselves with themselves how much they fail of the observance of the Rules of
Prudence that concern the next World in comparison of their observance of those
very same Rules as to this World, they may shame themselves into discretion,
and may learn to be a Rule and an Example to themselves, which I must first
enforce by that property of Wisdom, which I mentioned in the first place, that
the wise man always looks at, and intends some end.

I suppose this, and I may well do so; for the World allows the action that
has no end, to be to no purpose, vain and foolish. Now the worldly man, as
such, proposes, as I told you, to himself the satisfactions of this world,
either more particularly of some one kind, or else all in general; and the
Child of Light, so far as he is so, designs especially the happiness of the
world to come. But then if in relation to their aims, those men be wisest that
propose the best end to themselves, the Child of Light is as much wiser than
the worldling, as eternal Blessedness above is better than the little broken
dying starts of satisfaction here below. And truly it is not in relation to
their several ends in general that our Savior here compares them, but the one,
says he, are wiser in their generation, in their own concerns; and that first
in relation to their ends.

For the worldly man is intent upon his end, his will is fixed to it, and his
affections all concenter in it. We are most assured of this by the pains he
takes to compass it, all which are carried on and sweetened and made easy merely
by his aims and expectation, which his heart is therefore passionately set on;
for men's actions will be cheerful, vigorous, and lively only by those measures
that the Soul breaths spirit into them. If the will and outward faculties looked
several ways, all his external motions would be force and violence, not nature;
but since his pursuits are eager, his affections are in them. I should enter
into an Abyss of matter and should find no end of the discourse, should I
attemt to show this in the several states of men of this World in relation to
their several inclinations to this World's advantages. Some pour out and sell
the blood and souls both of their own and other Nations, but to purchase some
accession to their Territories, to enlarge their bounds and glory. And it is
matter of astonishment how it is possible that humane nature should attain to
such a monstrous excess of barbarous and bloody villainy to acquire their ends,
as Sylla and Marius practiced. Yet neither should men wonder, and complain of
these so much; for every little great man, that has power, would be
enterprizing upon others, outing and supplanting, catching at more power,
cutting short, diminishing the rights of others to extend their own: and although
these Aggressors be not bloody as the former, (which it is possible they would
be, if they durst,) yet they are as unjust and false; and they that are not
able to do so much, are not in a state to put a force on others, force
themselves, break their own natures into soft compliances and servile
attendances to reach their ends. It Is thus in all conditions, the Soldier
charges and storms fire, and the Merchant storms the raging Sea and Tempests;
and if the man's heart be once bent on getting wealth, he ^ells his meals, his
sleeps, his sweat, the whole emploiment of his life, and his anxieties for that
which only brings him more care and more parsimony, and by consequence more
want.

Now is there any thing that is like this in those others who pretend to aim at
Heaven and the Blessedness that God is happy in? Nay do they mind it cordially,
when they stand before him in his house in order to it? Or is their heart upon
it there, while they are praying for it? Whenever we discern religious
performances are uneasy or unpleasing to us, we may then assure our selves the
mind is not intent upon the end of them. For it is impossible he should not
busy, concern himself extremely in the things that his affections are engaged
in, which possess him mainly, and which are his treasure. But it is as when God
asked the question by the Prophet Jeremy c. 2. 32. Can a maid forget her
ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten me days without
number. He asks a gentler question by the Prophet Isaiah c. 49. 15. Can a woman
forget her sucking child, that she should not remember the fruit of her womb?
There is some object for an heart, that it should mind and pour out it self in
tenderness to that dear part of its own breast and bowels; it is no wonder, if
it be not with so sensible affection set on any of those remoter objects, such
as God and Salvation in Heaven; but that they should be less considerable than
attire, the Robe of Immortality not so much minded as a dress, that to be gay
should challenge morning hours and cares, but to be blessed scarce engage a
prayer, wish, or thought, is sad. The truth is, such is man's corruption, that
there is scarce any inclination left in nature that desires, or is indeed
content to be upon the way to Life Eternal. Before any thing can be don for
man, he must be made willing not to destroy himself; for Phil. 2. 13.
St Paul tells us it is God that by his power works in us both to will and to
do. We must not only be obliged by duty not to neglect and forsake our own
mercies, but we must be wrought and made contented to receive them; all God's
arts and methods used, the terrors of the Lord, and the promises of Heaven, and
the strivings of the Holy Spirit, and the power of Grace employed to work in us
to will, for it is God that works in us to will.

In this the men of this World have especial advantages over the generality of
Christians, that they mind and are intent upon their aim. For the mere being so
engages them to the observance of that Rule of Prudence, which above all others
is to regulate the counsels and the actions of all men in order to their
several ends, if they mean to act wisely in relation to them, which is this,
namely to be true to their own ends, still observing their main point. I say
not they should never look off from it, mind no other; secondarily they must do
that. For as in the wise Government of Nations Princes must take care, not
only that their Subjects live in Godliness and honesty and keep all the Laws,
but that they may live, as 1 Timothy 2. 2.
St Paul says, peaceable and quiet lives, secure as far as may be from the
danger of their Enemies abroad or at home, in all tranquillity and plenty; and
the like in Oeconomical and Military Wisdom: So in Christian Prudence we are so
to look at everlasting life hereafter, as not to neglect this here, but may
contrive for the conveniences of this life, to avoid what may be dangerous or
incommode us, provided we do nothing that is against the other. So Acts 23., 67.
St Paul was wise, when both the Sadduces and Pharisees conspired against his
life, to break that their confederacy by throwing in the question of the
Resurrection of the dead, which was certain to divide them, since the thing he
said was true, and consequently since the means he used did not at all clash
with his higher purposes: the Rule thus signifying, that wise men in order to
whatever end their wisdom lies, must still be true to their own end, be careful
to do nothing that may take them off from, or oppose their main aim, (for that
were to destroy their own design) and must be certain never to avoid whatever
tends most to attain their purposes.

Accordingly the Children of this World are used to stick at nothing that is
likely to advance their ends. This was the case expressly of the Text, and
thereupon our Savior pronounces they are wiser. The unjust Stewards aim was to
provide what should maintain him and his ease and reputation the remainder of
his life, a comfortable plentiful subsistence, when his office should be taken
from him; and discerning no way to this, but to cheat his Master, and engage
his Master's debtors in the wrong too, making them as false and wicked as
himself, regards not the injustice, but pursues his mark. And so the Child of
Light, so far as he is wise, in order to his aim, the price of his high
calling; looks directly forward to it. If he cannot at once do his duty in
relation to his great end, life eternal, and take care of the conveniences of
this life, he will not for these let go the other, never will look after these,
but when, and so far as they will consist; does not turn aside to any other
ends that thwart that, is neither biased from his mark by any flattering
considerations of whatever this World temts with, nor is forced from it by
terrors or whatever sufferings. We have great instances of this in the second
book of Maccabees the seventh chapter, the Mother and her seven Sons, who
looking to obtain a blessed resurrection, as St Paul says Heb. 11. 35. did in
order to it resolve to die under God's Covenant of everlasting Life, would not
therefore accept life here, and deliverance from most cruel torments on
condition to transgress the Laws. Thus the three wise men in Dan. 3. 17, 18.
told Nebuchadnezzar, Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand. But if not, be
it known unto thee, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden
image which thou have set up. Thus Eleazar 2 Macc. 6. from v. 19. chose to die
gloriously rather than to live stained with an abomination, as it behooved them
that are resolute, to stand out against such things as are not lawful to be
tasted; tho the penalty proposed were loss of life, and tho the Officers that
were his friends besought him to bring flesh of his own provision, such as was
lawful for him to use, and make as if he did eat of the flesh taken from the
Sacrifice, he began to consider discreetly and as became his age and his most
honest Education from a child, or rather the holy Law made and given by God.
Therefore he willed them straitways to send him to the grave, v. 24, 25. For it
becomes not our age in any wise to dissemble, whereby many young persons might
think that Eleazar were now gone to a strange Religion; and so they through my
hypocrisy and desire to live a little time should be deceived by me.

Wendelin. Mor. Phil. p. 255.
It Is said the Prince of Conde gave this answer to King Charles the IX. of
France, who told him he must make his option either of going to Mass, or death,
or to perpetual prison: for the first by God's help he would never choose it, in
the other he submitted to his pleasure, but that God would certainly dispose of
them as it seemed good to him. On the other side we have an instance, Aul.
Gell. Noct. At. l. 1. c. 3.
Chilon, one of the wise men of Greece; who, whatsoever his last aim was, here
his end was to live justly and according to right reason, who upon his
deathbed told his friends, it was not then a time for him to flatter and
deceive himself, his thoughts did not suggest unto him any thing he had don in
his whole life that troubled him but one, that when he with two others was to
sit in judgment on a man that was his great friend, who had broke the Law so
heinously that it was necessary to condemn him, looking out for some means that
might save his virtue and his friend too, he resolved on this, that since the
suffrages were given so that none could know what sentence any one Judge in
particular pronounced, he persuaded his Companions to absolve him and himself
condemned him, thinking thus he salv'd his duty both as Judge and Friend: but
when he came to die, he thought 'twas wicked and perfidious to draw others in
to do that, which he held not just for him to do, he was not true to his own
end, but was diverted by the calls of friendship to serve other, and in that he
found his Wisdom failed him, and his Conscience condemned him. So that we have
seen the Rule exemplified in all kinds.

Now by this Rule we may make experiment both of the truth of what our Savior
here pronounces, and men's wisdom also of what kind it is, what the aim is,
whether of this World or of the other, and which of the pursuers are the truer
to their end, and so wiser.

There is scarce any one profession, dignity, or place of power, nor indeed
condition or state of life, but is adapted so that it may serve ends, either of
the Child of this World or the Child of Light, and contribute either to the
advantages of this life or of that which is to come. To take a view of one or
two of them: the man that gets into authority and place, may have for his end
to serve God and his Country, if he intend it for an opportunity truly and
indifferently to administer justice to the punishment of wickedness and vice,
and to the maintenance of God's true Religion and virtue; by such Sons of
restraint, as the Scripture calls them, vice may be discountenanced, goodness
cherished, till judgment run down like waters, and righteousness like a mighty
stream, Amos 5. 24.
and the Nation be taught to live in peace and honesty: or he may intend to
serve himself, to gratify his pride or his ambition by getting into place and
power, that so he may be over others, and his person more regarded, and his
will observed, and himself be more uncontrolable in his words and actions, may
be vices; or to gratify his covetous desires, if in the perquisites of his
place he find an opportunity for bribes, a power to sell justice, or what is
worse, impunity of wickedness, an office where men may buy off their duties,
yea their crimes and punishments, at least a place of doing something like this
as they find occasion. Now whereas Authority finds good men often modest in the
use of it as to its true ends of Religion and Justice, power will scarce give
them countenance and courage for its executions, it is uneasy, or they are
solicited or awed, and they look off, at least they seldom put themselves upon
it as upon the prosecution of a thing they mainly aim at, or they seldom
persevere so: on the other side in order to the other ends men struggle for
them, buy the opportunities of selling, give bribes that they may have power to
receive them, use all arts to compass offices to serve their worldly end with.
This is more notorious if the Office be Ecclesiastical, the true end of whose
Ministry is to gather Christ's Sheep that yet go astray, to carry on the
Salvation of those Souls which God has purchased with his own blood, to
preserve his Children from Eternal Hell, to be applying to the wounds and the
distempers of the body of Christ, to prepare his Spouse for the marriage of the
Lamb, to be Dispensers and Stewards of his means of Grace and Glory; in fine,
Fellow-workers with him to the Everlasting blessedness of those that are
committed to their charge, and who is sufficient for, and does not tremble at
these things? to all which yet they do solemnly in express words dedicate
themselves and their faithful endeavors, and are consecrated to it by the Holy
Spirit. Or the end of this Ministry may be to advance themselves, to reap the
profits, to receive the fleece, enjoy the honors, no great care appearing of
those other dreadful obligations, or concern that looks proportionable to them:
and if men will purchase this charge too, as some say, we may be sure they do
not buy the duty or those fearful obligations, and much less the Holy Spirit or
his graces; but it is somewhat else they bargain for, which they break through oaths
to come at, some other end they aim at.

2. As for states of life I must be endless should I enter into them, to name
but that which God himself did institute and first before all others, which he
made to be the complement of the felicities of Paradise, to be mutual support
in every state of life, give all the comforts of society with innocence, to
preserve from vice in the most dangerous and fatal instances, and so assist in
the recovery of lost Paradise; to fill earth, so as by their good education it
might people Heaven, and repair its loss of fallen Angels. But some also may
intend no more by it than dowry, or to serve the needs or interests of
families, and to raise them; for as for other satisfactions, they intend to
make them to themselves much otherwise, and design not this at all a bar to
any, do not look upon it as God meant it for a remedy, because they would not
be preserved from the transgression, only they purpose to have such posterity,
it may be, as the Law will suffer to inherit what their vices leave, and their
arts can secure from Creditors. Yet truly, since men learnt to disbelieve or
not regard their own immortality, and then learn not to care for living after
they are gone hence in a good name; it is not strange if they esteem not living
in posterity, and however brutish they are, mind not yet that immortality which
beasts endeavor toward, to live in successive Offspring: yea where such men
have it, they so little mind the giving them good education, that their vices
only seem to live in their descendants. Thus men convey ruin into all the
future Ages of their own families, and all this the most certain consequent of
depraving this Divine primary Institution which was of such absolute necessity
and benefit to mankind as he judged, and of slighting his ends in it, drawing
it aside, and so making it of no reputation to others.

By these few instances we may discern, that there is no profession place or
state of life, but may be taught to serve ends either of the Child of this
World or the Child of Light. It is not my part to affirm that most men make
them minister to worldly purposes, that is not necessary to make good my
Thesis, which says only that the Children of this World are truer to their own
ends, more careful to do nothing that may call them off from, or oppose their
purposes, more certain never to avoid what tends to the attaining them, and by
consequence are in their generation wiser. Men's practice in those instances
(and it is the like in others) look them in the face so, that it were a shame to
prove it to them; and it is as easily discerned what kind men's wisdom is of,
they need no marks to distinguish them. In a word, he that will act wisely in
order to those ends and objects which the light of Christianity discovers and
proposes, must in every serious action look before him and consider what he
purposes and designs by it, and, not giving ear to the suggestions of his
prejudices, interests or any passions, shutting out their counsels, think where
and what his aims are in it; whether by what he is about to do, he can intend
an act of justice, honesty, charity or religion; whether he can do it out of
love of God and for his service: or else passing by that, whether it does look
another way aside to something else, and then consider, since Almighty God is
infinitely just, and will be sure to punish what is grossly don amiss, and
eternally reward what is faithfully endeavored in his service, whether
therefore by thy action thou art going to work toward, and ascertain thy
felicity, or not. For if it be to gratify carnality or worldliness, to serve
but any present inclination that will call thee off from, or will make thee
worse disposed for duty, and will not comport with thy designs of Piety and
Heaven, then thou art not true to thy own ends, run'st counter to thy own
design and everlasting interest; but if thou can really and in truth intend
to do that thing for Heaven and God, on God's name do it, if I say, thou do
intend directly by just means, that being the second property of our wise man,
that he pitches on such means as seem most useful and directly tending to his
end, which I am next to speak to.

And as to this the Child of Light is furnished now with all, that he, who is
the Wisdom of the Father and his Everlasting Word, could judge was necessary or
conducing to his end, and would prescribe for the attaining it. For however in
the state of Heathenism they were much in the dark, both as to vice and virtue,
and to the rewards and punishments, and through the prejudices of their education
in a world corrupted wholly both in practices and principles; they sinned out of
piety, and their Religion was their greatest crime: yet he that brought life
and immortality to light, was himself John 14. 6.
the way, the truth and the life, the true living way to it, sent by his Father
to trace out, and walk before us in that only true way that can bring us to
that Life and immortality. Faith and Repentance make up the whole duty of man.
To believe on him, to endeavor faithfully and with sincerity to obey him, and
when 'ere we fail, to be humbled for it and amend, these are the true men's to
attain eternal Life, as God has by two most immutable things assured us, both
by Promise and by Covenant, which he sealed to us in the blood of his own Son,
which blood also purchased it. And his Word declares infallibly all the Rules
of our duty, not in general only, but often brought down to particular cases
with their circumstances, and resolved in most familiar instances. So that as
to this part of Wisdom, which consists in pitching upon good means, sure the
Child of Light is prepared as much better than the other, as the Wisdom of God
exceeds that of men. It Is true the other has the compass of all Arts,
Professions, and all other humane Inventions for his choice, but besides that
they are humane, how fantastically are most put upon their course of life as to
this world? To some chance does appoint it, others are determined to it often
without considering their capacities, whether they can fulfill the obligations
of the charge they undertake, are blindly set down; one for example for a
Soldier, this a Merchant, one a Scholar, this for Law, that other for the
Gospel etc. as if they thought God in the distribution of his faculties and
abilities were bound to follow their rash inconsiderate appointments. But be
the ways and means designed well, yet how insufficient they are for the most
part for their ends is every man's complaint, who seldom can attain them with
all industry imaginable, Eccles. 9. 11.
The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, Psalm 33. 16.
There is no King saved by the multitude of an host: the ways to some too are
false and slippery and on a precipice, the men that aim at high place often
find it, men that build on air, as others do on water, on the waves, men whose
means are most uncertain; so the paths in seas are also to the Merchant, and
the winds and weather: some are dangerous too as shelves and tempests to them.
So the Soldier's constant conversation is with death too, and his life is
always in his hand, says David. Yea many of the means men use are treacherous,
false arts, exactions, frauds, injustices, and bribes breed rust and canker in
the gold and silver which they get, and eat the flesh like fire, James 5. 2.
And what is taken from the Altar has a live coal in it. And as to the means
men use in order to the plentiful enjoiments of their good things, the
luxurious often eats surfeit, the intemperate drinks fever, the incontinent
embraces rotteness that eats out his marrow. So that certainly the worldly man
that aims at satisfactions of this life by such means, makes the worse choice,
and were wiser, if he sought them also by those means that tend to life
hereafter, to Salvation even in the ways of piety; for as David and St Peter
both prescribes, he that loves life and would see good days, let him eschew
evil and do good.

But he has a very obvious objection, it is the most concerning part of wise
men in the choice of means to pitch on such as are within their power; for to
deliberate about, and to intend impossibilities, is the most horrible instance
of folly. Now the man of this world chooses such means, as humanely speaking,
seem within man's power. But the means whereby the Christian must attain his
ends he thinks are not so, and he is glad to think so, it is Apology, and he had
rather have the excuse of God's not giving grace to him, than have the virtue;
and it is certain truth, that God must give it. O God, from whom all holy
desires, all good counsels, all just works do proceed, says our Church. All
holy desires, for he prepares the heart that his ear may hearken thereto, his
Spirit is the Spirit of supplication, he must intercede in us with groans
unutterable, as if men need not set themselves to it, but were to wait for
inspiration for it from that Spirit who blows where he lists. All good
counsels also and just works are from him; For we are not able of our selves to
think a good thought, as of our selves, all our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor.
3. 5. the very preparations of the heart are from him Psalm 10. 17. it is he
that does touch the heart, 1 Samuel 10. 26. and open it, Acts 16. 14. turn it,
Jer. 31. 18. he must draw us, John 6. 44. which if he do not, no man comes to
him; and must give an heart to know him, Jer. 24. 7. give a new heart, Ezekiel.
36. 26. and in all variety of expression, a new spirit I will put within you,
and will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and cause you to walk in
my statute, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. In a word, he works
in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. Now since he only does all this at
his own pleasure, as St Paul affirms there, therefore it is not in man's power:
I know, O Lord, says Jeremy c. 10. 23. that the way of man is not in himself,
it is not in man that walks to direct his steps, no not to his main sovereign
end. And in this the worldling thinks he has advantage; but does he not know
that he must pray too, as well as labor for his own bread Matt. 6. 11. it is
God produces all in order to it; He brings food out of the earth, and gives
wine that makes man's heart glad, and bread which strengthens it, Psalm 104.
14, 15. He that waters the hills from his chambers v. 13. and his clouds drop
fatness, he prepares men corn, Psalm 65. 9, 10. etc. It Is he that gives us
power to get what we have, and he that does not know this, knows not God, Deuteronomy.
8. 14, 17, 18. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, and say in thy
heart my power and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth; but thou
shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to get
wealth, yea he gives it it self, whatever labor we bestow in getting it 1 Chronicles. 29. 16. O Lord our God, all this store comes of thine hand, and is all
thine own; riches and honor come of thee v. 12. It Is I gave them corn, and
wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and her gold [even that] whereof they
did make Baal, made an Idol. And God is so jealous of his honor in this
particular, that if men do not render this acknowledgment, he threatens to take
all away: Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof
and will recover my wool and my flax given to cover her nakedness, Hos. 2. 8,
9. And if he do not take it, he must bless it, otherwise we shall not thrive,
shall have no comfort in it; for the blessing of the Lord it makes rich, and
he adds no sorrow with it, Prove. 10. 22. Without that, bread may stuff us but
not nourish, we may have saturity but not have sustenance 1 Hag. 6. 9. for I
did blow upon it, says the Lord. So that for ought appears, if Scripture
signify to the men of this world, as here they appeal to it, the means whereby
they should attain their Ends seem no more in their power then the others. For
as in the order of Grace those general rules to which he has determined the
conversion of a sinner, God must work with his means to make them effectual; so
in the order of Nature those general rules by which all things in nature are
effected; he must prepare the means, and bestow the power, and bless the
endeavors, yea and himself give all too, otherwise they also cannot be
effectual. Thus he has in both appointed, that in one and the other we should
live with constant application to, and with entire dependence on him in the
faithful use of means both in the one and the other order. So that the
objection is quite vanished. It Is true tho sometimes God does blast men's actions
so, that do they what they can, they cannot prosper for some secret cause
that is unaccountable to us, yet because for the most part in the sphere of
Nature, so far as the men of this world diligently use the means, they attain
their aims in some measure; therefore notwithstanding all the interest God
pleads in these things, they make no doubt but they are sufficiently in their
power; much more then those in the sphere of Grace are in that of the
Christians, where they have express promises of not being disappointed, and are
required by most strict and multiplied commands which represent the work of
grace as duty. For tho all good desires and Prayers, come from God's good
Spirit, and from his preparing of the heart as we saw, yet Eccles. 18. 23.
Before thou praiest, prepare thy self, and be not as one that temts God, as
one that waits for a particular inspiration to it, one that will not pray
without a Miracle. Tho God is said to open Lydia's heart; yet Rev. 3. 20. he
dos only knock, and we must open. He turns the heart, and therefore Ephraim
prays Jer. 31. 18.
turn thou me, O God: yet by Ezekiel he says Ezekiel. 18. 30.
turn your selves from your transgressions, and bids Judah Jer. 18. 11.
Return now every one from his evil ways, and make your ways and your doings
good. He promises to circumcise the heart Deuteronomy. 30. 6. but yet he bids them
circumcise the foreskin of their hearts, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. He dos engage to put a
new heart and a new spirit in them, Ezekiel. 18. 31. In fine although he works in
us both to will and to do as S. Paul says, yet he therefore charges us, Work
out your own Salvation, For it is God that works in you.

Now when the man of this world thinks all those expressions of Gods workings
in the course of Nature are such as yet leave Phil. 2. 12.
all to him to do, so far, that he were a Fanatic as to worldly interests who
without endeavoring in the use of means, should look that God would work out
his ends for him, give bread without sowing, nourish without eating,
notwithstanding that Scripture dos ascribe to God the entire efficacy: shall
the like expressions in the order of grace, leave nothing for the Christian to
do, especially when the same endeavors are commanded him too? I know not
whether these expressions made to us to turn our felves etc. do make more
Pelagians that deny all need of grace; or else ascribed to God, make more deny
all need of our endeavors, even of our prayers, or of any thing but more
dependence, waiting for his season. Whereas indeed we are to work, because he
works and gives means to enable us; and not to use the means he gives us is to
temt him, it is to refuse Salvation by the ordinary methods of his workings, and
expect new miracle, it is to be that fanatic that dos look to live without food.
It Is gospel truth to say it is not the direction of Gods laws can rule us, nor
his promises allure us, nor his threats affright us; but his Holy spirit must
direct and rule our hearts. Coll. 19. Sun. aft. Trin. and he must write his
laws there Heb. 8. 10. and he must give us a heart to love and dread him. To
affirm the other is heresy: and to say that a sinner can dispose himself for
his conversion, or that the outward means can by their own moral efficacy turn
a sinner, is an heresy against grace, but grace where it has not been too far
resisted, still accompanies the means. Gods word is Romans 17.
the ministration of the Spirit and of 2 Cor 3. 8.
rightousness, and his word and Spirit go together Acts 7. 51. for to resist
one is to resist the other. And if the heart be not by evil education, bad
converse and example (great advancers these of reprobation) depraved, either
hardened or made dissolute, or overgrown with principles that choke all God's
good seed that can be sown in it, those means so assisted call attention, work
some disposition to regard them. The ordinariest means are blessed to that end.
Prove. 23. 14. thou shall heal him with the rod and deliver his soul from hell.
Yea they do it, tho the force of good education have been broken, when these
gracious means find congruous soft seasons, lay hold on occasions of calamity
or such like; and they move the inclinations, and so make soil prepared for
God's husbandry. And since experience shows us mere Gentile breeding and
converse, if there be but care and parts, can temper, take off, at least
moderate all insolence and passion, make men generous, and meek and humble,
decent as to all behavior toward God and man, not one ill vicious habit in
their practice, but an universal probity upon the face of their whole life; why
therefore may not those beginnings of God's workings, which he never fails to
carry on for his part, do as much? And if they but keep off ill habits, and by
constant practice weaken inclinations to them; here it is plain that God's means
of grace find not so much resistance, and that which in another state of mind
would not have been sufficient there becomes effectual; especially when with
them that work, he works, and as S. James says, gives more grace to them that
use it, and diverts temtations, enables to do all things through Christ that
strengthens. O that the Christian would but try and strive to use his means as
heartily as the Child of this world! It is because men are not so industrious
for salvation, answer not the motions of God's Spirit, but neglect grace given,
when the worldly man is indefatigable in, and therefore is wiser in order, to
his end.

Yet in relation to their proper means in order to their several ends I must
confess the worldling does observe the rules of prudence better; the true child
of this world for the most part chooses the prescribed known ways to his end,
and does use the general means and methods of the world, gets into a profession
or a place in which if he use false arts, they are trades now, mysteries well
taught and known; there are few adventure on untrodden paths: Projectors seldom
thrive. But the generality of Christians who would gladly reconcile God and
this world, life hereafter with the being well here, do not therefore acquiesce
in Gods means only, but make Principles, by-Rules of Conscience, which they
guide themselves by on occasions, and have taught themselves to think they are
safe ways, and such as do not lead them from salvation.

It is too well known what one sort of men have attemted in this case, how by
new-raised principles of Probability and directing the intention, they have
reconciled all villainy with Christian life, made it safe yea meritorious to
lie, forswear, and bear malice, to defame, revenge by either force or
treachery, rebel, massacre, drown whole Nations in their own blood, depose or
murder Kings. But passing these as monsters in Religion and honest heathen
humanity; there are pretenders to some tolerable regard of God and virtue, who
on occasions, fit their conscience to their convenience. Besides S. Paul's good
Conscience void of offense to God and man, there is one of gentility, of
Politics, of Honor, of friendship, and a conscience for persons, times and
places, one of compliance and one of the mode, one for the interests of a
Profession, and the like. I might have named some quite the other way; the
Conscience that is ruled by rouling changeable Principles, which* play fast and
loose, now strains at Gnats, and now can swallow camels: or a Conscience of
caprice, that sets it self strong sudden heats of nice observances sometimes in
little things, sometimes in greater, but is firm in nothing. But waving these,
and that for Politics too, which is governed wholly by reasons of State, which
is too nice and high for my consideration; the man of honor makes himself a
Principle which will allow him to require reparations for the least affront so
called; for otherwise what Gentleman would be of Christ's Religion; he can
right himself with sword and pistol and with a good Conscience. The conscience
for friendship is like that of Chilon, whom I mentioned to you, has a by-rule.
And indeed who is there almost that has the same sentiments or laws for equity
and justice in his own cause or the cause of those he is most concerned for, as
in others? They mesure not by the same standard: do not think in conscience the
same case is like when it makes against, as when it serves a turn. As for
persons, so for times. We have one conscience for the time of health, and one
for sickness. Things do not equally seem good or evil in their different
seasons. And as for places, ut vestitum, sic sententiam aliam domesticam, aliam
forensem says the Orator. Men have their shifts of conscience as of clothes;
their dress is carefuller, and their rules stricter much abroad in public, then
when at home or out of sight. As for the conscience of compliance, many do not
only do things which they have dislike to, out of compliance, but satisfy
themselves because they do them with reluctance against their inclination, to
avoid the being singular or offensive. For the mode too; Men learn to interpret
God's laws also by the practice of the age, live and judge by imitation and
example. The man's conscience tho it boggle at first sight of dangerous
uncomely liberties, yet conversation with them, as it takes away the horror of
them, so he thinks it does the danger and ill influence. And as fashion makes
all dresses to be mode and not look uncomely; so the custom of these things
makes them seem indifferent. A Conscience also for the interests of a
Profession: as in trade for example, and in Corporations of it, it thinks their
combinations for the better keeping up the Company fair and honest, and
therewithal make tricks and exactions lawful. And in single traders such
another principle makes Princes Laws be broken, and their dues stolen without
any check of Conscience; and I verily believe that many think these are not
inconsistent with a good mind. I might have instanced in other professions;
particularly in that which satisfies it self in the defending manifestly
wrongful, and in right causes, in protracting suits to men's great molestation
and the ruin of just rights. But in truth this is paltry trifling with
religion, having false weights and mesures of what is lawful and unlawful,
things that God abhors: and indeed these frauds will in the end return upon
their authors, and the unhappy artist will most certainly deceive his own soul.
For he never can arrive at life, whom he that is the way does not lead thither,
Christ and his rules only can introduce us into the mansions of Eternity. It Is
true there may be doubts sometimes about the way of duty (for it is that I speak
to) in applying general rules; for circumstances may perplex and vary cases,
obligations seem to clash and quarrel, so that one may be uncertain which to
follow, what means he should take to attain his great end.

2. Now in case of such uncertainty, as to the means, the Child of this world
does observe a Rule of Prudence better then the Christian, for he takes advice.
For who intends to purchase an inheritance but he goes to Counsel, and if there
be the least appearance of uncertainty in the Title, spares no charge to have
it searched and to be sure? The least indisposition drives the man that aims at
life to his Physician. In every difficulty of a voyage where there is any
apprehension of a shelf or rock, the Merchant and the Master will consult the
Pilot. But in the voyage toward heaven how many make shipwreck of a good
conscience, because they will not commit themselves to any conduct? How often
do they shake their Title to God's inheritance, because they will not take
advice of him at whose mouth God commanded they should seek the Law? And who
does go to the Physician of Souls to prevent death Eternal? I do not say men
should betake themselves to a director in each action of their lives; For who
goes to a Doctor to know whether he should eat stones or poison; or who asks a
Lawyer whether he should keep or burn his evidences? Now for the most part what
I ought to do, what to forbear, is every jot as clear as those, except where
circumstances trouble, or else seeming cross obligations a muse our judgment;
and then for a man not to ask direction in his way to heaven, is unanswerable
folly in a man that will inquire the way to the next village; it is nothing but
a wretchless stupid carelessness in the Eternal interests of his own Soul. When
he that takes the best directions he can get with this sincere intent that he
may not transgress, may quiet his own mind in this that he has don his utmost
faithfully toward duty, and in doing that with our good God shall be
interpreted to have don his duty, if he also faithfully pursue the means
directed, the 3d. property of Wisdom, which does set the man upon the use of
those means which he must attain his end by; the last thing I am to speak too.

Now as to this I must confess the Child of this world wiser: and give up the
cause. Whoever does resolvedly intend his profit, pleasure, honor, or whatever
state in this life, it is the business of his parts, his study and his whole
life to pursue it: and it is so while the appetite of any carnal end is eager
in him, Anger, hate, revenge etc. And I cannot say it is so with the Christian
as to his end. But the worldly man besides the zeal in using all means in
pursuit of his end, he observes two Rules that wisdom dictates, with more
carefulness; 1. Be circumspect, then wary; both prescribed us by St. Paul
Ephesians. 5. 15. See that ye walk (...) circumspectly, not as fools but wise, as
we translate it, and the Vulgar caute warily, with caution. Now the first of
these two, Circumspection signifies the looking every way about him to discern,
or if he can foresee whatever may obstruct him in his progress, give him any
hindrance in whatever shape it is likely to attemt it; whether it do threaten
with inconvenience, or do flatter with the deceitful appearances of being
useful; come with treachery or open opposition, as a false Friend or a known
Enemy: and the other, Caution sets him upon all the care he can make use of to
avoi'd or rid himself of such impediments of what kind soever.

Now it is evident the man of this world in whatever occupation, trade,
profession, or place he may be, from the lowest to the highest, who proposes
any one thing to himself, and does not live ex tempore and follow ends and
objects as the boy's do Crows, but has at least some one design, so far as he
does so, looks round him, that he may shun every thing that would defeat,
divert, or but disturb him in it, and endeavors to move every stone, which he
may stumble at in his pursuit, whatever may be an impediment to his seize.

Now the Child of Light has warning given him by the wise man also, My Son if
thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for temtation. There are those
that will attemt to break his progress in pursuit of any such designment; His
enemy the Devil like a roaring Lion, his false friend the Flesh, and a third
(that will assault him under both appearances) the World, sometimes by reproaches
taunts and insolent scorn, by turning piety and virtue into raillery,
discouraging men from the pursuit, sometimes by vexatious molesting, injuring,
oppressing good men that they think will bear it, making a prey of the meek,
patient and long-suffering, treading under foot the humble; because they know
their principles will make them suffer it: and sometimes by invading them with
downright persecution, when duty and Religion are made crimes, true faith and a
good Conscience mark men out for ruin. Sometimes on the other side it courts
us, shows us all it is glory, it is places, powers, plenties, pomps and gayeties,
and so kindles in us the desire of wealth, which is the only way to compass all
those; which desire if it touch the heart once, if the world can charm us once
with the deceitfulness of riches as our Savior words it Matthew. 13. 22. we are
quite betrayed. For these deceitful riches, tho they are and may be made great
instruments of good, and most well minded men, when they are in the way of
getting them, imagine they shall do more good with more of them, when they have
got them, they deceive them, prove occasions and foments of vices, do not only
serve, but grow incentives to those Sins, which men have any inclinations too,
yea many times betray them into those they before had no disposition toward,
by putting them into their power, and by heightning for them. And however many
that possess them, do make blessed use of them, yet those that seek them and
endeavor their increase on the account of doing so, to make them help their
entry into life, do in our Savior's judgment for the most part so deceive
themselves, and are as sottish as a man that should get up upon a Camel, to
ride through the eye of a Needle. It Is our only wisdom to beware of all
temtations. 'Twas Christ's last advice in that agony both of his Love and
Sufferings. Watch and pray that ye enter not into them; Look about you, give no
opportunities to them to approach you undiscerned, advert still that you may be
either able to avoi'd them, or have time to fortify and call up all the
succors Reason and Religion offer, and all those of Grace, which God is ready
to bestow upon your prayers, that you may not be surpised and taken
unprepared; and rather bear and suffer any thing then yield. Whatever it is that
is most precious to thee, serves thy greatest uses, contributes to thy most
charming satisfactions, rather part with it then let it temt thee. It Is our
Saviors charge, if thy right Eye offend, ensnare, thee pluck it out and cast it
from thee. It is sad indeed when the Eye that should watch, the organ of
Circumspection and with which we should discern the snare to shun it, should it
self lead into it, and be it. But it is sadder when the snare is dear to men as
the usefullest part and most delightful of their senses, when they can no more
endure to withdraw from temtation, then to cut off their right hand, or pull
out their right Eye, when they use those parts to look about for ruin, and lay
violent hands upon the instruments of their Perdition; when they will loose any
of those organs rather then not pursue what the temtation suggests, rather cut
off a right hand and pull out a right Eye, then not satisfy the appetite it
raises, give up all their own aims, and the worldlings also for that only;
loose their Salvation, their God and their own Soul, spend wealth and strength
and body, honor and understanding on one sin, that they may become their own
ruins here in this life, and the type of their judgment in the life to come.
Now these are such instances of folly that the men that practice them and call
themselves Christians, are not to be put in the comparison with the children of
this world, who in every part of wisdom are much wiser, in relation to their
ends, and to the means they pitch upon, and to the use of those means in
pursuit of their intentions: which I undertook to show.

And then when all their Wisdom is foolishness with God, and branded with the
worst extremest names of it in Scripture; in what rank of folly stand most
Christians? And truly to sum up all, it is a most astonishing contemplation how
it is only in these everlasting interests that most men act without any
consideration, as men wholly destitute of understanding, and that could not
think. He that has a journey or a voyage which he must make, and accordingly
designs, he takes some thought of fit means of conveyance, and providing
whatsoever else is at least necessary for it, never is so sottish as to choose
and prepare a Ship for land, or a Coach for Sea, nor to hire and put himself in
any one he meets by hazard, without minding whether it is going and will carry
him. Now each man has a journey to the other World, knows he must make it, and
is going on it, and and pretends at least to be assured there are two ways to
that world; one that leads to felicities which never can dye, and the other to
as endless and immortal misery and torment: yet the one of these however
dreadful, and the other how desirable soever never enter into his
Consideration so as to weigh ought with him, and to incline him in the choice
he makes of that way which he walks in all his life long. And tho men know that
they approach nearer to that terrible moment every day, and have for ought they
know few paces more, but are to step immediately into one of these two
Eternities; yet if you ask them why they go that way they march in, not
another, whether they ever minded where that way will lead them: why alas they
did not ask themselves that question, may be never yet reflected on it; but
their inclinations and affections, the example of converse with others carried
them along without consideration whither: these did guide them wholly, and from
these they took their sentiments of things and actions, which they followed
without ever giving heed too, or examining how they came by them, or what
grounds of truth or goodness they have for them, but pursued them constantly,
and doing so, that while those sentiments remain in them as judgments, and
remaining long so and by that becoming prejudices, with them go for Principles;
and if ever they be called on to reflect upon the way they walk in, being
willing out of a desire that is natural to man, and is inbred in him, to justify
themselves as much as may be in their inclinations and their actions, they seek
reason or color of it to guild over and beautify the principles they took up
so. Thus they come to have their maxims and rules, and so a Conscience which
excuses or at least does not reprove their conduct; and so go on confidently,
and acquiesce in those, and never take nor ask other direction. Yet these very
men will hire a Tutor to direct their footings that they may be to the mesures
and the rules of Music; will be bountiful and docile and obedient to him, and
spend time too in reflecting how to set their paces to the cadences of an air:
so much more considerable it is to dance well then to live and dye well. No
guide in that science that must teach them how to be for ever blessed; they
march forwards in the way they fall into, in which provided all their appetites
be entertained well, and themselves diverted, the good company submissive and
complaisant, and let them have their will, and rule it, then they go on
pleasantly not ever thinking what way they are in or whither going. Much less
are they circumspect and wary, watching both their ways and steps; but rather
love to walk amongst, break into snares; and so walking so entangled, their
last fatal minute overtakes them: never till then sensible, but then made so by
despair, when, as the wise man words it, they repenting and groaning for
anguish of spirit, shall say within themselves, Wisdom c. 5.
The Righteous we had in derision and a proverb of reproach, we fools accounted
his life madness; how is he numbered among the Children of God, and his lot is
among the Saints. Therefore have we erred from the way of truth; we have
wearied our selves in the way of wickedness, yea we have gone through deserts.
Where there lay no way; but as for the way of the Lord we have not known it.
What has pride profited us, or what good has riches with our vaunting brought
us? All those things are passed away like a shadow. For the hope of the ungodly
is like a thin froth that is driven away with the storm, but the Righteous live
for evermore; the reward of them is with the Lord, and the care of them is with
the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful
Crown from the Lords hand. Which Crown God of his infinite mercy grant, etc.

SERMON XVIII. THE LIGHT OF THE BODY is the Eye.
Matt. 6. 22, 23. The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thy eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness?
IN days that above all others so pretend to light, yet then in which the
Church was scarcely ever more involved in darkness, wholly overspread with
error and confusion, and these new lights prove but like those fires that do
mislead them that are overtaken by the night; guide them only out of their way
into dangers and precipices, and make them loose themselves in many wanderings;
only Religious meteors: It cannot be unseasonable or needless to try what kind
of light it is that Christ would have us follow; if all were true those others
do pretend, 'twould give them but enlightened brains: but Christ's light here
will give us shining lives, make our whole bodies full of light; and which
light if men want, notwithstanding all their wild illuminations, they are still
in the most amazing darkness. For the light of the body is the eye. etc.

The words are clearly the former part of a comparison, only hinting at, and
leaving us to guess and to draw out the latter; which has by diverse been
assigned diversely. In their direct view they say thus much, The Eye is the
candle of the body: that is, as in the body of man the Eye is the director,
does that office to it that a lamp dos in the dark, shows it which way it
should walk, what it should do, and by its guidance the body can discerningly
set about its offices and perform its functions: and if the Eye be as it ought,
pure and right, it directs well; but if not, the body not being able to
discern, not only cannot exercise its functions as it ought, but also may walk
on in dangerous errors, and stumble upon precipices into ruin. So also it fares
in our spiritual estate. But the particulars thereof are not by all agreed
upon, and are very variously rendered. The single and the evil eye being expressed
by such words as do assure us that a spiritual eye is here intended, yet leaves
place for enquiry into what it is: and tho several meanings have been pitched
upon, and but one was meant, yet each having either large authority or reasons,
I know not why I may not apply it too, and treat of every one: seeing each way
afford's us true and good instructions. And first that which has most
generally been adhered to is that the singleness of the Eye should mean the
singleness or simplicity of heart, and purity of intention. So Abimelech Genesis
xx. 5, 6. when he had taken Sarah to him, pleads for himself he did it in the
simplicity of his heart, and God acknowledges he did so; with an honest
intention, meaning to make her his wife, not knowing that she was so to another
man. And then the second part of the comparison says thus: So also if thy heart
be single and sincere, thy intentions right to God, if in all thy actions thou
intend his service and Glory, that thy good meaning will derive a goodness into
all thy doings, thy whole body will be full of light, all thy actions holy; but
if thy intentions be vitiated, if in the duties I named before, alms, prayer,
fasts thou aim not at my service, but the praise of men, if thy heart be
impure, mudded with the desire of earthly things, which I did last forbid thee;
thy actions must needs be dark and foul: yea indeed how. great a spiritual
darkness, how much unholiness must needs dwell upon thy doings, if the only
thing, that should give light, and shed an holiness into them, thy intentions
be dark and evil? To this sense I shall first speak, and divide my text into
subjects rather then parts.

1. The first shall be this, the lamp of the body is the eye, a good intention
a well meaning must enlighten and direct every action to make it not reprovable.

2. I shall lay before you a single eye, show you what is required to make a
Religious intention singly and purely so.

3. That from such a single eye the body shall be light, that such good hearty
meanings do either break out into holy actions, or are accepted as such.

4. That such a single eye makes the whole body light, that by such pure
religious intentions a man may sanctify all the actions of his life.

5. The remaining part of the text, but if thine eye be evil etc. being but the
affirming all the contraries to these of the evil eye, the bad meaning, the
intention that is not honest and pure, must needs be proved and pressed in
pressing of the former part; and therefore that shall only furnish me with
application.

First of the first, the candle of the body is the eye, a good intention; a
well meaning must enlighten and direct every action to make it not reprovable.
I mean in actions that are any way matter of duty* I know only an innocent
harmless intention, if there be no other unhandsom circumstance, will serve to
make the common actions of life innocent and not blameable; but without the
Religious intention the action cannot be accounted duty, and upon this score
it is in Religion reprovable.

Among all creatures here below man is the only one that has a faculty to
choose his ends, and consequently that can direct his intentions. Things without
life are carried only to the makers ends, not to their own; the stone however
by its own weight it hurry downwards to it is sphere of rest, and as it does
approach goes faster still and faster, as if there were it is inclination, and
that inclination were more sensible as it came nearer, and so increased upon
it; yet it is determined to it is line, it is bound to move by plummet, and cannot
possibly turn one point aside, not make the smallest crook to meet a nearer
knob of earth that stretches up it self to give it soonest rest: and all it is
have is only weight not inclination, not choice, but natural violence as it
were. Things that have life and sense, have inded aims, and these do prosecute
those aims with eager strong intentions; but they also are limited,
determinantur ad unum, as the Schools speak; their end is set to them, nor do
they pick and choose upon comparative considerations; that which strikes their
present sense with strongest relish, that they necessarily fix upon: and
therefore Buridan tells us of an Ass that was so justly placed between two
bottles of hay of so exact and equal sent and goodness, that neither of them
being able to determine his appetite to the one more then the other, his
inclinations stood divided equally betwixt those equal invitations, and being
not able to prefer, nor consequently choose any, he wanted both, and two
bottles sterv'd him whom one would have preserved. But it is not so with man,
for as there is as great a difference betwixt his ends as does distinguish Hell
from heaven in obedience on one side, and transgression on the other; life and
death, eternity of blessedness, and immortality of misery are set before his
choice; one of these everlastingnesses sets out it self before every action of
his that is not merely indifferent, and offers it self to be his aim. So also
he has (as it mostly proves) a most unhappy privilege, that he can choose his
ruin: and as by the assistance of that Grace, which God does not deny, he can
intend those actions that look directly toward happiness; so he can by the
power of his will prosecute his own destruction. Now then as for him that can
thus choose his ends, that can direct his intentions either to good or evil, to
limit this his freedom to the choice of evil would be most unreasonable; God
knows it is too much so for him to let the lawful delights of his senses
according to their degrees and strengths fix and determine much of his
intentions; and to employ his soul to spring and start such pleasures, and let
his appetite still hover over them, and the fairest quarry always engage it in
the pursuit, tied to that object that does strike his sense with greatest vigor
of temtation: for this is to live merely a life of sense, it is to degenerate
from man into the rank of lower creatures; for just these are their aims, and
so they make their choices: and did God place an immortal and Angelic Spirit in
a man only to make him be a more sagacious brute? But then much more then
brutish would it be when as two objects court his choice, as different as Hell
and Heaven in desireableness; for him to choose the terrors, to pursue that
which carries with it inconsistency to all his happinesses. The beasts cannot
do so, they cannot choose the worse, but man will prefer misery, and make his
choice of wretchedness. And truly thither every action of man does tend, that
is not otherwise levelled and directed by honest intentions. It is the meaning
that distinguishes the deeds, and as the mind intends, so it alters the
exterior action into good, bad or indifferent. If I do take a walk to the next
town, whether I do it for fresh air and recreation, or else to make a
charitable Christian visit, so to relieve or help a weak sick soul, or go to
meet companions of my sin and to appoint or execute a vice, the walk is still
the same, but those so different ends do make the action tend to consequences
of an eternal difference. Nay the aim has so great an influence upon the
deeds, that tho the action be an action of a virtue or Religion, yet according
to the quality of the man's meaning that performs it, so it may either lose its
virtue, or transmute into a vice, and the very Religion become sin. The first
part of this chapter is all demonstration of this: it is lawful without question
by all good humane means to seek to advance my reputation, but he that does
endeavor it by his devotions, tho his life be all strictnesses, and he do spend
himself in alms and fasts and prayers, by all these holy practices he does not
purchase the reward of piety, but only praise of men; so that all that Religion
cease to be holy, and if it mainly aim at that, becomes hypocrisy. And all
the reason in the world it should be so; for he that merely in order to his
ends does choose and practice such means, it is certain he does love those means
no otherwise then as they serve that end, and therefore tho the means be
virtue, he does not love the Religion of that virtue, but the convenience of it
as it does contribute to his aim. Now if it be convenient to an ill end, it is
an evil convenience, and so in choosing virtue he chooses evil; if but to an
indifferent end, it is an indifferent convenience; and so the Religion becomes
insipid and indifferent; and tho there be honesty in the thing, yet it is by
accident as to his mind, it is not for that he chooses it, but for its
usefulness; and ordinarily it is not that males it convenient or useful for
ends, or if it do, yet the appearance of it is as good as it is it self; and so
it is clear, howsoever he choose virtue, yet the virtue has no interest in his
performance, not in his intention, nor election. Thus he that is charitable to
one in distress on purpose to oblige him afterward for some designs he has in
using him, he does contract, not give, and it is not alms, but commerce, it is
rather earnest of wages, then a liberality. She that abstains from vicious and
suspected company, and observes strictest chastity merely to avoid an ill name
or worse consequences, does not fear God, but shame and being undone, and it is
not virtue this but care of reputation: she is no more chaste as to the Religion
of it, then she that does abstain from places suspected of diseases, that would
spoil her face or do her other injury: she does avoid uncleanness, as she does
small pox or breaking of her limbs; and she that will not lame or deform her
self is every jot as virtuous. They that make long prayers for a pretense to
cover their devouring widows houses, that their opinion of their Religion may
palliate some other wickednesses they have; their prayers only pull down woes
upon them Matthew. 23.

They that go to the place of Gods Worship and Service and to the exercises of
devotion, intending there to offer up some eyes and thoughts to some object,
which their vicious inclinations have service for, their very Religion is
Idolatry; and truly they who do good actions to an ill intent, their wickedness
is multiplied, they do not only sin in the intention, but they defile the
means, they make Piety serve their vice, and Christ Minister unto Belial.
Occasion enough to persuade us to look to our intentions, and have a care our
meanings be purely and singly religious; which when they are I am now next to
show you.

Now for this intentions may be considered either precisely in order to the end
they aim at, without taking in the consideration of the means, by which I must
prosecute that end; as for instance, from this time forward I intend strictly
and duly to observe my private and the public hours of prayer; nothing but such
an occasion, as God shall interpose, shall hinder me. Or I intend according to
my ability to practice charity to the distressed. Or secondly the man considers
also what means there are for him to pursue that intention, and chooses what he
thinks the most convenient, and by that means intends to compass his designs.
So in order to my constant keeping prayers, I will be sure to rise so early, as
that the have of any business I shall have, shall not hurry me from my private
morning devotions; I will be up timely enough for both: and I will so and so
order my business of the day, and so cut off, or so dispose my pleasures as
that they shall not enterfere with prayers, shall not entrench on my Religious
hours, but doing so and so I will have void spaces left for them, that are so
much more my concerns; and will not suffer trifles to detain me from them; or
from any part, such as I may easily shake off, or defer for so much better
interests then trifles, as the business of my prayers is; which yet truly it is
to be doubted they do scarce believe, that let trifles turn them either from
all or part, or slacken them in coming. And for my charity I do intend out of
such my revenue, or my wages, or out of the superfluity of my expenses (from
which I do discern I could spare something, and be never the worse) to lay aside
constantly for the uses of that virtue. And so any man intends to set upon the
serious practice of sobriety and temperance or chastity; and then considers
that it is necessary for him to avoid such and such engaging practices, or such
and tempting companions, and occasions, and thereupon intends that too: where
we see the means come in with the end to make up the intention; as where they
do not, God knows the bare intention of the end is but imagination and fancy.

1. Now as to both these intentions: First for the precise intention of the
end; that in religious aims that may be single and pure, I must 1. take heed
that neither temporal nor vicious aims do mix in any degree with my Religion
in my thoughts, nor that the pious meaning do decline unto any such intention.
For any either mixture or defilement, makes a thing not pure and single. Do not
mistake me, temporal ends such as profit, recreations; reputation are not only
lawful, but necessary for our intentions, provided they do not transgress their
bounds of time ot mesure, but they must not in any degree come into your
obediences to God. To intend both in that, were to endeavor that which Christ
says we cannot do, 'twere to serve God and Mammon, or God and pleasure, or the
Lord and Honor: yea 'twere to serve them with the Lords Religion, to make the
very worship of my God be the Idolatry of my covetousness, it is one of the
worst kinds of sacrilege to alienate his own service from him. Nay I must take
a care that an intention piously begun, do not decline into any degree of such
meanings. I may out of a real sense of my imperfections or detestation of some
of my former practices begin a confession, and complaint against my self, and
have the thoughts of emtyness and of humility of heart, when this intention
springs within me, but if I then find some have a better opinion of me for it,
and speak well of my modesty or my humility, and that opinion do begin to
tickle me, that air to fill me (and I shall easily discover it, if there be any
thing of such an aim, for if I cannot well endure another should say that of me
which I say my self, then it is sure that my confessions were either
dissimulation, or fishing after praise:) here the humble intention declines,
and now it is time to have a care and turn my thoughts from other men's opinions
to my own guilty consciousness.

So for vice, if the same confessing man acknowledge sadly former loosnesses, or
out of a good meaning tell some story to aggravate the vileness of such fault,
and doing this before a female auditor makes her pleased with the expression of
it, and as she begins to like the person for the story, so the contagion
spreads, and the relator from such a liking (as it quickly will) contracts a
mutual kindness, and refreshes decayed desires; here the good meaning is sunk
and drowned in sin; desinit in piscem, it is but a Mermaid intention, the fair
upper part, however beauteous, ends in monster, the Saint declines into a feind.

2. If none of this, yet if I can foresee some casual unconcerned evil accident
will happen and come in; then I must either free my good intention from that,
or change it. If I intend to reprove my Superior toward whom I have some
office of so doing, for his vice, and do foresee that probably upon that his
just respect and authority may decay with some others; I will then take some
other way of doing it. If by aggravating the guilty hainousness of some
practices of those that do profess the strictness of Religion, I can guess my
doing so will cast a dash upon the profession of Religion it self in the esteem
of some that hear me; I will forbear a good of so ill consequence, except such
aggravation be necessary upon some other score, as to take off the opinion of
those that may be mislead by those persons into guilt.

If I foresee my laying open of a false opinion (provided that it be not
fundamental as to practice) in a man of pious learning and of reverend esteem,
may chance to stagger the beliefs of some that must receive their knowledge from
instruction and cannot do it better then from such; and make them thinkalas
from whom shall we learn truths, or what assurance have we that any thing we
have given credit to is so: sure my intention is more noxious then his false
opinion and to be turned aside.

If by telling a true story intended for the disparagement of vice, I think
aspersions may come upon a person (which are not at all necessary for my
hearers avoiding of the vice,) yea tho he be mine enemy, the story and my
intentions would be much better spared.

A meaning then is purely good, when it has nothing else but good in view of
it; and that intention is not truly single, that has two ends, although but one
be mine, and the other chances only; for if I foresee it, I some way adopt it,
and do make it mine. So for the first intentions.

2. The entire intentions as they take in the means succeed into our
consideration; and here I would be plain because I know it is the common plea
and ground of most whereby they excuse actions otherwise very blameable by
saying that they did it with a good intent: and this they think will stop the
mouths of their impleaders and their conscience. On this score Phineas's zeal
is grown a Christian principle (tho the like zeal were blamed by Christ in his
disciples) yea and that stretched now much beyond the original; such a zealous
intention shall execute real murders, and all the bloody heinous consequences
of a war undertaken upon no other appearing ground: when not upon a visible
confessed Idolatry, and impudent whoredom, as that in Phineas case, but upon only
controverted doubts, or indeed fancied stains in an established happy Church;
their zealous intention must warrant them to let out those taint's together
with the life, to blood them with the sword; and if they cannot call for fire
from Heaven to purge away the dross, yet they will make the reformation with
fire and faggot, prune the worship by cutting up both root and branch: Tantum
Religio potuit suadere malorum. And Religion must persuade and warrant all
these mischeifs.

A like good meaning shall engage men to defy the persons and authority of
their most just Superiors, to both which they were bound by laws and oaths; but
they are nothing to a good intention: and while they prosecute the ruin of
their Governors, and desolation of their Nation, yet they can mean well to them
both, and be still innocent.

So the ends of self-preservation, or which is much worse, preservation of a
little wealth or dignity, shall justify perjury and doing things against the
conscience: and those things looked upon as slight transgressions in order to
that end, when the pride of an estate, or of a wife and family is in the
intention.

I could make diverse other instances in common actions of our lives, in which
whatever men do practice, if they have a good meaning, they believe themselves
excusable. Therefore

1. That an intention may be good, it is absolutely necessary, that it do not
take in any forbidden means to bring about its end; for if it do, however the
end were good, the intention will be sinful. The reasons clear, because that
particular intention does especially respect and include that particular means;
which means is evil, that is to say, it does especially respect and include
evil, and consequently is so. Nay if I use ill means, tho to advance an end of
noblest Religion, yet in so intending that intention does not do God service,
nor obey his commands for it is impossible that the same action of the mind
should in it self be both commanded and forbid by God.

Now as the intention takes in and pursues the evil means so it is forbid, and
consequently is a sin, and therefore cannot be service to God nor obedience to
his command. If that this reason will not do, example and command shall do it.
Saul did intend to sacrifice when he did spare the fattest of the sheep and
oxen: it is true he was commanded to slay all, but he intended to preserve the
best for God, his meaning was Religion and worship; but yet that good intention
of worship did condemn him, and he and his posterity lost the Kingdom for this
Religion.

God does not require any action, which he sees I cannot compass without sin;
for the requires no man to sin, for that were to require that we should break
his commands, and 'twere a strange obedience to the Lord to disobey him for his
own sake; shall I speak wickedly for God, says Job, Job. 13. 7. and talk
deceitfully for him? will ye accept his person? and plainer yet S. Paul. Romans
3. 5, 6, 7, 8. But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God,
what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? (I speak as a man.)
God forbid: for then how shall God judge the world? For if the truth of God
has more abounded through my lie unto his glory; why also yet am I judged as a
sinner? And not rather as we are slandrously reported, and as some affirm that
we say, Let us do evil, that good may come: whose damnation is just. The
argumentation runs thus, If Gods way of grace may be thus set out, and more
illustriously seen by the sins of men; why should God thus punish their sins
which so tend to his glory (Irecite the objection of some men) or if he does,
is it not injustice in him so to do? v. 7. For (say they) if the faithfulness,
and mercifulness of God in performing his promises to Abraham giving the
Messiah has appeared more abundantly, and tended more to his glory by occasion
of the Jews sins or infidelity, there will be then no reason why they that are
guilty of such sins so much tending to Gods honor should be complained of or
proceeded with in judgment; but on the other side men might do well to commit
such sins, from which so much good or glory to God might come. I recite, says
the Apostle, a damnable doctrine, and in opposition say, that no one sin is to
be committed, tho in order to and contemplation of the greatest good, Gods
glory. And this is proof enough, and therefore

2. tho an intention that sets it self an holy and Religious end, the glory of
God, the purity of Religion, the peace and flourish of Jerusalem, nay Church
and nation, or some particular service to God, while it looks only at the end
is good and holy, yet when it comes to think of means in order to that end, if
he can find there is only one within his compass, and that forbidden, as he is
bound to renounce the means, so also he must desert the intention instantly:
for if he go on to intend good, which he knows he cannot compass but by doing
ill, it is clear he does intend the doing ill; as he that know it is not
possible, that he should shoot at such a mark, behind which a man stands, but
he must kill the man, if he intend to shoot, he does intend to kill. No, he may
pray for such an end that God would find expedients to bring it about, but must
not set wickedness on work to do it; God does not need the aids of sin to
promote his glory or service. And therefore

3. A truly Religious intention of a good end purely as it is good cannot
suffer a man to choose an evil means of working toward it. It is not possible
that he should do it; for he that does choose a means unto an evil end, intends
it only as it is useful to that end, and otherwise he could not like nor pitch
upon it; but sin cannot be useful to a virtuous action as it is virtuous, but
perfectly repugnant to it. I may exact, and gripe, oppress deceive, and many
more such things, that so I may be rich, and have to give to them that want;
but I cannot do those things truly intending the Religion of charity, because
that would not suffer me to do them. Those actions are perfectly contradictions
to its nature, they ruinate the very being of a virtue, as it is in obedience
to God; for a man cannot disobey God in obedience to him, and therefore are not
useful to it, as it is a virtue, nor chosen so but on some other motive. The
man that heaps by fraud and by oppression intending to build hospitals, intends
thereby to build himself a monument, and leave as great a name behind him, as
he does treasure may be, but if he truly had intended charity, he had not been
uncharitable for charity.

The man that does intend to be a daily constant person in the public exercises
of Religion, and travail up and down to get the opportunities, if when he does
begin to think how he is to prosecute those intentions, and so considers that
then he must neglect his calling greatly and impoverish, may be break himself
and family, if he then set down with himself; I may allow my self some arts of
thriving, take ways of getting greater gains in my commodities then are fit for
others that do not give God so much of their time; or I will restrain my hand
as to the poor; for if Religion to God take away so considerable a part of what
I should gain, charity to the poor, has no reason to have a great share too in
what I have; and so leave off to be a doer, that he may be a hearer, or do that
which is not justifiable, use some deceitful methods, or be not merciful (and
these are no strange things they say) It Is clear this man does not intend
toward the real power of religion, for that would not allow him such ways to
it, which are so far from useful to it, that they are perfect oppositions to
its nature, but either the repute of a professor, or the being owned as of a
party, or some such motive lurks under the visor of Religion; it may be
undiscerned by him who minds that fair appearance of a good end, so intently as
not to search, and try the whole intention, the means as well as aim. For such
means, however they may contribute to the action of Religion and virtue in the
general, yet they cannot be useful to the Religion, or the virtue of the
action, nay do they not contribute sin more then their own to the intention?
It Is a hard question; and tho indeed it be apparent, that he that chooses an
ill way only to bring about a good intent; does not like or choose that ill for
it self, and would not embrace it if it were not dressed and varnisht with the
adornments and the paint of a well meaning, and consequently is not so
malicious, as they that choose sin barefac't in its own shape and colors; yet
when to do so is so directly against the very nature of piety, against reason
and command, and has so harsh a sentence as S. Paul does thunder out against
them, that shall entertain such a doctrine, that truly I do not know what to
say to them, that notwithstanding that dare practice it. I Am sure the wise man
says Eccles. 34. 20. He that brings an offering of the goods of the poor,
does as one that kills the Son before the Fathers eyes; an offense that to
the Father, that has more then his sons death in it, it strikes him also through
the eyes and would make his own sight his murderers, does make it to be his
torment; and defies his displeasure, choosing to spite him to his face: and some
such aggravation it should seem vice carries in it, when it comes into
Religion, as it does, when it thrusts into our holy intentions, as means to
pious ends. However it be, I Am sure I Have said enough to prove that truly good
intentions cannot take in evil means, and that such means when they are taken
in, make the intention mixed and unholy, and therefore far from pure: and so
have don the second thing, and let you know what is required to make a
Religious intention singly and purely so. The third follows

3. That from such a single eye the body shall be light, that such good hearty
meanings do make the actions good and holy, or are accepted as such actions.
The former part, that actions regulated by intentions completely Religious are
Religious, needs no proof; because our actions derive these guilt or their
Religiousness from thence: there can be nothing there to blame; for when the
end is good, and the means good, then all is so. But I would tell you such
intentions have a privilege beyond this of making outward actions acceptable to
the Lord: for where we do endeavor in pursuance of such intentions, and cannot
bring them into act there those intentions are in Gods sight as the actions
themselves, he does so value them, and so he will reward them. For God accepts
the will for deed, and if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.
4. Here thy good meaning if it put forth it self according to thy power is
complete performance; here is a way the meanest soul may be an Hero in
Religion: there is no bounds that can be set to holy meanings. My actions may
be fettered in, tied by impossibilities, that I cannot perform such holy deeds
as others, but my intentions are free as Angels; I can mean heartily and intend
to the utmost, and by such an art the poor widow, that gave nothing but the
expression of the meanest poverty, did yet give more then they that bestowed
treasures, because in two mites she meant to give her utmost; and at such rates
God will reward them too.

Those good intentions that sincerely mind Gods glory shall themselves reap
glory, even before the action shall. From resurrection to eternity is time
enough to reward holy actions, but before that, betwixt death and judgment, the
soul shall be rewarded with the blessing of its intentions. As it did often do
its part in piety without the body, so it shall have a crown before the body,
shall forestal happiness, and for a while it shall alone be blessed, as
oftentimes it has been virtuous alone in good intentions, when it could not
act.

4. But all this is not strange, that the great mercy of our God should so
interpret to our advantage our designs of piety, as to impute good meanings to
our glory as if they were good doings, and consequently where the intentions
are holy, the actions must be holy, and where this eye is clear, the body must
have light: but 'twill be very strange if a clear eye make the whole body full
of light, illustrate those performances which have no relation to the soul.
Most of the actions of our life are common and indifferent, serve only the
necessities or recreations of nature, and how can these be holy? Why yes, by
pure Religious intentions a man may sanctify all the actions of his life, and
if thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.

Whether you eat or drink or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God,
says S. Paul 1 Cor. 10. 31. Every therefore the most common action may be
intended to Gods glory, and then it is sanctified. That the Lord should look for
honor from the devout performances of our strictest Religion, it is no wonder,
for therefore he requires them: but that when in the meanest instance I do
serve my self, in doing so I should be able to give glory to my God, is sure by
virtue of some strange stratagem, some Divine elixar that will so transmute
things: why a good meaning will do this. To show thee how, when thou go
about the employments of thy lawful calling, have but good thoughts about thee,
good intentions in them, and the actions of thy calling are for the uses of
grace, and thy necessities do prove thy virtue. As for instance, when thou
labourest do but consider to what pains sin has put thee, sells thee thy bread
for sweat; for if man had not sinned, Eden had furnished him with all the
delicacies of Paradise, without his care or contribution, and he had had the
fruits of the tree of life without the pains of planting any thing: it is sin
that gives thee all this toil; and then do but resolve to use this as an
argument to thy self to make thee hate the cause of so much trouble: I will
sure labor most against that, which has so changed and debased my condition,
and which does aim to make me far more miserable to eternity. If I am weary of
my work e're night, what shall I be of everlastingness of torment? If little
thirsty heats and drops of sweat offend me, what will unquenchable feavors, and
what a lake of brimstone? And think again upon the mercies of thy God, who
offers thee at the rate of easier endeavors the food that lasts to eternal
life; the calling of a Christian being the least painful, and yet it brings the
greatest fruits, the price of that high calling being blessedness, if thou but
labor in it.

If thou be sustaining the necessities of nature in meat and drink, look up to
him that does provide for them, and resolve only not to use his blessings to
his dishonor by excesses, not to spew his mercies out into his face again; but
use them as assistances of nature to enable thee for such emploiments as his
providence has assigned to thee.

And in thy recreations also do but take notice thankfully how God has
provided for delights too, how he has not only brought forth bread to
strengthen man, but wine to make his heart glad, and oil to make him a cheerful
countenance, and instruments of sport to delight him: and but acknowledge all
these things to God, and intend with thy self to use them only to his ends. Thy
calling either to provide for thy subsistence here, that thou may serve him,
or to do good to others. Thy meals for preservation of that life which he has
lent thee for his uses; and recreations for refreshment and for health; and
make no doubt if nothing do interpose to spoil these instances, that thou art
serving God in all of these, that thy most secular actions are thus make
spiritual imploiments by being dedicated so to God undertaken in his fear, and
intended for the uses of his providence: so that if whenever thou art going
about any thing, thou do but ask thy self, why thou do set upon it, and
can but make a good intention look toward it, and resolve only to let it
serve such ends, resolve not to transgress in it the bounds that God has set
thee either of time or measure, and to make all subordinate and to assist
toward piety some way or other; and then sometimes with eyes lift up, call
for, and look for a blessing down upon thee in it: and by this means the action
is sanctified, so thou do consecrate thy deeds to God and he accepts thy
meaning in it, as an offering to him, the action is adopted into the stock of
Religion meant to God, and so thy whole life may be made pious by such good
intentions, and thus thy single eye makes thy whole body full of light.

And this consideration alone might apply it self with pressingness upon us.
Shall I think God not easy to be served when I may teach my recreations to
serve him? Shall I think Heaven placed out of my possibilities, when I can
learn my sports to wing me toward it? Religion sure is not so very difficult,
when a good honest meaning can transmute every action of my life into Religion;
and then who would not at such easy rates change his employments, which he must
do, and his sports which he will do, into pieties; when it is don by putting
good intentions into them, by good thoughts and ejaculations engaging God along
in them? But the last words do urge an application which I promised in one word.

But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body is full of darkness. My brethren, if
ill intentions have so destructive an influence upon our actions, that when the
end is foolish, tho the action I practice be a virtue, yet that aim does defeat
it of its vertuosness, it loses all its taste of piety, and an ill enddo's
debauch it into vice, as I have proved; and so for want of a good meaning I
either lose my Religion, or my Religion becomes sin unto me: Unhappy I that
when with such intentions I practice duty, I lose the pleasures or the profits
of the sins I might have practiced every jot as innocently, and much more
usefully, as to those ends; and I lose the duty, and by the very duty I
purchase condemnation; enjoy neither the vice I do omit, nor yet the piety I
practice, nor any thing, but the sad sentence of they have their reward.

And on the other side, if my ends be never so pious, if I intend to compass
them by unlawful means, and do evil tho that good may come thereof; what does
the justice of my ends do for me, but only make damnation just to me? Alas!
then in one word what is their doom, who do by evil means intend to compass
evil ends, whose intentions are entirely singly wicked, that design only the
plesures or the profits of iniquity, that level directly at sin both all the
way and at the mark too, whose aims and whose contrivances are wickedness, thy
purpose such an evil action, and care not by what means they compass it, so
they acquire their ends? Our Savior had no way to express the condition fo
these, but that of an admiring question: If the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness? The Sinner notwithstanding all his pomp
of shine and splendour, that he thinks himself clothed with, dressed up with
gilded profits or with a glory of pleasures; yet he is still in the dark, his
life is all night, and that condition, which three days made intolerable to
Egypt, is always on the Sinners soul; he is envelop't in thick darkness like
theirs that may be felt by any thing but by a soul of such stupidity as the
sinners is; a darkness such as Christ had not a fit word for, nor did know how
to phrase but by being astonished at it. How great is that darkness! a state
indeed that is most proper for his deeds and intentions of darkness that need a
night to cover them: a darkness, that does border on the regions of utter
darkness, that shall never have any dawne, but such as flaming brimstone
strikes into it: and O How great is that darkness? O blessed Savior, who art
the day spring from on high, that came to visit us, deliver us from those dark
regions. O thou Eternal Sun of righteousness that came to enlighten the
darknesses of the world by thy example and by thy doctrine, and the
illuminations of thy Holy Spirit, let these thy methods shine powerfully upon
our souls to scatter all the clouds and mists that dwell upon our hearts; that
we may have no misapprehensions of our duty, that our intentions may be clear,
our affections pure, and all our actions regular and holy. We know, O Lord, we
were created for thy glory, and our own eternal happiness: We beseech thee
direct all the purposes of our minds, the inclinations of our hearts and
actions of our lives unto these blessed ends. Teach us to mind thee in every
thing we do, that so whatever we shall do in our whole lives, may work toward
our future happy life. Let no unholy aims mix with any of our actions, no
forbidden contrivances or purposes creep into, and make sinful our performancs.
Let not self ends of pride, vainglory, gain, revenge, or any vice make our
Religion hypocrisy of sin, nor any poor low ends of little pleasure or of
profit rob the actions of our callings or recreations of that Religion, which a
good intention may put into them: but make all our actions so orderly and
temperate, and so subordinate to holy ends, that they may all turn into duty:
make us heartily intent on our Religious performances in their seasons, and
submitting all our other works to the occasions of Religion, and making them
serve and assist toward it, and thereby become Religion; that so our whole
lives may be consecrated unto thee, and our whole conversation become holy. And
do thou prevent us in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and further
them with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued and ended
in thee, we may glorify thy holy name, and after an age of doing so may be
glorisied with thee in thy Kingdom, thy power and thy glory for ever etc.

SERMON XIX. THE LIGHT OF THE BODY is the Eye.
Matt. 6. 22, 23. The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thy eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness?
WHat is observed of the lights of our days that they still abound in their
senses; will appear true of the light in the Text: and indeed it is but proper,
that it should have that most excellent quality of light still to communicate
it self without decay, to pour out fresh streams every moment, and yet be still
the same: one of the rivulets we have exhausted in the last days discourse;
and we shall also find that in another sense The light of the body is the eye.

Amongst the diverse things to which the Eye in the Text may have Analogy, and
which may make Christ's Aphorism here true in the spiritual sense, as well as in
the outward literal; the second and indeed in my apprehension much more proper
then that I have already given, tho not so general, is Conscience; that Eye of
the mind in order to practice, from which alone and nothing else in matters of
Religion the actions have all their direction and guidance; and which so far as
it is clear and well informed, the actions that are regulated by it are all
full of light and Piety: and on the other side so far as the Conscience is
amiss, so far the man's deeds must of necessity be dark and evil. And that I may
now for all say, without discussing every minute particular Analogy, it is for
this that the expressions of blindness of mind, understanding darkened, and
sins being called darkness; and on the contrary holiness light, and the Eye of
the understanding enlightened, are so frequent in the Scripture, to let us see
the whole comparison is good. For to declare to you that the Conscience may be
properly set out by the Analogy of an eye, I need but tell you this eye of the
mind is in the little world the frame of man, the true deputy and Vicegerent of
that universal and all seeing eye of Providence and inspection: for as that eye
of inspection spies all our ways, watches over all a man's motions,
inclinations and thoughts; and as the eye of Providence guides and directs
every thing to its ends; all this the Conscience does in man: it is privy to
every little rising of the appetite, it knows each bending of the will. There
is not any closet, no recess in the whole heart, where the soul can retire to
think of, wish, or design any thing, but this same Eye of Conscience looks in,
beholds it all, and lays it up. And Conscience also is the under-Eye of
Providence in man, it prescribes to all our actions, it leads the will that
potentia caeca, and gives directions to all that man attemts or does in matter
of Religion. Thy word, says David, is a lanthorn to my feet, and light to my
paths, and it is certain Gods Commandments are the light we are to walk by,
except we will walk on in darkness unto the land of utter darkness. But as a
lanthorn is no guidance to the blind, and a light is of use only where there is
an eye; so Gods commandments can have no influence upon, nor give direction or
assistance to our ways except this eye of the mind be enlightened by them; for
it is Conscience that is the conveiance to all duty to the heart of man, that
cannot set up obedience, but as the Conscience does press it on it, that
conveys the immediate obligation. My Conscience tells me this I must forbear,
that I must practice. Yea where there was no law to give direction, the eye of
Conscience looking over the frame of man, a creature reasonable in his making,
could strait see a necessity of doing things agreeable to right reason; and
viewing the materials of the pile saw he was built of Soul as well as body, of
of an immortal Spirit, as well as a carnal part, knew that his life was to be
ordered to the uses of the Spirit, as well as of the flesh: (and more indeed
that being the better part) and easily could gather hence, that man was not to
serve his lower brutish part the body, so as to discompose his soul, and when
it did so did condemn him for the doing of it. And upon this S. Paul affirms.
Romans 2. 14, 15. When the Gentiles that have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law, they having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves, which show the work of the Law written on their hearts, their
Conscience bearing them witness. Which says that tho the rest of the world had
not the Revelation of Gods will, and Law as the Jews had, yet from the dictats
of their reason, and the notions of good and evil implanted in them, their
conscience did oblige them unto the performance of such things as the Law
required, and upon such performance or omission without any other Law did
either excuse them, as men that did not culpably wander out of those paths,
which the light and Eye that God had planted in them, did direct them in; or
else accuse them as transgressors, and render them obnoxious to punishment. And
so it did before the Law. So Romans 5. 13, 14. For until the Law sin was in the
world, but sin is not imputed where there is no Law, Nevertheless death reigned
from Adam to Moses even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of
Adams transgressions. First after Adams time till Moses before the giving of
the Law men fined, and tho it be true that sin is not charged to punishment but
where there is a Law to forbid it under that penalty, and therefore it might be
thought that sin without the Law would not have brought death into the world,
yet from Adam till Moses death reigned, men died that had not sinned as Adam
did against an express actual precept promulgated, as his was, and established
with a positive threat of death: but died because they had sinned against the
laws of their nature, the principles of duty that were put into their making,
which Conscience pressed upon their practice and whose guidance they would not
follow, they pulled death upon themselves in the errors of their ways.

'Twas by the equity of this that when the wickedness of men grew great in the
earth, the flood grew so too: an inundation of waters overspread it, when sin
had once don so, and iniquity against the dictates of conscience struck all the
world at once with death, except eight persons. Conscience therefore where
there is law, and also where there is none, is the great director of our
actions; and to this I shall apply our Saviors discourse dividing not the Text
but Conscience, and in the several members verifying what our Savior he
reaffirms.

1. Conscience either respects actions to be don, or actions already don.
First as it respects actions to be don, telling us this we must do, that we
must forbear, so first as it answers to the single Eye, it denotes the pure
Conscience the enlightened Eye of the mind as S. Paul calls it, that is a truly
well informed Conscience, a Conscience that judges according to its rule: and
to this I shall first tell you what is the entire rule of conscience, and
consequently when its dictates are right, when it informs me truly this I must
do, that I must forbear.

2. Prove to you that all our actions that are regulated by such a well
informed conscience are good and honest; so that if this eye be single, the
whole body shall be full of light. If the conscience be pure, the man's holy,
and so the first part of the text is proved.

2. As it answers to the evil eye, so it denotes an evil conscience, a
conscience that does not give true judgment of duty, ill informed. And this
either First wholly so, and then it is reprobate sense, such as that of them
that call good evil and evil good, from which men are styled (...) 1 Timothy 4. 2.
or (...), that is (...), says Phavorinus, Romans 1. 31. Or secondly but in part,
and then it is either first an erring conscience, or secondly a doubtful
conscience, or thirdly a scrupulous conscience, to which also several others
will fall in. And I shall show you how every of these does mislead a man into
the dark. The scrupulous raises clouds and mists about him, dark errors and
discomforts too: the doubtful does instead of guiding leave him so puzl'd, that
he knows not which way to be-take himself; and the erring conscience lights him
into the pit, takes him by the hand to thrust him down, guides him into a
necessity of sin; and the no conscience, the reprobate sense, it is a darkness
somewhat worse then that, the blackness of Hell here. All this I shall do in
order.

Upon the other part conscience as it relates to actions already don, so it
does testify, and in so doing either excuse or accuse Romans 2. 15. Now tho
conscience in the other former respect has indeed the greater influence upon
our practice, and so to it the text does more directly answer: yet this latter
having some also in order to the making future actions holy by repentance, (for
when once the soul has shipwrack't on a sin, and she is ready to sink and
perish, there is no plank on which she can escape but repentance.) Now it is
this Eye that must look out for that; it is an accusing conscience that must set
him upon Repentance: this hurry's him about and will not let him rest, 'till he
get upon the plank that is fastened to the Anchor, even the Anchor of hope, by
which until it be secured, a good conscience never is at quiet. Because I
intend to say but little to this, I shall dispatch it now. And that in order to
its actions excusing and accusing.

And first if conscience be the Eye: then a clear single eye is a clear
conscience; and then of that it must be true that it does make the man full of
light; and so it does indeed as light does signify joy and gladness, and so it
often does in Scripture Psalm 4. 6, 7. And truly the applauds of an honest
undeceiving heart, that is conscious to it self of cordial endeavors after
good, and knows it neither had ill ends nor ill means, they shed comforts
beyond all that the earth can give, they shed the peace of God that passes
understanding. If my conscience be clear, let my condition be never so
overcast, never so dark and cloudy, yet do I live in shine. This is the only
thing that makes every estate gladsome: If my condition be low pressing
adversity, yet if my conscience assure me it is not my fault that threw me down
into it, my sin did not put out the light of Gods candle of prosperity that
before shone about me; but rather because I would hold fast my duty, and would
not let go a good conscience, therefore I was thrown down with them into deep
affliction, here my conscience assures me I am in a case which S. James bids me
count all joy Jam. 1. 2. and which our Savior does call blessed Matthew. 5. 11.
S. Peter tells me: If ye be reproched for the name of Christ (and it is so for
all duty) happy are ye; for the spirit of Glory and of God rests on you, 1
Pet. 14. 14. What if I be in the place of Dragons, my conscience does assure me
'twas my duty not guilt did put me there, that is, God brought me thither, and
he is with me there: the Spirit of God rests on you. What if I be in
darknesss and dimness of anguish, encompast with the shadow of death, the
Spirit of Glory rests on me. And then sure a clear conscience makes the man
full of light, when it makes him full of glory: when in his darkest solitudes
there does break in the light of Gods countenance.

Let them be sadded with afflictions, who understand no delight but in
carnalities, whose souls are married to some little comforts of this world.
Adversity indeed sweeps all their joys away at once, a cross throws blacks upon
them strait, their heart's in mourning instantly. But he that understands the
comforts of a good conscience, and knows where to find them, and has a
treasure of them in his breast, will soon be able to allay the other sadnesses.

What can I want while I have a continual feast, for so'is a good conscience?
It is not in the power of words to express the happiness of this blisful state.
It is the peace of God which passes all understanding Phil. 4. 7. and tho
felicity seems to be measured by our perception of it, here we are happy beyond
the scanty limits of our narrow apprehensions, do not take in the beatific
object, but are our selves enclosed, and enter into the joy of our Lord, Matt.
25. 23.

2. In order to the second act, accusing; if conscience be an eye, then the
well qualified eye is the tender conscience. I mean not in the modern sense,
not only as it is accompanied with, but as it is but another word for a weak
Judgment and a proud heart; sturdy opposing private opinion or fancy against
public authority. And whereas conscience is said to be the eye of the soul, a
tender conscience has the sme importance in this case, as when we call a blear
or bloudshot, a tender eye. A gentle word for a troublesome malady. The
innocent importance of the word is that which denotes, besides weakness in
judging, quickness in perception; for conscience is the judgment of the mind
concerning actions, and whatsoever is tender is weak; but a conscience which is
such, as tender things are always, is sensible of every the least touch of
guilt, checks at whatsoever we do amiss; the least thing we do is a wound to
it. This is the tender conscience. Such a one as is deeply sensible of the
majesty, and power, and justice of Almighty God, and the fatally provoking
guilt of sin; fears always, doubts and trembles, foregoes lawful enjoyment,
least they should prove to be unlawful, and flies from every not only approach,
but even appearance of evil. This is an uneasy state, but the inconvenience is
abundantly repaid by the safety it procures, whilst this flaming sword that
turns every way, guards both our Paradise and us, and suspicions render us
secure. But if my heart grow hard, not tender, and my conscience insensible,
there is no hopes of cure.

I shall content my self with this one instance in answer to the evil eye as it
relates to both these actions of accusing and excusing: tho I might also name
the conscience that accuses to despair. This is an evil eye indeed that
entertains it self with the terrors of utter darkness in their own shapes, that
sees nothing but feinds, those spirits of the dark; nor will see any other. An
eye that will not endure, but hates the least light of instruction or comfort.
A darkness this, out of which the grave has been counted an escape, the darks
of death a refuge, yea to avoid the horror they have run into the shades of
Hell. And oh! how great, how insupportable is this darkness?

But God knows in this age we see little cause to fear, nor reason to endeavor
to prevent this. Some little beginnings of it would be mercies to most men, the
danger now a days is in the insensibleness of conscience, the heart that never
does accuse of its commissions in earnest, nay rather does find out excuses; it
does not check or sting them to the quick, but rather tickles them. Good God*
the heathens had a much more tender constitution of soul. The Poet says of
guilty souls -- ad omnia fulg^ra pallent,
Cum ^onat exanimes primo quoque murmune coeli.
They that knew not there was an Hell to recompense iniquity, nor knew that God
threatened it with plagues; yet when they heard it thunder, their guilt did
strike them like the thunderbolts, their souls did faint as it were the voice
of God pronouncing wrath to their iniquities, as if its lightnings were the
flashes of that brimstone in whose eternal burnings sin must dwell. This
conscience did in them, when knowing Christians can stand unappal'd. We read of
men of seared consciences 1 Timothy 4. 2. and such indeed cannot be tender.
Searing does make insensible of pricks or little touches, that you may lance
and gash, and it will not perceive. And so it seems are some men's consciences:
and you will find there some other qualifications of such men, they depart from
the faith, they give heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils; and it
will be no wonder if they desert the holy Christian faith, who have put
themselves under the tutorage of Satan, and have imbibed the doctrine of
Devils, who with his institution, have received his flames, whose consciences
are feared, that feel no stripes from their commissions, and are such whom sin
does not wound.

We read of a strange evil eye Matthew. 7, 3. see not the beam that is in thine
own eye. A beam upon the eye must needs make all dark: but the insensibleness
of such an eye, that does not feel a beam is strange beyond imagination, yet
'twas but fit to word a conscience that was not sensible of the guilt of wilful
gross deliberate sins; it is like an eye that under the dead weight of a mighty
beam yet rouls and feels no pressure. A much worse then feared conscience this.
That which is seared tho it will not shrink for a prick or gash, yet 'twill
shrink under load; but this feels no degree of weight; but tho it be that weak
and tender part the eye, yet is this without feeling under that which the whole
body cannot stand under, nothing but pillars can support.

The characters of such a conscience, and its dark consequence (to fit it to my
text,) are given by S. Paul Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. You see here a blind heart like an
evil eye creates a darkness such as makes them aliens to the life of God; for
indeed they lead the life of feinds the inhabitants of darkness, and they do
quickly grow to an estate past feeling, and then they commit evil with
greediness.

And indeed 'twere very easy for me to show how this does grow by deading the
tenderness of conscience at the first, by fortifying against its checks and
pricks, by seeking little excuses to allay and palliate the sores, either
Christ does not mean so strictly; or getting other principles to set against
the strictness, as custom of the age, or honor, or the like; God knows things
that will not be principles, nor be allowed in any lest degree, when he comes
to examine, but in the mean time they do stop the mouth of conscience, and the
doing so frequently, together with the conversations of sin, do clear take off
the horror, and the aversation, and by degrees the sense^ the mind first leaves
to be afraid and startle at it, and then leaves to check for it. All this I
could deduce at large, but that I hasten to the other remaining consideration
of conscience, as it respects actions to be don, as it signifies the judgment
of the mind informing us what we may or must do, or what we must forbear.

And so, I told you, as it answers to the single eye, so it denotes the pure
Conscience, the enlightened eye of the mind, that is, a truly well informed
conscience, a conscience that judges according to its rule. And to this I must
(what I promised) tell you first, What is the entire Rule of conscience, that
so we may know when conscience does inform us truly this we must do, that not.
For conscience being not it self supreme director, it has a God above it, that
conscience may be right, it must be according to its rule, therefore we must
enquire of that; and

First it is certain that the Law of God in force (as all the law of Christ is
to us Christians, particularly that of these Chapters that contain Christ's
sermon on the Mount, Repentance, self-denial, Charity, forgiving injuries,
humility etc.) is a rule of conscience. And here I will suppose that I do not
speak to Antinomians, and that I need not to prove that we are obliged to do
what God by his commands has enjoined, and that whether the mandate terminat in
duty to himself, or to our fellow men, especially his Vicegerent upon earth the
lawful Magistrate. There are some men I know who would acquit themselves to
their Governors, if they are content to suffer in case of disobedience: but
unless there were guilt in the neglect of active obedience, it would be very
unjust to enforce passive, especially when it is plain that all the Apostles
arguings Romans 13. do prove an obligation to active duty. 1. Because the
Magistrate has Commission from God; and therefore he that will not yield
active obedience to their lawful constitutions, will not obey the Lords
commission v. 2. and then 4. he is the minister of God, his officer; and he
that does refuse obedience to those Constitutions of an officer, which his
superior has empowered him to make, he does refuse it to that Superior. And
out of these he then infers Wherefore ye must needs be subject.

Yea indeed if the just laws of such Governors do not oblige the conscience,
neither can many of Gods laws. To instance; God has commanded me I shall not
steal, and I think my self bound in conscience not to do it; but what is it to
steal? To take that which of right is another man's against his will. And what
does give a right but human Law? It Is according to that, any thing is thine or
mine. Christ does not interpose in settling rights; for when the man would have
had him speak to his Brother to divide the inheritance with him; answers Man
who made me a Judge or a divider amongst you, let the laws do it. That
inheritance which here a Man does claim as eldest, in other places of this very
Nation the youngest should have only right too; where the tenure of Borough
English takes place. And again in other places each brother should have equal
right to by Gavelkind. And in some other Nations, as in Denmark for example, no
child of any second Wife has any right, according to the example of Abraham:
yet all these several ways of right are one as just as another, and in one
place the one has as true a right as the other has in the other. Established
laws therefore do give the only right, and by those human Laws thou have a
right in conscience to that which they make thine; for otherwise how can it be
a sin against my conscience to take that from thee, which neither thou nor any
man else has a right in conscience to? Such human laws therefore do oblige the
Conscience, or else Gods eighth and tenth Commandments cannot.

3. There is yet another branch of the Rule of conscience, and that is the law
of scandal. In things that both by Gods and by man's law are free to me to do or
not, if yet by doing any of them, or by not doing, I see others will be
ensnared in sin, I am bound in conscience to avoid either such actions or
omissions. 1 Cor. 8. from v. 8. Romans 14.

And here I will not wonder how barefac't temtations to vice, and pressing sin
upon a man with all the arts of friendship, or of treachery or force, should
grow to be civilities and kindnesses; when an innocent lawful action is so ill
charactered because it may prove a stumbling block: but I will only sum up what
has been said in one word: the Will of God is the Rule of conscience, I am
bound in conscience to do what God will have; and so the law of Christ, and the
just laws of our just Governors (which that we should submit too, is the will
of God says S. Peter) and the law of scandal are the full and entire rule of
conscience. Whatsoever they prescribe or forbid, that my conscience, if it be
rightly informed, will tell me I must do or forbear; and if I act according to
the dictates of a conscience so informed, my actions will be good and honest,
and such a single eye makes my whole body full of light, which was the second
thing.

Now this is proved in one word; that must needs be a good life, which is
regulated by a good conscience, because all good life is called by the name of
a good conscience 1 Timothy 1. 19. This was S. Paul's whole charge to Timothy
holding faith and a good conscience, there is the belief and duty that is the
whole. So 1 Pet. 3. 16. a good conscience is explained by a good Conversation
in Christ, and plainer yet Heb. 13. 18. We trust we have a good conscience
willing in all things to live honestly. Sincere endeavors to obey the
conscience in every thing, not boggling with it accepting the persons of
duties, and being very conscientious in some things, but taking liberty in
other, bribing my conscience to wink like an evil eye, and leave me in the dark
as to some actions, this is not to be conscientious; he is so only that is
willing to live honestly in all things, and to do so is matter for the Apostles
confidence (...). This also was the sum of all S. Paul himself endeavored after
Acts 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self to have always a conscience void
of offense toward God and toward man. He had no stricter aims, here was the
height of his Religion, these were his exercises. And the ancient Father
Clemens Alex. Strom. 6. says (...). And what would any man have more? Yea it is
apparent from the very terms; for if thy conscience truly inform thee of all
thy duty, and thou do accordingly, then thou do all thy duty, or which is
all that we can do. So far as thy hearty endeavor is to this, so far is thy
life good and acceptable.

And here I have an hint for application by conviction of those, who guide
their conscience, and consequently their lives by humors and fancies, and not
by the certain rules of conscience, the laws I have assigned. Some men will
call that conscience which is their inclination, tho they do not examine whence
the inclination springs, from God, or from suggestion of an interest, or an
affliction, and think they are bound to do, or may do that they have a mind to
do. Some men's rash heats that have something like zeal, and it may be that have
good intentions in them, are strait the dictates of their Conscience, and they
must actuate those animosities and heats, for they are bound in conscience.
Some men are advised by their fears, and that will look like conscience in a
little time. Some men's imaginations promted by loose and libertine
interpretations of Scripture or false infusions, are strait their conscience,
and then their conscience tells them they must act accordingly. But where is the
Law for these? Conscience was, I told you, Gods Vicegerent, possessed his throne
in man, and was his Deputy, prescribed to all man's actions and took cognizance
of them; and accordingly did sentence: and will a man have humor give the Law
to Gods Vicegerent, or vain imaginations rule (...) that God within us, as the
ancients called it, set fancy on the Throne?

Or I might secondly complain of them that would divide the rule of conscience,
and pick and choose and take but part of it; the immediate law of God they would
think themselves bound to, but for the law of scandal they regard it little.
Who did make them the keepers of their brothers soul? If others by
misunderstanding of their actions be drawn to sin, at their own peril be it;
and at so little rates they value the salvation of that soul, which Christ
thought worth his blood, that for their meat or drink, as S. Paul words it,
they will let their Brother perish, for whom Christ died, do actions for their
interest or security under a close and secret sense of their own, which being
not understood by other weaker souls that look on their example with some
Reverence, they are led to sin and to perdition.

But much less do they think a law of man a Rule for conscience. According to
the Spartan method, to be found out was transgressing the law, the crafty
performance was merit and virtue: and whereas only Almighty God has cognizance
of the heart, his laws alone can reach designs and the obortive issues of the
thought, or those reserved enormities that are committed in the dark, and
without the privity of a witness.

Here were a subject for a sad complaint, but that I have occasion for a worse,
and that is of the conscience, that answers to the evil eye, the other subject
of the parable, that is, an evil conscience, a conscience that does not give
true judgment of duty, ill informed. And first that which is totally, or for
the most so, and of that but a word for it is not pleasant sure to rake in such
a sink.

We read in Scripture, of men given up to a reprobate mind or sense, Romans 1.
28. and to every good Work reprobate Tim. 1. 16. men who against all the checks
of conscience, and in despite of all its oppositions have chosen and pursued
forbidden interests and pleasures so long, till custom of them has made them
a part not only of their family but themselves: and they do nothing now but
prosecute them by contrivances and actions, and have don this till conscience
is stupefied; and as pleasures are especially says Aristotle, corruptive of
principles, from the absolute necessity they have conceived of them they think
them little sins, and from a long practice none at all, these men are so far in
a reprobate ense, their hearts give a false judgment, as false indeed as Satan
would have them give, and falser much then he can give himself of things of
Religion, who believes and trembles. For they stick not to think those terrors
Clergy men do talk of are but mormo's, vizards of fear, only Religious
specter, shades of terror; those strictnesses of virtue and of the means of
practicing it, but the dreams of bigots, foolish self injuries, and those
things we with so much eager zeal call sins, the only and not dangerous
enjoyments.

It Is the Apostles asseveration, and it is justified by every days unhappy
experience, that evil men and seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived 2 Timothy 3. 13. Habits of ill improve gradually as those of virtue; only
with this difference, that the grouth is more sudden and prosperous: like that
of weeds and noxious plants in respect of those which are medicinal. There is
no opinion, nor no practice so bad which men by degrees cannot make plausible;
as custom renders vice necessary, so by familiarity it becomes acceptable; the
first horrors are soon worn off; and as it fares in War; the enemy is made a
servant, and after grows up to be a favorite, and is at length a master. The
progress from bad to worse, is like that of heavy bodies downwards, the native
weight, gains fresh accessions from the decent already made, and the motion
being continued grows still more rapid and irresistible. That fool who said in
his heart there is no God, e're long emproves into a wit, and loudly says
there neither is or can be one. Conscience galled with perpetual ill usage
contracts a callows hardness, and becomes utterly insensible; and by these
unhappy steps, ungodly men are dead, while they live 1 Timothy 5. 6. are dead in
trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2. 1.

O thou the dayspring from on high that came to visit us, who sat in
darkness and in the shadow of death, in ignorance and sin, and in the suburbs
of eternal darkness, shed thy light in our hearts we beseech thee and by the
Illuminations of thy Holy Spirit give us enlightened minds, and sanctified wills
and affections. Thou have placed conscience in thy stead within us, to do thy
offices and to be thy Vicegerent, to lay thy laws to us for our direction, and
to watch over all our actions, to teach us, to convince us, to correct, or
comfort us. Furnish we beseech thee then this thy commissioner within us with
all qualifications necessary for thy offices, endue it with the knowledge of all
thy will, that we may have a right judgment in all things, and then endue us
with obsequious hearts, that may be always ready to obey the dictats of our
consciences, willing to live piously and honestly in all things, exercising our
selves always in this to have a conscience void of offense both toward God
and toward man, and when the good Lord delivers us from this sad state and the
occasions of it, and if at any time we do rebel against thy officer our
conscience, Lord arm it with thy terrors that it may whip and lash us back
again into our duty, and sting, and goad, and never let us rest till we return
to our obedience and persevere therein unto the end, then shall we have the
blessed comforts of a good conscience here, and the gladsome light of a clear
heart in this world; and in the world to come light and Glory with the in thy
Kingdom etc.

SERMON XX. THE LIGHT OF THE BODY is the Eye.
Matt. 6. 22, 23. The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thy eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness?
I Have drawn you the parallel betwixt the Eye and the Conscience, to several
of their objects and uses; showed you how the clear eye is not a better guide
to a man's walks, nor finds more pleasure in the prospects of those beauties
that are made to temt and entertain the sight, then a pure conscience does find
in looking over the landshape of a life led righteously, soberly, and Godly,
which it must needs if it follow the guidance of this single eye, this
well-inform'd conscience: I have lead you also to the confines of that more
dismal prospect, the dark of that sad state, which an evil conscience does lead
into. This I have done in one, and that in the worst consideration, that of a
seared reprobate conscience; there remain three that I proposed to
consideration; the first that of an erring conscience, second doubtful, third
scrupulous.

And now I am to show how each of these does lead a man into the dark; the
scrupulons raises a dust about him, leads into error and discomfort too; the
doubtful does instead of guiding him leave him so puzl'd that he knows not
which way to betake himself; and the erring conscience lights him into the pit,
and takes him by the hand only to thrust him down: if in any of these ways the
eye be evil, the whole body shall be full of darkness. Of these in their order.

2. An erring conscience, a conscience that gives false information of duty,
that either tells me I may or I must do that which either Gods Law or some Law
in force upon me tells me I must not do; or else tells I must not do that which
I am bound to do, or at the least may do. Now that this is a light indeed like
those deceitful ones that lead men over precipices into dark ruins; like such
lights that were so placed between the rocks as to guide the mariner into a
shipwreck, to make it necessary for him to be dashed against the one or the
other, is most certain: for so it is here. There is scarce such another
infelicity as that this man lies under, whose conscience tells him one thing,
when God's Law, or that which is any way his duty does require the contrary;
for if he do according to the Law of God, he acts against his conscience, and
so sins; and if he act according to his conscience, he sins against the Law of
God. Poor soul! Sin lies on the right and on the left hand, which way soever he
does turn, it seizes on him, and all this I shall prove.

1. That if he act against his conscience he sins, (tho the Law of God make it
no sin) Scripture and reason shall make good. Romans 14. 14. I know, and am
persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self, but to
him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean. God had once
forbidden such and such meats under pain of sin to the Jews by Moses Law, and
made them unclean, that is, unlawful to their use: Now Christ had taken off
this obligation, and made all meats lawful for any man; S. Paul says that he
knew so. I am assured that Christ has so removed all obligation to the Law of
Moses, that to a Christian no meat is unlawful to be eaten: but yet for all
this it is unlawful to him, who thinks it still prohibited, and if his erring
conscience tell him he ought not eat it, tho by Christ's certain Law he may, he
sins if he do eat against his conscience, and that to such an height, that he
whose example wrought with him to eat against the persuasion of his mind,
destroys the man v. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died;
it is therefore a destroying sin to do a lawful thing against a man's conscience.
The reason of all this is clear, because no Law of God or man, no rule of duty
can be applied unto us, but by the mediation of conscience: for till my
conscience lays it to my heart, and tells me such a thing is commanded and my
duty, it is to me as if there were no such command, and it were not my duty,
for till then I knew nothing of it; this alone therefore does propose and apply
duty to us, and consequently whether that which it proposes be my duty really
in it self or no, yet I must needs look upon it as so, having no other
direction imaginable what to do or forbear, but what my conscience some way
instructed tells me God or my Governors have commanded or forbid me. So that if
I am resolved in my mind of the sinfulness and obliquity of an action proposed,
tho really the thing be innocent, yet to me in my present circumstance 'twill
be utterly unlawful, and tho the action be innocent, the agent will be guilty.

2. That God has placed the conscience in us as the only next and immediate
rule of all our actions, according to which they are to be directed, which if
they be not, they are faulty, as every thing that swerves from its rule is not
right: tho what I have said will sufficiently prove, yet Scripture does
confirm; when it says Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, that is
to say, whatsoever is contrary to the persuasion of lawfulness, that is in
other words contrary to conscience, is sin; whatsoever he does as long as he
thinks in conscience he should not do it, he sins whether the thing be sin or
no, as that was no sin of which he there spoke. And reason good; for we are so
far honest hearted lovers of God, as we embrace that which our hearts are
really possessed is his service and our duty, and hate the contrary; that is, as
we follow our conscience: conscience being nothing but the persuasion that this
is duty, which if we go against it is sure we like and follow that which in our
thoughts is vicious and wicked; be it what it will in it self, to us it is so:
it is sure the inclinations and the actions pursue vice, when they pursue that
which they cannot look upon but as vice. Conscience therefore is the rule from
which it is sin to recede.

It Is with fair pretense to reason said, that nothing can be a rule which is it
self crooked and irregular. That which is strait is indeed said to be index sui
and obliqui, and having justified its own rectitude, becomes qualified to be a
test of right and wrong in others. For certainly if the man knew what God's Law
does require of him, in that case the conscience does not err; if he do not
know what God's word does require, how can he follow it against that which his
conscience tells him God requires? And it is certain if the man should suspend
his action, and have not reason to act according to his erring conscience, he
never can have reason to act according to a conscience well-inform'd, not when
it tells him God is to be loved; for it is sure his conscience does as much
propose the error as his duty, as it does the truth: the man as really believes
the one is to be don as the other, and has no reason to make difference, and
therefore if at any time he must follow his conscience, he must always, and it
will be sin to act against it, be it what it will.

But then you will hope it will excuse to act according to it. Oh no alas! for
that is the second thing in this case of erring conscience: if a man act
according to his conscience he sins too, if he act against the Law of God.
Scripture will furnish me with several examples and proofs of this, and it is a
doctrine worth the taking notice of, it having proved to so many persons a plea
for actions otherwise abominable; they followed their conscience, 'twas, it may
be, mistake in judgment, but 'twas uprightness of heart, sincerity of
conscience. Now to take off this color, which I shall do with all imaginable
plainess. Our Savior John 16. 2. foretells to his Disciples, they shall put you
out of their Synagogues yea the time will come that whosoever kills you will
think that he does God service, (...), that he does offer God an oblation or
worship; shall think it not only lawful but acceptable to God, and of the
nature of a Sacrifice which propitiates for other offenses, to put you to
death. See here a conscience bravely glos'd, when the error looked like
Religion and Atonement, (a color not at all strange to our days in such
another case,) and yet these Jews that did so (for of them he speaks) were
given up to the direst punishments that ever any nation did groan under. Of the
same Jews S. Paul says Romans 10. 2. I bear them record, that they have a zeal
of God, but not according to knowledge; that is, I must testify of them, that
they are very many of them great zealots for their Law, as that which is
commanded them by God, and so in their way and heart zealous to have God
obeyed, only for want of knowledge they are mistaken in their zeal. Here is
strong conscience granted in these Jews, and that built up upon a Law of God,
then indeed outdated, which yet through a zealous earnestness they were ignorant
of: but yet the following this zeal and conscience was plagued with total
induration of of that people c. 11. 8, 9, 10.

Nor was this S. Paul's heat against that persecuting nation, but that Apostle
does more plainly yet and home to our matter say of himself, Acts 23. 1. I have
lived in all good conscience before God until this day: I have all my life
long, even when I was a defender of the Mosaical Law against Christ's
reformation, acted sincerely and uprightly according to my conscience: and
again 2 Timothy 1. 3. I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with a pure
conscience, i. e. whom I have obeyed sincerely all my time, even when through
ignorance I persecuted the Christian faith, doing according to the dictate of
my conscience, and as I was persuaded I ought to do. And now if conscience will
excuse, there was enough of that, a good conscience and a pure conscience; and
will his fiery persecutions n^w by virtue of his conscience be Christened holy
zeal, shall the pure conscience make his bloody hands to be undefiled? Oh no:
'twas Blasphemy, and injury, and persecution, for all 'twas conscience, 1 Timothy
1. 13. I was before a blasphemer, etc. and notwithstanding I did it all in the
uprightness and sincerity of my heart, I am the chief of sinners, v. 15. And
let us not suppose these aggravations were laid on by S. Paul upon himself
because of his unbelief, that that was the only thing that gave guilt to his
actions, and that we through faith and assurance shall escape, if we do such gross
actions out of an erring conscience. For on the contrary S. Paul does bring his
unbelief not as the Aggravation, but the Apology of his crimes, he pleads that
for himself v. 13. and he finds another occasion for God's remitting him not
from his conscience, which might alleviate the faults, but by his being by the
horror of his sins a greater instance of God's wonderful grace in forgiving, v.
16. Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ
might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should
hereafter believe in him to life everlasting. God dealt most mercifully with
me, called me from heaven, whilst I was persecuting him, to be a prime object
of his patience and longanimity, and in order of time the first that was so
miraculously called, that so the wickedest of the Gentiles may in me have an
example of hope of mercy, if they shall come in to Christ.

And will it now be fit, my Brethren, with this of S. Paul, who notwithstanding
such true pleas of conscience is forced to seek out for such motives of
forgiveness, and plead hard ignorance and unbelief, and yet confess himself the
chief of sinners, with this I say to parallel some actions of our days, that
under the pretense of conscience (which too has no Law, as that of S. Paul
had, tho then outdated) will justify forbidden actions even against repentance,
men will not ask forgiveness where they can pretend conscience: I could
instance in a strange particular of one of my remembrance, and my knowledge of
the person and the story sufficiently notorious, who because the Papists
believing that to be Christ, which indeed is bread, worship it, therefore
thought in his conscience all kneeling at the Sacrament Idolatry, and to that
error adding the command Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9. cut off his brother's and his
mother's head: yea and when condemned to death by sentence of Law for the
action, would not be beaten from his hold, but on the strength of that mistaken
place went as boldly with that blood on his hand and his soul to face the
judgment seat, as he could have don, had he bin washed in Christ's own blood;
and of this resolute fury the Zealots of our neighbor country of Scotland have
made many recent instances in their revived Ravilliacs. See the sad issue of an
erring conscience, an action whose horror feinds would startle at, such a
persuasion does make meritorious, and yet God knows, that erring consciences
have brought the Parent of a Nation (a thing of much direr guilt) to the same
state; and yet that conscience must be admitted an excuse, when God knows
jealousies and suspicions have bin all the ground and all the rule for their
determinations of conscience, and yet on that stock alone they could misjudge
and censure, speak evil of and revile the actions of just Governors, and do
that which I dare not say. When against all Laws both of God and man, all ties
sacred and civil, obligations of oaths and duties, that it may be impossible to
plead ignorance, men yet will act under the banner of such a thin conscience,
that never could produce any Law of God for its direction or its quiet, and yet
think themselves secure. When a confident persuasion of heart, God knows how
taken up, shall quite annual that command of Christ, of taking up the Cross,
and change that state which he calls blessed, suffering for righteousness sake,
(if there were such a thing) change it into so great a curse, as men will
rather embowel themselves in their brother's hearts, involve a Nation in blood
and misery, in guilt and ruin, than not throw off the Cross from off their
shoulders.

And now it is to no purpose to observe, that when perjury and sacriledg and
breach of almost every Commandment in the Decalogue shall not only become
tolerable, but be the only character of a godly side by virtue of a thing
called conscience; surely S. Paul was a weak man, that when he had don some
such things out of a good and pure conscience, yet calls himself the chief of
sinners. In like manner in the Church new religious fancies are bold to take
upon them the holy face of conscience, and then to quicken men into schisms,
and all uncharitable separations and factions, withdrawing them from the
obedience of them that have the spiritual rule over them, not at all submitting
themselves to them, who by Gods appointment watch over their souls, but rather
flying in their faces, at once with open disobedience, loud reproaches, bitter
censures, and severe condemnations. Others, by having had men's persons in
admiration, and consequently their opinions, suffered their models to be stamped
upon their conscience, and then that must justify Ecclesiastical parricides,
destroying their own fathers that begot them to the Church, and at once cutting
off the whole line of those progenitors, that can derive their race from
Christ, a fairer stem and pedigree than most can show. But alas! my Brethren,
if we shall grant that these opinions really possess their souls, and that in
the uprightness of their heart they did pursue them, that neither interest nor
faction, nor having bin disobliged, or having suffered, has pufft up a passion
into conscience, but that it is all sincerity; yet we have seen that cannot bear
us out in such commissions, it is but an erring conscience still that animates a
man into any breach of duty, and if there be no other Law to warrant actions,
the conscience is so far from being able to justify them, that while it errs,
it but entangles a man in the necessity of sinning, leads him into such
Labyrinths of guilt, that whatever he does, he offends: on one side if he do
what his erring conscience dictates to him, he sins against God's Law; on the
other side, if he forbear, he sins against God's Vicegerent, his own
conscience; there is the guilt of his deed, here is the guilt of his heart,
which does oblige a man to follow that which it is sin to follow, and which
makes him he must and ought to do that, which he must not nor ought to do.

And sure, my Brethren, the only application to such a conscience is to advise
the laying it aside, to rectify the error. Good counsel that indeed, but the
hardest to be taken in the world; for that a man may rectify, he must know
himself in an error, and if he know that, then he has not an erring
conscience: this when it is strongly so, does not so much as doubt of his
opinion, and while he does not doubt, what temtation has he so much as to set
upon the rectifying? I shall but name some means.

The first will be Prayer for Divine illumination; S. James has directed this,
if any man lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not, c. 1. 5. and our Savior has promised, that he will give his
Holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. whose office, we know, is to
lead us into all truth, John 16. 13.

The second means will be, not to be wanting to our selves, not to shut our
eyes against, or resist the truth, Acts 28. 27. 2 Timothy 3. 8. nor by a
wretchless unconcerndness take up with slight appearances, and receive a vulgar
error for a sacred revelation, and having men's persons in admiration, Jude 16.
believe as doctrines the devices or commandments of men, Matt. 15. 9. not to
consider what this celebrated Teacher, or this Sect and Party say, but make our
resort to the Law and to the Testament, what Law of God there is for, or
against this action. For in this case it is most true, There is one Lawgiver,
who can save and destroy, James 4. 12. and if sin be the transgression of a
law, 1 John 3. 4. it inevitably follows, that where no law is, there is no
transgression, Romans 4. 15. And yet it is strange to see, how men amuse and
embarras themselves in things that have no bottom or foundation in Scripture,
and in the mean time omit the weighty matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and
faith.

Thirdly, if I have bin engaged in any practices, of which by the contrary
practices of other sober rational men, I see there may be reason, if not to
doubt, yet to search into them; then I Will take the same course in order to the
settling, or the rectifying of my judgment; and especially if any obligations
to the contrary have got possession of me, if obedience and meekness, and peace
of the State or Church, or any sacred bond, in a word, if any commands of
Superiors, or engagements to them seem strong for the other side, then nothing
but clear Law of God or my Superiors shall fix me.

Fourthly, where things are not absolutely convincing on either side, and there
is no clear Law on neither, or else so much like Law on both sides; here, as I
must suspend if possible my action, for these must needs make doubts, so if I
be necessitated to act on one side or other, then if my conscience do mistake,
according to the degree of my diligence in examining, so will be the degrees of
my guilt. If I have searched to my utmost, and so offend out of an ignorance I
could not overcome, it is the constant doctrine of all, that the mercy of our
God by the tenure of the Gospel will not impute the error to a person otherwise
of holy life: but if there was a means of knowing, that either heat, or any
other thing did hurry me from a sufficient consideration thereof, according to
my means so is my sin. Abimelech had a competent ground to think that Sarah was
not Abraham's wife, when both herself, and he had told him so, and upon that he
says, he took her to him in the integrity of his heart, his conscience
reasonably well-inform'd telling him that he might do it; and yet God p^nisheth
his have: he determined too speedily, his desire was too quick, did not proceed
by those slow steps, that a good careful conscience does move with, that will
examine with all strictness where he discerns there will be gross sin on the
other side. The Jews had a strong prejudice against Christ's reformation of the
Law, by those so many promises of Scripture that their sacrifices should be
eternal, and when for many ages they had bin brought up in a Religion so owned
by God, and were so hardened in that Religion by all their Teachers, 'twas no
wonder they rejected the Apostles preaching out of conscience of their own
Religion, Paul himself had don so, and yet God gives them up to final
induration for it; because they had sufficient means of knowing Christ was sent
by God to reform their Religion, for have they not heard? Romans 10. 18. Thy
diligence therefore shall alleviate the fault, and where it is used in a good
measure, probably will not suffer the conscience to be long positive and
peremtory in a mistake, but at the most will let it only be a doubting
conscience, which how far it is an evil eye, and how we are to guide our selves
out of that darkness it does lead into, we must now show.

A doubting conscience may be either in things of very little moment, and also
where there is very little light to guide it, and then we only call it
scrupulous; or else in things of consequence, and of these we now treat; and
the Position is, that he that acts according to a doubting conscience sins, and
this evil eye leads into utter darkness. The Aphorism is a certain reveled
pronunc't truth, he that doubts is damned if he eat, Romans 14. 23. However
sacred the tribunal of conscience can be thought to be, it must not stand in
competition with the Throne of Almighty God, and oblige us to do that which the
Divine Command has interdicted, or to leave that undon, the doing of which he
has expressly charged upon us. It was thought to be a tyrannous hardship which
the Egyptian taskmasters put upon the Israelites, that they should be beaten
because they made not brick, when they had no straw to make it with: but it
would seem a more tyrannous cruelty, to punish them if they made, and also to
punish if they did not make it. But so it is; he who chooses to do that which
his conscience suggests he ought to avoid as being ill, and resolves to omit
that which he judges or believes he ought to do as being good, has all the
inordination of mind that constitutes the most flagrant guilt; he pursues evil,
and turns away from good apprehended to be such, and so has that depravation of
mind that constitutes a Devil. But on the other side, our opinions cannot alter
the real natures of things, nor will my belief that my act is laudable make it
to be so, any more than my fancy that Poisons are wholesome food, will free them
from their noxious venim, and render them restoratives and cordials. In like
manner, my adventuring on an action which I think is bad, upon the cold reserve
of a possibility, that it may be otherwise, involves the desperate resolution
of doing it howsoever; which differs very little from doing it, tho I know it
to be certainly unlawful. But a doubting conscience admits of a counterpoise
from a contrary doubt, and there is fear of sin, as on the one, so also on the
other part. I am uncertain whether I may not do ill in acting, and yet whether
I may not do worse in forbearing: or thus, I am not sure that what I enterprise
is lawful, but yet I have no ground to believe it is unlawful. Now from this
exigent thus declared I might deduce resolutions in many cases of our life. As

1. When there is no ground to build a certain judgment on of either side, but
it is only probable the thing is not sin, and consequently I cannot be sure it
is not, yet if upon that probability I act, this is clear different from the
state of the doubting conscience: for tho I may have some doubt it is possible
the thing may not be good, yet having honestly examined it, I have no reason to
think it not good, and I am sure of my own heart, that if I thought it were so,
I would not do it; here is no choosing of a sin, not with the least degree of
inclination. It Is this secures the Physician, who cannot possibly be assured
there may not something lurk in his Patient's body, (for whose dark and
unwholesome closets he has no prospective,) to which the physic he prescribes
may be pernicious; yet because God has revel'd no certain grounds for guidance
in this case, therefore he upon diligent search and grounds of art, which are
the best God has allowed us prescribing what he really believes will do him
good, satisfies a good conscience. Upon the same account the Pilot satisfies
himself, where he adventures his ship and freight upon shelfs and shallows: and
the Captain, when he leads his men upon he canon's mouth, and other desperate
attemts of war.

Shall I make more familiar instances to you: some have doubted whether
celebrating Christ's Nativity be not will worship, because it is not commanded
in Scripture; other have doubted of the use of Garments prescribed Ministers
from the same ground, and from their being significant. Now as to these, not to
show the unreasonableness of these doubts, tho I could easily do it: for in
God's name why is it to set apart a day to thank God for the Redemtion of
mankind will worship, and yet to set apart a day for the deliverance of a
Nation from a temporal plague not will worship? Is the fifth of November in the
Scripture any more than the twenty fifth of December? Or is it the infinitely
greater mercy of Christ's Birthday that makes it more unlawful than the
Gunpowder-Treason day, and therefore it is not lawful because it is more fit? And
for the Garments of the Clergy, I would they were all significant, but that
that is an argument against them in these days. It is true Scripture
prescribes them not, and by that rule they should wear none, for it prescribes
none: but pray tell me, will not any of these doubting men seek a Pulpit to
preach in, or now a days a basin to baptize with, never looking whether they
have a warrant in Scripture to command it? Just so, rational and sensible men
select a particular habit for a Priest, whereby his words and exhortations may
be received with greater respect and authority, and this without any written
precept: for as where Scripture commands, it renders every thing necessary; so
where it is silent, it renders nothing unlawful in such circumstantials.

So a prescribed way of Prayer is boggled at, and why that more unlawful than a
limited way of praising God? They had effusions of those in the first times,
why do not we as well pretend to the one as to the other? Or why should it be
less faulty to have set forms of singing Psalms than have set forms of Liturgy,
in which too people might communicate, as they do also join in praises? or
indeed would that Rhyme and tune become unlawful, should the Magistrate command
them too?

But passing over this, and to speak in short of the whole matter. If the man
that doubts, bids his conscience stand aside, and because of legal penalties
muffles himself, and resolvedly goes on, notwithstanding his speculative
irresolution, with desperate boldness judging it better to trust God with his
soul, than the Law with his estate or liberty: if he fears to consider or
enquire, least he should get conviction, that suits not with his interest, and
thinks it easier to doubt than to be certain, because he is certainly determined
to do what is enjoined, tho it be never so unlawful. This is a profligate state
of mind, that wants nothing but occasion to engage upon the greatest villainies,
and close with Apostasy it self, when recommended by impunity. But if this
doubting makes another scheme of reasoning, and performs what is enjoind,
because the Magistrate's command is certain, but its unlawfulness is only
dubious, and the safest course is ever the most innocent, because it is the
most prudent; then the obligation to suspend the going on to act in case of
doubting, is superseded by another obligation, actually to obey the undoubted
injunction of Superiors, and the good Subject will not fail to be a good
Christian too.

But alas! why should I busy my self in picking cases which here, I hope, are
not useful, when as upon this very Proposition we are now upon, other things do
apply themselves to most men's hearts of a more strong concern, and of more
daily practice. If an action otherwise lawful will make up an indictment to our
condemnation, if don with a doubting conscience; what guilt and damnation is
there in those actions that are don against present full persuasion of
conscience. Truly, my Brethren, I have no aggravation for sins don against
knowledge, that being the worst that can be said of sin; and I shall only add,
that they who so defy their conscience, are in the ready way to have no
conscience, the sad estate of whom my last did display to you; and in short,
it is no wonder, if God's Vicegerent do depart, when he is so affronted. There
is a great and sad example of this procedure Romans 1. 18, 19, 20. For the wrath
of God is reveled from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. Because that which may be known of
God, is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible
things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they
are without excuse. There is no plea for such, because they did not use their
knowledge to his service, but sinned against it, and by their deeds of darkness
put out that light, which was vouchsafed them by God, yea indeed did commit
those deeds of darkness in the face of light.

I have to what I have already said, one word to add for the scrupulous
conscience. Scruples are little suspicions in things of small concern or
indifferency, and where there is but little ground; for otherwise they swell
into that we call doubts, and which denominates a doubting conscience. Now
scruples, which are small particles of dust, do indeed cast dust into the eyes,
which dim the sight, and make the eyes to roll, and fret, and grieve; and so
do these the mind: they disturb duty wonderfully, by taking up the heart, and
making it restless and unquiet, and so quite discomposed for duty; for the
heart is still called aside, and wandering about that which troubles it. And
indeed these quite take off the edge of the mind; for while scruples arise, I
am unsatisfied in every thing I do, and then with what heart can I do them? I
am in fear of every performance, and such a fear exceedingly damps love, and
quashes all endeavors. I have no cheerfulness in my actions, and consequently
never can be eager and forward, but cold and slack; for these do still put
demurs, and nothing but discomfort dwells upon my spirit.

A dark and ill state this, and therefore it is no wonder if the Spirit of
darkness sheds it, especially where he cannot draw in the soul to works of
darkness; if he cannot quench the heats of their devotion, then he will strive
to cool them by these arts, which like little dashings of water thrown into the
fire, if they cannot put it out, yet at least they darken the flame, and change
that which was pure and clear into thick fume and smother: so do these raise
smoke and cloud in the soul. If the Devil cannot betray the heart to downright
vice, but his suggestions are shut out, and temtations scorned, or at least
avoided; then he will trouble them in their duties, he will suggest things that
under the vizor of nicer and stricter Religious shall be let in, and when they
are in, shall put the soul in little combustions, and disturb all its
performances. Therefore these are to be combated with, and the heart to be
fortified against them; as soon as ever we find these little spies and
incendiaries of Satan stirring in the mind, let us strait seize them, and
examine what they do there, what account they can give of themselves. Have they
any ground or plea? when a thought checks me with a sudden motion of heart,
least what I do may be amiss, I will question instantly, has God said so any
where, is there any Law that forbids it? If I cannot resolve my self, I will
call in counsel; (for if I be not ashamed to whisper the unhandsomnesses of
nature to a Physician, to betray uncomely infirmities, shall the cheerful quiet
of my Soul, and the comfortable progress of my Religion be less considerable to
me?) and if by these means I cannot find God has forbid it any way, either
directly or by consequence, why then shall I do Satan's work for him, help him
to disquiet my own heart, make the semblance of Religion hinder my Religion,
and with a pudder about duty keep my self from doing duty, much more of which I
might perform with less trouble, than I do think of these things, and with
infinitely more comfort? No sure, I will make no sins to my self that God has
not made, but in God's name with an upright heart set about my known duty, in
full assurance of faith. But

Secondly it will become us, whosoever is at any time troubled with these, to
consider with our selves, when we find scruples arise about things of very
small concern, to examine, am I thus wary and thus nice in every piece of known
duty, have I as sharp checks there, and is my conscience as stirring in every
circumstance of sure Religion; if a true object of charity pass by me, or I
hear of such an one, whose real wants seem to call upon me for Christ's sake,
and I instead of satisfying his needs, satisfy only the importunity of my own
thoughts by some little excuse, I have not about me, or let others give that
are more able, or why should I give to every one that asks me? In this case now
is my heart restless and scrupulous, least the real wants of the poor soul
should make an alms duty, unsatisfied till I either know that, or till I do
relieve him?

If when Prayers call, and at the same time either a trifle or something, which
I had time enough before to prevent, and knew well enough the fit times of
doing one and the other, yet seek to detain me; have I scruples here, and are
they strong enough to throw aside the less concerns, and will not let my heart
rest till it brings me honestly and zealously to my devotions? If some little
slight injury, or it may be inadvertency of another fret my mind, and begin to
swell me into a passion, or thicken into a grudg, and I am in present heat of
words, and remember him with a slight or a less esteem; do scruples rise as
fast as these heats, and my heart become more troubled at it self, than at the
little conceived injury, and never well at ease, till I am calm to him? If it
be not thus, but we who strain at gnats and swallow camels, we whose eyes
boggle at motes in the Sun, can wink, or suffer beams to hood-wink them; we
that scruple at things indifferent, things of which we have no rule to judge
them sins, and are not nice at all in things of certain duty, have no such
scrupulous conscience in known faults, or at least in much more concerning
matters, we may do well to consider, whether our nicest carefulness in these do
not betray, that in such little things the main of our Religion lies, our
hearts lay their greatest stress upon these. There are certain formalities of
Religion, things that speak people Professors, distinctive characters of a
Party professing Godliness, little things by which they are discriminated, as
niceties in habits, or gestures, or modes, or tones of speaking, or forms of
doing things in Religion, or some strict forbearances of things that all the
world beside themselves never imagined hurt in. Now they that do make such to
be the stamp and signature of a Professor, it is no wonder if they be nice and
scrupulous in them; and truly to be scrupulous, especially in such
indifferencies, does dangerously look toward that: it is certain, where the
greatest care and watchfulness is laid, there will the most and greatest
scruples be apt to stir; so that if these be most in such indifferencies,
either the heart has entertained some end besides Religion, the seeming strict
or a Professor; or else the heart has bin betrayed, and by being bred up to
strict cares, especially in such things, it has let it self be besotted by
those strict and handsome appearances, and low spirited as it is, has raised no
higher, but set up his chief rest there; they think if they do these things,
they are religious. There cannot be any other reason given of these different
strictnesses, this scrupulosity in little things, and negligence in greater
interests; and therefore it is worth the search in every heart, in which
examination whosoever shall find his scruples to be universal, and proportioned
to the duty, his heart watchful, especially where the concern is greatest, and
there most careful where it most behooves him; let that heart take comfort, that
quality is but the nicety, the quickness of a clear, pure eye, that can endure
no dust, no soil upon it, and such an eye shall lead a person through the paths of
God's word, which is a light to the feet, and a light unto the paths here to
the Land of everlasting light and glory, where in God's light he shall see
light for evermore.

SERMON XXI. THE LIGHT OF THE BODY is the Eye.
Matt. 6. 22, 23. The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thy eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness?
THE Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field, Matthew. 13. 44. a
field this much richer than it shows for, that provides for several uses of our
life, that furnishes with food and wealth too, and is both granary and
treasury; and just such is the word of the Kingdom also, it has in it more
than it promises to sight, there are still hidden treasures besides the food
that grows before our eyes: if we search, we shall find still more and more
furniture for life, more wealth yet in the bowels of it. These words give us
experience of this, from which tho we have had several spiritual
entertainments, provisions for diverse cases of our life, yet have we not
exhausted them; for we shall find that yet in another sense The light of the
body is the eye, etc.

To the two interpretations, I have given of these words, the first of which
that by a single eye should be meant a single intention, an entire, honest
meaning, an heart like that of Jacob, plain, simple, and upright, such as may
therefore style a man an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile, no
doubling, but such an one as lays always to it self good ends, and intends to
take in no ill means to compass them, has bin generally adhered to by almost
all Expositors. The second, that by the single eye should be meant the pure,
clear, good conscience, which to me indeed seems much more proper than the
other; to neither of them have I any objection but this, that they do not at
all relate to the matter of the discourse, which our Savior has in hand, and
it is not imaginable why Christ should in the midst of a Paragraph concerning
mortifying the desire and love of wealth, the beginning of which commands
laying up treasure in heaven, and the end tells us we cannot serve God and
Mammon, should interpose any thing of conscience or intentions: and therefore,
tho what we have delivered of them be exactly consonant to the words, and built
upon other certain Scripture, and be the sense of most men, yet we will view
one other, which tho it be assigned but by one Expositor, that I know of, yet
being exactly pertinent to the matter in hand, and having a surer plea for its
being the sense of the place, than any of the rest have, it shall not escape
us, tho no more have lighted upon it. Now the way of finding out the meaning
was, not to consider what may be compared to a single eye or an evil eye, for
possibly so many things may be; but by seeing what those words do constantly
signify in Scripture, and so what light and darkness also do, and then put them
together, and see whether they will so here: and we shall take those grounds.

1. Then what a single eye and evil eye do use to signify in Scripture: and for
the evil eye, we find it often Prove. 23. 6, 7. Eat thou not the bread of him
that has an evil eye, neither desire thou his dainty meats; for as he thinks
in his heart so is he; eat and drink, says he to thee, but his heart is not
with thee: which means, eat not the meat of him that is a niggard, who tho he
do invite thee to it, yet he does grudge it thee, and grieves thou eatest it;
his heart does not speak in his invitations, but he had rather thou would
spare, and he computes thy morsels. So again Prove. 28. 22. He that hastes to
be rich, has an evil eye, that is, is covetous; he envies every other man's
prosperity, (so most Translations render it here) is troubled to see another
flourish, and thinks their gain his loss. So Matt. 20. 15. Is thine eye evil,
because I am good? he says to them, who tho they had contracted for a penny by
the day for labor, yet when they saw those that had wrought but a little part
receive so much, strait entertained desires and hopes of more than they had
bargained for, and when they saw they should have nothing but their due, they
murmured; to whom the Master does reply, Friend, I do thee no wrong, did thou
not agree with me for a penny, be thou content with that which comes to thy
share? This man that came last to work (it being not his fault that he came no
sooner, but his not being sooner called, and he having labored honestly and
cheerfully ever since he came) shall by me, who accept the will for the deed,
be rewarded with the same reward that thou have; and sure thou have no reason
to complain, that I dispose of my own as I see cause: what reason is there that
my bounty to others should be matter of envy and discontent to thee? So that an
evil eye signifies unsatisfiedness with ones own condition, and envy at
another, an eye that grieves to see any thing go besides it self; in one word,
an illiberal, covetous, envious mind. You have its perfect character
Ecclesiasticus 14. from v. 3. to 10. Riches are not comely for a niggard, and
what should an envious man do with money? He that gathers by defrauding his
own soul, gathers for others, that shall spend his goods riotously: he that
is evil to himself, to whom will he be good? he shall not take pleasure in his
goods. There is none worse than he that envieth himself, and if he does good,
he does it unwillingly. The envious man has a wicked eye, he turns away his
face, and despises men; a covetous man's eye is not satisfied with his
portion, and the iniquity of the wicked dries up his soul: a wicked eye envieth
his bread, and he is a niggard at his table.

Next for the single eye, that certainly is set as opposite to the evil eye, as
meaning liberality and cheerful bounty, and we shall see accordingly that
singleness does signify; for so our Bible almost always translates the word: 2
Cor. 8. 2. Their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their liberality, the
riches of their singleness it is in the Original. So chap. 9. 11. being
enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, to all singleness; again v. 13.
liberal distribution, singleness of distribution the Greek does say; and so in
many places which others have observed; and Romans 12. 8. He that gives, let him
do it with simplicity or singleness, for it is the same word still, and there
our Margent tells you, that it means liberality. Single therefore does in
Scripture signify bountiful, and we shall find that coupled with the eye, Prove.
22. 9. He that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his
bread to the poor. And so we have the Scripture sense of these two words, the
single eye does signify a liberal mind, and the evil eye a niggardly,
uncontented, envious disposition. And here let us stop a little, and say a word
on these expressions, why these things to the eye? is that the chief seat of
those qualities, is not the heart much rather? It Is true indeed that discontent
and envy shed themselves into the eye, they dwell there in a cloud, the eye
flags and is dull, and does so certainly betray a niggard, envious heart, that
we may see it grudges spirits to its own eyes, and does restrain that current
that is to feed them with a vigorous life: when bounty on the other side flows
into the eyes in a cheerful stream of spirits, that make them full and bright.
But this is not all the reason; it is not only the sign of these same
inclinations that hangs out in the eye, but the lust it self does lodge and
dwell there. S. John calls covetousness the lust of the eye, 1 John 2. 16. and
that not only because the eye of the covetous is never satisfied with wealth,
but lusts still more and more; but there is reason why it should be the lust of
the eye, for when goods increase they are increased that eat them, and what
good is there to the owners thereof saving the beholding them with their eyes?
Ecclesiasticus 5. 11. When plenty does stream in upon us with a torrent, while
we do lay it by and do not use it, then it is clear, that nothing but the eye
enjoies it: when we do lay it out, if we dispose it to comply with fashions, or
to serve pomp and ostentation, or to feed emulation, because I will not be
without what any other has, or else to entertain sports and delights, it is
clear that nothing but the eye is treated with the expense, and with the
magnificence of these; neither the back nor belly has the least relish of
them, nor has the soul any other organ to employ about them, but the organ of
seeing. But if thy riches be expended in great provisions for the appetite,
unless a man can stretch his belly as he does his barns and his demesnes, and
make all bigger, enlarge his stomach as he does his table, pull out new sides
of appetite, and multiply his hungers as he does his dishes; the wealthy man
himself devours but little more, than when he had not such abundance, only he
sees more meat, and sees more eaters of it: so that muchness of wealth, what is
beyond sufficient competency, nothing but the eye enjoies, and it is therefore
said that that lusts after it; it is the eye desires riches, and with them we
serve no other part.

And then, my Brethren, this expression of single eye or bountiful eye do s let
us see, that liberality is no great pressure to a man, it does require no
inconveniences from him, it does retrench from nothing but his eye; if we can
but get this to be moderate in its objects, get but a single eye, an eye that
is not covetous of every thing it likes and that delights it, an eye that will
be satisfied with competencies, and then a man will have no other uses for much
wealth, but only those of doing good with it; for if thine eye be not always
gaping after superfluities and daily novelties of entertainments, pursuing
every thing it fancies, or any other man possesses, and still ambitioning the
heights of whatsoever it beholds that pleases it; if he can keep it from
thirsting after every thing that feeds its own pride, or another envy: keep, I
say, but the eye in bounds of moderation, and there is nothing else in man,
that does require much for its satisfaction. It Is nothing else but the
unlimited, unwearied eye, that looks through all the world for entertainments, and
must have services from every part of the whole universe; the Indians must dive
into the depths of the Abyss, and digg the rocks to get a Jewel that shall dash
a little light into thine eye; the Mariner must pass throughout all the variety
of climes, must cross the frozen and the torrid Zones to pick up those
diversities of things that are to please thy sight, with a new garment for thy
self or for thy chamber, or rather are to make a dress, not for thy back indeed
or for thy room, but for thy eye, which is not well, except it see fine things;
that must have furniture out of the bowels of the worms, and out of the bowels
of the earth, have gold and silver utensils, and silken ornaments, and have I
know not what: so also several nations must conspire to make up almost any one
in the whole variety of sports, which yet do but pass by, and please the eye,
and move away as quick as sight it self. It is the eye indeed that endears
every excessive sin to us. The Scripture does most properly express it, when it
says the Adulteries of the eye; for its delights, those of variety I mean, for
that too has no other, serve nothing but the eye. So it is in the sin of
pride, and covetousness, and pleasure: it is that part spends almost all the
riots and intemperances, that drinks in objects minutely, and thirsts for all
diversities, these consume. Do but teach that to be content, and there will be
enough for charity. If God had bid us rob our bowels for to feed the hungry,
divide necessity betwixt us, and deny nature's cravings to hear those of the
poor, it had bin hard; and tho the Lord emtied himself for us, yet sure the
croaking of our emty bowels would have sounded much like murmurings at such a
precept: but when he bids us only spare a little of the provisions of our eye,
which wants nothing at all of them, do but deny thy sight some little portion
of its excesses, and lay out some of its unnecessary objects on the Poor, and I
will ask no more for charity. This sure is no hard duty. Get but a single eye,
an eye that is not niggardly and covetous, that catches at and grasps at every
thing that likes it; do but moderate its desires and lusts, and all the rest of
thee, thy back and belly will be easily contented, will spare enough for
liberality: it is nothing but an evil eye that hinders. The pinching Miser he
can deny all other appetites to gorge his eye, he crucifies his flesh, and
almost starves his body to provide for his sight; it is this alone he cares for,
to have wealth to behold, not use. Could he cure this Wolf, this canine
appetite in his eye, that is so greedy to look on wealth, he might afford to
give his heaps, for he does nothing else with them, but see them. And it is the
very same with them who are as covetous of pleasures for their sight, or things
to furnish out the pomps of pride or ostentation of vanity; if their eye would
abate in these, bounty would have provisions.

And sure, my Brethren, among the lovely changes that the eye delights in, this
might come in for one handsome variety, to see such and so many souls live
cheerfully through the help of thy liberality, to see thy wealth, not only feed
the instruments of thy delight, thy Dogs, it may be, or thy Hawks, but feed
poor Christians, but feed the members of thy Savior; to see when with a great
deal thou can hardly furnish one room well, much less of it does furnish such
poor laboring families: furniture of a very comfortable prospect it will be at
that day, I am sure, when all the other satisfactions of thy eyes are dead, or
else dissolving in a flood of fire, then to behold those works which thy estate
did help thee to perform; for they shall follow thee to Heaven, Rev. 14. 13.
and to see that Christ upon the Throne, whom in his members thou have often
relieved; an object that will comfort such a single eye with everlasting light.
And so I pass to the second terms to be expounded, Light and Darkness.

1. Light in Scripture does often signify Prosperity, as Darkness does the
contrary. I need not cite much Scripture for it, Psalm 18. 28. For thou will
light my canlde, the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness. Job 21. 17. How
often is the candle of the wicked put out, and how often comes their destruction
upon them? God distributeth sorrows in his anger to them. Isaiah, c. 5. 30.
does express times of affliction thus, and if one look unto the earth, behold
darkness and distress, and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof. So
chap. 8. 22. Behold trouble, and darkness, and dimness of anguish. Now if it
mean thus here, then the sense is, a single eye fills the body full of light;
Charity makes a man prosperous in all his actions; but if the eye be evil, the
body shall be full of darkness, he that either to furnish coffers, pride, or
pleasures, or excesses does retrench from bounty, however he advance these for
a while, yet before long God will cut off the opportunities of these; he that
will not put a good portion of what he has to good uses, the time will come,
when either he or his, however well provided for, shall not have for their own
uses: if their eye be so evil as not to let their candle shed a light to any
other but themselves, God will put out their canlde, and uncharitableness shall
bring adversity upon them or upon their families; and if the verse mean thus,
then it agrees with Solomon's Aphorism Prove. 11. 24. There is that scatters,
and yet increases; there is that withholdeth more than is meet, and it tends
to penury. But to this I have spoke already; now I shall only say, this is a
doctrine that we need not only trust on Christ for the truth of, a very Turk
believes it, and not the Gospel only, but the Alcoran affirms it: saying, that
which they lay out of their wealth in the way of God, in pious charitable uses,
is like a grain that brings forth seven stalks. Blessed harvest of Charity,
increase more than an hundred fold! and I will add but one place of Scripture
to it, which says over the Text in larger and more glorious words Isaiah, 58.
7, 8, 10, 11. To deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor
that are cast out to thy house, when thou see the naked that thou cover him,
and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh; then shall thy light
break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and
thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be thy
reward: and if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
soul, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the
noonday: and the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
droughts, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and
like a spring of water, whose waters fail not. The expressions seem to grow
upon the Prophet, first he says, Thy light shall break forth as the morning,
by little slow degrees of increasing light, which peeps out first in a dawn,
and so grows into day; and so shall thy prosperity, which dawns and brightens
by degrees, as thou drawest out reliefs: but he corrects these words, and
thinks this is not blessing quick enough for this virtue, whose return shall be
more eminent, conspicuous, and notable; thy light, says he, shall rise in
obscurity, shall have no creeping twilight for to usher it, but they very night
shall break into Sunshine, and in the midst of hopeless affliction the face of
joy and gladness shall rise upon thee. Yea more as if the rising light were but
weak, and too faint for his meaning, Thy darkness shall be as the noonday,
strong and hot brightness shall break in upon thy occasions of sadness, which
shall both cherish and enlighten thee, thaw every thing that did sit cold about
thine heart, and make all pleasant shine about thee. But where, I pray you, are
the Luminaries that are to shed this Noon? The Prophet has them here, thy
Righteousness, that is in Scripture dialect thy Alms, shall go before thee, and
the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward: Light expressed not only in terms of
overflowing blessedness, but terms of guard and strength; Light he shall have
here that shall be glory to him, and shall be fortification to him; the glory
of the Lord shall be his reward, as if the charitable man did also dwell in
Light that were inaccessible, who is so guarded as to have righteousness in his
van for his avantguard, and the glory of the Lord of hosts and victories for
his rere-defence; which means in plain words this, that the Lord will make the
righteousness of such a man appear, and will do good and glorious things for
him in this life. And then let others please themselves to have their wealth
break out in shining pomps of bravery about them, or flow in streams of plenty
and of delicacy, or of pleasure; alas the spring of these will quickly fail. If
any scorching weather come, any fiery trial, any persecution, yea any days of
adversity, the wealth will go out that is to furnish them; or if there do not
come such days, yet the too full streams will drain the fountain, and there
will be no spring to feed the current; yea or however in a while these streams
must grow unpleasant, and they will choke the soul that swims in them: but the
charitable man, the man that deals his bread, and draws out his soul to the
hungry in relief, while he has the means, and in compassion and assistance
while he has not, whatever fail, the fountain of the glory of the Lord cannot
be exhausted, he will have righteousness and glory still about him; the
comfortable streams of which are of another relish than those carnal worldly
delights which wealth provides, or else can give; of a more blessed goust, the
inextinguishable shine of which is surely far more cherishing and gladsom, than
the gauds of vanity or fading pleasures. The brightness of God's glory cannot
die, cannot be taken from thee, it is its own defense and shine: for
righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be thy
rereward, and then it is clearly proved, that such a single Eye shall make the
body full of light.

2. Light does signify holiness of life, deeds truly Christian; walk as Lights
in the Lord, nothing more common in Scripture: and Darkness signifies a sinful
and un-Christian life, a life that is full of deeds of darkness. And then the
words mean thus; as the eye is the candle of the body, lightens and directs it
well if it be as it ought, but otherwise very ill, and the man is in the dark,
if his eye be ill, and do not serve him: so is the heart of man, as to the
guidance and direction of his actions; if his eye be single, if he have an
heart taken off from the world, a liberal, bountiful mind, not set upon the
love and desire of the things of this world, his whole body will be full of
light, his whole life will be very Christian, all his actions holy and
heavenly, and to the making of them so, liberality of mind has a very
observable influence. It will incline a man wonderfully to pious courses, it is
a leading virtue, as the eye is a leading part. But if the eye be evil, but if
the heart be worldly set upon wealth, either for it self, or for those heights
or fine things, or pleasures which wealth does procure; if it be unsatisfied in
these things for it self, or envious at others for them, the whole body will be
full of darkness, the whole life will be very un-Christian; such a disposition
of mind as that, quite draws a man off from the temper that Christ requires:
the unsatisfied, the envious, and the covetous person can never serve God, but
only Sin, those dispositions being the root of all evil. Now if the light that
is in thee be darkness, if thy heart be un-Christian, and if thy leading
virtue, that was to take thee off from all worldly inclinations, be extinct and
dark in thee, how great is that darkness? what an un-Christian life will there
be, and whatever light does shine about thee of the Gospel, whatever light thou
do pretend of knowledge, or of whatsoever else, there is a deep darkness
dwells upon thy heart, and is in all thy actions.

Now this sense we see connects what went before and that which follows after,
drives on our Savior's design that he is pressing here, and to this sense
Scripture always speaks in the expressions of single and of evil eye, of light
and darkness; and therefore this was certainly the sense that was intended by
our Savior, and to the prosecuting of it I shall show,

1. That to have a generous, liberal mind, an heart taken off from the self
uses and advantages of wealth, is the great means, the great engine and
instrument of making all the actions very Christian, the life holy.

2. This grace in the heart, bounty of mind, is a great evidence of a true
Christian heart.

3. A worldly heart, loving and desiring wealth, troubled at its condition,
envying others that are in better, and for the ends of any advantages to it
self, straitning its liberality, is not only in it self an un-Christian temper,
but such as is the root and cause of a life wholly un-Christian and unholy. Of
these in their order.

1. To have a liberal mind etc. That the throwing of this earth out of the
heart is a most hopeful way of making the man clean and pure, we have most
pregnant Scripture, Luke 11. 39, 40, 41. Now do ye Pharisees make clean the
outside of the cup and the platter, but your inward part in full of ravening
and wickedness. Ye fools, did not be that made that which is without, make that
which is within also? But rather give alms of such things as you have, and
behold, all things are clean unto you: which bears this seen, ye hypocritical
Pharisees wash yor selve as if a man should wash his vessels, the outside of
them only, leaving the insides of them full of filthiness; for thus do ye wash
your bodies, leaving your souls full of all uncleaness. This is an extreme
folly; for it your outward washings were in obedience to God, you would cleanse
the insides, your hearts and souls, as well as your bodies. The best way of
purifying your selves, your estates, your meats and drinks, etc. from all
pollution cleaving to them, is by works of mercy and liberal alms gifts, and
not by washing pots and vessels. Thy broken meats, thy scraps, thy charities
shall cleanse thy platters more than washing them shall do, alms shall make all
things clean. But how this? To cleanse has two aspects, either on the guilt of
past actions, or on the habits and dispositions to future commissions; and is
to cleanse us from the evil that we have don, or to make us clean from those
vices that were in us, and which would make us do more evil: the first of these
is don by Repentance, not by Alms. Indeed the Wise man says, the alms of a man
is as a signet with the Lord, and he will keep the good deeds of a man as the
apple of an eye, and give repentance to his sons and daughters, Ecclesiasticus
17. 22. the happiest way of purchase for a family in the world. The give to
children an estate perchance is but to give an instrument of vice, bestow the
means of sining on them; at best it is but to leave them pomp and superfluity;
but to give Repenetance to them is to give security of everlasting blessedness,
this is as it were to entail Heaven on ones children. But this is not the thing
we mean, we are to see how Alms should make us clean from vice. It is observed
by a Reverend Expositor, that our Savior speaking Syriack, uses a word for
alms, which in that language and Arabic signifies cleansing; that is, give
Alms, which as it comes from a word that signifies to cleanse, so all shall be
clean to you: and they give this reason of the notion, they derive Alams from a
word that signifies to cleanse, quod opes ab inquinamento, and animum ab
avaritiae sordibus purgat, because

1. Alms purges our wealth from the pollution and filthiness that adheres to
it. As among the Jews it was not lawful for any man to use the increase of his
own land or cattle, to eat part of his own harvest, nor feed on his own
vineyard, or employ the profits of any one beast of his own herd or flock, till
he had given up to God the firstborn of that beast, offered the first fruits
every year of his fruit-yards, and dedicated a first sheaf of his harvest: this
must sanctify all the rest, which till then was unclean, not to be used by him;
to this, it seems, our Savior does look in his direction. There is an unclean
tacke in every thing that comes from earth, it does derive a soil and tincture
thence, and tastes of the palce from whence it came, there is a kind of
unsanctifiedness in wealth, which must be purged away. Our Savior does imply
this, when he says, all things shall be clean to thee, intimating, that
without some such course be taken (...) all our possessions are unclean to us;
and S. Paul says expressly of meat, it must be sanctified. Now says he, the
way to cleanse thy meats (and so for all thy wealth) is to give up part of thy
meat to God by the now Christian way of sacrificing. Alms: this the truest way
of blessing a meal, by engaging God a guest to it, who brings his blessings
always with him, and he has still a share in that meal that the poor partake
in. This course is of so great importance to be taken in every sort of our
wealth, that holy Job presses an imprecation on himself, if he have not don so,
Job 31. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23. If I have withheld the poor from their
desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail, or have eaten my morsel
my self alone, and the fatherless has not eaten thereof; for from my youth he
was brought up with me as with a father, and I have guided her from my mother's
womb: if I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering; if his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the
fleece of my sheep, then let my arm from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be
broken from the bone; for destruction from God was a terror to me, and by
reason of his highness I could not endure. So that Alms makes (...), all our
possessions, all our moderate enjoiments clean, if sanctifies them to our use.

But secondly, which is mre to our design, their second reason is, animum ab
avaritiae sordibus purgat, it does draw off the heart from worldly mindedness,
and by that means from all unclean carnalities: but to not mistake me,
Brethren, that a few, tho perhaps noble acts of charity will necessarily take a
man off from all vice; he may perchance be willing in some good humor to part
with some wealth, that will not part with a lust or an ill custom, and his
profuse and inconsiderate bounty may come in amongst his prodigalities, and be
his vice, so far it will be from lceasing him from vice. But the thing is this,
he that has thus far conquered his heart, and unwrapt is out of the
intanglements of riches, that he is perfectly disposed in mind, not once, but
by a constant course to dedicate a good portion of what he has for those
compassionate uses, and is very well pleased to look upon such a share as not
his own, but set aside and consecrated: it is certain that if this be hearty, he
that can resolve to part with such a part of income for those uses, must also
resolve to part with all worldly or carnal advantages of that income, such
things as it procured him, and he cannot have without it. If I will cut off so
much from my estate on that good consideration, then I must cut off such
degrees of superfluity, I must abate such and such pomps and vanities, I must
retrench excesses, and I must part with heights of pleasures, for these are
virtually resolved in the other; I cannot have these if I give away the foment,
the thing that is to feed and preserve them, these therefore I disposed of with
that part of my revenue, nor shall I think them fit to vie with those
necessities, that beg or Christ his sake, nay with those wants of Christ
himself that begs in those poor men's request and needs, nor shall I for such
things draw back or grudg my charities. I can much easier want some portions of
those contents, than see so many souls want necessaries; compassion strikes me
deeper than those satisfactions, and finds me much more pliant, and more
sensible. Lo here a man already brought within the mediocrities of virtue,
there too where virtue finds the greatest oppositions of temtation; those of
intemperance, and pride, and pleasure, in all these he is moderate and calm,
merely by virtue of his bountiful-mindedness: and if he be not so, it is certain
that the person is not free-hearted, unless it be unto his sins or the
companions of them. For if he love his pride, and heights, and honors, and all
those pomps that are to serve them and his emulations; or love the
superfluities of riots, or love immoderate delights, it is certain he loves
wealth implicity, although he take no notice of it, and he is covetous in his
heart, tho he does not discover it; because he cannot but desire passionately
that which is to furnish his eager desires, and love immoderately that without
which he knows, if he consider what he does, he cannot have that whicih he
loves immoderately; and if he do resolve to serve those still, and yet do give
away, it is out of inconsiderateness, not from bounty; he is not liberal but
rash and careless, will not weigh how the wealth serves the other ends, but
still resolving upon thees, not minding what he does, disposes of the other.
No he tha is truly compassionate and liberal, resolves to deprive himself of
somewhat to relieve others wants, that is to say, if he consider what he does,
(and if he do not, it is not liberality of heart) to deny himself some of the
advantages of his estate, (for to consideration those and his estate are all
the same) pomps, profits, and pleasures to sustain those that need: and he that
does so, he has plainly brought himself into the bounds of all virtues, and
for the rest that concern men, it is sure he that is so fully disposed in heart,
as to deny himself his own advantages merely to do good to others, cannot be
inclined to do ill to others for his own advantage, these inclinations cannot
dwell together; so that in one word, this bounty of heart ingages into all
Morality, he will be humble, sober, contented in himself, and live righteously
and justly with other men. It Is such a leading quality, that merely by virtue
of that disposition of mind, when it is seated there in earnest, the other
parts of that which we call honesty, come in. And then for all Religion and
Piety, if he that out of obedience to God and compassion to the afflicted have
brought his heart to such a pass, that he can draw out his soul to the needy,
it is certain that in doing so he lays up treasures in heaven, v. 20. and by
the verse that follows he that lays his treasure there, he sets his heart
there also; and he whose heart is set on heaven, I shall not fear to pronounce
of him, his actions will drive him thitherwards with all religious violence. Do
but think with your selves how you pursue the things you hearts are set upon in
earnest, what outgoings of soul you have to this rencounter of the object of
its strong affections, no rest but in the labors that work toward it, no calm
but in those violences. And much of this there must be in Religion, where the
heart is set upon the hopes of it, on heaven. He must be eager in it, as the
covetous is on his gains, the proud man on his pomps, the pleasurist on his
sports, the Epicure on his excesses. It is not possible a man should have no
heart to that on which his heart is set. He therefore that has set his heart
on heaven, must be religious and holy; and so it is concluded that the
liberal-minded must needs be so. The progress of which proof is this, he whose
heart is in heaven, his conversation will be there, his life will be Christian
and holy: he whose treasure is in heaven, his heart is in heaven: he that has
taken off his heart from the world, and out of liberality of heart gives alms,
he lays his treasure up in heaven, and then it is concluded that he is
religious.

And this now may apply it self without my help to press it to you. Ah my
Brethren choose and strive toward a virtue that will help you to all the rest,
that will calm and moderate your affections to this world and the dying follies
of it; and that will draw your hearts to heaven, and set them on the world to
come. Who would not labor for one disposition of mind that comes with such a
train of pieties, that has all Christianity in its attendance, and brings all
into the soul with it? Who would not give alms, if by doing so he give himself
a shole of virtue? to whom is this man bountiful, but to himself indeed? Here
is a ground for men to beg after the fashion of Lombardy, Be good to your self,
Sir, and bestow an alms upon me: for he indeed is good unto himself, who what
he gives lays up in heaven as a treasure for eternity, and at the same time
entertains the disposition to all piety in his heart, receives all virtue into
him. I sahll not need to call in accessory proofs, fetch in auxiliary motives,
tell you that works of charity are called good works in Scripture, and the
liberal man good. So Romans 5. 7. the good man signifies, and Tit. 2. 5. where
the women are commanded to be good, it is merciful; so works of mercy are
called good works, Acts. 9. 36. doing good, Matt. 12. 12. Heb. 13. 16. good
fruits James 3. 17. So to work good signifies Gal. 6. 9. and every good work 2
Cor. 9. 8. is works of mercy, as if he did engross all goodness, and that same
virtue did fulfill the title. Nay I tell you more, that the merciful man and the
perfect man are but two words for the same person, Matt. 5. 48. Luke 6. 36. all
Christianity is so sure appendant to this disposition of the heart, (when it is
in the soul I tell you, not when it is now and then in the actions) that this
alone is perfectness, it is entire lacking nothing. And then here is a clear
account, why at the last great trial nothing should come upon account but
charity, that is the only thing the Judge takes cognizance of at the day of
final doom; When I was hungry, ye gave me meat: the words of everlasting
Judgment pass only in relation to this, nothing but charity does come into that
sentence, for all the rest is implied in this: and where the heart is liberal,
the whole life will be Christian; this is an evidence will pass at God's
Assise, stand before the Searcher of the heart and reins. And therefore it may
well be a sign to us, and make proof, that this grace in the heart, bounty of
mind is a great evidence of a truly Christian heart: the second Proposition.

Blessed Savior, thou that were all bounty to us, that did emty thy self to
enrich us, and did choose rather to die thy self than not relieve us when we
were sick to everlasting death; give us grace to be like-minded, shed into our
hearts this disposition of soul, that will make us so remember thee, a
disposition that will make our affections even and moderate to things of this
earth, which by teaching us to part with wealth contentedly, will work us out
of the world, and teach us not to be enamoured on the advantages of wealth, not
to be passionate for pomps or pleasures, or for any superfluities which wealth
procures, which will set our hearts in heaven, and lay up treasures for us
there; which if it rob us of the pomps and the magnificences of this world,
will give us for them pomps of piety, the whole train of virtues, a long
attendance of graces; if it deprives us of some heights or some excess of
pleasures, it will recompense with the satisfactions of relieving Christ in his
members here, and reigning with him hereafter in Kingdom:

SERMON XXII. THE LIGHT OF THE BODY is the Eye.
Matt. 6. 22, 23. The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thy eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness?
PHILOSOPHY does say that all virtues are so annexed and tied together, that it
is not possible for any man to have any one truly and complete, but he must
needs have all; they are like pearls upon the necklace, from which if any
violence pull one, the string is broke, and all are shattered and disordered.
And S. James says, c. 2. 10. Whosoever shall offend in one point, is guilty of
all; and sure the virtue of the Text makes good both these Positions: if
liberality of heart be that one point, he that excludes it from his Soul, shuts
out the rest at once. All the graces are as train to that leading virtue, are
its such close attendants, that they must needs have the same fate, and either
dwell together in the heart, or all together be thrust thence: for, if thine
eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light; but if thine eye be evil,
thy whole body shall be full of darkness. An envious discontent, uncharitable
mind, makes the whole life un-Christian, and he that does offend in that one
point, must needs be guilty of all; and if Charity, that bond of perfectness in
S. Paul, that tie of graces that does unite them to it self, and with each
other, if that be there, all graces must be there, and liberality of heart
makes the life Christian; for if thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be
full of light. But

I am now to show you that bounty in the heart is a great Sign of a true
Christian heart, that that person who not out of easiness or modesty of
constitution not knowing how to deny when he is asked, nor out of
inconsideration or vanity bestows an alms, or else when importunities does beg
it; but he who out of real compassion to the wants of others, and hearty sense
of their calamities, and out of sincere obedience to God resolves with himself
to deny himself such and such advantages of his condition to such a good
proportion of what God has bestowed upon him, purposes in his heart to set
aside such a portion from his own uses, knowing and considering that by so
doing he does part with such and such satisfactions which did accrue to him by
that wealth, yet will do it for the relief of others necessities, that their
souls may be comforted, and they may praise God in his behalf. This person has
in himself a great evidence of an heart truly and sincerely wrought upon by the
Gospel, and wrought over into the realities of Christianity.

I shall prove this to you, and tho I know there be many virtues which seem to
have no connection with liberality, and many inclinations in the heart which
bounty has no direct influence upon, several evil tendencies of soul which it
has no formal opposition to, that it should thrust them out of the heart; yet
that such a complexion of mind does either directly or by consequence so
oppose them, as not to endure them in the heart, I shall very briefly show you
in gross, and by retail.

And first that in gross that is a sign of a true Christian heart, see Col. 3.
12. Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies,
kindness; it seems that bowels of compassion and bounty is a sign of being such
full Christians, that the Apostle takes in all words to complete the Character,
and does it in words of a beloved sense: and let men take them in what sense
they please, they do my work, whether as persons chosen out before all time; it
seems then to be liberal is a sign of that, and they will have very little
reason to conclude themselves elected an eternity before they were, who now
they are, and are called and taught by God, do not find this disposition in
their hearts: or to take them in their naked meaning, be liberal, as being
God's choice and precious ones, (so it signifies, elect, precious, 1 Pet. 2. 6,
and in other Scripture elect is the choicest, best,) such as are prized and
valued by God: as the elect of God, holy, such as have his sanctifying Spirit
poured out upon them; and such are beloved by him; as choice and precious
things are always dear to us. Now then to be compassionate and bountiful is to
be as thus, and liberality of heart is one mark of Election and Holiness, and
they that have it, are as God's choice, sanctified, dear ones. Put on
therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of compassion and
bounty.

2. As it is a sign of our being the Elect of God, and the Inhabitation of the
Holy Spirit, so it is also a sign of our being like minded with Christ. S. Paul
does urge his example as a motive to the Corinthians liberality, Ep. 2. c. 8.
v. 9. For ye know the grace (or charity) of our Lord Jesus Christ, that being
rich, yet for your sakes became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich:
and therefore for us to do so is to follow his example, and to have our hearts
set to it is to be like minded, and truly that is to be Christian enough. If
that a person of the Godhead emtied bimself, (...) Phil. 2. 7. exhausted
himself of Divinity to relieve us; if the God of all the pleasures of the earth
and the joies of heaven became the Man of sorrows to rescue us, if that the
Lord of everlasting blessedness made himself Prince of sufferings and
calamities to ransom us, if this be a temtation to the inclinations of our
heart to set us upon going to do likewise in some low weak mesure after the
rates of our abilities; then to do so considerately, to deprive my self of some
advantages, to exhaust somewhat for the sakes of those that want, is to have
the like mind in us that was in Christ Jesus our Lord: but because this may
possibly evince us to be like-minded only in one thing, therefore

3. In particular, he that is thus minded has a great evidence of his having
overcome the World, a wide and a vast conquest; for, my Brethren, it is not only
he that is a slave to money, whose heart and actions do importunately pursue the
ways of getting or of hoarding that, whom the world overcomes; but he is a
slave to the world, whose mind is impotently set upon any of the advantages of
this world, the man whose heart does in too great a proportion either of time
or whatsoever else pursue any thing which this World is to furnish with, that
man's heart is entangled in the pursuit, and it is fettered to the World, which
is his motive and pretense for that too eager inclination. And therefore in our
Baptism when we renounce the World, we do not only bid defiance to the love of
money, but we renounce the Pomps and vanities of this wicked World; whatsoever
either too great pleasure or height, excess or ostentation, or pride that this
World ministers unto. Now then, when a man does not only now and then give
little to them that ask and beg of him, (for so it go's away in such small
instances, as will not evidence either much consideration of it, or any great
work wrought upon him as to not loving of the World,) but in devout retirements
resolves to deny himself in such a proportion, and cut off such a part, it is
certain he does cut off such degrees either of pomp or vanity, or plenties, or
whatsoever other thing that part of his estate did serve. Now he that can do
this resolvedly in his soul, not out of any heat, but from deliberate purpose
of heart, it is certain he has to so great a degree disentangled himself from
the snares of the pleasures or other advantages of this World, he has unloosed
their fascinations, and weakened all their sorceries; it is clear he has so far
withdrawn his heart from the degrees of whatsoever he did love that this World
served him in, that he resolves none of them shall engage him to their
superfluities: for to prevent that he cuts off their foment, the streams of
those contents, they shall not overflow his soul; for he will turn the spring,
and make the current run another way. It Is evident he has so torn all beloved
earthly satisfactions from the embraces of his heart, as that he will not feed
them, not with his own estate, if he cannot also to a virtuous degree feed the
poor: he has so far turned out the love of pleasures, or of pomps, or
whatsoever, as that he willingly does part with those degrees of them, cannot
be retained together with his liberality. And such a heart sure is without the
vicious degree of worldly contents: for vicious inclinations to them use to
pursue them as far as they are able, and set no bounds to themselves but those
of possibility, will not be limited in their prosecutions by considerations of
a virtue as this man's are, and therefore he is too strong for these
temtations, and so has overcome the world.

And now if we consider the advantages of this conquest either in gross, it is
a victory over such Enemies as were in Christ's opinion almost invincible, such
as did so block up all passages and avenues to blessedness, that he affirms and
repetes it is impossible for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Let men think what they will of those occasions of sin, which their dislikes of
a low condition or of poverty makes them believe it does abound with; but I
tell you there are such ineluctable temtations to vice in an estate of plenty,
as that without a greater measure of God's grace than is sufficient for any
other state of life, a man will never overcome them. It is so insuperable a
temtation to have that which will furnish him with all his heart or lust can
wish for, to have every thing that is in his desires put into his power, and so
impossible to part with that which serves all his inclinations when God calls
for it, as he does when we cannot at once keep the estate and obey Christ,
(which was the occasion of our Savior's words:) and wealth it does so sauce and
invite every vice, it does so dress objects for lust, and feed with those full
plenties, that heat men into it and strengthen for it, does so pour in
provocatives by idleness and excesses, it does so fill with insolence, or
pride, or ostentation and vain glory; it does so swell and so puff up with
heights and scorns, makes men contemn others and oppress them, think any thing
almost is lawful in their usage of them; yea become careless of Religion, and
by degrees contemn it too, wax insolent with God, scoffers at piety, rude in
profaness, any thing forsooth they may do; and a whole shole of other such like
qualities are the almost certain appendages of men in estate, at least in some
degree. In a word, it takes off the heart quite from the Love of God and those
things that relate to him, it fixes them so to these worldly satisfactions: yea
when it comes to such a pinch, that a man must either wound his conscience, do
some great deliberate sin, or part with this so forsooth happy utensil, his
estate; break with all the duty in the world rather than part with that which
furnishes him with such convenience of sins, that it is no wonder if it be
impossible for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

And then for a man to have overcome the General of this great Army of ruinous
vices, the only leader that can draw them up against him, to have cut off the
source that feeds this inundation of mischeifs, these overflowings of
ungodliness from the heart, is a good strong evidence to a man's heart, that he
is well resolved against the vices, when that he does resolvedly deprive
himself of the instrument of them, the thing that does advance them, and has
perfectly divorced from them: he needs not doubt but that if it please God to
bring him to straits, that he shall rather be content to part with a good
portion of his estate, than part with a good conscience, who is content to give
away good part of his estate merely to exercise a virtue in obedience to God.
He will give it if Christ call for it, who gives it if the poor call for it. He
is well secured from feeding pride, excesses, and the other sins of fullness
with his plenty, who gives all superfluities away to feed the hungry, his
wealth is otherwise employed than in ministering to vice: and however it is
certain his heart is taken off from the sins that are occasioned by riches, who
heartily gives away the occasion of those sins; and tho the gate of Heaven be
as strait as any needle's eye, yet this wealthy Man, this Camel in one sense of
the word as it does signify a cable rope, when his wealth is divided thus and
scattered, when the rope is separated into little threads, then it will go through
the straitest needle's eye, and this rich man enter inter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

And here were argument enough for the triumphs of comfort to an heart that can
discern this sign of his Election, this fruit of the Holy Spirit, this instance
of like-mindedness to Christ, this assurance of his conquest over that same
Enemy, which is the Fleshes auxiliary, and the Devil's instrument, without
which neither of them could much prevail upon us; for they do it by the aids
the World does bring, by the temtations and the baits which it does minister. A
consequent fit for Christ to glory in, I have overcome the World, says he,
Matt. 16. 33. and truly if any man, the religiously sincerely bountiful man
has don so to a great degree. He has unglued his heart from it, they part
with ease; you see how he distributes it, and throws it from him: and this is
sure encouragement enough to set you upon searching whether you can find this
Evidence within you, if it were not a certain sign also of more things, a sign
of particular evidences and effects of having overcome the world.

For first, it is a sign of a perfect contentedness in ones condition; for
apparently he is not unsatisfied with what he has, who not only is content,
but who contrives to have less, and gives away good part of what he has. He
cannot be discontented that he has no more than he has, who is resolved not
to have so much, but searches for occasions to distribute what he has. And if
this be an infallible sign of a contented mind, (still I speak of the liberal
heart, not only of a scattering hand,) it is an evidence of the greatest
happiness in this world; for God has prescribed one certain remedy for all the
evils in the world, a contented heart. This is the only aim of all the arts and
all the plenties of the world, it is for this alone men dig the mines of
treasures, search the whole circuit of delights, run through the hurry of an
universe of pleasures, wherein, God knows, they seldom find it, but all intend
only content. Whether they would be great or rich, or be luxurious, or every
thing, it is because they seek content in these things; which he that has in
whatsoever state he be, he has the scope, the price of all the treasures in
the world, he has the sum and comprehension of its felicities, which therefore
the liberal heart has the sure sign of: yea in this he has the certain
evidence of S. Paul's temper that he so much exults in, Phil. 4. 11, 12, 13. I
have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. I know both how
to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, and in all things I am
instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer
need. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.

Secondly he has an evidence, that he is freed from envy, and those black
disturbing passions that attend it. For certainly he does not envy other men's
greater condition, who willingly diminishes his own. I am not troubled others
coffers are more full than mine, when out of choice ^emty mine, and rather
choose to lay up my revenues in the bowels of the poor. I do not envy their
richer furniture, when I give mine away to furnish needy laboring families, and
change the clothings of my rooms into the clothing of the cold bare
Christians; and I can much more calmly see my chambers naked, than Christ's
members. I have no emulations at the full plenties of other men's provisions;
for why should I, when I send away my own provisions to cheer the hungry, to
make the hearts of famishing souls rejoice? If I have not so many plenties in
my dining Room, yet I make more feasts in the cottages, where every alms is a
feast. It Is certain he that will not use what he has to his own interests and
advantages, but gives them to advantage others, cannot envy the advantages of
others: so that he is free from envy, that rottenness of the bones, that
consumtion of the soul and body too, that which makes every other man's
prosperity his own torment, and tho he have a kind of malice wheresoere he sees
any thing of flourish or of excellency, yet by all those malices he only
strives to vex himself; from this the liberal heart is clear.

Thirdly from Covetousness also, and all the griping and injurious passions
that are in its train: for it is certain he cannot be inclined to do ill to
others for his own advantage, who out of choice parts with his own advantages,
that he may do good to others. And indeed I need not prove this; for that a man
should be bountiful-hearted and covetous-minded is a contradiction. So that we
see the man has a certain Evidence of being of a contented spirit, and being
free from envy and from covetousness, which to be free from will appear to be
the great ingredients of a Christian, when you shall see that those three
qualities of discontent and envy and of covetousness are the fountains of all
the most un-Christian vices of the soul; which was the last Proposition from
the later part of the words, For if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be
full of darkness. That, as I proved, does signify, if thy heart be discontented
and unsatisfied in its own condition, apt to envy another's prosperity, and
covetous of greater things than it possesses, the whole life will be full of
most un-Christian actions; they will betray the man, and fill him full of all
inquity. A subject this of a most vast extent, and truly worth considering and
staying on: but I shall only point at things, and show you how they are so in a
word; for I will dwell no longer on this Theme. First then discontent in ones
condition is the Mother of many provocations of God: for

1. It seems with many murmurs and rebellions of heart against the dispositions
of God's Providence. You must not think, Beloved, that a discontented Soul is
only unwise, tho truly so he be to great degrees. He whom a tempest storms in
open field, on whom the rain beats and the wind, is sure a fool if he sit down
and cry at it, and vex. What relief is it to him to vie shours of tears with
those the clouds drop, to return the blasts of wind with sighs and murmurs, and
storm at the tempest? Sure there is no one so unwise, but would make have and
seek for shelter rather, and not sit down to fret and weep at it. And yet that
is the fashion of the discontented heart; if the least cross be upon their
mind, their sad and troubled thoughts make it look very big, (as thick and
misty air does make all objects,) they fancy it insufferable, they look upon it
as if God's indignation did lie hard upon them, and he had vexed them with all
his storms: and in these storms why do they not fly to God for shelter, nor
run under the shadow of his wings for refuge, but vex and cry at it, yea murmur
and repine? And what an insolence is this to be angry at the Almighty, because
he does not govern the world as they would have him; to quarrel, because his
Providence disposes of events otherwise than they think is for their
interests? Some are discontented when God takes from them any thing they did
possess. Now since neither health, nor wealth, nor any other good is thine or
from thy self, but only lent, vouchsafed during his pleasure and discretion,
and whatsoever he takes from thee is only thy not enjoying any longer what is
no way due to thee, when he in his wisdom and in his love also to discipline
thee calls for what he lent thee. Is this occasion for a contest with the Lord?
Must he lend thee his mercies, when his wisdom sees fit to do otherwise in
order to the ends of Providence? What irreligious Rebellion is this, to have
risings of heart against God's dispositions, to fall out with their Maker, if
he will not lend them his mercies as long, and in as great degrees as they
would have him? Others are discontented, because they are not in a better,
higher, or more plentiful condition; and why do they not as well quarrel with
God, because he did not make them Angels; for what they are is his mere gift,
and more than their deservings? He was no more obliged to make thee what thou
art, than he was bound to make thee a Cherubim or an Archangel: and must thou
murmur at the Lord, because thou have not the disposal of his gifts to lay them
out in what degrees thou please? It is the sin of both these discontents,
that they do not submit their hearts cheerfully to God's disposals. They that
do not so, S. Peter says, are proud, and such as God resists and fights
against. And surely then the discontented is a strange person that is proud
toward God, and an unhappy person whom God resists and fights against.

2. He renounces his own Prayers; he begs of God, thy will be don, and yet does
murmur that it is so: and what a strange Petitioner is this, who repines if he
be heard, and is vexed that God does grant his Prayers, is angry with the Lord
because he does what he desires? And then shall such a person ever hope that
God should hear his Prayers at any time, who is displeased because the Lord
does not deny him?

3. All concupiscences are the effect of this; for because they are not
satisfied with their own condition, they desire what is not their own: and so
the breach of the tenth Commandment is the certain consequent of this
disposition of mind, or indeed rather it is but several instances of forbidding
discontentedness with our own condition; and in it, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbor's wife, is not meant, thou shall not desire to commit adultery with
her; for that was forbidden in the seventh Commandment: but as thou shall not
covet his house, which does not signify thou shall not desire once to walk through
it, or to sit and dine in it, but thou shall not desire the possession nor
propriety of what is not thine own, shall not desire it should be thy house,
but be contented with thy lot; so here, thou shall not be troubled that his
wife or servant is not thy wife or servant, and think it as fit thy Neighbor
should enjoy the comforts of a happy wife, if God have given him one, or the
pleasures and splendors of an estate, or the advantages of a commodious
servant, as thou do think it fit thou should enjoy what is thine; and not
desire not only to be theif, but not the owner of them: be content with what is
thine.

4. All the Seditions and Rebellions in the world, and those armies of Sins
that attend them, that wage their wars, which are upheld by legions of
villainies, as numerous as those of men, all the disturbances of States and
Churches are but the effects of discontented spirits, men that were unsatisfied
with their condition, desired a change, and cared not by what means they
compast it. They can charge through seas of blood and sin, over the faces of men
and conscience to get out of the condition, which they are not well content
with.

I could assign more sins that do attend a discontented heart, when it has
opportunity to break into them: all the effects of anger, and of malice, and of
concupiscence, and a whole shole of others are in its train, but that I must
reserve one word for Envy.

2. Envy, to say all in one word, however slight a thing we may esteem it. For
to envy at another person's having better qualities, or greater dignities, or
richer furnitures, or wider estates, or handsomer provisions, this we think
does no mischief to the persons, and therefore is no crying crime. Yet besides
that it is more unjust than hatred or than malice, for these have still
pretenses that do look like reason. I cannot hate a man, but because he does me
some wrong, and that is some reason; for I hate his injustice: but envy has
not any least pretense. Is it a wrong to me, because that person is better
qualified, or better endowed? Is he unjust because he is rich, or learned, or
well provided? and yet for this I envy him. Besides this, I say, to stab it
with one thrust, Envy has all the vices and all the ruins in the world for its
issue, all sin and all damnation is its brood. The Devil envied man's felicity,
and therefore temted him, and so man lost Original Righteousness, and he lost
Paradise; and he envies his recovery by Christ, and therefore temts him still
until he ruin him eternally. Whatever guilt, and whatever misery is in the
world, hence it springs, it is a feind-like devilish humor. And now would you
take the prospect of these two qualities, discontent and envy. Lucifer was not
satisfied with his condition, and he was therefore cast from Heaven, and all
his fellow Angels became Devils; and then he envied man's condition, and
changed his Paradise into everlasting misery. These two qualities robbed Heaven
it self of those inhabitants that should have filled it, and the Son of God
himself, and peopled Hell; it made Angels become Feinds, it made God die, and
made men damned, and there is enough for that.

3. Covetousness, I am sure I can say no more of that, than what S. Paul has
said, nor more to my purpose, 1. Tim. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Godliness with
contentment is great gain; for we brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out, and having food and raiment let us be
therewith content. But they that will be rich, fall into a temtation and a
snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction
and perdition: for the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with
many sorrows.

And oh that three such dismal qualities with their accursed trains should
breed in that same little part, the eye! An evil eye is the womb wherein they
are conceived, and if that one small faculty be so fruitful in guilt and in
destructions, how shall we reckon the whole man? Miserable men that we are, who
shall deliver us from a whole body of death, and from the state of those
deaths, and from darkness, in which this evil eye engages us? A darkness which
our Savior could not otherwise express, but by astonishment, How great is that
darkness! A darkness great indeed, because it is wilfully incurable, no state
does so withstand the light as this. The Sun of Righteousness, the Dayspring
from on high, that came to visit us, could strike the light through darkness, and
make the shadow of death bright Luke 1. 79. that did shed light, that was a
glory, Luke 2. 32. could not yet break in upon a Country clouded with this
humor: his Miracles and he were both desired to withdraw, could have no least
Reception, when interest and profit came to be touched; and a Legion of Devils,
that did plot together, could contrive no surer means to keep out Christ
himself, than by setting up an evil eye to look upon him and his Miracles, than
by engaging this greedy affection against him, and that but in a small
instance. We read a strange story Matt. 8. 28. Mark the contrivance and the
policy; the Devils knowing that Christ would cast them out of the two possessed
men, and by that Miracle so far show forth his power, that it would probably
bring all the Country to believe on him, they desired to prevent this, and
thereupon fall on this project, which might incense the men of that Country
against him; and in order to it they besought Christ, that if he did cast them
out, he would suffer them to go into the herd of Swine; and tho he seldom
wrought any destructive Miracles, yet that the people might see the virulency
of these Devils, how destructive they were, if not restrained by his omnipotent
goodness, and so they might understand the mercy don to those that were
possessed, and likewise see the mercy now approaching to their Country by the
coming of Christ, if they will accept of it, and withal to try whether their
love to their Swine was greater than that to their own souls, he permitted the
Devils to go into the Swine, he would not restrain them, and they went into
them. They who fed the Swine gave to the owners notice of their loss, and did
let them know, as the Swine were drowned on the one side, so two men possessed
with Devils were recovered, and that Christ had don this since his coming
thither. Hereupon the whole City, as being very much concerned in that which
had happened, came out to meet and see Jesus, who did such Miracles; and
instead of being wrought on by his cure on the men to desire his continuance
among them, the consideration of the loss of their Swine made them desire and
beseech him that he would depart out of their Coasts. Behold an equal Enemy to
Christ and all his Miracles, an Enemy that was too hard for them, even a little
worldly advantage! The Senate of Hell has no project like this to keep out
Religion, as this making Religion thwart an interest; rather no Christianity,
than abate gain or greatness, or any earthly satisfaction; rather the Swine,
than Christ himself.

But we have a worse instance yet than this, and more comprehensive as to our
purpose. An evil eye could not endure to see the Son of God alive, and when the
second Person of the Godhead was to be betrayed and crucified, the Devil had no
other passion to employ on that design, but these same, discontent and envy and
a greedy mind, and all these but at little trifles. We find that Judas bore the
purse, and S. John says that he robbed it, John 12. 6. was deceitful in the
discharge of his office of relieving the poor. Now it happened that a woman
spent a box of precious ointment upon Christ, at which Judas was discontent,
and envied it his Master, Matt. 16. 8. Mark 14. 4, 5. he murmured, and had
indignation at it, says the places; his evil eye could not endure to see such
a sum should pass his purse, (of which yet he could have purloin'd but very
little, for the sum was not great) and missing that, for very envy (for it was
immediately upon it Mark 14. 10.) his own covetous heart by the Devil's
suggestion put him upon his project of gain to make some advantage by
delivering Christ to the hands of the Jews, and upon his consenting to this
suggestion the Devil was permitted by God to have this power over him, to enter
into him, John 13. 2. and doing so incited him to make a bargain with the
Rulers of the Sanhedrim, their great Council, and with their Officers to
deliver up Jesus unto them; and he yielding to his incitation, and after
Christ's talking with him, and telling him distinctly of it, and the sin and
danger attending it, Mark 14. 21. and his not yet relenting, the Devil entered
into him again more forcibly than before, John 13. 27. hurried him to the
speedy execution: and he went and covenanted with them that he should have
thirty shekels, Matt. 26. 15. (...) Luke 22. 6. and thanked them, although it were
a low and a vile sum, as could be the price of a slave, Exodus 21. 32. yet Judas
thankt them for the offer, so covetous he was and glad of an occasion to get
money. We see the Devil enters at an evil eye, if that be envious, Satan gets in
strait at that eye himself in person, and he possesses hearts set upon gain:
and then no wonder if the Kingdom of darkness be in such an heart, when as the
King of Hell, the Devil dwells there. Satan entered into him, and when he was
there, what design has he to fill an heart with? nothing but that of getting
money, this is effect enough of his possession. The Devil has don work enough
in such a heart as he is entered into really, if he but make it set upon desire
of money, tho it be but a trifle of gain, but three pounds fifteen shillings.
But, Lord God, what will not a worldly heart adventure on; what will not a mind
undertake, which envies at another, and is greedy for it self? When such an one
did set Judas upon betraying Christ for almost nothing: one vanity, one sport,
one dress, one sin's engagement to damnation costs a man more, than what an
envious covetous Soul did sell the Son of God, the Ransom of Mankind, the price
of all the Souls in the whole world for, yea and was thankful for it too: so
low, so fordid, and so base a soul it is that loves increase.

And now, my Brethren, there is no need that I should tell you, that you must
bring no evil eye to the Lord's Table to see his body crucified, and his blood
poured out in the Sacrament; no discontents, no murmurs, no envious intentions,
nor covetous desires must come near that, for they were these betrayed him. If
such a soul come thither, Judas is there again; the things that sold him come
again to tear his body, and to shed his blood. And do you think that such shall
be received and entertained by Christ? Oh no, the bread of the Sacrament will
be their Sop; and not Christ, but the Devil enters into such. Oh sure no heart
so fit to come to that same feast as the charitable; those that feed him, he
will feed: and I could tell you, charity (the offertory I mean, an offering for
the poor) was used as an essential part of the Sacrament, and was a service of
so high esteem, that preparation was required for it as for the Sacrament; and
by the first Councils men guilty of gross sins might not offer, their charities
would not be received by the Church. Yea and there was an excommunication from
this duty, and to be excluded from bringing their gifts for the poor was a
greater censure, than to be shut out from the Sermon or the Prayers. But these
are things our world does not take notice of, nor will understand; to be
censured from liberality, and to be excommunicate from bounty, and that
receiving of men's alms should be a grace and an indulgence to the givers, are
talks that men now have no notions of, nor much care for. But let them be sure
no time so proper for our relieving the members of Christ, as when the body of
Christ is relieving us to life eternal; no occasion more urgent for us to
contribute toward the clothing of the naked body of Christ, than when Christ
is clothing us with the crimson glorious garment of his Righteousness; no
opportunity more pressing than this to visit his sick members, than when he
administering to us (...): nothing does preach Charity like a Sacrament, nor no
Sacrament more than this at the time of his Incarnation, when the Son of God
did so exhaust himself for us, as to emty immensity of Godhead into a span of
weak, poor, helpless flesh, to become really one of the meanest objects of
compassion, one that had no revenue in the world but Charity; for while he
lived he had not an hole to put his head in, nor when he died a grave to put
his body in, but as through all his life his sustenance was alms, so at his death
his burying place was alms too, and yet this was the Heir of both the worlds.
And this he did to settle us in an inheritance of infinite, eternal glory; and
the approaching day began this state to him, a day sure to be reckoned not with
the riots, but with the charities of hospitality, with feasts not for our sins,
but feasts for Christ, and for his members; feasts such as his own Table is fit
to be the leading entertainment in.

O Lord, who have taught us, that all our doings without Charity are nothing
worth; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift
of Charity, the very bond of peace and of all virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee: grant this for thine only Son Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen

THE END.
ERRATA.
Vol. 1.
PAge 4. line 15. for (...). p. 5. l. 26. for meres r. metes. p. 19. l. 42. for
no r. do. p. 23. l. 22. for an r. can. p. 50. l. 14. for despute r. dispute. p.
51. l. 1. for of any of one kind r. of any one kind. p. 60. l. 28. after found
r. them. p. 63. l. 7. for it is r. is it. p. 65. l. 6. read after evil? p. 65.
l. 49. for Palms read Psalms. p. 66. l. 48. for but that r. than the. p. 70. l.
41. dele and. p. 77. l. 4. for censor r. censer. p. 82. l. 1. for coersively r.
coereively. p: 83. l. 14 for Antimonians r. Antinomians. p. 84. l. 13. for
(...) r. (...). p. 85. l. 6. dele that. p. 85. l. 41. for belief r. disbeleif.
p. 90 l. 41. for what r. when. p. 110. l. 43. for salisfaction r. satisfaction.
p. 118. l. 24. before proved r. is. p. 119. l. 1. for breast r. beast. p. 123.
Marg. for (...) r. (...). p. 125. l. 31. for difference r. deference. p. 129.
l. 29. for persecutions r. persecutors. p. 132. Marg. for Thoma r. Thomae, for
precamus r. precamur. p. 133. Marg. read homagil for homigii, ordinat for
ordinatu. p. 171. l. 17. for (...) r. (...) Marg: for Ps. 77. r. 78. p. 176. l.
31. for with r. which. p. 185. l. 18 dele re. p. 186. l. 24. dele to. p. 187.
l. 2. for no r. now. p. 191. l. 17. for fins r. sins. p. 195. l 1. dele is. p.
198. l. 35. for insalliable r: infallible. p. 201. marg. for feri r. fere. p.
203. l. 41. after other r. that. p. 205. l. 31. dele to. p. 206. l. 37. for
immitate r. imitate. p. 210. marg. for (...) r. (...) ibid. for (...) r. (...)
p. 212. l. 11. for powered read poured. ip. 218. marg. for (...) r. (...) p.
220. l. 6. for entertain r. entertain. p. 221. marg. for (...) r. (...). ibid.
marg. r. Galatians. p. 222. l. 20. for St. Peter's r. St. Paul's. p. 229. l. 4.
before man r. no. p. 236. l. 12. for where r. were. p. 238. l. 7. for Isral r.
Israel.

Vol. 2.
Page 11. line 2. for unto read unto. p. 26. l. 36. f. an r. and. p. 39. l. 27.
f. renverse r. reinverse. p. 58. l. 33. place the Comma that is after Tenants,
after government. p. 64. l. 16. after tenth r. v. l. 32. f. put r. puts. p. 73.
l. 45. before arrive r. men. p. 74. l. 43. f. permetted r. permitted. p. 75. l.
21. before will r. that. p. 79. l. 4. dele the Comma after is. l. 22. dele the
Comma after sacrifices. p. 86. l. 26. dele are. p. 88. l. 42. f. ad r. and p.
104. l. 43. before it r. of. p. 110. l. 6. f. it r. I. p. 122. l. 34. after
believe dele the stop, and for That r. that. p. 133. l. 5. f. art r. are. p.
142. l. 20. f. one r. once. p. 150. l. 35. f. sins r. fires. p. 153. l. 3. dele
the. p. 162. l. 14. f. solomn r. solemn. p. 171. l. 21. before heal dele to. p.
172. l. 11. f. measuress r. measures. p. 181. l. 20. f. faith which r. faith
which. p. 199. l. 28. f. whom them r. them whom. p. 203. l. 36. f. kearkning r.
harkening. p. 224. l. 40. for pcesrib'd r. prescribed. p. 225. l. 40. f. n^ r.
us. p. 238. l. 28. f. Statute r. Statutes. p. 244. l. 14. f. too r. to. p. 248.
16. f. too r. to p. 256. l. 32. f. their r. their. p. 262. l. 20. f. to all r.
of all. p. 264. l. 35. f. 1 Pet. 14. 14. r. 4. 14. p. 267. l. 38. before
answers r. he. l. 41. f. too r. to. p. 269. l. 37. f. obortive r. abortive. p.
270. l. 6. f. ense r. sense. p. 271. l. l. ult. f. the r. thee. p. 279. l. 4.
f. pronunct r. pronounct. p. 292. l. 37 after my arm r. fall. p. 295. l. ult.
before Kingdom r. his p. 297. l. 47. before became r. he p. 300. l. 24. f.
Matt. 16. 33. r. John 16. 33.

The First SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. January 27. 1660.
1 PET. IV. 1. He that has suffered in the Flesh, has ceased from Sin.
SO great a flatterer is Man of himself, that from all kind of Events, how
various soever, he will adventure to conclude himself in the right way to
Blessedness; and rather than want Argument, contradictions shall conspire to
make him happy. If he prosper, then God allows his doings; and the success of
actions is his mark and Seal, that they are acceptable and dear to Him: And if
this Argument be good, The Tribe of Benjamin while it conquered (as they did
Conquer those that fought Gods Battles; Judges xx. 18, 21, 23, 25.
and that by his immediate commission:) yet all that while, those Sodomites and
foul Adulterers, the men of Gibeah were Saints; But when calamity does take
away this Argument, then on the other side the Gibbet; though the punishment of
Villainy, is only execution of that Decree, Romans viii.
whereby God has predestined them, To be conformed to the Image of his Son.
As if they died most like Christ, who died with the most Guilt about them, and
they will needs be Martyrs when they suffer for their vices; and, if this
Argument be good, Egypt was blessed with all her Plagues, and the consuming fire
that ran upon the ground, was the light of God's countenance upon them. Yet
both these Arguments have been made use of lately, by each several party of us,
in the variety of Gods dispensations to us. Now this each could not do of
right. Some Parties of us made false and unjust pleas to them both. Now to
decide which did so, not a priori, from the cause; though that alone does guild
prosperity, and that alone too makes the Martyr, not the sufferings. But men
will never be agreed of that, while whatsoever happens (whether their cause
prosper or be oppressed) still proves them in the right. But I shall do it from a
plain notorious effect: nor do I know what else can be more seasonable than
while some men seem to stand candidates for sufferings, and choose Sedition and
Schism, rather than lose the reputation of not being afflicted with their
Party; and while others plead the merits of affliction, and Trumpet out their
having suffered, as a pretense for the ambition and the covetousness, the
luxuries and intemperance, and all the other vices of prosperity, which their
late sufferings have before hand expiated; while it is thus on each side, to
give both a (...) whereby to judge the Case, which my Text here presents; for,
He that has suffered in the Flesh, has ceased from Sin.

The words make a single Proposition, and therefore cannot well be taken
asunder, nor indeed need they; the Terms being very well understood. The
Subject every one is willing to assume to himself; no one I believe that hears
me, but will say he has suffered in the Flesh. Therefore we have no more to
do, but to see whether the other Term agree as universally, which certainly it
must, if our Proposition here hold good, if He that has suffered in the Flesh,
has ceased from Sin.

Therefore in order to this, I shall offer at Three things.

First; Discourse of the truth of the Proposition in General, and see if we can
discern how necessary, and how effectual this Instrument of Reformation is,
whether it be such as may build a confidence of asserting; That He who has
suffered, has ceased from Sin.

Secondly; Because discoursing in General, is not so practical and useful, I
shall endeavor to discover in particular, By what Artifice of method the Flesh
engages men into courses of sin, and how it works them up to the height of it,
and then see how sufferings blast that method, and make the Arts of the flesh
either unpracticable, or too weak.

Thirdly; I will attempt to view our own concerns in all this; propose to
consideration, Whether this method has had this effect on us; or, Whether
indeed it be as easy to confute God's Word, as to break his Commandments, and
contrive that his truth shall no more stand than his will does; but
notwithstanding Scriptures bold affirmation here, yet they that have suffered
have not ceased from Sin: and if so, then to propose the danger and infer
Christ's Application that at least we begin to cease, and sin no more least a
worse thing come unto us.

I. He that has suffered in the flesh has ceased from Sin: None but He, and
He certainly:

When it appeared that Eden had too much of Garden for innocence to dwell in,
and although man were made upright, yet amidst such delights he could not be so
a whole day, but of the many inventions he found out, the first was to destroy
himself immediately, and under the shadow of the Tree of life he wrought out
death, and made the Walks of Paradise lead him toward Hell: God saw himself
concerned to take another course: He sets a guard of fire about Eden, about the
place of pleasure, as well as in the place of torments; and there was as much
need of flame to keep man out of Paradise, as flame to fright him from Hell. He
makes the Earth not spring with Garden any more, but bring forth thorns and
briars, that might scratch and tear man in the pursuit of things below, which,
if the Soul should cleave and cling unto the Earth, might gore and stab it in
the embrace; Nothing but sufferings will do us good: The Earth was most accursed
to man when it was all Paradise, nothing but the malediction could make it safe
and bless it to us; our happiness must be inflicted, executed on us, and we
must be goaded into blessedness: and therefore God has put afflictions into
every dispensation since the first. Deuteronomy. vii. 10.
Among the Jews sin did receive immediate punishment by the tenor of the
Covenant, and though the retributions of our Covenant be set at distance, as
far remote as Hell, yet Christ has dressed his very promises in sackcloth and in
ashes, tears and trouble: when he would recompense heroic virtue, he says it
shall receive an hundred fold with persecution, Mar. x. 30. and he does grant
us sufferings; To you it is given in the behalf of Christ to suffer: Phil. 1.
29. so that the sting of the Serpent is now the tempter; his bitings and his
venom moving us to obedience, as much as his lying tongue did our first Parents
to rebellion, and when he does fulfill Gods threat and wound the heel, he only
drives us faster away from him, and makes us haste to him that flies to meet us
with healing under his wings. This method God has always used, and the
experience confirmed by the blood of all Ages, even from the blood of righteous
Abel to the blood of this season: of all the Prophets that went before us, and
the Apostles that came after them, as if those were men inspired for ruin, and
what ever Judgment they denounced, it was their own burden; and as if these
were men chosen out for, and delegated to Persecution, 1 Cor. iv. 9.
men appointed unto death, as St. Paul expounds their Office, none escaped: and
the next succeeding times of Primitive Christianity were but Centuries of
Martyrdom, so many years of Fire and Faggot, and worse tortures. This method
has not past by any Grandeur, but of those great ones that have been eminently
good, their afflictions have vy'd with their Majesty, the Calendar has had as
much share of them as the Chronicle, the Martyrology as the Annals, and their
blood, not their Purple put them in the Rubric. Gods Furnace made Crowns
splendid, gave them a Majesty of shine, and an Imperial glory, and so all our
Crowns indeed must be prepared in the Furnace; he that told us we must be
Baptized with fire, saw there was something in us that the Christians water
will not cleanse; Baptism may wash sullays but not dross away, That must be
washed in flame, and nothing else but fire will take away our base alloy. And it
cannot be otherwise, never was there any other way to Glory: for when God was
to bring many Sons to glory, he sanctified the very Captain of our salvation
through sufferings. Heb. ii. 10. Who though he were a Son, and that the Son of
God, yet learned he obedience by the things that he suffered, Heb. v. v. 8.
This therefore is the only and most effectual way of teaching it, when God
speaks in Judgment: and indeed he counts all other of his Voices but as silence
in comparison of this; and though he gave his Law in Thunder, and sent his
Prophets daily to denounce wrath to transgression, yet he reckons of all this
as if he had said nothing till he speak Plagues and command afflictions; Psalm.
l. 21. after a Catalogue of sins he tells the man, these things have thou done
and I kept silence; though my Law did warn thee, and my Messengers called to
thee, yet I hardly expect that thou should hear those whispers, with all
those Voices I did scarce break silence; but now I will reprove thee, Micah.
vi. 9.
and thou shall hear the rod or hear thy own groans under it: For that we may
be sure to hear this Voice, God does by it open the ear, Job xxxiii. 14, 15,
16. God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not, in a dream and in a
vision, then he opens the ears of men by Chastisements, as it follows in four
Verses full of them, 91, 20, 21, 22. and seals his instruction that he may
withdraw Man from his purpose, i. e. that he may make him cease from sin. It
seems the place of Dragons is Gods chiefest School of Repentance; and we may
have a clearer sight of him in the dimness of anguish, than Vision it self does
give. When men did not perceive that, says Job, yet this opened the Ear, and
so God seals the Instruction: And truly when the Soul dissolves in Tears, and
when, as David words it. Psalm. xxii. 14.
The heart in the midst of the body is even like melting wax, then only it is
susceptible of Impression, then is the time for sealing the Instruction. Nor
does Chastisement open the Ear only, but the Understanding also; Hos. xi. 14,
15.
I will give her trouble, (...), I will take her into the Wilderness (...)
says he, and speak unto her Heart; There is convincing Experience of all this.
Pharaoh that was an Atheist in Prosperity, does beg for Prayers in Adversity;
before he suffers, Pharaoh says, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice?
I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go, Exodus v. v. 2. but yet
Thunder preaches obedience into him, and Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and
Aaron and said, I have sinned, the Lord is righteous, and I and my People are
wicked, entreat the Lord that there be no more mighty Thundrings, (no more
Voices of God, the Hebrew words it) and I will let you go, Exodus ix. 27. And in
the Book of Judges you will find that whole Age was nothing but a vicissitude
of sinning and suffering, divided betwixt Idolatry and Calamity. When Gods hand
was not on them they ran after other Gods, as if to be freed from Oppression
had been to be set free from Gods Worship and Service; but when he did return
to slay them, then they sought him, and they returned to enquire early after
God, and they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God was their
Redeemer. Psalm. lxxviii. 34, 35. So that from such induction the Prophet might
pronounce, that when Gods Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the
world will learn righteousness, Esaias xxvi. 9. and S. Peter in the Text, they
that have suffered in the flesh, have ceased from sin. Which calls me to my
second Task;

2. To show first, by what arts the flesh engages men into courses of sin, and
by what methods it does work them up to the heights of it. That I may Secondly
declare how sufferings blast those methods, and make all the arts of flesh
either unpracticable or too weak.

1. That the carnal appetite should reach after, and give up it self to sensual
delights is so far from strange, that it is its nature; it is the Law of the
members, the very signature of flesh, and inclination imprinted into it, of
which it can no more divest it self, than the heated Deer can restrain it self
from thirsting and panting after waterbrooks: But when Reason and Religion
have set bounds to this appetite, for it to scorn these mounds; for that Law in
the members to fight with and prevail against the Law in the mind, those
original dictates born in it, and Christian Principles infused into it, this is
the Fleshes aim and sin. Now this it does by exciting to ill actions, as being
sauc'd with pleasures and contents, and by indisposing to good actions, as
being troublesome or not at all delightful to the sense, and as for all other
delights, it has no apprehension of, but indisposeth for them perfectly. So
that this it does, it engages too much in Pleasures here, and it takes off all
cares or thoughts of any joys hereafter; both these I will show you, and thus
it works;

1. It prevails with us to indulge our selves the full use of lawful pleasures,
and for this the Flesh will urge, it is the end of their Creation; to do
otherwise were to evacuate Gods purpose in the making; Did he give us good
things not to enjoy them?

Thus every sort of sin insinuates it self at first: Youth will not deny it
self converses with temptations, although he have reason to fear they will
commit a rape upon his warmer passions, which are chafed by such encounters.
But God has not forbid him Conversation; and why should he be an Anchoret and
recluse in the throngs of Cities and of Courts? Another that would not by any
means be luxurious or intemperate, yet goes as near them as he can, and
contrives to enjoy all those delights that do indeed but sauce Intemperance,
and make Excess palatable: And truly why should he restrain himself from meats
and drinks, and be a Jew again? All these believe they live righteously,
soberly, and godly enough. This resolution works in every recreation, pleasure,
honor, and advantage of this World, men are content to make as near approaches
to the Sin as they can; and indeed believe they have no reason to be morose
unto themselves: I will deny my self nothing that God has not denied me, but
enjoy as far as possibly and lawfully I may. But then, by doing thus it

Secondly, does often take in somewhat of the immoderate and unlawful, which
cannot be avoided, both because it is hard to set the exact bounds and limits
of what is lawful: The (...), the Line that meres out Virtue from its Neighbor
Vice, is not so plain in every place as to chalk out exactly to this point thou
may come, and no farther; hence the man sometimes mistakes himself into a
fault; however the extremity of Lawful is, we know the confines and very edge
of Vice. And then to him that plays upon the brink of sin, it is a very easy
step into it, and indeed unavoidable, when a man is rusht and hurried on, not
only by his inward stings and inclinations, but by the practice of the World,
which makes use of that holy Name of Friendship, to bring Vice into our
acquaintance, and to befriend us into everlasting Death (of such Friends I can
have legions in Hell; and the God of this World will serve me, upon this
account, to procure for my Sin and my Destruction:) but howsoever when the
Appetite is heated, they are not to be denied.

Thirdly, this happening therefore sometimes proves a Snare and bait still to
go on, both as it takes away the horror and the aversation of the sins which
at the first seem uncouth, till a man be experienced in them; and also as it
smooths the way, for such beginnings do nurse up a Habit and prepare a Custom,
and make Vice very easy, which at first it is not, while the Appetite is
modest and not able to digest full Doses, till use enlarge and stretch it.

And now the Mind, which by these means tastes diverse Pleasures, and the
Degrees of them, and finds a gust in them, yet not being satisfied in any one
(as it is impossible it should be) stirs up the Appetite to vary and proceed;
that that contentment which single pleasures could not afford, diversified
might make up. Wretched Nature using that as an Attractive, which should
repel; for who would hugg a Cloud? embrace that which does not, cannot
satisfy? but only Flesh which for that very reason, hunts on and follows the
scent. And by doing so a while, it brings upon it self.

Fourthly, Something like a necessity of doing so: Thus Continence would be
some men's Disease, and the Intemperate cannot live without his Vice, but gapes
as much as Thirst and Fever do, and if he have not satisfaction, suffers as
many qualms and pangs as his Riot used to cause in the Apprentisage of his sin;
so that there is a kind of necessity of the practice, and he wisely seeming to
make a virtue of necessity, begins to think them the only happiness, at least
of this life, freely without reluctance embracing them.

And now the Flesh is Callous, and if you doubt how it could so harden it self,
as not to be pervious to any stings of Conscience, but Proof against all
Pricks, though Experiment may persuade you; yet I will show you the Method.

As all Appetite you know is blind, so the Guides also of Carnal appetite; The
senses are very short-sighted, they cannot look forward to the next Life, to
the hopes of Heaven, or the pains of Hell, to bring them into the balance with
the present pleasure, and see which does overweigh. The Flesh only lives
extempore, looks but upon that which is before it, scarce on that. We have
sufficient experience of this, for when one Vice will not look forwards a year
or two to the penury and rottenness some courses do pull down: And when another
Vice, as if it had learnt to fulfill our Saviors command, and take no care for
the morrow, will not think of the next mornings pains and Headache; Nay, when
the ambitious Usurper will not look just before him, to see where he does place
his steps, on Precipices and Sword-points, to note how the Pyramids he does
climb are made slippery with blood; Pyramids, did I say? pointed Reeds rather,
things that have not strength to bear, but only sharpness to stab; and where
the man's own weight makes his Upholders fail and wound him both together, at
once sink under him and pierce him thorough. Nay, we see many whose sins
inflict themselves, who may be truly said to bear their Iniquities, yet choose
those sins that bring their Plauges along with them; for we see men with most
excessive difficulty practice a Vice only that they may have the Vice, swallow
sickness, drink Convulsions and dead Paralyses, foaming Epilepsies, only that
all this may be easy to them. And this is but one instance of the many that
might be made; just as the King of Pontus, that are Poison that so he might be
used to it: Strange! that a man should torture himself with all those deadly
symptoms that Poison racks the body with, only that he might eat Poison; yet
just such is the Sinners Design, and all the ease and pleasure he acquires at
last in sinning, is but familiarity of Poison, custom of Danger, and
acquaintance of Ruin. Good God! that men should train and exercise themselves
so for perdition! that they should go through a discipline of torments to get
an Habit of destroying themselves! that they should work out their own
condemnation with hardships and agonies! that as if 'twere too easy to go down
the hill to Hell, the descent shall be made craggy, and they force breaches
into it, and great headlong Precipices to make the way more painful, and more
dangerous, to make the fall more wounding and more irrecoverable! And what
shall give a check where difficulty does provoke, and torments do ingratiate.

Well: But though Flesh be so short-sighted and inconsiderate, the mind might
trash it by suggesting other sorts of punishments that do await transgression.
Why truly if rude and unmannerly Conscience do sometimes thrust in the thoughts
of Hell, the Flesh, which I told you, is not terrified with any thing but what
it feels (now Conscience presents Hell as a thing of hereafter, not till Death
be past) it satisfies Conscience with a Repentance of Hereafter, before Death
come I will be sorry for my sins, and God is merciful. Conscience being thus
quieted, and both Reins and Spur given to the Flesh, it takes its full Carier,
and leaves behind all thoughts of Repentance, and indeed, of God, or Heaven;
the hope and joys of which, are the only possible method that is left to take
off the Man from his eager pursuit, or to divert him in his course. But as to
that also, that I may show you the next heat.

The Mind that is immerst in body, and has been long accustomed to taste no
pleasure but the carnal ones, its fancy filled with those Ideas, it does imbibe
such a tincture of sensuality, receives such an infusion of Flesh, and so
impregnated with the fumes of Carnality, which clog the Spirit, that its
complexion and temper is quite altered, it is diluted and deprest, and so grown
stupid and unactive to all higher things. Heaven and all after-things, it may
be, are the prejudice of such persons, not their persuasions; some thin
conceptions of such things have been thrown into them, but never were improved;
for their Mind has otherwise been employed, and they can have no appetite to
them, because they have never had any taste or relish of any thing but sensual.
And indeed that both longings after, and thoughts of a better Life should be
altogether dead in the carnal man, is but a natural and necessary effect of the
verge of his Delights. For what motive is there in Heaven to stir up his
appetite, to whom Heaven it self would not be a place of Joy? For I am verily
persuaded, were the Carnal man in those Eternal Mansions compast with streams
of Glory, it were impossible for him to take delight in them, and he would
grope for Paradise in the midst of Heaven: As much impossible as for the most
unlearned Idiot to satisfy himself with the pleasures of a Mathematical
demonstration: Let him have the Hecatombe, and let Pyth^goras be an Epicure on
the dimensions of a Triangle, the other has no palate for these pleasures; and
indeed how could the unclean lascivious please himself in the enjoyment of
those Felicities that have no Sex, Matthew. xxii. 30.
Where they neither Marry, nor are given in Marriage? Or how the Riotous, that
Eats to eat, eats to hunger and provoke, not satisfy; how will he content
himself there where their happiness is, Rev. vii. 16.
they shall neither hunger nor thirst, or the Incendiaries that love to set all
on fire, what should they do there where there are no flames but such as kindle
Seraphins; so that flesh and blood, not only shall not, but cannot enjoy the
Kingdom of God: And why then should they long after, or think of it? Nay, I
would this unhappy Age, and an unlucky axiom of Aristotle's did not convince
that they do think there are no such things; Sensual pleasures, are corruptive
of Principles, says he; and indeed where Damnation is the conclusion, it is a
much quieter and more easy thing for Men of Wit and Understanding to deny the
Principles, than granting them, to lie under the torture of being liable to
such an inference; they therefore that resolve to love this Life and all the
sinful pleasures of it, at the next step resolve there is no other Life. And
now this pampered and puffed Flesh is got into the Psalmists Chair, Psalm i. 1.
the Chair of Scorners; and it is one of the Luxuries of their life to scoff at
them who are so foolish as to be Religious, and to deny their flesh its present
appetites and pleasures on such thin after-hopes; here their Wit also is an
Epicure, and feasts and triumphs, dictates, and professes in that Chair; (...),
in the Chair of Pestilences, as the LXX translate, and very truly, for such men
shed a Sphere of Contagion about them, and their Discourses are effluvia of the
Plague, and the breath of Pestilence. But how to get Flesh down out of this
Chair, that is the difficulty; yet that my Text will tell us, for all this
progress of the Flesh is trasht and checked by Sufferings, for, He that has
suffered has ceast from Sin. Which how, I will briefly show.

The Fleshes first Art was by immersing it self in the full Lawful use of
Pleasures, and by consequence, in the immoderate; to prevail with the Soul to
find a gust in them, and from a continued enjoyment to conclude them necessary;
and so from the importunities of a perpetual temper and an accustomed
satisfaction to think of nothing else in this life. Now it is plain Affliction
made this Art unpracticable, for that it did do so, was every ones complaint;
it robbed them of the immoderate, and even of the lawful use of Pleasures, it
took off those customary Delights by which the mind was habituated and glued to
them, by not allowing them; and made them so far from being necessary, that
they were not acquirable. Thus by denying us even the Lawful use of them, it
stabs the Flesh in its first onset: Indeed it does that for us which every man
in every state of life in his most plentiful prosperity must sometimes do for
himself; that is, Deny himself what he desires, and might enjoy without
offense: Which he that does not do, but constantly gives his Appetite every
sort and degree of lawful thing it asks, does teach it to crave on, and be
importunate, and insolent, and not endure to be resisted, when it did always
find him to be so obsequious to it. If David never checked Adonijah, did not at
any time displease him, saying, Why have thou done so? he easily takes
confidence to say I will be King, and step into the Throne. 1 Kings i. 5, 6.
But he that mortifies sometimes, that does acquaint even his most innocent
desires with a denial, how can unlawful ones assault him? For can my Appetite
hope to betray me into superfluities, who have taught my self not to wish for
necessaries? Will he be tempted with Excesses, or hearken to the invitations of
Luxury, that will not hear his bowels when they croak for bread? Or he gape for
intemperate satisfactions, who will not let thirst call, but shuts his mouth
against it? Why should he covet more that has learnt to give away, and want
that which he has? Now Sufferings inflict this temper on us, and acquaint us
with the necessity of all this, and in a while with the liking of it, teach us
Content without Lawful Delights? yea, by degrees make that content appear
better than an assured enjoyment: For were I offered the choice either of an
uninterrupted Health, or of a certain Cure in all Diseases, sure I had rather
never need a Potion than drink Antidote and Health it self. And even so the
lawful good things of this Life are at the best but Remedies and Reliefs, never
good but upon supposition: Therefore while Affliction taught us to want, it
has destroyed this Art of the Flesh.

As for the Second, Then the lulling asleep all sense or thoughts of any Life
hereafter, neither minding the fear of one, or hopes of the other; Affliction
surely met with this too: For Sufferings bring both the hereafters to
remembrance, the Sad one, while every Punishment was an Essay and taste of that
which is prepared for those that live after the Flesh, and the more
insupportable our Fiery Trial was, the more it cautioned us to beware of that
Fire which is never quenched* And for the other Life, surely when our Condition
was such, that if we looked unto the Earth, behold nothing but Darkness and
dimness of Anguish, and darkness as of the shadow of Death, we could not choose
but turn away our Eyes and lift them up to Heaven. When the Soul is thrown down
by Oppression, it mounts by a resiliency, and with the force of pressure is
crushed Upwards; or if the Load be heavy, so as to make it grovel and lie
prostrate, it is but pressed into the posture of Devotion: When she is disseised
of all, turned out of every possession, then she begins to think of an abiding
City, and eternal Mansions. For the Soul that is restless, when it sees nothing
here below to stay upon, but all is hurried from her, roams about for some hold
to rest on, and being able in that case to find nothing but God, there she does
grasp and cling; and when the storms splits all enjoyments, and devours Friends
which ^^ke enjoyments comfortable, all perish in one wrack, then she sees she
must catch at him that sits above the Water-Floods. I told you out of Job,
Affliction did discover better than Revelation, and in the dimness of Anguish
we might see more than by Vision; and truly of two Visions which our Savior
gave to his most intimate Apostles Peter, James, and John, the one of Glory on
Mount Tabor, the other of Sufferings in Gethsemane; showing in the one Heaven
and Himself transfigured, a glimpse of beatifical Vision; and in the other Hell
transfigured, and a sad Scene of all its Agonies, he thought this a more
concerning sight, for when they fell asleep at both, at his Transfiguration,
Luke ix. 32. Peter, and they that were with him, were heavy with sleep; yet he
does not rouse them up to behold his Glory; when they did awake, indeed they
saw a glimpse of it, but straight a Cloud did overshadow it, verse 34. But at
his Passion he bids them Watch with him, Matthew: xxviii. 38. and when he finds
them asleep, he says, What, could ye not watch with me one hour? ver. 40. and
bids them watch again, ver. 41. and comes again a third time and upbraids their
drowsiness, ver. 45. So much more necessary was it to behold his Agonies, than
to see his Felicities: Glory does not discover or invite to Heaven, so much as
Sufferings drive to it; and we are more concerned to take a view of that Garden
in Gethsemane, than that of Paradise, and the going down from the Mount of
Olives does more advantage us in climbing the Eternal hill, than all Mount
Tabors height. Nor do Afflictions only drive us toward Heaven, but they beget
an hope of it. Knowing that Tribulation works Patience, Patience Experience,
and Experience Hope, Romans v. 3. 4. And I will give them the Valley of Achor for
a door of Hope, Hos. ii. 14. As if Despair oppressed them into Hope, and that low
troublous Valley opened into the highest Firmament. Now he that rides at Anchor
of this Hope, though his Anchor lie buried under Waves, yet those rouling Hills
of Sea, swelled by storms of Affliction, and raised too by his Tears, do
without Hyperbole mount him to Heaven: He that has entertained these
Expectations in earnest, how will he slight Temptations here below? What will
he not sacrifice to Christ's Command? See, Abraham that did but hope for Canaan,
and that far off too, to be possessed by the Posterity of his Son Isaac, yet when
God commands him to slay Isaac before he had any posterity, and so to dash all
his own Promises, and quite cut off the very motive to Abraham's Obedience, yet
he hopes and obeys even to contradiction, Romans iv. 18.
Does both against hope. And had we but the shadow of his hope, as he had but
the shadow of our Promises, how would we sacrifice a sin at his Command, and
think a Fleshly lust a good exchange for the hope of Heaven, which Tribulation
works? and he that had suffered in the Flesh, would certainly cease from sin.

And now my last work is to view our own Concern in this, and surely that must
be all Exultation and Triumph, and this not so much that our sufferings are
ceast, as that our sins are so; not that our Enemies are sunk, but that our
flesh is vanquished, that sub hoc signo vinces is thus also come to pass, with
the Standard of the Cross, that Cross on which our selves were Crucified, we
have overcome; and with this Christian Banner we have put to flight the Armies
of our Heathen Vices. For thus it must be, if my Text be true; and sure it is
not possible it should be otherwise: For look upon the Muster-roll of these our
Foes which S. Paul does produce, Gal. v. v. 19, 20, 21. and see which of them
could escape; it runs thus, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies, Envyings, Murder, Drunkenness, Revellings.

To begin with the great Commanders, those that lead the Van and bring up the
Rear, Uncleanness, and Revellings; They that consider how they not only
suffered for, but by these Vices, which did misplace men's watches and
attendances; sins that were not only like Achans in our Army, and ruined it by
bringing the accursed thing into it, but were like Hannibal's Numidians in the
Roman Army, that did at once betray to, and inflict Ruin; sins that did merit
and effect Destruction, and made as well as provoked, overthrows; and sins that
by Gods goodness did cut off themselves, while they did bring men into a
condition that would not bear such Vices. These are the guilts of Wealth and
Splendour, that do attend Felicity and Pomp; it is not only hopeful that men did
resolve to be revenged on these great workers of their mischief, and will no
more reset such Traitors in their bosoms; But sure these sins are ceast that
did put out themselves.

Then for Seditions; They who consider when they broke the Scepter, they left
us nothing but the Rod of God instead of it; a Rod that turned straight into a
Serpent, that changed our Seas into Blood, or rather made new Seas of our own
blood; that brought Locusts over the Earth, and Frogs into the Temple also, to
croak there; that struck Lights here worse than Egyptian Darkness, and
destroyed all the first born of the Nation, all the Nobles of the Land; these
will easily believe that we have selt this Rod too much to seize upon it
hastily again; the Scepter is restored, and this Rod like to that in Israel,
laid up, I hope, within the Ark together with the Tables of the Law, never to
be dis joined from Gods Commands, nor taken thence against them.

Next for Heresies; Truly we have left us none to revive, or to make new; the
mischief both of them and their Cause, the want of Government in the Church is
now discerned and remedied: And for Divisions and Schisms, they who reflect on
the said issues of them, how well meaning soever all their Causes were, will
certainly avoid them: To see how while we quarelled for the Fringes of
Religion, we tore the seamless Coat of Christ to pieces; yea, and the body too:
How when we first disliked a Liturgy, the daily Sacrifice of Prayer was made to
cease, and then the House of Prayer was demolisht; next, Christ's, our Lords
Prayer was rejected, that Liturgy of his own framing, thrown away in the
Rubbish of his Temple, and then it was a sin to pray at all. His Table we must
have removed, and then his Supper was so too; and that great Mystery of our
Religion, the Sacrament of our Redemption, was buried in the Ruins of his
Altar. To see how thus out of heats of Religion we destroyed all Religion,
because that some adjacent Circumstances did not please us, and fetched a Coal
from the Altar to set fire to and burn down the Temple, because the building of
some out-Court was, we thought, irregular; is Document enough not to attempt
this any more for Religions sake: For now it would be in despite of Christ, who
has almost verified the Jewish accusation of him, Destroy this Temple also,
and in three days he will build it up again; and has built it up we hope, as
he did that of his own Body, never to fall again by us: Surely we will not kill
this Body of his out of Love to him, and make his Temple his burnt Offering.
When God has set our sins in order thus before our eyes, showed them us in
their sad effects, there is no fear that we should fall in love with them.

But where it is not thus, where Gods last and most working Method has been
able to produce no good, I must, to keep my word,

Apply the Danger: In that case what remains but the Curse of the ground, Heb.
vi. 8. which, if after all the Husbandmans methods of Care and Art, it brings
forth only thorns and briars, it is rejected by him, he will bestow no more
labor on it, but can hardly forbear cursing such an ill piece of ground, and
its end is to be burnt: So we after Gods Husbandry of Afflictions, Psalm. Cxxix.
3^.
when the Plowers plowed upon our backs and made long furrows, and the Iron
teeth of Oppressors as it were harrowed us; if we bring forth only the fruits
of the Flesh, we are rejected, reprobated, God will bestow no more Arts on us,
we are not far from his curse, and there remains only a fearful looking for of
Judgment and fiery Indignation. If any did continue refractory to the Rod,
sinned under and against Judgment, and did commit with an high hand even while
the Lords hand was stretched out against them, what shall reform, what can
express their guilt? To have beheld that tragical iniquity we read of Lions,
where when the City was so visited with the Pestilence that scarce any were
free, that the Dead without a figure buried their dead, falling down one upon
another, each being at once a Carcass and a grave; the Soldiers of the Citadel
would daily issue forth and deflour Virgins now giving up the ghost, defile
Matrons even already dead, committing with the dust, warming the grave with
sinful heats, and coupling with the Plague and Death; would not this have
seemed the Landscape of Hell to us, when they suffer and sin together? Yet when
a Church and State were on their deathbeds, Gods Tokens on them, visited with
the treasures of his Plagues, and our selves sinking in that our Ruin, if any
went a whoring after their own flesh, still fulfilling the lusts thereof, and
in the midst of Deaths searching for sins; what was this but to do the same
things whose story does affright us, while the actions please? and in this case
what method will be useful? do we think our selves of that generous kind that
will do nothing by compulsion, but will for kindness; and though we would not
be chained, yet we will be drawn to Virtue by the cords of Love; and now God
has shown mercy on us, we will return him service out of gratitude. Truly, I
make no question but most of us have promised some such things to God, how if
he would but save us from our Enemies that we might serve him without fear,
that we would do it in holiness and Righteousness before him: And if he would
restore his opportunities of Worship, how we would use them. Thus we did labor
to tempt God, and draw him in to have compassion; and this was Ephraims
Imagination just, Jer. xxxl. 18.
I heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, says the Prophet, as a Bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke, turn thou me and I shall be turned; turn my
Captivity, and I will turn my life: But this was as a Bullock unaccustomed to
the yoke, that did not like the straitness and pressure of it, and would
promise any thing to get it off, thought it more easy to reform than bear
Affliction: But is this hopeful think you? The Soldiers of Lions that would
ravish Death, and break into the Grave for Lust, it may be would have been
modest, and retired from the fair Palaces that are prepared to tempt and
entertain that Vice: Cold and insensible of all those heats that Health and
Beauty kindle; but remember it was the taking off Gods hand that hardened
Pharaohs heart, and a release from punishment was his Reprobation.

And as for those that were humbled under the Rod, and when God had retrenched
from their enjoyments, did put restraints upon themselves, gave over sinning. I
have a word of Caution for them, that they examine well and take a care it be a
ceasing from sin, like that in the Text, a dying to it, that they no longer
live the rest of their time in the flesh to the lusts of men: For if this Old
Man be only cold and stiff, not mortified; by the calm and sunshine of Peace,
likely to be warmed into a recovery; if thou owe all thy Innocence to thy
Pressure, were only plundered of thy sins, and thy Virtue and Poverty hand in
hand as they were born, so they will die together, thy Vices and Revenues come
in at once: What is this but to invite new Desolations, which God in kindness
must send to take away the opportunities and foments of our ruining sins? It Is
true, when God has wrought such most astonishing miracles of mercy for us, when
he did make Calamity contribute to our Happiness; when we were Shipwrackt to
the Haven and the Shore; when Ruins did advance us and we fell upwards; it is
an hopeful argument God would not do such mighty works on purpose to undo them,
we have good ground of confidence that he will preserve his own mercies, and
will not throw away the issues of his goodness in which his bounty has so
great an interest and share. But yet if we debauch Salvation, and make it serve
our undoing, if we order these opportunities of mercy so, that they only help
us to fill up the measure of our sins, if we teach Gods long-suffering only to
work out our eternal sufferings, these Mercies will prove very cruel to us, and
far from giving any color for our hopes. When the Prodigal was received into
his Fathers house and arms, Luke xv.
had a Ring put on him, and the fatted Calf killed for him, if he should strait
have invited the companions of his former Riot to that fatted Calf, and joined
his Harlot to him with that Ring, he had deserved then to be disinherited both
from his Fathers house and pity, who would have had no farther entertainment,
nor no bowels for him. To prevent such a fate, let us make no relapses, but
quite cease from sin; which if we do not, a little Logic will draw an unhappy
inference from this Text; if he that has suffered has ceast from sin, then he
that has not ceast from sinning has not suffered, and then what is all this
that we have felt and so lain under? What is it if it be not suffering! If this
be but preparative, then what is the full Potion, the Cup of Indignation, when
all his Vials shall be poured into it? If such have been the beginnings of
sufferings, what shall the issues be? If the morning dew of the day of
punishment have been so full of blood, what shall the Storm and Tempest be? the
deluge and inundation of Fury? Take heed of making God relapse, it is in your
power to prevent it, your Reformation will be his preservative and Antidote.
That is the way to keep all whole; to settle Government and Religion both; at
once to establish the Kings Throne and Christ's: For notwithstanding men's
pretensions, these Thrones are not at all inconsistent: For that there must be
no King but Christ, that there cannot be a Kingdom here of this World, because
there is a Kingdom that is not of this World is such another Argument, as that
there cannot be an Earth because there is an Heaven. Indeed if we fulfill my
Text, then we shall reconcile these Kingdoms, and bring down Heaven into us;
for that is a state where there is neither sin, nor suffering, where there shall
be no tears because no guilt to merit them, and no calamity to ^^ke them. Now
Reformation does work this here in some degree, and afterward our comforts
that are checkered with some sufferings, and our Piety which is soiled with
spots, shall change into Immortal and unsullied Glories, he prepare us all Who
washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and by his sufferings has made us
Kings and Priests to God and his Father, to whom be Glory and Dominion for ever
and ever, Amen.

The Second SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. October 20. 1661.
PSALM LXXIII. 1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a Clean
Heart.
'TWAS a false Confidence the Jews did nourish, That they should dwell securely
in their Land, notwithstanding their provocations, because the Worship and the
House of God was in it; They did but trust on lying words, Jer. vii. 4.
the Prophet says, when they did trust upon The Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord; As if the Temple were a Sanctuary for those that did profane it,
and the horns of the Altar would secure them, when 'twas the blood upon the
Altar called for Vengeance. Nor was that after-plea of theirs valid, We are the
chosen Israel of God, John viii. 39.
We have Abraham to our Father; As if when by their works they had adopted to
themselves another Parent, Verse 44.
were of their Father the Devil, they could claim any but their present Fathers
interest, or have the blessings of forsaken Abraham. Now if it be no otherwise
with us, Psalm lxxvi. 1, 2.
but because in our Judah God is known, his Name great in our Israel, with us
in Salem, that is, in peace, he has his Tabernacle now, and his dweling in
Sion: And so much knowledge, such pretenses to the Name of God, and to his
Worship, are not with other Nations, nor have they such advantages to know his
Law: If as each party of us does assume these Privileges to it self, so each
do also rest in them, although their Lives answer not these advantages. If
while they judge themselves Christ's chosen Flock, boast Covenants and Alliances
with God, although they violate all those Relations, they yet trust those will
secure them: For why? the being of such a Party and Persuasion is the signature
and Amulet that will preserve them in Gods favor, the charm through which he
will not see Iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel. Numb. xxiii. 21.
Lastly, If we that were the distinctive Character of Israel, that of a
Ransomed, Purchased People (for sure our Rescues rise unto the number and the
rate of those which brought the Sons of Jacob from the House of Bondage) if we,
as they, presume and furfeit upon goodness, and think these gifts of God too
are without Repentance, beli^^^ our being his Redeemed, his Church; conceit our
Orthodox Profession (as once we thought our righteous Cause should do) will
shield us from the danger of our Enemies, and of our Vices too, and neither let
our Foes nor our selves ruin us; with such my Text and my intentions prepare to
meet, lest we should fill the Parallel; and as we equal Israel in our
Deliverances, and imitate their practices, we do transcribe the fatal Pattern
too in the most full resemblance, and repletion of an entire excision; for
although God be truly loving to his Church; yet the ungodly does his soul
abhor; however in a signal manner he be good to Israel, yet this his kindness
does confine it self to such as are of a clean heart.

The words need not much explication; By Israel is meant the Church of God, and
by his goodness to it, all his external mercies also and protections, as the
Psalm evinces; and by such as are of a clean heart, those that to the
profession of Religion and Holiness of outward conversation, do add internal
purity and sincerity; for some trnaslate it, such as are of a clean heart,
some, such as are true^hearted and sincere: And it signifies both.

The words thus explicated give me these Subjects of Discourse. First, a
general Proposition, Truly God is good to Israel, to his Church. Secondly, an
assignation of Conditions under which that general Proposition holds, Romans ix.
6.
All are not Israel that are of Israel, it holds only in such as are of a clean
heart. And in this we have, first, a quality appropriate to the Church,
Cleanness. Secondly, with its subject, the Heart; and there I shall enquire why
that alone is mentioned, whether the cleanness of the Heart suffice, and having
answered that, shall proceed. Thirdly, to consider them together, in both the
given senses as they mean, a sincere heart, and a pure undefiled heart: In each
of which Considerations, because the latter part of my Text is a limitation of
the former, showing where that general Proposition is of force, where it is
not; I shall as I proceed, view all the several guilts opposed to either notion
of Cleanness, and see how far each of them does remoye from any interest in the
Lords goodness to his Church, which is the natural Application of each part,
and shall be mine.

1. Truly God is good to Israel, his Church. And sure this Proposition is
evident to us by its own light, to whom God proved his goodness to
astonishment, by exercising it to Miracle; while he at once wrought Prodigies
of kindness and Conviction; to which we have only this proof to add, That God
has been so plentiful in Bounties, that we are weary of every mention of them,
and have so furfeited on Goodness that we do nauseate the acknowledgment. So
that his kindness in sustaining his Compassions does vie with that which did
effect them, who as he will not be provoked not to be good by such prodigious
unthankfulness, so neither will he by the most exasperating use of his Favors:
God did complain of Israel, Ezekiel. xvi. 17, 19.
Thou have taken thy fair Jewels of my Gold and my Silver which I had given
thee, and made to thy self Images: My meat also which I gave thee, my fine
Flour, mine Oil, and Honey wherewith I fed thee, and have even set it before
them for a sweet savor. And if men now do offer things, in which God has the
same propriety, to baser Idols, to their Vices; if they do sauce his meat,
which he has given them, to sacrifice to Luxury, take his silver and gold to
serve in the Idolatry of Covetousness, and use his Jewels to dress Images also
for foulest adorations. If Atheism grow against Miracle and Goodness too, and
men do most deny God now when he has given greatest evidences of his kind
Providence; I know not by what argument encouraged, unless his in the Poet, --
Factum quod se dum negat hoc videt beatum, because they see they fare best now,
though they deny him most; teaching his goodness to consute his being. If they
do look upon the wondrous restitution of Gods Service as but a shifting of the
Scene of Worship, only another and more gaudy draught and Landscape of Religion
shot on the Stage, and do accordingly esteem it as a variety and entertainment
for their senses only; for nothing higher is engaged, I doubt me, in those
Offices: If they assist in them not out of Principle, but mere indifference to
all, and therefore these at present; It is not halting betwixt God and Baal
this, it is the bowing of the knee to both, which they can do to each alike,
when either is the uppermost, and truly count them Deities alike, I fear. Nay,
when the only Ordinance, the Sermon, is but a prize within the Temple, the
Preacher but Rhetor dicturus ad aram, that comes to do his Exercise before the
Altar, in which men are concerned no farther than to hear and judge, not to be
sentenced by: If God endure all this, and do continue still his Church, his
Worship, and his other Mercies, then I may well conclude that Truly God is good
to Israel.

But I will not be this fastidious Remembrancer: These arguments may prove his
goodness, but sure these qualities will not preserve it to us; the limitation,
my next part, must suggest them; which tells us. who they are God is good to:
Even to such as are of a clean Heart.

1. Clean. Clean, Pure, and Holy, are so essential Attributes of the Israel or
Church of God, that though I must not say the Church does take in none but
such; Mat. xvi. 28, 29, 30.
For there are Tares, unwholsom Poppy too, and Darnel with the Wheat, yet I
must say that (...), the Church is but a Congregation of such as are called to
be Saints, 1 Cor. i. 2.

In the first Israel almost the whole Discipline of their Religion was purity
in type, and all the Ceremonies of their Worship were but figures, rather
Doctrines of Cleanness, when they came first to enter Covenant with God at
Horeb, Exodus xix. 10.
and to receive their Law, they were to sanctify themselves and wash their
clothes. What purity do those Commandments require, which they must not hear
with any thing that was unclean about them? which they must wash all to
receive? and indeed nothing with them was enterprized without it; they were to
cleanse themselves from the impurities of mere Contingency; yea, they were
bound to wash their Dreams and purify their very sleeps; and all this is
expounded by the Prophet Isaiah, i. 16, 17. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away
the evil of your doings, cease to do evil, learn to do well.

And in our Israel by our Covenant there is as much of this required, for we
were all initiated into our profession by Washing, Tit. iii. 5.
regenerated in a Laver, John iii. 3, 5.
and born again of Water, becoming so Tertullians Sanctitatis designati, set
aside for Holiness, consecrated to cleanness, and made the votaries of purity.
How clean a thing then must a Christian be who must be washed into the Name?
nor is he thus washed only in the Font, there was a more inestimable fountain
opened for sin and for uncleanness, Apoc. xi. 5. Jesus Christ has washed us in
his own blood; And Heb. ix, 14. The blood of Christ did purge our Consciences
from dead works to serve the living God: How great is our necessity of being
clean, when to provide a means to make us so, God opens his Sons side, and our
Laver is drawn out of the Heart of Christ: yet we have more effusions to
contribute to it, 1 Cor. vi. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified by
the Spirit of our God, Matthew. iii. 11.
and we must be Baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire. A Laver of flame
also, to wash away our Scurf as well as sullages, and beyond all these, some of
us have been purged too with the fiery trial, and molten in the furnace of
Affliction, to separate our dross and purify us from alloy, that we may be
clean and refined too; may become Christians of the highest Carrect.

Such, among others, are the Obligations, such the Instruments of cleanness in
a Christian: Let us inquire next into the importance of the quality, and the
degree that is exacted.

And here I need not say that it stands in direct opposition to the licentious
practices of Vice; this Scripture calls corruption and pollution, 2 Pet. ii.
19, 20. and the Sinner is there styled the servant of corruption; sure a worthy
relation this, a Servant is we know, meaner than whom he serves, at least he is
in that consideration as he serves; and then I pray you, in what rank of things
is he or she who is below and baser than Corruption? David does also call such
open Sepulchers; things all whose horror does not lie in this, that they
enclose rottenness and putrefaction, but open Sepulcres are gaping frightful
noisomness; and they do also shed a killing stench. A man that is engaged in
conversations with impure sinners, is in a like condition with him who has no
air to draw into him, but that of Funeral Vaults, and does suck in only the
breath of Pestilence.

But it is a small thing to say the cleanness of a Christian does abhor such
licentious impurities; for it is such that though it may consist with those
little stains that come by slips and failings of infirmity (these are the spots
of Children) and also with some single fouler acts, into which the man may be
surprised, provided they be suddenly washed off in tears: Yet can it not
consist with continuance in a known sin, though it be but a breach of a single
Commandment: And though the man be strict in other things, yet if he do allow
himself one Vice, he is of the number of the unclean; for partial obedience
does imply also partial disobedience, and to the worst and foulest mixture;
therefore no purity. Herod feared John the Baptist, knowing that he was a just
man and an holy, and observed him, and when he heard him he did many things,
and heard him gladly, Mark vi. 20. Could you but pardon him one Crime, he were
a most Religious person, but that indulged makes him the wicked Herod: The
matter of Vriah threw dirt; perpetual sticking dirt, into the Character of
David, that man after Gods heart. There are few persons but some sin or other
finds a particular engagement on, and does insinuate especially above all
others into them; the vice of Constitution, the Crime of my Bosom, it is my own
flesh and blood, I cannot tear that from me: Or else another sin does get into
my Coffers, the profits of it bribe me to make much on it, and it brings such a
reward with it I cannot be unkind to it; Or else the custom of a Vice has made
it my acquaintance and my friend, and then it is so joynted into me that there
is no divulsion of it. Now when a Vice has got any of these relations to me,
rather than use a violence upon my self, I must find out some salve now to
quiet Conscience, and yet keep the Vice. And truly if it be but one thing that
a man transgresses in, he is apt to be gentle to himself, and finds plump
grounds to be so. The best man has his fault, and this is his, only in this
the Good Lord pardon him; in other things he will be strict, but this is his
particular infirmity, to which his very making did dispose him, having been
poisoned by its Principles without his fault or conspiration.

It Is true, indeed, men have some one or other sinful inclination, which is a
weight and violence upon them, and which they did derive from Adam, whose sin
like an infection taken in by diverse men, breaks out in several Diseases,
according to variety of Constitutions: But truly Adam gave them no ill Customs,
and they have no Original habits, themselves did educate their inclinations
into Vices: and for those inclinations that are derived into them, the water of
their Baptism was therefore poured upon them to cool those inbred heats, and
quench those flashings out of Nature, wash away those foul innate tendencies in
that Laver of Regeneration; which therefore they who spare and are tender to,
because they are original and natural, they spare them for that very reason,
for which they there engaged to ruin them, and do renounce their Baptism, as to
the aims and uses of it. There thou did list thy self a Soldier to fight
against the Devil, World, and Flesh; now whichsoere of these gets most into
thee, will thou think fit to spare thy Enemy, because he is thy bosom one? the
Risque is greatest when the Foe is Rebel and Traitor too, is got in thy own
Quarters, shuffled with thy own Forces, entered thy Holds and thy Defenses, and
mixes in thy Counsels, does counterfeit thy Guard, so that thou but command'st,
and leadst on thy own ruin. Sure here is need of strictest care to rid thy self
of so much treacherous danger; so far is it from a defense to say, this is the
single force and bent of Nature in me, that if I no not therefore most resist
it, I am perjuriously confederate with my Destruction; and howsoever pure I
keep my self from other Vices, I am not clean. David will tell me when I am,
Psalm xviii. 23. I was incorrupt before him, and eschewed my own wickedness.
God has not given us Authority to pick and choose our duties; observe him
where we like, and leave the rest; and when in the severe contritions of
Repentance we come to judge our Lives, we have no leave to spare a Vice because
custom has made it our Companion and Intimate, or it is as near to us as the
close inclinations of our hearts. He that does so, although he live a careful
life in other things, yet all his Innocence is only this, he has a mind to but
one sin; and those he does not care for he forbears, but that which pleases
him, that he commits. And sure God is beholden to him that there is but one way
of provoking which does take him, and therefore must allow him what he has an
inclination to, and pardon him because he does abstain from those he does not
like. James ii. 10.
I shall now only add that in this case St James's Aphorism holds, that
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point only, he is
guilty of all; he that allows himself to break one Precept, does keep none, but
shall be reckoned guilty of those things which he does not commit. For
whosoever keeps the whole Law, and yet thus offends in one point, is guilty
of all.

And then I need not prove such have no Title to the goodness of the Text, but
may conclude, if God be good to Israel, it is to such as are of a Clean Heart;
And so I fall upon the subject, Heart.

And here I must first caution not to think the Heart is set as if it were the
entire and only Principle by which a judgment might be past upon our doings; as
if our Actions so wholly derived denomination from it, that they were pure
which came from a clean upright heart; In opposition to which, I shall not
doubt to put, That the external actions may have guilts peculiar to themselves,
such as are truly their own, not shed into them by an evil mind; and a man may
be wicked in the uprightness of his heart, when he does not intend any such
thing, but rather the clean contrary. Our Savior tells his Apostles, The time
will come that whosoever kills you will think he does God service, John xvi.
2. (...), that he does offer an Oblation or Worship, shall think his Murder
Sacrifice; that that would propitiate for other faults; his Crime should seem
Religion and atonement to him. (We have seen guilts put on such colors too:)
and yet by these same actions which their hearts pursued with Holy aims, out of
a Zeal to God, as S. Paul says, Romans x. 2. they sacrificed themselves and their
Nation to Gods Vengeance. Once more St. Paul does find reason to call himself
the chief of Sinners, 1 Timothy i. 15. for the commissions of that time of which
he says that he served God with a pure Conscience, ver. 3. did what he was
persuaded in his heart he ought to do, pursued sincere intentions; and after
says, he had lived in all good conscience before God until that day, Acts
xxiii. 1. So that here was enough of the clean heart, a good and a pure
conscience, and could his fiery persecutions by virtue of that flame within be
Christened Holy Zeal? Could his Pure Conscience make his Bloody hands undefiled?
Oh no! 'twas blasphemy, and persecution, and injury, for all 'twas Conscience;
for all his heart was clean from such intentions: I was before a Blasphemer,
and a Persecuter, and Injurious, ver. 13. We may not think to shroud foul
actions under handsome Meanings and an Innocent Mind; a Conscientious man may
yet be chief of Sinners; St. Paul was so, he says, and a clean Heart will not
suffice alone. Therefore Heart is put here accumulatively, as that whose
cleanness must be added to the purity of Conversation to complete it; and it
implies what elsewhere he does set down more expressly Clean Hands, Psalm xxiv.
4.
and a Pure Heart, all which a clean Heart may be set to signify, because
under Gods Holy Spirit it is the principal and only safe agent in the effecting
of the rest, as that which only can make the other real, valuable, and lasting.

When a Disease has once insinuated it self into the Vitals, spread through
the Marrow, and seized the garrisons of Life, the Souls strong holds, and after
fallies out into the outer parts in little pustles and unhandsome Ulcers; they
who make application only to those outward Ulcers, may perchance smooth and
cure the skin, make the unhandsomness remove and shift its seat, but all that
while the man decays, the Forts of Life are undermined and sink, the vitals
putrefie, and the whole Skin becomes but the fair Monument of its own rotten
Inwards: Just so we have a (...) an inward deep infusion, bed or seedplot of
malignity, which sometimes shows it self in outward gross commissions; but if
we only use the Lance or corrosive to these, we may perchance make a man shift
a sin (thus it is possible that the profane may alter into Factious, or
contrary, the profuse Proud man turn Covetous) but till the ground of these be
purged away the man's not cured, but only the Disease is changed, and he is as
unsound as ever. Gods severe Judgments that did lie so long so close upon us,
like strong repercussives, may have stricken back the breakings out of former
sins or inclinations: But then no care being taken of the Heart, the first heat
sent them out again, and Mercy made a restoration of Vices too. But if the
Heart once entertain a real and sincere sense of Religion, if it consent to
thorough resolutions of Piety, as far as the man discerns, so far the Cure is
perfected, and such are fitted for Gods goodness; for truly God is good to
Israel, even to those that are of such a clean Heart; And so I fall upon them
both together, first in the former sense proposed.

That Clean heart signifies sincere true-hearted men, I have not only the
assurance of Translations, and among them the Syriack, but the Text it self
does evince it, because such only are indeed of Israel; for so our Savior
says, Behold an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile, John i. 47. One like the
Father of them (...). Genesis xxv. 27* a man unfeigned, that did seem nothing he
was not, all Heart. And such each Israelite, each man that does expect an
interest in that goodness which the Lord has for Israel, must be, sincere and
without guile.

1. In his Conversation with Men:

I am not here to say, Sincerity is much, most generous, when it looks like a
disingenuous fear to be afraid of my own mind, when my Heart dares not look
into my Face, or speak in my Tongue, but must lurk under a disguise of words,
or countenance, that are assumed and not its own. Nor is it Secondly, my
business to say it is the greatest prudence, or as we call it Policy, and that
not only because it has most reason to attend and to expect Gods Blessing,
which other false acts cannot; but because though bold open Truth breeds Anger
frequently, yet insincerity breeds hatred and contempt; there being no so
ignominious thing as Reputation of Falsness, which yet is unavoidable, for
events must discover insincerity, and then how piteous a thing he is when he
must turn and wind still in more Mazes, till he be quite lost in his own
shifts, and having no clue for his own Labyrinths, betrays himself more by his
not knowing where he is; and men must needs be much more angry at pretenses
when they find them, than they were at unpleasing truth at first; when they
discern their wants and expectations too deceived, themselves refused and
mocked, find nothing but a Vizard for a Friend: nay, find an Enemy indeed, for
so is the Dissembler to mankind. Great Casuists do tell us, that the moral
Obligations to speak truth depend upon a right that each man has who is a
member of humane society; Man being a sociable Creature merely by virtue of his
Speech: But speech could not contribute to cement Society, if there were not an
obligation to speak truth; hence they conclude, that Children, Fools, and
Madmen who are not truly members of Humane society, and also open Enemies, with
whom we are in a state of War, and have broke that society as to all things but
Laws and Articles of War; all these and these alone we may deceive, and then
surely the false insincere man either esteems all others Fools and Madmen, or
holds himself in a state of War with all Mankind, out of all Laws and
Obligations of Humane society, and is an Enemy to the World; a Creature by
himself, but that there are so many of them. But to pass by such Arguments,
Gods Precepts of not lying to one another, Col. iii. 9.
oblige us and all those that require faithfulness and his Command that Love
should be without Dissimulation; Romans xii. 9.
that while we speak gently, we should not be hard-hearted, give melting
language soft as the airs of Flattery, but yet have crusted inwards, that
cannot yearn nor stretch into compassion, Jacobs voice but Esau's rough red
hands; Besides Gods reasons do enforce this, Ephesians. iv. 25.
Putting away lying, speak every one truth to his Neighbor, for we are members
one of another: So that Dissimulation is as great a Treachery as for the Eyes to
seek Traps to ensnare the Feet, the Hands to sauce stones for a Meal, which may
perchance delight the Palate with a transient gust of that they are condited
with, but cannot be digested into Nourishment. Go prepare for your hungry
stomachs only festival Smells, which may encourage fainting Appetite, but do
but mock its emptiness; go warm a cold part with a painted light, cover a naked
member with a shadow; when your own parts would take it well from one another
to be thus insincerely dealt with, then, not till then, will it be tolerable to
Dissemble. For we are members one of another; all fellow members of Christ's
Body the Church; this Israel to which the Text says God is truly good, not in
presence or color only, he has not the hypocrisies of kindness. Now such a
true good God he will not be to them who are but counterfeit and mock-parts of
his Israel, for what is there in such a man that he can be good to? To the good
kind well-spoken part? Alas, that is but shape and varnish, it is not the man
that speaks, it is all a motion and artifice, he puts it on, and then it
vanishes and dies, is not a subject for Gods kindness; or to the heart, but
that is hard, and is not qualified for his Goodness, our true good God being
only such to those that are of a clean, true, and sincere heart toward their
brethren.

2. And much more, Secondly, is he such only to them that are sincere in their
Religion to him. Christ has nothing but woes for Hypocrites; the 23d Chap. of
S. Matthew. is made up of them; when he would word Gods Vengeance to Sinners, he
says, he shall give them their portion with Hypocrites and Unbelievers. Mat.
xxiv. 51.
Things strangely coupled sure, that they whose Life does seem all Faith, Luke
xii. 46.
all Godliness, should be only fit Company in Tophet for the Unbelievers,
ranked and condemned with them; that all their strong belief cannot remove them
from an Infidel; Sure they are far enough from the goodness of the Lord, when
the portion of Hypocrites is Rhetoric of Hell, is its Torments expressed with
Art.

They whose heart is not clean to God in their Pieties, but let their
strictnesses take in some temporal aim besides, as Reputation with their Party,
or getting Praise, or Wealth; they serve Mammon or Fame with Gods Religion, and
make the very Worship of the Lord be the Idolatry of Covetousness or of Honor.
If Jehu in his Executions on Ahab and his Family intend the cutting off the
Regal Line as well as Baals worship, and with their Blood to purple his own
Royalty, though God did bid him shed that blood, yet does it stain his Soul
with crimson guilt; and God will punish him for his Obedience, I will visit the
blood of Jezreel upon the House of Jehu, Hos. i. 4. But he that lets a vicious
aim mix with his Virtue, and does good to an ill end, addresses Gods Religion
to the Devil, and makes Christ minister to Belial; he does sin multipliedly,
both in his vicious intention, and in debauching Virtue to serve Vice, and he
might much more innocently not have been Pious. Neither is that Virtue or Heart
sincere whose intentions are not purely and merely virtuous, but intend to
compass some Religious end by means that are not lawful; For such intentions
are not clean but mixed with Vice; and it is sure I cannot please God with such
kind of holy meanings. 1 Samuel xv. 9. 21, 23.
If Saul will sacrifice with the Sheep and Oxen he was bid to destroy, his very
worship loses him the Throne of Israel: Nor an I serve God with such Pieties.
God never does require an action which he sees I cannot compass without sin,
for he requires no man to sin, for that were to command me to break his
Commands, and I were bound to disobey him in obedience to him, Job xiii. 7.
Shall I speak wickedly for God, says Job? and then shall I do so? Such
Religious intentions, the justice of those ends, will never qualify me for
Gods goodness, when it but makes Damnation just to me, for so S. Paul affirms,
Romans iii. 5, 6, 7, 8. In fine, if there be any wickedness in the heart, it
gives so foul a tincture to whatever pious actions we perform, that they become
sin to us. It Is true, Psalm Cxli. 2.
Prayer is as the Incense, David says, and the lifting up of our hands is like
the Evening Sacrifice; but if the heart of him that Prays have any heats of
Malice in it, truly that man does light his Incense with strange fire, James
iii. 6.
kindles his sacrifice with the flames of Hell, for so S. James does call those
heats. He that gives God any of his performances, and has a naughty Heart,
like Nadab and Abihu, he presents his Offering in an unhallowed Censer, and all
his holy worship will get nothing else from Heaven for him but a consuming fire
as theirs did. He that will offer any thing to God, must take a care it be not
tainted with such mixtures, which spoil all the Religion, making it not
sincere, and also spoil the Heart by making it not clean, and undefiled. The
last remaining sense,

A Clean and undefiled Heart.

Of those things which our Savior says defile the man, some are merely sins of
the Heart, such as may be consummated within the Soul; and for the perpetration
of which a spirit is sufficient to it self; such are Pride, especially
spiritual pride, the sin of those that think none holy as themselves, and cast
the black doom of Reprobation upon all that do not comply with their Opinions
and interests: such also are uncontentedness with our estates, inward repinings
at the dispositions of Providence concerning us, black malice, bitter envyings.
Now in these as the mind does need no outward members to consummate them,
requires no accessory Organs to work them out; so neither does it require any
outward accessory guilt to make them liable to condemnation: we know 'twas one
sin of the spirit only that made Angels Devils. If a foul body be abominable
to the Lord, shall a foul spirit be less odious? he that defiles his Soul
offends God in a much nearer concern of his, because that speaks nearer
relation to him than the Body: this was only his workmanship, made out of
Earth, the Spirit was created out of himself; a foul body is but filthy Clay,
but he that does pollute his Soul does putresie the Breath of God, and stains a
beam of the Divinity.

The other sort of things that are said to come from the Heart, and to Defile,
are those which S. Paul calls works of the Flesh, such as if they be committed
must be committed outwardly, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, Revenge, Wrath
and Contentions, Seditions, Factions, Schisms, all Uncleannesses, etc. In these
indeed the Heart can be but partial Actor, the utmost it can do, is to desire
and to intend them, and to contrive and manage the designs of compassing them;
which yet Providence or the Innocence of others may put out of the reach of
man's power, or his own temporal fears may make him not dare to set upon them,
though he do cherish the desires. Now if they be obstructed from committing,
most men use to conclude gently of their guilts while they do keep within the
Heart; the Execution of them is the only thing that does look mortal; and till
the sin be perfected there is no death in it. And truly I confess that, as it
happens many times, on a sudden surprise of soul, when a bright gilded
temptation strikes the heart, and dazles the mind, we see that the Will rushes
on it instantly, consents and wishes heartily; yet within a while the Spirit
does recover out of the surprise, puts by the thrusts of fancy, and the stabs
of the temptation, and that Will languishes and dies like a velleity, as if it
had been nothing but a woulding; and now the man would not by any means consent
to the commission: In this case though there be a guilt to be repented of, and
cleansed with many tears, yet this is Innocence in the comparison; but if the
Will purpose, contrive, and do its utmost, it is the same to the man as if he
had committed. 'Twere easy to demonstrate this, that whatsoever evil thing a
man intends and does fixedly resolve, he is guilty of, though he do nothing, or
though the thing he chance to do be never so much lawful. Those sayings of St.
Paul, I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is no meat unclean
of it self, but to him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean,
Romans xiv. 14. and he that doubts is damned if he eat, ver. 23. These could
have no truth in them, unless the heart by choosing and pursuing to the utmost
any thing that it does judge unlawful, incurred the guilt of that unlawfulness,
even to Damnation; and all that merely by it self without the Action, which in
that case had nothing sinful in it. A weight that is upheld by a man's hand, and
otherwise would rush down to the earth, does surely gravitate as much, it is as
heavy though it do not fall quite down, as if it did, and, were it let alone,
it would: A settled tendency, a resolved inclination to sin, that presses with
its utmost agitation is that weight, which though it may perchance be stopped in
its career, yet it tends to the Abyss, its center, and will not rest but in
that Pit that has nor rest nor bottom; the Heart in this case is as liable as
it can be, because here it has done its worst, and such a Will shall be
imputed to its self.

And now I need not tell those who are still designing sin, or mischief in the
heart, although it never dares come out of those recesses, how far they are
removed from the goodness of God to Israel. Tertull. de Anima. cap. 58.
A Father finds a way to prove such souls have larger doses of Gods Vengeance,
who when he had asserted that the soul does not die with the body, and then was
asked what it did in that long interval, for sure it is not reasonable that it
should be affected with any anticipations of the future Judgment, because the
business of the day of Judgment should be reserved to its own day, without all
prelibation of the sentence; and the restitution of the Flesh is to be waited
for, that so both soul and body may go hand in hand in their Recompenses as
they did in their demerits, joint Partners in the Wages as they were in the
Works: To this he answers; The Soul does not divide all its operations with the
Body, some things it acts alone, and if there were no other cause it were most
just the Soul should there receive without the Body the dues of that which here
it did commit without the Body: That Is for the former sort of sins, those
merely of the Heart: And for the latter sort, the Soul is first engaged in the
commission, that does conceive the sin, lays the design of compassing, and does
contrive and carry on the machination; and then why should not that be first in
Punishment, which is the first in the Offense?

Go now and reckon that thy outward gross Transgressions are the only dangerous
and guilty ones and slight thy sins of Heart; but know that while thy flesh is
sleeping in the quiet Grave at rest and ease, thy Spirit then is in Torments sor
thy Fleshes sins, and feels a far severer Worm than that which gnaws thy Body:
Poor Soul! Eternity of Hell from Resurrection to For-ever, is not enough to
punish it, all that while it must suffer with the Body, but it must have an age
of Vengeance besides particularly for it self, to plague it for those things it
could not execute, and punish it for what it did not really enjoy; only because
it did allow it self to desire and contrive them; and it must be tormented for
those unsatisfied desires: And though indeed desires where they are violent, if
they be not allayed by satisfaction, are but so much agony, yet do they merit
and pull on them more; these Torments shall be plagued, and the soul suffer for
its very passion, even from Death to the last Judgment; and it is but just that
being it usurped upon the pleasures and the sins of Flesh, it should also seize
on and take possession of the Vengeance appointed for those sins, it should
invade and should usurp their condemnation.

But why do I stand pressing aggravations against uncleanness of Heart in an
Age, when God knows Vice has not so much modesty or fear to keep within those
close and dark restraints? Instead of that same Cleanness which the Text
requires, we may find Purity indeed of several sorts, but it is either pure
Fraud, or pure Impiety; the one of these does make a strange expression very
proper, pure Corruption, for so it is, sincere and without mixture, nothing but
it self, no spots of Clean to chequer it, but all stain: The other is pure
white indeed, but it is that of whited Sepulcres; a Life as clean as Light, a
bright pure Conversation, but it shines with that light only which Satan does
put on when he transforms himself into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. xi. 14.
and it is but a glory about a fiend. But yet this shines however, whereas
others do stand Candidates of Vice, and would be glorious in wickedness; and
that is such a splendour as if Satan should dress himself with the shine of his
own flaming Brimstone, and make himself a glory with the streamings of his Lake
of Fire. And yet thus is the World, we do not only see men serve some one
peculiar vicious inclination, and cherish their own wickedness, but they make
every Vice their own, as if the Root of bitterness branched out in each sort of
Impiety in them, such fertile soyls of sin they are, here insincerity were to
be wished; and where there is not cleanness that there were a Mask, that there
were the Religion of Hypocrisy. We may remember God was good to Israel of old
by Obligation and performance; the one as great as he could enter, the other
great to Miracle and astonishment; when after seventy years Captivity and
Desolation, he did rebuild a Temple where there was no Monument of its Ruins,
and raised a Nation and Government of which there was no Relics. And yet at
last when the Religion of some turned into Faction, of others into
Profaneness; when the strictest Sect of them, the Pharisees, became most holy
outwardly, to have the better means (...), to mischief those that were not of
their Party, Jos. Antiq. l. 13. c. 23. edit. Basil. 1544.
and got a great opinion of Sanctity, (...), so as to be believed in whatsoever
they did speak against the King or chief Priests; and that so far as to be able
openly to practice against both, and raise Commotions. They are Josephus's
words of them; and when another Sect, (...)
the Zelots, the most pernicious of all, says Bertram, did commit Murders,
Sacriledg, Prophanations, and all kind of Villainies, Jos. Antiq. l. 17. c. 3.
(...), with good Intentions, says the same Josephus; (...). l. 4. c. 12.
and when those who did not separate into Sects, but were the Church of Israel,
became lukewarm, supine, and negligent in their Profession, yea, and licentious
and Profane, fit only to be joined with Publicans, in Christ's expressions;
when sin grew generally Impudent; when they did live as if they would be
Scandalous as well as vicious, as if they loved the guilt as much as the
delights of sin, and cared not to be wicked to themselves, but must debauch, as
if they did enjoy the ruin of other persons, sinning just as the Devil does,
who does not taste the sin, but feasts upon the Sinners Condemnation: Then did
God execute a Vengeance whose prediction was fit to be mistaken for that of the
Day of Judgment, and whose event almost fulfilled the terrors of that day.

I need not draw resemblances, show how Gods goodness to our Israel does equal
that to them; applying to our selves their Raptures; how when the Lord turned
the Captivity of our Sion, Psalm. Cxxvi. 1.
we also were like them that dream, surprised with Mercy. Indeed as in a Dream;
Ideas are not always well connected, there is no chain or thread of fancies, and
the thoughts are not joynted regular and even; but there are breaches and
disorder in them still, the Images of sleep being like Nebuchadnezzar's, made
of such things as do not well unite. So there is something I confess, like this
in our condition, for with our gold and silver, our precious things that are
restored, there is Iron and Clay, not only meaner mixtures, but such things as
will not close, or be soder'd, but do incline to part asunder, and would
moulder and tend toward dissolution; and just as in a Dream, the composure of
things is no so undisturbed, but that there is some confusedness; neither our
affections nor practices do perfectly cement; but yet I hope it is no dream of
mercy, it is not a Phantasm or an Apparition of Gods kindness, but the Lord will
be truly good to us.

Yet if we do proceed as Israel, and equal it in provocations: --

But I will make no parallels, public clamors do that too loud; these do
display the factions of iniquity among us, and muster up the several parties of
our Vices too; and each man is as perfect in the guilts of all sides that he is
not of, as if their memories were the books that shall be opened at the Day of
Judgment; some men can point you out our Pharisees and Zelots; others can show
you our profane licentious Professors, Lay and Clergy both; and indeed we need
not go far to seek any or all of these; nor do we want our Sadduces. Now if all
this be true, then as those were the signs of the Son of Man's coming to them
in Judgment, so we may fear they are his Harbingers to us. If they be, I am
sure the only way to make his coming good to us, is to prepare for it by
cleansing from all filthiness and insincerity; then though he come clothed with
a Glory of flaming Vengeance, yet will those streams of Fire find nothing to
consume or wash away in us; but through that flame the pure in heart shall see
God, so as that that sight shall be the Beatifick Vision: Yea, they shall see
the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living, they shall see Jerusalem in
prosperity all their life long, and Peace here upon Israel, and in his light
hereafter in the Jerusalem that is above, To the state of which glorious Light
He bring us all, who is the brightness of his Fathers Glory: To whom be Glory,
and dominion for ever and ever.

Amen.
The Third SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. Second Wednesday in Lent.
LEVIT. XVI. 31. Ye shall Afflict your Souls by a Statute for ever.
THE words are one Single Precept concerning one part of the Celebration of a
Day: I shall not take the Precept asunder into parts, for it has none; but
shall frame my Discourse to answer three Enquiries that naturally offer
themselves to be considered from these words: And they are,

1. What the Importance of the thing commanded is? What is required in this
Injunction, Ye shall afflict your Souls?

2. What Usefulness and Efficacy this Duty had upon that time in which it was
prescribed? what the Afflicting of the Soul contributed to the work of that
Day? that it should be made so indispensable an ingredient of its performances,
tied to it by a Statute for ever?

3. Whether that for ever do reach us? which is the Application, and brings all
home to us.

First, What the Import of the thing commanded, the Afflicting of the Soul is?

The Arab. and Targum of Jerusalem Translate it Fasting; Maimonid.
yea, and a Learned Rabbine says, that wheresoever these two words are put
together, that is meant. And indeed they are often joined in Scripture to
express it, Psalm XXXV. 13. I afflicted my Soul with Fasting. And the Prophet
Isaiah speaking of this Day in my Text, says, Is it such a Fast that I have
chosen? a day for a man to afflict his Soul? Isa. lviii. 5. Somewhat a strange
expression it is; for Fasting does afflict the Body properly, and yet we find
the like too in the other Extreme: We read of pampering the Soul, Psalm
lxxviii. 18. They required (...) meat for their Souls; not to supply the Hunger
of their Body, that they had before; but to indulge the Lusts of their mind;
they did not want for food, but variety; Festival diet, and a Table furnished
they would have; and this luxuriancy and wantonness of Meat the Scripture calls
meat for the Soul: Such as God says in other places the Soul lusts after.
Indeed forced meats, and things that please merely by being rare and dear, or
by being extravagant, these do not feed the Appetite but Opinion, and the Mind;
it is the Soul that only hungers after these: Thus when I look after Wine in
the glass, and make my Eye a Critique of its accidents, and by the mode and
fashion of it teach it to please or displease my judgment, I do not thirst
after the cool moisture of it, but the sparkling flame, and do not drink the
Wine, but the flavor and color, and this is all but Notion. Now certainly
these are not proper objects for our Appetites, meat for the Body, says the
Scripture, and it is the Stomach and not the Imagination that is hungry; nor is
it Fancy or the Soul that thirsts, but it is the Palate, so that these are
unnatural and monstrous satisfactions.

And yet to bring men's selves to this, is one of the great masteries of Wit and
Art, to force themselves to find a relish in these things, and then contrive
them, is a piece of Skill which the advantages of parts and fortune are
desirable mostly, as they are useful to: And a well studied Epicure, one
expert in the mysteries of Eating, is a singularly qualified and most grateful
Person.

It were in vain to ask what else such men can be good for? that being their
Profession, they are out at most other things: Indeed the Soul that dwells in
Dishes, and is stewed in its own Luxuries, grows loose and does dissolve, its
sinews melt, all its firmness of mind forsakes it, the man is strong for
nothing but for Lusts, his faculties are choked and stifled, they stagnate and
are mir'd within him, and there corrupt and putrefie. And then what Cranes will
force out thence, and wind up such a Soul into the practices and expectations
of Piety? will make it mind and entertain the hopes and Duties of Religion?
what macerations, what Chemistry will defecate a Spirit so incarnated, and
rectify it into such a fineness as befits that state where all their
blessedness have no sensual relish, but are sublimed into Divine and purely
Spiritual.

Lord God! that thou should shed a rational Angelick Soul into us, a thing
next to the Being of thy Self, to animate only the Organs of Intemperance, and
Gluttony, and their appendant lusts! Only inspire us how to be but more
sagacious, indeed but more luxurious Brutes, when thou have set us here to
train and discipline our selves for a condition of such glorious Joys as are
fit to entertain Souls of Reason with, and to make them blessed; which to enter
upon, our Bodies must drop from us, our Souls must be clarified from Flesh, and
Flesh it self refined into Spirit; that we should make our selves Antipodes to
this, walk contrary to all, and so debase our spirits as that they are
qualified for no other satisfaction, but those of dull sense and carnality.

Adam fell his great Fall by Eating, but ever since men fall further by riotous
intemperate Eating. He fell from Paradise, and they from Reason; the Man sinks
into Beast, and the Soul falls into very Flesh, and has no other faculties or
appetites but fleshly ones.

Such people of all others are not to be raised up by Religion; their fullness
gives no place to that, but does exclude it. God did complain of this of old,
Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15. Jesurun waxed fat and kicked: that we may see they want to
brutish quality, who do allow themselves the appetite of Brutes; they that
pamper themselves like to fed Horses, will also neigh like them and kick even
him that fed them; thou art waxen fat, thou art covered with fatness; then he
forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. When
they came once where they did suck honey cut of the Rock, Deuteronomy. xxxil. 13.
and Oil out of the flinty Rock, they could not mind the Rock of their
Salvation.

Indeed this sensuality as it consumes Estates, eats Time, and all the
faculties of the Mind, so it devours all Religion too, it has not only a
particular opposition to some one duty as the other Vices have, but by a direct
influence it destroys the whole foundation of Virtue and obedience to God; I
mean subordination of the lower appetite to Reason and Religion, which it
renverses quite, and breeds an universal cachexy of the Soul as well as Body.

For ever since Adam did eat of the forbidden Fruit, the carnal mind we know is
neither subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, as S. Paul says, Rom
viii. 7. because Gods Commands are restraints upon those things which Flesh
desires eagerly. Now therefore while that Mind is unsubdued, it must needs lust
against the Spirit for those things that are forbidden, nor endure to be
limited; which he that feeds it, is so far from working toward, that he does
give it still more provocation and more power, and makes the Flesh more
absolute; for it is clear that Plenty does increase all its desires and their
unruliness; it ministers both vigor to it by which it is enabled to fulfill its
lusts, and it ministers aptness and incitation also, both by custom of
satisfaction, and by adding heat which makes it more prone to rebel, and more
impossible to be kept under. The progress of this is apparent in the Scripture,
Exodus xxxii, 6. The People sat down to Eat and Drink and rose up to Play:
Tertul.
Lusum non denotasset nisi impudicum; he means, to play the wantons. But Jeremy
is plainer, Chap. v. 7, 8. How shall I pardon thee for this? thy Children have
forsaken me, when I had fed them to the full, they then committed Adultery, and
assembled themselves by troops in Harlots houses: Nor stays it there, but does
increase as well as feed to an Excess; we may discern that by the Wisemans
Prayer, xxiii. Ecclesiast. 6. O Lord, Father and God of my Life, Let not the
greediness of the Belly, not the lust of the Flesh, take hold of me, and give
not over me thy Servant to an impudent mind, Gyant-like he had called it in the
Verse before; and sure the Wiseman in the Proverbs apprehended it as such, and
dreaded it accordingly; as if Bellies full gorged were those Mountainr which
the Giants cast up to storm Heaven on: He looked upon this Vice as that which
would bid defiance to God, and out him, and therefore thinks it necessary to
beseech the Lord not to afford him so much as would furnish Plenty, Prove. xxx.
8. Give me not Riches, feed me with food convenient for me; (...) with an
Allowance, with no more than is sufficient for me, lest I be full and deny
thee, and say who is the Lord. It seems such persons know no other God besides
their Belly; nor is it any wonder if a Soul made Flesh cannot well apprehend a
Deity that is a Spirit, or believe it, but thinks all Notions of such beings to
be contradiction, when once by the suffusions of Carnality all the impressions
of a Spirit are wrought out of it self: And truly this is the most natural and
certain way to become Atheists.

Whether this time that has been almost always set aside for strict
Severities, and to work out Repentance (and if it be not so intended now, I
know not what pretense did call us hither) (for though there be some relaxation
of the severer Diet of this time, sure there is no indulgence of that Penitence
which the strictness of this time designed) and let some men talk what they
please of the Intention of their Statutes, yet these Assemblies certainly were
not intended for the increase of Cattle, and advance of Fishing; these were for
higher aims of Piety: Now whether we employ if so much toward this as to
afflict our Souls, i. e. our appetites, and to revenge our superfluities upon
our selves, and to teach our desires to be denied: Or whether we do teach the
Diet of this season to be but a variety of Luxury, and if the Law did not
command it, and so make it Pressure by giving it the inconvenience and the
uneasiness of being duty and obedience; our selves could make it be one of the
changes of our Vice, only another course, a diverse service of the same Riot,
and so defeat the Law by our obedience to it: Or whether we do break the Law
outright, and to our superfluities add disobedience to Authority, whether we do
the one or other is not for me to say. But if the Nation and we our selves have
any sins to be repented of, and we design this season for that use (as sure
some season must be so employed, and why not this as well, rather indeed than
any other;) if we be not of those that would be glad to see all thrown again
into Confusion; glad to see a return of the same Vengeance, as indeed a return
of the same sins, and the abuse of Mercies seem to call for it, while men do
live as if they thought God had wrought all these Miracles merely to give them
opportunity to serve their Vices or their other ends, to put them in a way to
get Places, Estates, and Dignities; and by uncharitable gains, hard-hearted
griping, yea by false unworthy treacherous Arts, to heap up Wealth, to raise
their Families, or feed their Lusts: These, these cry out to God to renew his
Commission to the Sword, to pass through all the Land again, and embowel it
self in Church and State; these call for it as loud as the hatangueing Prayers
of Seditious Men; and the Lord knows there are too many hands that would
unsheath it, if God do not interpose to hinder, and well we have deserved he
should. But if we would endeavor to engage him by Repentance, that will
require the Afflicting of the Soul by some severities. Do not mistake your
selves; Repentance, as it cannot be wrought out amidst our courses, that were
contradiction to return, and yet go on; so also it will not be wrought out
amidst the Comforts as we call the jollities, of life.

Tertullian is very pleasant with those who did dislike that in their
Penitencies, they were by the Church prescribed to put off Mirth and put on
Sackcloth, and take Ashes for Bread; Come, says he, reach that Bodkin there to
braid my Hair, and help me now to practice all those Arts that are in Mode to
attire it; give me the washes of that Glass, the blushes of that Paper, the
foyles which that Box has to beautify and dress my Cheeks; come and set out
and dress my Table too, let me have Fowl with costly forced and not a natural
Fat; or let me have cramb'd Fish, and cram my Dishes also; get me cheerful Wine
too: and if any one ask why I do thus indulge my self? Why I will tell him, I
have sinned against my God, and am in danger of Perdition, and therefore I am in
great trouble; I macerate (do you not see the signs of it?) and excruciate my
self, I take these fearful careful ways that I may reconcile God to me whom I
have offended.

Alas, to humble ones self thus in fullness, and to afflict the Soul in cheerful
plenties, is such a thing as none but he that sinks under the surfeit of those
Plenties understands. I Am sure the Lord, when he required his People to repent,
required them then to discipline, and use severities upon themselves; they were
to fast or dye: God took the execution, for whatsoever Soul it be that shall
not be Afflicted that same day shall be cut off from among his People, Levit.
xxiii. 29. Even cut off by God himself.

And I do verily persuade my self, that one great cause, why men that have
sometimes thought to reform their lives, and do resolve against their Courses,
yet repent of their Repentance, their resolutions untwist, and become frail as
threads of Cobweb, the first assault of a temptation does break through them,
is, they do not use mortifications, to work their aversations high and strong
against their sins, and fix their resolutions. The universal sense of the whole
Primitive Church gives me confidence in this persuasion, who for that very
reason in their penitential Excommunications did inflict such severities, as
it is almost incredible that Christians would submit to; yet they begged to be
censured into; and those had S. Paul for their precedent. But now Repentance
are but dislikes, little short unkindnesses at our sins, and wouldings to do
better: On some moving occasion, if Gods Hand or his Spirit lash, it may be
Tears will gush out of the Wound, and we in angry sadness do intent against our
Vices; but when that fit is over, and the Flesh by indulgences prepared to make
or answer a temptation, we fall again, and then it may be shake the head and
curse the sin; but yet again commit it, if the invitation be fair: And then are
very sorry, account our selves unhappy, who lie under such a violent infirmity,
but act it still. Now if we consider how it comes to pass that we go round like
men enchanted, in a Circle of Repenting and of Sinning, we shall find it is for
want of Discipline upon our selves; for had we strove to make our humiliations
more low and full of pungent sorrow, the Soul would start and fly at the first
glance of that which cost it so much anguish; but who would fear to act that
sin which puts him to so little trouble to repent of? as a sad thought, a sigh,
a wish, and a loose purpose, thin intentions, and that is all.

Do not complain of the Infirmity of the Flesh for this, and say thou would
live Spiritually, but the frailty of thy sensual part betrays thee; its stings
and incitations make thee start from duty, and goad and force thee into actions
which otherwise thou neither should or would commit. It Is thou thy self
that arm'st thy Flesh with all its stings; thou give it strengths, whereby it
does subdue the Spirit; thou waterest thy desires with Wines; thou feedest them
with strong meat and teach them to crave; thou cocker'st them with thy
indulgence, and thou do treat Temptations to sin, do invite wickedness, and
nourish the occasions of Ruin; and then it is no wonder if thy resolutions be
not strong enough, there is no way but by Austerities to mortify all
inclinations that stir against the Spirit, and by denying satisfactions to thy
Appetite, to calm and moderate thy affections to every thing below, and then
Temptations will have neither Aid nor Avenue.

But Secondly, You shall Afflict your Souls, cannot be meant only that ye shall
Afflict your Bodies; the Spirit also must be troubled, and we must rent the
Heart as well as Garments; that is indeed a Sacrifice fit for a Propitiation
day, for it is such a one as God will not despise, Psalm. li. 17. and without
which all others are but vain Oblations.

God may call fasting the Afflicting of the Soul, because it is the most
appropriate and natural means to work it; but when he calls it so he does
intend it should produce it. Austerities are humilificandi hominis disciplina,
as Tertul. says, Humiliation Discipline; but yet they have not always that
effect. The Pharisee that fasted twice a week did not mortify at all, but his
Humiliation made him lofty, his emptiness filled him with wind, and puffed him
up, and the Publican was more justified than he. And late experiences have
taught us, that Fasting does not always humble, when it did gape for
Sovereignty, and did afflict then into Power only, when there attended it a
sacra fames, an hunger after Holy things, and such as all the relicts of old
Sacriledg could not allay, but it devoured Church and State, and yet craved
still: And the throat of these fasting men was an open Sepulcher indeed; open
to bury, and that could no more be satisfied than the Grave.

But it is not only these demure impieties, and those that are devout in
wickedness, and act it in Religion and the Fear of God, I have to speak against:

But in the general, If Fasting do not humble, and those severities that wear
the Flesh break not the heart too and make it contrite, then they are lost upon
us, and do not profit us. All these strictnesses of bodily and outward
exercise, as S. Paul calls it, are acts of discipline prescribed to make the
Sorrows of Repentance more severe and operative, and so to be the Correctives
of the distempers of the Soul, to quell the risings of the Appetite and
Passions, and bring the sensual part of us under obedience to Reason and
Religion; to make all calm and even in us, and put us in the frame of Men and
Christians, of Rational and Pious Creatures. And if they do not work this in
us, if the Soul do not meet in the performances, they are not acceptable in
themselves at all; These are only the mint anise and cummin of our Pieties; and
as Origin says, the condimenta actuum the sauces of Religion, not the main
standing parts of it, which he therefore that offers solitary gives God a
Sacrifice of Sallads, and thinks that will be a Sin-Offering. They do mistake
themselves who cherish any hope from having spent a day, or Lent of abstinence;
if the Excesses of their Vices be not made over, and evacuated by it; if they
continue still full gorged with their iniquity; or who think all is well, they
have atton'd by having bowed down the head like a bulrush; if the Soul were not
also humbled in them; for as S. Paul does say, I may give all my goods to feed
the poor, yet have no Charity, and I may give my body to be burnt, yet in those
Martyr-fires there may be no heats of Love to God, and then all these profit me
nothing, 1 Cor. xiii. 3. So I may chasten my self too, and yet yet receive
correction or be disciplined, and then Gods punishments are still due to me.

That Church indeed which has found out the easy expiation of Indulgences,
that has the Treasure of Christ's merits and all the supererogations of the
Saints at her dispose, and by Commission can issue them at pleasure out, and
apply those merits to men's uses not by Sacraments, but by a Bull or Brief, and
not require Gospel conditions of Faith and Repentance in the Persons that
receive them, but visiting a Church in Rome, ascending the steps in such a
Chapel in the Lateran on such a day, shall give a plenary remission from sin
and punishment; the saying of such a Prayer over daily shall do it for
fourscore thousand years (could they but make a Lease for men to live and sin
out the indulgence too, that would get them good store of Chapmen) that Church
I say, may give encouragement to hope that God may be compounded with at easy
rates; that for a Surfeit I may give a Meal and God will pardon it, and let me
have Wine too into the bargain (for they allow afflicting of our Souls in Wine)
that some weeks change of Diet may go for a change of Life, for indeed these
come up somewhat nearer the just value than some of their Prices. But though
there be all the reason in the World they should let men out of Purgatory on
what condition they please, when themselves only put them in, and make the
breath of a few Pater noster's quite blow out those flames which burn no where
but in their Doctrines: Yet when without any commission from Christ they make
Attrition able to secure men from Hell, and an Indulgence able to release them
out of Purgatory; when they make new conditions of Pardon, that is new Gospel,
new ways of application of Christ's Merits, and though our Savior God when he
found in his heart to dye for us, yet in the Agonies of his Compassion could
not find in his heart to give us easier terms of Life than such as do require
Contrition, Humiliation, and Amendment, which they commute so cheaply with his
Vicar: We justly stand astonished at such usurpation on Christ's Blood and
Merits, that does assign them at these rates.

I make no question but easy expiations get them many Converts. Rome from its
first foundation grew from being an Asylum to the dissolute; but they that go
away upon such hopes, it is to be feared that easiness betrays them into sins
from which those Expiations cannot rescue them, and at once makes them
Proselytes to Rome and Hell. Nor are our trusts much more secure, if we rely
upon our opus operatum, too, our little outward strictnesses, unless the Soul
be engaged, and except there be inward life of Religion, all those will not
avail: If I deny my self my meals, and give my self my sins, that is so far
from expiation that it aggravates: I am an argument against my self that my
crimes are incorrigible, when I will have them though I cut off the Instruments
and foments of them, and though I meddle not with the Temptation, yet I seize
the sin.

What S. Austin does say of Alms, In melius vita mutanda, Aug. Enchir. c. 70.
and per eleemosynas de peccatis praeteritis propitiandus est Deus; non ad hoc
emendus quodammodo ut semper liceat impune peccare. This is applicable to these
performances also, our lives must be Reformed, and so on that Repentance and
these strictnesses God will be reconciled, and our offenses done away; but he
will not be bribed by these to let us alone in them; he is not gratified by
such performances so as to wink at Vices for their sakes, and suffer us in our
Rebellions upon such compositions as these; take a Reward to spare the Guilt:
Nor is he such a soft and easy God as to take them for payment of that
infinite Debt we owe; that which he bought off with the Blood of God shall not
be ours at such unworthy prices. The Prophet Micah seeking for a Present to
appease him with, rejects all the Jewish rites though God prescribed them, as
insufficient; and in them all things of the like external kind. Mic. vi. 6, 7.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and How my self before the most high
God? shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with Calves of a year old?
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand Rivers of
Oil? shall I give my firstborn for my Transgression, the fruit of my body for
the sin of my soul? If I do offer up whole Hecatombs to God, will that atone
for having offered up too plentifully to my Genius? Or if I do remove my Riots
from my Table to the Altar, and change my few extravagant Dishes into whole
Herds of thousand Sacrifices, shall I by doing so remove the guilt too of my
Luxuries? If I give God ten thousand Rivers for my overflowing Cups, will the
Intemperance be washed away in those? Or shall I think to expiate an Adultery
with a Child? and for that momentary and unclean delight give up the lovely and
first issue of my lawful Bed? And who will be content to be his own Priest in
such manner? to pay such Sacrifices for sins? But yet that will not do, as it
cost more to Redeem Souls, which not Rivers of Oil can cleanse, but streams
must flow out of the Heart of Christ to do it; nor the fruit of Man's body make
a satisfaction for, but the eternally begotten Son of the Divinity, and none
but the first born of God alone, for thus expiation of sins was wrought: Even
so to make that expiation mine, besides reliance on it, I must transcribe the
Copy of the Sufferings of that Son, transplant the Garden of Gethsemane into my
breast. If his Soul be sorrowful even unto Death, my Soul must be afflicted
too; Humiliations must prostrate me upon my face to deprecate that Fire and
Brimstone, burning Tempest that is the portion of the Sinners Cup, says David:
O my Father let this Cup pass from me! The lustful Fevers of my blood must
excern themselves in cold sweat of fear and grief, in Agonies of Penitence; and
my excessive draughts not only make me to cry out I thirst, but give me
Vinegar and Gall to drink; sorrow as bitter as my riotous egestions have been;
my Oaths that have struck through the Name of God, must pierce my Soul with
grief as pungent as his Thorns and Nails. In a word, I must so afflict my Soul
as to crucify the body of sin, and nail it to his Cross. And this is that
which in its own proportion was required of the Jews this Day here in the Text,
to the work of which Day how the Afflicting of the Soul in both the given
senses does contribute, was my Second and the next Enquiry.

Secondly, What this Day was the Verse before the Text informs us, it was their
Day of Expiation or Atonement. Now that the Jews esteem Fasting and Humiliation
expiatory Sacrifices, appears from a Form of Prayer which even yet they use on
such a day where he that fasted says, O Lord the Governor of all the World, I
have now finished my Fast before thee, thou know that when we had a Temple
standing, the man that sinned was bound to expiate it by a Sacrifice, the Blood
of which was poured out, and the Altar consumed the Fat to make amends for his
offense; but now by reason of our many wickednesses, we have neither a Temple,
Altar, or Priest to make Atonement for us; I beseech thee therefore O Lord my
God the God of my Fathers, to accept of that little portion of my own Flesh and
Blood which this days Fasting has torn from me, in lieu of a Sin-offering, and
be thou reconciled unto me for thy mercies sake. Thus when he cannot give a
Lamb for his Transgression, he gives some of himself, he offers Hunger for
Shewbread, and Thirst for a Drink Offering, he consecrates a Meal instead of a
Beast, and sheds a sower fasting sigh for Incense; and this he hopes God will
accept as Sacrifice. And truly the Text says no day of Expiation could be kept
without it. Nor does the Scripture want great instances of its effect toward
Atonement of Gods wrath: How when Judgment was given on a Nation or Person, and
Execution going out against them, yet this reversed the Sentence; Ahab is a
great proof of this, 1 King. xxi. 27. And it came to pass when Ahab heard those
words, that he rent his Clothes, and put Sackcloth upon his flesh, and Fasted,
and lay in Sackcloth and went softly: And the word of the Lord came unto Elijah
the Tishbite saying, See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? Because he
humbles himself before me I will not bring the evil in his days. On
Fasting-day secured a Life; the weaknesses it brought upon the body, upheld it
against all Gods threats, Vengeance pronounced and coming out against him falls
to ground if Ahab humble and afflict his Soul. Gods stretched out Arm will not
strike Sackcloth, nor wound through Fasting Garments: One fit of it removes his
Judgments a whole Age; and had it been sincere and persevering, how had it
wiped them out to everlastingness? Tertul. de pudicit. c. 13. and de poenit. c.
10.


Ninive is another instance of the practice and success of this even among the
Heathens. Cyp. Ep. 9. Edit. Priorij. 1666. ep.etiam 26. and. lib. de lapsis.
Aug. enchir. c. 71. Hieron. in Joel. and in ep. ad Eustoch. de ob. Paul.


Nor should it seem to have less Efficacy among Christians: The Primitive
Fathers call these severities Satisfaction for sin, and Compensations, the
Price with which they are bought off, the things that cover them, and blot them
out, and which Propitiate and appease God for them; not in their sense who
force up these Expressions to a strange height of meaning; and yet have quite
beat down the Practice as to the public wholesome use of them out of the
Church. But though these sayings assign not the Power and just Efficacy of that
discipline in it self, Tertul. de Poenit. c. 6. Orig. Hom. 15. in Levit.
Ambros. de Poenit. l. 2. c. 5.
yet they do the acceptance and effect of it by virtue of Christ's Satisfaction:
A Fainting Body cannot bear indeed the weight of our iniquities, nor will
lowest prostrations in the dust bury them in the dust, or Tears alone blot out
our Guilt; but Christ having done that which is effectual to all this, Orig.
Hom. 6. in Exodus
and requiring no more of thee to make that thine (as he does every where most
solemnly avow) but faithful humbling of thy self in an afflictive sorrow for
what is past, Cyp. Ser. de Lapsis. Chrysostom. Hom. 41. ad pop. Antioch.
and so to mortify as to work out Repentance; the doing this is doing what he
does require, and consequently will accept: These satisfy the Command, and
therefore God, though not by a condignity of performance, yet as Conditions
which his Covenant of Grace has set us, which when they are fulfilled then God
is satisfied, thy sins are expiated, and thou art pardoned: And so in this
lower sense these are thy Satisfactions with which God is well pleased.

And thus these self Afflictions of the Sinner supply Gods Indignation and
divert it; They leave no place nor business for it, and by these short
severities upon himself he does make void, he does expunge the Sentence of
eternal Torments, says Tertullian: As thou becomest severe against thy self,
so will the Lord abate of his severities, and he will spare, and he will pity
thee in that he sees thou will not spare thy self. How can he choose but be
appeased toward thee when he shall see thee executing his Sentence even upon
thy own self? and punishing his Enemies although they be thy Members? so that
by this means thou do censure thy self into Gods Absolutions, afflict thy
self into his Pardons, and do condemn thy self into eternal Life.

Our Church says the same thing; That in the Primitive Church there was a Godly
Discipline; that at the beginning of Lent such Persons as were notorious
Sinners, were put to open Penance, and punished in this World, that their
Souls might be saved in the Day of the Lord; and she does wish (if her wishes
be of any force and value when her Orders and Constitutions are not) that
Discipline could be restored. But this I shall not press; if all those whom the
Primitive Church Condemned, or S. Paul sentenced were so used, if every
Schismatic that lies tearing himself and others off from the Lords Body were
rejected, and if the Fornicator that joins himself to his unclean Accomplice
were disjoined from Christ, and not suffered to make his members be the members
of an Harlot; if every scandalous debauching Offender that lies corrupting
Christ's Body, spreading Contagion, thrusting the Gangreen forward, were cut
off, and these and all the rest delivered up to Satan, alas what part would
Christ have left of his own Body? Sed illos defendit numerus junctaeque umbone
phalanges, and that I fear too in more senses than the Poet means. Therefore I
shall not urge the Churches Wish, but only see whether the Statute in the Text
says any thing to this, and whether the for ever do reach us: Which is my Third
and last Enquiry.

Thirdly, Diverse of the Jews Rites are said to be, and be prescribed for ever,
although those very Rites and the whole economy of their Covenant were to be
changed and cease; among other Reasons, as the Fathers say, because they
foresignifie and point at things in the new Covenant, which were to last till
Covenants and Rites shall be no more, and so their meaning and signification
was to be for ever.

Now truly that their Expiation Performances, those which I am upon, did so,
the whole Epistle to the Hebrews is employed to prove; the Margin of your
Bibles in this Chapter so refer you to the places, that I shall not need to
make it out. Christ did fulfill the Temple and the Altar part, yea and the
refuse outcast part of the Atonement satisfied the Religion and the contempt of
that days Offices, He was the whole true Expiation.

Now does this Expiation as theirs did, require afflicting of the Soul in its
attendance, or was that but a Ceremony of their Rite? and though a Jew must
mourn and Fast to see his sin killing a Beast, and when he does behold his
wickedness eating up a Goat for a Sin-offering, he must deny himself his daily
bread, and suffer thirst if his Iniquities drink but the blood of Bullocks; yet
when we behold ours embrew themselves in the Blood of the Son of God, not only
lay hands and Confessions on his Head, but drive Thorns into it, make him cry
out, almost despair and Die; we need not be concerned so much as to do ought of
that either in order to the better Celebration of that Expiation, or on the
very day of it.

Indeed if we consider most men's practices, it would appear most probable that
if we were to expiate our sins as the Jews did by sacrificing of our Flocks not
of our Jesus, those satisfactions would more afflict our Souls, and more
restrain our Vices than that which was made for us by the Death of Christ, and
how can this be rectified, unless by some severities upon our selves, we give
our selves a piercing sense of what our sin deserves, and grateful
apprehensions of what our Surety suffered for us? When in sad private earnest I
have thought fit to Afflict my Soul with some austere mortifications, and when
my fainting Spirits are scarce able to sustain my Body that sinks under the
load of it self, then I may have some tender apprehensions of that weight that
sunk the Son of God, and 'twas my weight that he fell under. But he that cannot
think fit to revenge a year of follies and of Vices with a few weeks severer
life, sure thinks his Savior suffered much in vain; quorsum perditio haec? why
must the Blood of God be paid for sin, when I cannot afford a little
self-denial for it? Why such great Agonies of the Holy Jesus, when I cannot
find in my heart to bear a little strictness for it?

But I could easily deduce (were I not to suppose it done before) that sure as
if the Church had thought a Statute had annexed these two for ever, By Dr.
Gunnings Paschal or Lent Fast.
they have been joined from the beginnings of our Christianity; it was the Fast
that did attend our Saviors sufferings that in part caused the Contest about
Easter, which Polycarpe S. John's Disciple managed; and then there was a Fast
so soon: and he that tells us this, Irenaeus, Scholar to that Polycarpe, says
some observed it many days, some forty days also, if we can take the Ancient
Ruffinus's authority but for a Comma. And if the Ancient Fathers do expound
aright, Christ himself thought that men were interested so much in his Death,
that they would Fast by reason of it; When the Bridegroom is taken from them,
then shall they Fast in those days: Upon which words they say the Season was
determined to this Duty by the Gospel.

But they may say so, who knew how to persuade men to take up restraints of
strictest discipline and of severest Piety. But we cannot engage them into
Order or from Scandal; they made them fast, we cannot make them temperate.
Blessed Savior! what kind of Christians did thou hope for thy Disciples, of
whom thou were so confident they would so concern themselves in thy Passion as
to Fast because of it? when in our times Christians will not be kept from their
Excesses by it? not in those days of Fasting which thy Primitive followers did
Celebrate with abstinencies, that did almost mortify indeed and slay the Body
of Flesh as well as Sin, and we in imitation of them, in answer of thy
confidences, will not abate a Meal, nor an intemperance, will eat and Riot too,
and make a Lent of Bacchanals: Thus we prepare load for thy Day of Passion, sin
on to add weight to thy Cross, and yet we our selves will not be humbled under
them. It is in vain to tell men thou expectest they should mortify, that it
will spirit their Repentance, for they will have no kind of Penitence for sin,
but such as will let them return to sin again, suffer no discipline with which
their Vices too cannot consist, for they can scarce live if they make not
themselves cheerful with them, even in this time of Sadness, and in sight of
the Memorial of thy sufferings for them.

Indeed when I consider how this Season is hodg'd in from Vice by all Gods
Indignation, threatened at first, suffered at last, pronounced in Commination,
executed in Passion: Ashwednesday gave us all Gods Curses against Sinners, all
which Good Friday shows inflicted on our Savior. Thus we began, Cursed are the
Unmerciful, the Fornicators, and Adulterers, the Covetous persons, Worshippers
of Images, Slanderers, Drunkards and Extortioners; and we shall see the Son of
God made this Curse for them; yea we our selves said Amen to all, as testifying
that that Curse is due to all. When I consider this I say, I cannot choose but
be astonished to behold how men can break through all Gods Curses and their own
to get at Vice, first seal Gods Maledictions, then provoke and incur them
instantly, as if they loved and would commit a Rape upon Perdition; as if
because men have so long in Oaths begged God to damn them, and he has not done
it yet, they would now do it in their Prayers too; make their Devotions as well
as Imprecations consign them to the wrath of God. He that does love cursing
thus in the Passive sense, surely as David says, it shall come unto him, it
shall be unto him as the Garment that covers him, it shall enter into his
bowels like Water, and like Oil into his Bones, Psalm. Cix. 17, 18, 19. And
truly amongst those things which we did Curse, there are that will fulfill all
that most literally; the Riots of thy gaudy bravery that make thee gripe,
extort, spend thy own Wealth and other men's, undo thy self and Creditors, be
sordid and in Debt, merely to furnish trappings to dress thy self for others
eyes and, may be, sins; these bring a Curse to cover thee as does thy Garment,
yea and they gird it to thee. The draughts of thy Intemperance carry the
malediction down into the Bowels like Water, yea like the Wine into the very
Spirits: There is another of them too that will conveigh the Curse like Oil
into the Bones, till it eat out the marrow, and leave nothing but it self to
dwell within them, yea till it putrefie the Bones, till it prevent the Grave
and Judgment too, while the living Sinner invades the rottenness of the one,
and torments of the other; and then the Lents and abstinencies that the sin
prescribes shall be observed exactly, only to qualify them for more sin and
condemnation, may be at the best but to recover them from what it has
inflicted; when ^et alas! they are too soft and tender, the Lord knows, to
endure any ^rities to work out their Repentance and Atonement: and yet sure ^se
the Sinner does go through have nothing to commend them which these others do
not much more abound with. If those are not grievous to thee because they are
so wholesome, and though it be a miserable thing to go through all their painful
squalid methods, yet, how disgustful soever, by the benefit of their Cure they
excuse their offensiveness, and ingratiate the present injury they do the
Flesh, by the succeeding health they help thee to, and by the Death they do
secure thee from: Why sure (to omit, that the other have all these advantages,
none have so calm and so established health as the abstemious and continent,
and their mind is still serene, their temper never clouded, but besides this)
the Christians bitter Potions do purge away that sickness that would end in
Death eternal, his fastings starve that worm that otherwise would gnaw the Soul
immortally; his weepings quench the everlasting burnings, yea there is cheerful
Pleasure in the midst of these severities, when God breaks in in Comforts into
them: The Glory of the Lord appears in that Cloud too that is upon the penitent
sad heart; when he is drenched in tears the Holy Ghost the Comforter does move
upon those waters, and breaths Life and Salvation into them; and he who is the
Unction pours Oil into those wounds of the Spirit; and we are never nearer
Heaven than when we are thus prostrate in the lowest dust, and when our Belly
cleaves unto the ground in humble penitence, then we are at the very Throne of
Grace: And this our light afflicting of the Soul which is but for a moment,
does work for us a far more exceeding weight of Glory. To which, etc.

The Fourth SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. October. 12. 1662.
JOHN XV. 14. Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I Command you.
THE words are a conditional Assertion of Christ's concerning his Apostles, and
in them all Christians: And they do easily divide themselves into two parts. The

First is a positive part, wherein there is a state of great and Blessed
advantage, which they are declared to be in present possession of: In these
words, Ye are my Friends.

In which there are two things that make up that advantage, 1. A Relation, 2.
The Person related to. Friends, and My Friends. The

Second is a Conditional part, wherein there are the terms, upon which that
Possession is made over, and which preserve the Right and Title to them: in
these words, If ye do whatsoever I command you: in which there are two things
required as Conditions.

I. Obedience, If ye do what I command you.

II. That Obedience Universal; If ye do whatsoever I command you.

The first thing that offers it self to our consideration, is the Relation,
Friends.

It is a known commonplace Truth, that a Friend is the most useful thing that
is in whatsoever state we are: It is the Soul of life, and of content. If I be
in prosperity: We know abundance not enjoyed, is but like Jewels in the
Cabinet, useless while they are there: It is indeed nothing but the opinion of
Prosperity. But it is not possible to enjoy abundance otherwise than by
communicating it: a man possesses plenty only in his Friends, and has
fruition of it merely by bestowing it. If I be in adversity; to have a person
whom I may entrust a trouble to, whose bosom is as open and as faithful to me,
as it is to his own thoughts, to which I may commit a swelling secret; this is
in a good measure to unlade, and to pour out my sorrow from me; thus I divide
my grievances which would be insupportable, if I did not disburthen my self of
some part of them: Now there is no bosom so safe as that where friendship
lodges; take Gods Opinion in the case, Deuteronomy. xiii. 6. If thy Brother the Son of
thy Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy bosom, or thy
Friend that is as thine own Soul. This is the highest step in the Gradation;
And there is all the reason in the World; for though Parent and Child are as
near one to other as any thing can be to part of it self; Husband and Wife are
but two different names of the same one, yet these may become bitter and
unkind: A Parent may grow cross, or a Child refractory, a Mother may be like
the Ostrich in the Wilderness, throw off her bowels with her burden; and an
ungracious Son is constant pangs and travail to his Mother, his whole life
gives her after-throws which are most deadly: Dislikes also may rest within the
Marriage Bed, and lay their heads upon two wedded Pillows; but none of these
unkindnesses can untie the Relation; that ends not where the bitterness begins,
he is a Parent still though froward, and a Child though stubborn; but a true
Friend can be nothing but kind; it does include a dearness in its essence,
which is so inseparable from it, that they begin and end together: A man may be
an Husband without loving, but cannot be a lover, that is a Friend, without
loving.

And sure to have no one Friend in this Life, no one that is concerned in any
of my interests or me my self, none that has any cares or so much as good
wishes for me, is a state of a most uncomfortable prospect. The Plague that
keeps Friends at a distance from me while I live out of the sphere of my
infection, and after gives me Death, has yet less of Malignity than this; that
leaves me the Compassions, the Prayers, all the solitary Comforts, all indeed
but the outward entertainments of my Friends; that, though it shut the Door
against all company, yet, puts a Lord have Mercy on the Door: But this I now
described has none of that, has no good wishes, nothing else but hate, is
worse than a perpetual Pestilence.

Yet neither is this state so comfortless, in respect of this life, as not to
have a Friend in the concernments of the Life to come; none that has so much
kindness for my Soul as every man has for his Enemies Beast, which if he see
fallen in a Ditch he will at least give notice that it may be helped out
thence: No one, that when a sin, like to that Falling sickness in the Gospel
(and it is such indeed without a Parable) is casting me into the water,
quenching my parts, my Reason, and the Immortal spark within me; or throwing me
into the Fire, raising Lascivious heats within, which after will break out into
Hell fires; none yet that will stretch out his hand to catch me, or to pull me
out: None that does care to see me perish to Eternity, or that values my Soul,
which yet did cost the Blood of God, at a word speaking: This is to be like
Dives in the Flames, to whom they would not lend the help of the tip of a
finger, Luke xvi. 24, 25.
or give the kindness of a drop of Water: I am as it were on the other side the
Gulf already, Here is the use of Friendship, the only noble one, that is worthy
of that blessed quality: When I have one that will be an assistant Conscience
to me, who, when that within me sleeps, or is benumbed, will watch over my
actions; will testify them to my Face, will be as faithful to me as the
Conscience should be, hold a Glass to my Soul, show me the stains and the proud
tumors, the foul Ulcers that are there, and then will fret, and rub, or prick,
lance, and corrode, to cure those Tumors, and do off those spots, such an one
is a familiar Angel Guardian, is truly of that blessed Heavenly rank, and only
less than the Friend in the Text, the Person related to, and my next Part.

My Friends. There are three things from which men use to take the measures of
a Friend.

First, From the good things he bestows on them: He that thinks to keep
friendship alive only with Air, that gives good words, but parts with nothing,
that entertains only with Garbs and Civilities, is but the pageant of a
Friend: They that own having but one Soul, and seem to clasp as if they would
have but one Body too, cannot keep such distinct and separate proprieties in
other little things, as not to have communication one from the other. And,

Secondly, The friendship of these benefits is rated by the measures of our
need of them. When Midas was ready to die for hunger, his God was kinder to him
in a little bread, than in making all that he touched turn into Gold: Great
things engage but little where there is but little use of them: And all these,

Thirdly, Are endeared by the Affection they are given with. Good turns done
with design, what need soever I have of them, are hire, and not friendship; it
is the kindness only that obliges, the gift without the love does but upbraid
and scorn my want.

Now to measure the Friend here in the Text, by these, were an impossible
undertaking, whose Friendship did exceed all bounds and measures. I shall do no
more toward it but read the words before my Text, which were the occasion of
it, Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
Friends, and then it follows, Ye are my Friends. The token therefore of his
Friendship, the gift he gave them was his life, rather that was the least he
gave: He gave his glory first, that so he might be qualified to give his life,
for (...) Phil. ii. 7. He lessened himself from the condition of being Lord of
all, into that of a Servant, (...) Heb. ii. 9. being diminished, made lower,
meaner than his Creatures for the suffering of Death. Now with the price of
such Divine essential glory to buy only a life, rather only a possibility of
Death, that after he might give that life for us, and with his Death purchase
us an immortal life, is such a gift as no Romance of friendship ever fancied or
did aim at: We may have heard of two Companions that would die for one another,
that never quarrelled in their lives, but for this, who should suffer first to
save the other, and strave only for Execution: But for a Person of the Trinity
to leave his Heaven to come down to us; to dwell with Agonies that he might be
at one with us: and be tied to the Cross, that he might be united to us; this
is a friendship fit for Ecstasies of apprehension. Of all the things that court
thy kindness here below, that spread snares, and lay baits for thy friendship,
if any bid so fair, so temptingly, if any will give such a price, in Gods name
let it have thy love, I shall not blame him that engages his Affection there:
But sure Heaven cannot give a greater gift than this; for what can God give
greater than himself? Yea I may say God could not give so much, for he must be
Man too, to give his life, and this, says he, he gave for his Friends, even in
our stead, who must have perished else eternally, which intimates the second
thing, the need we had of this.

A need great as the gift, necessity invincible, that could break into Heaven,
rifle the Trinity to serve it self, throw Death into those Regions of
Immortality, and which would not be satisfied but with the Blood of God.

And now is not the kindness and the condescension of Friendship in his
expressions too, when he says, greater love than this has no man: which was
the third Endearment.

There never were such wounds of Love as those that tore this Heart; never such
meltings of Affection as dissolved this Lover into sweats of Blood. There was
no motive to all this, but his mere love: For all this he designed to us before
we were, and therefore sure before we were deserving: And O our God! thou that
from all Eternity did lay Contrivances to give thy Life for us, so to redeem,
and then to glorify us; what were we then that thou should do this for us?
what were we then when we were not? and yet that thou from the Abyss of
Everlastingness, should think thoughts of such kindness to us, and such
blessedness for us, who then were not, and deserved nothing; and who since we
were, have deserved nothing but Damnation.

And as there was no other motive to all this design but love, so neither was
there any thing but love in the fulfilling. Look on your Savior in the Garden,
and upon Mount Calvary, and you shall find him there in as great Agonies of
Affection as Torment, and hanging down his head upon the Cross with
languishments of kindness more than weakness. His Arms stretched out and
racked, as if on purpose to the posture of receiving you to his embraces, and
his side opened not only to shed Blood for you, but to make you a passage to
his very Heart. Look on him offering up his Tears, his Prayers, and his Soul
for Sin, and in the midst of all, projecting happiness to you, as it were
praying, O my Father, here I charge my self with all the guilt of those my
Friends, I thy only Son God, one with thee, am content to suffer Torments that
they all may be acquitted; Here I lay down my Life that they may have eternal
Life, let me be Crucified, so they be Glorified. Which was the purchase and the
gift of this his Passion to all his Friends, even to those that do what he
Commands; which is the first Condition that entitles to his friendship, and my
next Part.

Ye are my Friends if ye do what I command you.

I shall not urge, that Great men upon Earth will not take any to their
Friendship but upon these terms; nor will I plead the reasonableness of this in
Christ, there being no cause why he should be a Friend to any that will daily
disoblige him and dishonor him: Nor will I press the whole Economy of
Scripture, which says, all the advantages Christ ever gave or meant us, and all
the acts of Friendship that he ever did for us were with this design. He gave
his grace that brings salvation to save us into an estate of sober Virtue. Tit.
ii. ver. 11, 12. He gave himself also to Ransom us from our own evil doings,
and to redeem us into his Obedience, Tit. ii. ver. 14. Without which no
dependence on him will avail. Matthew. vii. 21. He will own no acquaintance with,
nor services from them who have friendship with sin; though they have cast out
Devils in his Name, if they retain their Vices; though they do Miracles, if
they do wickedly, he will bid them depart, profess he never knew them, ver. 22,
23. He will not let such have a bare relation to his Name, nor have the
friendship of a Title, 2 Timothy ii. 19. All his Rewards also that he will give
are promised to none other, but them that do what he commands, Apoc. xxii. 14.
that is, do Evangelically, heartily and faithfully endeavor it, and do this
with all diligence expressed by words, that import all strife imaginable, as
Running, Wrestling, Fighting, Warring. And persevere also by patient
continuance in well-doing, Romans ii. 7. and he has nothing else but Vengeance
for all others, 2 These. i. 8. and we have neither Christ, nor Gospel, nor
Religion, but with these terms.

But I shall wave all this, and bound my self within the present words, Greater
love has no man than this, that a man lay down his Life for his Friends. Ye
are my Friends if ye do what I command you. When Christ is boasting of his
love, making comparisons, and vying friendships with mankind, nay more,
contriving heights and depths of Mercy, such as Man has no comprehension, nor
fathom for; when he was preparing to do an act of compassion almost equal to
his Divinity, when he had resolutions of so much kindness as to give his life
that he might show kindness. Yet could he not then find in his heart to offer
or declare one jot of kindness to the men that will not do what he commands,
but in the midst of such Agonies of compassion, he thought of nothing but
infinite indignation and eternal vengeance to the disobedient. I have but now
given my Body and my Blood even to the Traitor Judas, Luc. xxii. 19, 20, 21.
John vi. 70. Romans v. 10. John iii. 16, 17, and 6. 51. and 2 Cor. v. 19.
to one who is a Devil: I am going to give my life even for my Enemies, for the
World: But I will give no love to any, have no friendship with any but the
virtuous: no, though they be my own Disciples, ye are my Friends, ye my
Companions and Apostles are my Friends, only on this condition, if ye do what
I command you.

And then is it not matter of Astonishment, to see men fancy they have a right
in all Christ's Actions and Sufferings, presume upon his favor and their own
happy condition, though they do nothing, or but very little toward this, and
the main of their life be disobedience, as if all Christ's Commands, appointed
them to do no commands, and Christianity were but a liberty from virtue? To
pass by those that do nothing but Evil, that which the Devil does suggest, or
their flesh dictate, and to consider the Demurer sort of Christians, that
pretend a respect to Christ, and to Religion, and see what they will do.

Why sometimes you may find them troubled at their Vices and themselves; and
those troubles breath out in Sighs, and in warm wishes that they could do that
which Christ prescribes; to will is sometimes strongly present with them, but
to perform they know not how. Alas Christ does not tell you that you are his
Friends, if you wish well to him, and his Commands, but he requires that you
shall do them. These are but vapors of a troubled Soul, which howsoever they
may chance rise warm, catch a strong sudden heat, breath up in flashing
thoughts. They are but Meteors, little shooting flames that only do catch fire
and fall and die; show fair, but they warm nothing: And so these thoughts do
never, heat the Heart into Devotions and holy resolutions, the fire is not
strong nor does it live enough, to melt and work away the filthinesses of the
Soul: No, though they grow to aversations; For you may find such men, when
wearied with the pursuit of their sins, hating their customs, and the
engagements to the practice of them; complaining thus, I know it is ill, and
it is against my heart, that I obey the motions of my passions or Lusts: The
incitations of my Appetite, the usance of the World, the Obligations of
Civility or mistaken honor do indeed prevail upon me, but it is with great
reluctance of mind that I yield to them, but I cannot avoid it. There are not
few that satisfy themselves with this condition. Now sure Christ does not say,
Ye cannot be my Friends except you sin against me and against your Knowledge,
and your Consciences too. It Is strange that men should think the Heathen
instance of a Witch that cried, -- Video meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor --
I know, and do approve of better things, but cannot choose but follow these
that are the worser) strange, that this Fury that had the Devil for Familiar,
should make Christ a friend; that this should be the state of Gospel Saints,
and of Gods favorites. It Is possible some therefore go yet further to good
purposes toward Obedience, and have holy Intentions, but this is not
sufficient neither, if to do his Commands be necessary: for to purpose and
intend to do them, is not certainly to do them. Yet where are any that do aim
at doing any more? and there is none of these but does presume upon his
interest in Christ, and satisfies himself and is secure.

Yet is it hard to find a ground of this their confidence, unless it rise from
the unhappy use they make of Gods preserving Mercies, and his kindness to them
in the concernments of this life. They see without their cares, and upon very
weak entreaties indeed, against all provocations both of God and danger; yet
his protections secure them, although they neither mind the asking them, nor
mind the walking worthy of them. The man whose Sins, not Prayers, prepare him
for his Bed, he sleeps well: perhaps more soundly than he who at his Bedside
throws himself on his face into Gods Arms, and there bequeaths himself to the
Securities of the Almighty: And he, whose Sleeps only refresh him for returns
to Sin, does often live as long, as safely, and as merrily, as he that daily
most Religiously does beg Protections from above. And others that afford the
Lord some little homages, themselves some Prayers when their pleasures or
occasions permit, God has a care of them, and their desires flow into them,
all does succeed well with them. Now they take confidence hence to conclude,
these are the Tokens of Gods friendship, and all his mercies will come in at
the like easy rates; that such a short Petition as committed them to the
refreshments of the night, and after which they waked into renewed strengths
and pleasures, such another shall lay them down in safety, to the sleeps of
that long night, that afterward will break in happy Resurrection: For why? God
will not sure fail his own mercies, but be as friendly to their Souls as he is
to their Bodies.

And thus God's Preservations here, in mere defiance of our provocations, which
are the arts of his long-suffering, his strivings of Compassion, merely to give
us opportunities of being reconciled to him, and to invite us to be so, while
we make them occasions of carelessness and security, they are so far from being
pledges of his Friendship, that they have all the aggravations of affornted
goodness, become Temptations and degrees of Ruin! 'Twere fine indeed it
Christ's eternal preparations for his Friends, would come in to us, without
care or doing any thing, as an accession to our pleasures; if when we had lived
many years as in a Garden, our days all flowered with delight; we might expire
into Paradise, and in soft Airs of Music breath into Hallelujah's But alas!
the smooth easy way leads down the Hill, and he must strive and pant that will
get up into the Mansions and the Bosom of his Savior, and whosoever will be
his Friend, must do that he commands.

But is there nothing less indeed will qualify? The Scripture says, that
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness, and he was
called the Friend of God, James ii. 23. and then, is Christ more inaccessible,
and harder to be made a Friend?

Why, truly God and Christ both are so much Friends to all true Believers, that
the Life of Christ was given for them; for, God so loved the World that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life, John iii. 16. Nor are there any qualities more signally
peculiar to friendship, more engaging than confidence and trust, dependence and
relying, embosoming my self in him: Now these are but the exercise of Faith;
and it is most certain if we heartily endeavor to do what he commands, there is
employment then for all this work of Faith, place for its applications and
assurances. My Text does make this good. But when his friendship is made over
on Conditions, as it is not only in these words, but every where in Scripture;
(there being not one Promise absolute that does concern Gods favor,
justification, and eternal Life: he does not once offer Remission of sins, but
to those that amend their Lives; nay, does express as if he could not give it
otherwise, peradventure they will repent that I may forgive them, Jer. xxxvi.
3.) The Promises therefore being conditional, Faith must be answerable to the
Promises that it does rest on and apply; and at the most, can be but an
assurance that you shall be partaker of what is promised, that is to say,
partaker of the favor and the life of Christ, if ye do his Commands. But then
if I perform not this Condition, to trust upon his friendship which I am not
qualified for; to think by Faith to receive a Pardon, which in that case I am,
was never offered me; to apply to my self Promises which were never made me,
for none were ever made to them that do not do: and to assure my self Christ
will transgress his everlasting Covenant for my Vices sake, merely to give me
leave to enjoy my sins; will do that which God may not do, forgive one that
will not repent: If I believe thus against Promise, and against Decree, am
confident whether Christ will or no, and will rely upon him in despite of him,
if such a faith will make us friends, affronts do reconcile. This is indeed to
lay violent hands on his favor, and to invade his friendship, and without
Metaphor, take Heaven by force.

But sure I am, that this is not the Faith made Abraham be called the friend of
God in that place of S. James, but a Faith that was perfected by doing, ver.
22. of that Chapter, a Faith that made him offer up his only Son upon the
Altar, ver. 21. It Is true, he did in hope believe against all hope, Romans iv.
18. So that his faith was stronger than a contradiction, but yet his
resolutions of obedience seem stronger than his faith; for he did that even to
the cutting of the grounds of all his faith, and hope. He trusted God would
make his Promise good to him, make all the Nations of the Earth be blessed in
the seed of Isaac; though Isaac had no seed, nor could have, if he should be
slain: And he resolved at Gods command himself to slay that Isaac, so to make
him have no seed. His Faith indeed did not despute the great impossibility; but
his obedience caused it. He did not question, how can God perform with me when
I have offered up my Son? I cannot look that a large Progeny should rise out of
the Ashes on the Altar; nor will those Flames that devour all my Seed at once,
make my seed numerous, lasting and glorious as the Stars in Heaven, Genesis xv. 5.
which he promised me: But much less did he question, why should I obey in
this? He that does his Commands, can but expect what he has promised; but if I
should do this Command and slay my Son, I make his Promise void, and destroy my
own expectations: And if I disobey I can but suffer what he bids me do; my own
obedience will execute all that his Indignation would threaten to my
disobedience. Genesis xxii. 4.
Though Abraham had three days time and journey to the Altar, that Nature might
have leisure the mean while to reason with the Precept thus, and his Affection
might struggle with his Duty; yet he goes on, resolves to tear out his own
Bowels, and cut off his hopes, will Sacrifice his only Son, and Sacrifice Gods
Promises to his Commands.

And then, he that will trust to Abraham's example of believing, yet will not
follow him at all in doing, will obey no Commands; that is so far from offering
up an only Son, he will not slay an only evil Custom, nor part with one out
of the herd of all his vicious Habits; will not give up the satisfaction to any
of his carnal, worldly, or ambitious appetites; not sacrifice a Passion or a
lust to all the Obligations that God and Christ can urge him with, he has, nor
faith, nor friendship, no, nor forehead. It Is true indeed, he that has
Abraham's faith may well assure himself he is Christ's Friend; but it is only on
this account, because he that believes as Abraham believed, he will not stick
to do whatever Christ commands; which is that universality of obedience, that
is the next condition that entitles to Christ's friendship, and my last Part.

Ye are my Friends if ye do whatsoever I Command you. There is no quality so
necessary to a Friend, or so appropriate to friendship, as sincerity. They that
have but one Soul, they can have no reserves from one another: But disobedience
to one Precept, is inconsistent with sincerity, that has respect unto all the
Commandments; and he that will not do whatever Christ prescribes, has reserves
of affection for some darling sin, and is false to his Savior. He is an Enemy
indeed, so that there is no friendship on either side. S. Paul says so of any
of one kind; the minding of the flesh, says he, whether it be providing for
the Belly, or any other of the Organs of Carnality, is desperate, incurable
Rebellion: Now such a Rebel, is, we know, Romans viii. 7.
the worst of Enemies. S. James does say as much of any of those vicious
affections that are set on the World: Whosoever will be a friend of the World,
is an Enemy of God, James iv. 4. And he calls them adulteresses and Adulterers,
who think to join great strict Religion to some little bylove of an Honor, or
a profit of this World. Such Men are like a Wife, that not contented with the
partner of her Bed, takes in another now and then, she must not count her self
her Husbands Friend, though she give him the greatest share in her affections;
no, she is but a bosom Enemy: And so any one Vice allowed is a paramour sin, is
whoredom against Christ, and our pretended friendship to him in all other
obediences, is but the kindness and the caresses of an Adulteress, the mere
hypocrisy and treachery of love. If it be necessary to the gaining Christ's
friendship, that thou do his Commands, it is necessary that thou do them all,
that thou divorce thy self from thy beloved sin, as well as any other: Because
his Friendship does no more require other obedience than it does that, but is
as inconsistent with thy own peculiar Vice as with the rest. Indeed it is
impossible that it should bear with any, they being all his murderers. If thou
can find one sin that had no hand in putting Christ to Death, one Vice that
did not come into the garden, nor upon Mount Calvary, that did not help to
assassin thy Savior, even take thy fill of that: But if each had a stab at
him, if no one of thy Vices could have been forgiven, had not thy Jesus died
for it, can thou expect he should have kindness for his Agony, or friendship
for the man that entertains his Crucifiers in his heart? If worldly cares which
he calls Thorns, Matthew. xiii. 22.
fill thy head with Contrivances of Wealth and Greatness, of filling Coffers,
and of platting Coronets for thee, as the thorns did make him a C^own too,
Matthew. xxvii. 29.
would thou have him receive thee and these in his bosom, to gore his Heart
as they did pierce his Head? If thou delight in that intemperance, which filled
his deadly Cup, which Vomited Gall into it, can he delight in thee? Matthew.
xxvi. 38, 39.
That Cup which made him fall upon his face to deprecate, will he partake in as
the pledge of mutual love? He that sunk under, could not bear this load of
thine, when it was in his Cross upon his shoulders, will he bear it and thee in
his Arms, when thou fallest under it? When thou will cast a shameful spewing on
his glory too, if he own such a Friend? Thou that art so familiar with his
Name, as thou were more his Friend than any in the World, whose Oaths and
imprecations, Moses says, Levit. xxiv. 16. (...)
strike through that Name, which they so often call upon, thou may as well
think his Heart did attract the Spear that pierced it, and the Wound close upon
its head with Unions of Love, as that he has kindness for thee. If Christ may
make Friendship with him, that does allow himself a sin, he may have fellowship
with Belial: For him to dwell in any heart that cherishes a Vice, were to
descend to Hell again. But as far as those Regions of Darkness are from his
Habitation of Glory, and the Black Spirits of that place from being any of his
Guard of holy Myriads; so for is he from dwelling with, or being friend to him,
that is a friend to any wickedness, to him that will not do whatever he
commands.

And now if these Conditions seem hard, if any do not care to be his Friend
upon these terms, they may betake themselves to others. Let such make
themselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness: A Friend indeed that has
not so much of the insincerities as many great ones have: For this will furnish
them with all that heart or lust can wish for, all that necessity or wantonness
proposes to it self to dress out pomp or Vice: But yet when with enjoyment the
affections grow, and become so unquiet, work them so, as not to let their
thoughts or actions rest, make them quicken themselves, and like the motions of
all things that go downwards tending to the Earth, increase by the continuance,
grow stronger, and more violent toward the end, then when they are most
passionate, it fails them: And having filled their life with most unsatisfied
tormenting cares, it leaves them nothing but the guilt of all: When their great
Wealth shall shrink into a single sheet, no more of it be left, but a thin
shroud, and all their vast Inheritances but six foot of Earth, be gone, yet the
iniquity of all will stick close to them; and this false Friend, that does it
Self forsake them, will neither go along, Psalm. xiix. 17.
nor will let its pomp follow them, raises a cry on them as high as Gods
Tribunal; the cry of all the Blood, all the oppressed rights that bribery till
then had stifled, the groans of all those Poor that greatness, covetousness, or
extortion had groun'd or crushed; the yellings of those Souls that were s^arv'd
for want of the Bread of life, which yet they paid for, and the price of it
made those heaps which will that day appear against their Friends and Masters,
and prove their Adversaries to eternal Death.

Let others joy in Friends that Wine does get them; such as have no
qualification to endear them, but this, that they will not refuse to sin and to
be sick with their Companions: Men that do only drink in their affections, as
full of friendship as of liquor, and probably they do unload themselves of both
at once, part with their dearness and their drink together and alike. I know
not whether in be heats of mutual kindness that inflame these draughts, and the
desires of them, so as if they did drink thirst; but sure I am, that these hot
draughts begin the Lake of fire.

Let others please themselves in an affection that Carnality cements. These are
warm friendships I confess, but Solomon will tell us whence they have their
heat. Her house, Prove. vii. 27.
says he, does open into Hell, and Brimstone kindles those libidinous flames.
There are strait bands, fetters in those affections indeed; for the same
Wiseman says, The Closets of that sinner are the Chambers of Death: Prove. ii.
19.
That none that go unto her return again, or take hold of the paths of life; it
seems she is a friend that takes most irreversible dead hold, she is not only
as insatiate, but as inexotable as the Grave, and the Eternal Chains of Fate
are in those her Embraces. But God keep us from making such strict Covenants
with Death; from being at friendship with Hell; or in a word, that I say all at
once, with any that are good Companions only in sin^ing. Such men having no
virtue in themselves, must needs hate it in others, as being a reproach to
them, and therefore they are still besieging it, using all arts and stratagems
to undermine it: and having nothing else to recommend them in men's affections,
but their managery of Vice, no way to Merit but by serving iniquity, they not
only comply with our own evil Inclinations, that so they may be grateful, and
insinuate into us, but they provoke too and inflame those tendencies that they
may be more useful to us, having no other means to work their ends. And then
such friends by the same reason, must be false and treacherous, and all that we
declaim at, and abhor in Enemies, when that shall be the way to serve their
ends; because they have no Virtue to engage them to be otherwise: And to be
such, is to be constant to their own designs, their dispositions and usances.
These are the Pests of all Societies, they speak and live infection, and
friendship with them is to couple with the Plague. These do complete and
perfect what the Devil but began in Eden: Nurse up Original sin, chase
inclination into appetite and habit, suggest and raise desires, and then feed
them into Constitution and Nature: In a word, are a brood of those Serpents,
one of which was enough to destroy Paradise and Innocence. It Is true, a man
would think these were our Friends indeed, that venture to Gehenna for us: Alas
they are but more familiar Devils, work under Satan to bring us to Torments,
and differ nothing from him, but that they draw us into them, and he inflicts
them. And when sinful contents come home in Ruin, and pleasures die into
Damnation; then men will understand these treacherous loves, and find such
Friends are but projectours for the Devil; then they will hate them as they do
their own Damnation, discerning these are but the kindnesses of Hell. Nay it is
possible, I may slander that place in speaking so ill of it. Dives will let us
see there are affections of a kinder and more blessed strain in Hell, Luke xvi.
from the twenty seventh Verse; you find he did make truce with Torments, that
he might contrive and beg only a message of Repentance for his Brethren; he
did not mind at all his own dire Agonies, he minded so the reformation of his
Friends. Good God! when I reflect upon these pieties of the Damned, together
with the practices of those who have given their names in to Religion, when I
see Fiends in Hell do study how to make Men virtuous, and Christians upon Earth
with all their art debauch them into vice and ruin; I cannot choose but pray,
Grant me such Friends as are in Hell. Rather grant us all the Friendship in the
Text. But then, we must have none with any Vice. Friendship with that, engages
into Enmity with God and Christ I showed you. And to pass over all those
after-retributions of Vengeance Christ has studied for his Enemies, when he,
that now courts us to be our Friend and we will make our Adversary, must be our
Judge: For were there none of this, and should we look no further than this
life; yet sure we of this Nation know, what it is to have God our Enemy; who
for so many years lay under such inflictions, as had much of the character of
his last execution; they had the Blasphemies and the Confusion, the dire
Guilts, and the black Calamities, and almost the Despair and Irrecoverableness
of those in Hell. And though He be at Peace with us at present, at least there
is a Truce; yet I beseech you in the presence and the fear of God, to think in
earnest, whether the present provocations of this Nation do not equal those
that twenty years ago engaged him into Arms against us, and made him dash us so
in pieces: Whether those Actions of the Clergy be reformed that made the People
to abhor their Function and their Service, the Offerings and Ministers of the
Lord, and made God himself spew them out. 'Twere endless to go on the
profaneness, to the loose impieties and the bold Atheisms of the Laity,
especially of the better sort; in short, what one degree, or state or Sex is
better? Sure I am, if we are not better, we are worse beyond expression or
recovery: who have resisted every method, and conquered all God's Arts of doing
good upon us, been too hard for his Judgments and his Mercies both.

It Is true, when we lay gasping under his severe Revenges, we then pretended to
be humbled, begged to be reconciled and be at peace with him, and vowed to his
Conditions, promising obedience, and aliened our selves from our old sins, his
Foes. But then, when Christ came to confirm this Amity, came dressed with all his
Courtship, brought all the invitations of Love along, our Prince and our
Religion, our Church and State, Righteousness and Peace, and the Beauty of
Holiness, every thing that might make us be an Happy and a Pious Nation, thus
he did tempt and labor to engage that Friendship which we offered him and
vowed to him: And we no sooner seized all this, but we break resolutions as
well as duty, to get loose from him; and laden with the spoils of our defeated
Savior's goodness, we join hands with his Enemies, resume our old
acquaintant-sins, enrich and serve them with his Bounties, make appear that we
only drew him in, to work such Miracles, but to assist our Worldliness,
Ambitions and Lusts, to be our opportunities of Vice and provocation of him.
And being thus affronted and refused, his Enemy preferred, not this God, but
Barrabas, any the vilest thing for Friend, rather than Christ, must he not
needs be more our Enemy than heretofore? And if he be, that question will
concern us, 1 Cor. x. 22.
Are we stronger than God? It should behove us not to fall out with him till we
are. See how he does prepare himself for the Encounter, Wisd. v. Taking his
Jealousy for Armor, putting on Justice, ver. 17, 19. 20.
severe and vindicative Justice, as a Breastplate; and, his Wrath sharpening as
a Sword; and, arming all the Creatures for Auxiliaries. Alas! when Omnipotence
does express it self as scarcely strong enough for Execution, but Almightiness
will be armed also for Vengeance, will assume Weapons, call in Aids for fury,
who shall stand it? Will our Friends, think you, keep it off us, and secure us?
did we consider how uneasy God accounts himself, till he begin the Storm,
while he keeps off his Plagues from overrunning such a Land, we would expect
them every moment, and they must come. Isa^. l. 20.
Ah, says he, I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine
Enemies; and then in what condition are we, if God can have no ease but in our
ruin, if he does hunger and thirst after it, go to his Vengeance as to a
Feast? And if you read the 25th Chapter of Isaiah, you will find there a rich
Bill of Fare, which his Revenge upon his Enemies does make; view the sixth
Verse. He that enjoys his morsels, that lays out his Contrivances, and studies
on his Dishes so as if he meant to cram his Soul, let him know what delight
soever he finds, when he has spoiled the Elements of their Inhabitants, to
furnish his own Belly, and not content with Natures Delicacies neither, has
given them forced Fatnesses, changing the very flesh into a marrow, suppling
the Bones almost into that Oil that they were made to keep; all ^his delight
the Lord by his expressions does seem to take in his dread Executions on his
Enemies, a sinful People.

And if the vicious Friendships of the World have so much more attractive than
Christ's love and favor, and the happy consequences of it, as to counterpoise
all the danger of such enmity, you may join hands with them: But if His be the
safer and more advantageous, then hearken to his Propositions and beseechings;
for He does beg it of you: As he treated this reconciliation in his Blood, so
he does in Petitions too. 2 Cor. v. 20.
For says S. Paul, We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did beseech you
by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, Be you reconciled, and then be Generous
toward your GOD and Savior; and having brought him as it were upon his knees,
reduced him to entreaties, be friends, and condescend to him and your own
Happiness. If He be for you, take no care then, who can be against you. His
Friendship will secure you not only from your Enemies but from Hostility it
self; for, when a man's ways please the Lord he will make even his Enemies to
be at peace with him, Prove. xvi. 7. He will reconcile all but Vices. And
afterward see what a blessed throng of Friends, we shall be all initiated
into, Heb. xii. 23. To an innumerable company of Angels, to the general
Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn that are written in Heaven, to God the
Judge of all, and to the Spirits of Just men made perfect, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, etc. And of this blessed Corona, we our selves
shall be a noble and a glorious part, inflamed all with that mutual love, that
kindles Seraphims, and that streams out into an heavenly glory, filling that
Region of immortal love and blessedness; and being Friends, that is, made one
with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that Trinity of Love, we shall enjoy, what we
do now desire to ascribe to them, All Honor, Glory, Power, Majesty, and
Dominion, for evermore.

Amen.
The Fifth SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. Third Wednesday in LENT.
EZECH. XXXIII. 11. Why will ye Dye?
THE Words are part of a Debate which God had with the sinful House of Israel,
in which there are three things offer themselves to be considered.

First, The Sinners Fate and Choice: He will Die; That Is his End, yea, it is his
Resolution, he will die.

Secondly, Gods inquiry for the Ground of this, he seems astonished at the
Resolution; and therefore reasons with them about this their so mad choice, and
questions Why will ye dye? Which words are also,

Thirdly, The debate of his Affections, the reasoning of his Bowels, and a most
passionate Expostulation with them on account of that their Resolution, Why
will ye dye? which as it is addressed by God directly to the House of Israel, so
it would fit a Nation perverse, as that; which mutinies against Miracles and
Mercies, is false to God, Religion, and their own Interests; led by a Spirit of
giddiness and frenzy, unsteddy in all things but resolutions of Ruin, that
would tear open their old Wounds, to let out Life, and they will dye. And
though the Lord be pleased to work new prodigies of mercy for us, and to say
unto us in despite of all our Enemies both Foreign and Domestic, Live: The use
we make of all is only to debauch the Miracles, and make Gods Mercies help to
fill the measure of our Judgments; live as if we would try all the ways to
Ruin; and since God will thus deliver us from dangers, we would call for them
some other way. But to prescribe to these is above the attempt of my
endeavors: May the blessed Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
Holiness and Peace, and Order, breath on their Counsels whom this is committed
to. I shall bend my Discourse to the Conviction of Sinners in particular, and
treat upon the words as if they had been spoke to us under the Gospel.

The first thing which my Text and God supposes, is the Sinners Fate and
Choice: He will dye. Even the second Death, for it is appointed for all men
once to dye, and then comes the Judgment which shall sentence him to another
death that is immortal, in which he and his misery must live for ever; that is,
he must die everlastingly: Such is first his Fate.

That Sin and Death are of so near, so complicated a relation, as that though
they were Twins, the birth and Issue of one Womb and moment, yet they are also
one another Offspring, and beget each other, while Sin brings forth Death,
James 1. 15.
as S. James says, and is the Parent of Perdition, 2 Thessalonians. xi. 3.
and yet the Man of Sin is the Son of Perdition, as S. Paul says, and Iniquity
is but destruction's birth, only itself derived. And that this Death and
Perdition is Eternal in the most sad sense of the word there are a thousand
Texts that say. This is the Message of God in the mouth and Blood of his Son,
who uses all the artifice of Words affirmative, and negative, to tell us so,
as if on purpose to preclude all doubt and subterfuge, Matthew. xxv. 41, 46.
calls it Eternal fire, and Eternal punishment, where their worm dies not,
Mark ix. 43, 44.
their fire is not quenched, Torment for ever and ever, and the like. Your
Faith and certainty of which is as strong as your Christianity, Rev. xiv. 10,
11.
and therefore by attempting any farther proof of this, to imply there is
reason and necessity for doing so, were to suppose my Hearers Infidels.

But then this being granted that such is the Sinners Fate to lay down
positively that it is his Choice, and that he does resolve for Death, is to
suppose them worse than Infidels, more than irrational and brutish; Beasts
cannot so desire against the possibilities of Appetite, break all the forces
and instincts of Nature, as to will destruction, and choose misery. Yet that
the Sinner does so is the ground of Gods Expostulation here, Why will you dye?
Psalm. xxxiv. 12.
David enquires as if it were a Prodigy to find, What man is he that lusts to
Live? And sure the vicious man does not, for Wisdom that is Virtue, says, He
that sins against me wounds his own Soul, and all they that hate me love
death, Prove. viii. 36. And it is most evident, that they who eagerly, and out of
vehement affection pursue and seize those things to which they know destruction
is annexed inseparably, they love and choose destruction, though not for it
self, yet for the sake of that to which it clings. He that is certain such a
Potion, howsoever sweetened and made palatable, is compounded with the juice of
deadly Nightshade, if notwithstanding he will have the Poisonous draught, it is
apparent he resolves to dye.

And that I may evince this is a settled obstinate incorrigible resolution in
him, and by what ways and steps it comes to be so, I will lay before you the
violent courses he does take to break through difficulties and obstructions
that would trash and hinder him: And when the avenues to Death are strongly
guarded, how he storms and forces them, overcomes all resistance possible, that
he may seize on Sin and Death.

And First, When such persons have entered the Profession of Christianity in
Baptism, and by early engagements tied themselves to the observation of its
duties, if Principles of probity in Nature, fomented by others, instilled with
Education, have made impressions of duty on the mind, and wrought a reverence
and awe of God and of Religion, which is a fence about them, and does keep off
Vice, by making it seem strange, uncouth and difficult, while these fears and
aversations are rooted in them; why then the first thing that they do, as soon
as Youth and the Temptations do stir within them, is to poison these their own
Principles by evil Conversation, and from that and Example take infusions,
which shall impregnate them with humors of being in the fashion of the World:
Thus they labor to strangle the then troublesome modesties of Nature and of
Virtuous breeding; thus they look out ill Company to infect themselves: And
surely they that seek the Plague and run into infection, we have cause to fear
they have a Resolution to dye. But,

Secondly, If notwithstanding this in the first practices of Vice, their former
Principles stir, and ferment within, and fret the Conscience, set that on
working; why then if the sin sting gently, do but prick the heart, and make an
outlet for a little gush of Sorrow, then in spite of Scripture, they do teach
themselves to think that grief Repentance, and by the help of that conceit this
sorrow cools, and does allay the swelling of the mind, washes away the guilt
and thought of the commission, they have been sad, and they believe, repented;
as if those stings opened the fountain for transgression, and those little
wounds did flow with Balsom for themselves: And by this means that sting of the
old Serpent sin, while it pretends to cure by hurting thus, proves indeed the
Tempter to go on. For if this be all, why should a man renounce all the
Contents and satisfactions of his Inclinations, and mortify and break his
nature to avoid a thing which is so easily repented for? No, if it be no worse
they can receive this Serpent in their bosom, dare meet his sting, and run upon
these wounds, and they do so till the frequent pungencies, and cicatrices have
made the Conscience callous and insensible, the heart hardened.

But if their first essays of sin were made unfortunate by Notoreity, or some
unhappy circumstance, and so the wound were deep, and the Conscience troublesome
and restless, because this is very uneasy, these inward groans make discord in
their cheerful airs, make their life harsh, they therefore find it necessary to
confront the shame with Courage of iniquity, go boldly on that so they may
outlook it, fear their own Conscience that its wounds may not bleed. And as
those Fiends of Men who Sacrificed their Children in the fire to Moloch, that
they might not hear their Infants shreek, nor their own Bowels croak, had
noises made with Timbrels to out-voice them: So these to drown the cries and
howlings of their wounded mind, put themselves in perpetual hurry of
divertisement and Vice, make Tophet about themselves, and with the noise of
Ryots overcome all other, because they will not hearken to those groans that
call for the Physician of Souls, and then sure these resolve to dye.

Nay if this will not keep them quiet, you may see them sometimes ruffle with
their own Consciences, desire present Convictions in the very instant of
Commission, men so set on Death, that they Condemn themselves in that which
they allow. And though a man would think there should be little satisfaction in
those pleasures which Condemnation thrusts it self into, and which have an
alloy of so sad apprehensions; yet such are it seems the satisfactions of sin:
For while it slabs and gashes, He brave Hero of Iniquity, can charge the wounds
and take the Vice.

Yea Thirdly, though the Lord himself appear, and take part in the Quarrel,
join with our Principles and Conscience against the sin, and with importunate
Calls alarm us, give us no rest, ordain a Function of men by whom he does
beseech us, dresses their Messages with Promises of that which God is blessed
in, and arms them too with Terrors such as Devils tremble at, and joins his
Holy Spirit too, that Power of the Highest, sends him in Tongues of Fire, that
he also may Preach this to our very Hearts, and fright us with more flame: And
yet the Sinner breaks these strengths, and vanquishes the Arts and strivings of
Divine Compassion. If these Ambassadors speak Charms, it is but what God tells
our Prophet in this Chapter, ver. 32. And lo thou art unto them as a very
lovely Song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
Instrument. And it does dye like that, as it there follows, They hear thy words
but they do them not. And if they flash in Hell against their Vices, in
torrents of threatening Scripture, they concern themselves no more than they
would in the story of a new Eruption of Mount Aetna or Vesuvius. Yea they do
quench the Spirit and his fires, do not like the deaf Adder, stop their ears
against his whisperings, and the charms of Heaven (that were a weaker and less
valiant guilt) but are Religious in hearing them, curious that they may be
spoke with all advantages to make it harder not to yield and live, that so they
may express more resolution to perish, and with more courage and solemnity may
sin and dye.

Nay more, when God has found an Art to draw themselves into a League and
Combination against their Vices, bound them in Sacraments to Virtue; made them
enter a Covenant of Piety, and seal it in the Blood of God, and by that
foederal Rite with hands lift up, and seizing on Christ's Body, and with holy
Vows oblige themselves to the performances, or to the Threats of Gospel, which
they see executed in that Sacrament before their eyes, see there death is the
wages of iniquity, they show themselves its damned consequences, while they
behold it tear Christ's Body, spill his Blood, and Crucify the Son of God; yet
neither will this frightful spectacle, nor their own ties hold them from sin
and ruin, they break these bonds asunder to get at them.

The Wiseman says that wicked men seek death and make a Covenant with it, Wisd.
i. 16.
and so it seems: But sure they are strange wilful men, that seek it at Gods
Table in the Bread of Life, that will wade through an Ocean of mercy to get at
Perdition, and find it in the Blood of Christ, will drink Damnation in the Cup
of blessing; men that poison Salvation to themselves: They that contract thus
for Destruction, and tie it to them at the Altar, with such sacred Rites and
Articles, are sure resolved and love to dye.

Fourthly, God had provided other Guards to secure men from sin and Death, the
Censures of the Church; of which this Time was the great Season, and the
discipline of abstinence we now use is a piteous relic, all that the World
will bear it seem: But as the Lord appointed them they were so close a fence,
Matthew. xvi. 19.
that our Savior calls them Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, as if they locked
us in the Path of Piety and Life; and we must pick or break all that the Key of
Heaven can make fast, burst Locks as well as Vows before we can get out, have
liberty to sin. God having bounded in the Christians race as that among the
Grecians was, which had a River on one side, and Swords points all along the
other, so that Destruction dwelt about it on the borders: And God has mounded
ours with the River of Hell the Lake of Fire, and with these spiritual Swords
(as S. Cyprian and S. Hierome call the Censures.) But yet a Mound too weak
alas! to stand the Resolution and assaults of Vices now adays; which do not
only make great breaches in the Fence, but have quite thrown it down, and
slighted it; and the Church dares not set it up again, should she attempt it
they would scoff it down. Men will endure no bar in the way to Perdition; they
will have liberty of Ruin; will not be guarded from it; so far from brooking
Censures they will suffer no Reproof, nor Admonition, not suffer one word
betwixt them and Death eternal.

But Fifthly, Though we will not let Almighty God restrain us with his
Censures, yet he will do it with his Rod, and set the sharp stakes of
Affliction in our walk, to keep us in; thus he makes sins sometimes inflict
themselves, and then we straight resolve to break off from them; and while we
suffer shame, and feel destruction in the Vice we shrink and uncling: And now
the Sinner would not dye, especially if his Precipitance have thrown him to the
confines of the grave; and while he took his full careers of Vice, the fury of
his course did drive him to the ports of Ruin, and Death seemed to make close
and most astonishing approaches, when standing on the brink of the Abyss, he
takes a prospect of the dismal state that must receive him and his Vices, then
he trembles and flies, his apprehensions swoon, his Soul has dying qualms,
caused as much by the Nausea of sin as by the fear of Hell: he is in agonies of
passion and of Prayer both against his former courses, he never will come near
them more; and now sure God has caught him, and his will is wholly bent
another way, now he will live the new life if God will grant him any: But alas!
have we never seen when God has done this for him, stretched out his Arm of
Power, haled him from the brow of the Pit, and set him further off, how he does
turn and drive on furiously in the very same path that leads to the same Ruin,
and he recovers into death eternal?

And now this Will is grown too strong for the Almighties powerful methods, and
frustrates the whole Counsel of God for his Salvation, neglects his Calls and
Importunacies whereby he warns him to consult his safety, to make use of Grace
in time, not to harden his heart against his own mercies, and perish in
despite of mercy. And when he can reject Gods Graces and his Judgments thus,
defy his Conscience and his own Experience too, there is but one thing left
wherein this Resolution can show its courage, and that is,

Sixthly, His own present Interests; All which the Sinner can break through and
despise, to get at Death. It is so usual to see any of the gross wasting Vices
when it is once espoused, murder the Reputation, and all those great concerns
that do depend upon a man's Esteem, eat out his Wealth and Understanding, make
him pursue pernicious ways and Counsels, besot him, and enslave him, fill his
life with disquiet, shame and neediness, and the sad consequents of that,
Contempt, and all that is Miserable and unpitied in this Life; and yet the sin
with all these disadvantages is lovely, not to be divorced nor torn off from
him, that I were vain should I attempt to prove a thing so obvious. I shall
give but one instance of the power of the Will, the violence and fury of its
inclinations to Ruin.

The man who for another inadvertency, possibly such as their own rules of
Honor will not judge affront, yea sometimes without any shadow of a
provocation, merely becaue he will be rude, does that upon which they must call
one another to account, and to their last account indeed at Gods dread
Judgment Seat; whither when he has sacrificed two Families, it may be all
their hopes and comforts in this Life; two Souls which cost the Blood of God,
having assaulted Death when it was armed and at his heart, and charged
Damnation to take Hell by Violence; he comes with his own and his Brother's
blood upon his Soul to seize his Sentence, Go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire:
It Is plain against all Interests of this World and the World to come, this man
will dye. And yet this is one of the laudable and generous Customs of the Age.
Neither does this man stand alone, the desperate Rebel would come into the
Induction, that without any hopes sets all on fire, to consume all here, and to
begin his Flames hereafter.

But I have said enough to prove the Resoluteness of a Sinners Will, which is
so great indeed that it is this especially which does enhance the guilt of sin
into the merit of an endless punishment, this persevering obstinacy does
deserve Hell and make it just.

For whatsoever inequality there is betwixt the short-lived pleasures of a sin,
which dye while they are tasted, and put out themselves, and those eternal
never-dying retributions of Vengeance, (As sure there is also betwixt the life
of Man, and several of those petty felonies that forfeit it) yet the Law does
not murder when it Executes. (I might have instanced in the gathering sticks
upon the Sabbath day in Israel. Numb. xv. 32, 35.
) For since the preservation of public safety and propriety is valuable with
the lives of many men, and to secure that and affright the Violation, it was
necessary to affix such punishments to such offenses; they that know the
penalty, and wilfully, merely to feed their other Vices, run upon it, justly
suffer it: So that Man might not rob himself of that Immortal Glory which God
had ordained him when he did see it absolutely necessary, thus to hedge Vice
with Eternal Death: And as he set Angels and Flaming Swords to keep him out of
Paradise, so to set Fiends and Flames to guard Hell from him, and to entail
those Torments on Man's sin, which he had prepared for the Devil, and sealed
the Deed in the Blood of his Son. If notwithstanding men renounce the
blessedness, and against all their Interests and Obligations, in spite of all
the Arts and Powers of Heaven, they will have the Torments; and, (what they
never would attempt for Paradise) invade those flames to get to Hell, it is very
just that God should let them have it; should not break his Decrees, dispense
with Holy Laws so confirmed, merely to gratify those that are obstinate for
ruin, and against his whole Gospel quench Hell fires because men are resolved
to run into them. This Will does, as it were, even the Scales betwixt the Sin
and the Damnation, equal the pleasure to the punishment, and fill the distance
from a moment to Eternity.

But though this Will do clear God's Justice, yet it does not satisfy his
Reason, he seems astonished at the choice; God himself cannot find a Ground for
such a Resolution; and therefore does enquire, Why will ye dye? Which is God's
question, and my second Part.

It is the present pleasure sin does tempt your sensuality withal, whose
agitations are so quick and strong that they surprise or break the forces of
your Reason, and your Principles, put the Mind in disorder, and then seize it
with such violence as to lead it captive to the Law of Sin and Death? It Is true
indeed thus both of them had their original, so they prevailed in Paradise, for
when the Woman saw the Tree was good for food, and pleasant to the eye, and a
Tree to be desired to make one wise, she took thereof and she did eat, although
she knew that God had said, In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely dye, Genesis iii. But there was generous pleasure here, such as tempted the
Soul, assaulted it with the appearances of Wisdom, and divine Knowledge: Ye
shall be as Gods, Genesis iii. 5. And sure it is no great wonder if the proper
pleasures of the mind engage it, therefore when God would give a Precept liable
to a Temptation of being broke, he laid it in the sphere of those things that
delight the Soul, of Knowledge; but far be it that those of sensuality should
ever have prevailed; Man may yield to the pleasure of being like God, but for
pleasure to make himself a Beast is contradiction to Nature. For pleasure is
but satisfaction of our appetites, and the more natural the inclination is, the
higher and more powerful that Nature, and the desire eagerer, so much the more
delightful is the satisfaction. Now it is certain that the reasonable faculty,
the Soul or Spirit is the highest and most proper nature of a man: In all the
rest he is not a step removed from Beasts, unless it be in shape, but in the
accurateness of his senses is below them far; and therefore must be so in
sensual satisfactions; but in his Soul he borders upon Angels, and does come
toward God.

Now then that Soul being man's peculiar nature, the highest part of him, It
follows its delights, Spiritual reasonable Joys must needs be the most natural
and most proper for it, most conformed to it, and therefore the most taking
with it. This may be cleared most irrefragably.

A Beast has several ingredients of Nature in his making, he is an heavy body,
and a Vegetable, and he has also Sense which is his highest nature. Now though
the only inclination of heavy bodies be to fall down to the Earth, and this be
also natural to a Beast, we do not find that it is his greatest pleasure, sure
he had rather feed than tumble in the Pasture; his chief delight lies in the
satisfaction of his chiefest faculties, wherein he does excel, his Senses; and
as Beasts differ and transcend in these, so do their pleasures also differ and
exceed. A man also, as Aristotle says, does live a threefold Life: At first he
is but a Plant-man, a growing span of living Creature, and he is born only into
Animality, a Life of Sense, and at last educated into reasonable. Now the
delights of his first Stages, whilst only Vegetation and Sense live, although
proportioned to those states, yet have no savor to the mind; he grows through
Nuts and Rattles to the use of Reason, and the pleasures of it also; these must
keep even with the growing faculties and become higher, rational, and manly:
Which if they do not, but the man still dwell upon the satisfaction of sense,
he does confound the Stages, contradict the progresses of Nature; he has the
age and strength of Reason but to play the Child with, to exert it in those
things that are but a Man's Rattles, has the sagacity of an Intelligence
merely to find out how to be a brute with greater luxury and relish.

Come therefore, show me now the sins which the delights of Reason do betray
you to, and I Will admit the Plea: But if you live your own reverse that you may
dye; renounce all your own pleasures first, that so you may renounce the joys
of God and Heaven; and fall from Nature that you may fall into Hell, this case
has no pretense; and those pleasures cannot toll man on to death, which till
the man be dead, and the brute only live within him cannot be his pleasures.
And it is plain they are not pleasures to a Sober man that lives the life of
Reason, not to say of Grace: Nor are they such to any man till he have trained
and exercised himself into an habit of enduring them, and by a discipline of
Torment made himself experienced for Vice and for Damnation: Nor is there ever
any pleasure in some Vices. What is there in the dismal Wishes of man's
imprecating passion? there cannot be music in those harsh horrors, and yet
the Sinners will destruction so as that they call to God to pour it on them,
and tear it down from Heaven, so that Pain and Disease seem to sauce those
delights, and Death to be the tempter to the pleasure; it is evident men's
reasons and their Practices must be first debauched, that they may count them
Pleasures, and therefore pleasure cannot be the first mover in the Sinners race
to Death.

But I will grant, that the Spirit and Flesh of Man by their so strait alliance
and perpetual converse, may grow to have the same likes and dislikes, have but
one appetite, and this alas! be that of flesh; to whose only satisfactions the
man uses himself, by long Custom of which, the Soul does so imbibe the
Inclinations of the Body, that nothing of another kind can possibly be
relished. In this case sensuality has pleasures, yet such as cannot answer
Gods enquiry; for do but consult man's other Choices and you find a present
satisfaction cannot work his Resolutions to forego great after-hopes, or run
upon a foreseen ruin. Who will exchange his right to the Reversion of a Crown,
which from his Father he shall certainly inherit and succeed to if he do
outlive him, for a present Scene of Royalty, and choose a painted Coronet, the
pomps and adorations of a Stage, and the applauses of a Crowd before the real
Glories of his Kingdom, the love and the obedience of his Subjects? And yet my
Soul, the disproportion of the Sinners terms is infinitely greater; and there
is no hazard, which to make his choice of present things more flattering, the
others hopes are liable to: For that Heir of the Crown may die before the Crown
fall to him; but it is impossible that we should miss of ours except we put our
selves by, by such choices; except we change it thus. And on the other side we
know, men will adventure the Sentence of the Law by Robberies and murders to
provide for Lusts, while they hope to be undiscovered: But sure a Prison made
delightful by all arts of pleasure, and all plenties of it, will not hire a man
to own those actions which shall forfeit him to certain shameful Execution the
next Sessions, and yet this is the Sinners state exactly, he is ti'd and bound
in the chain of his sins, they are it may be chains of Gold and softened with
delices, but they reserve him to the Judgment of the great Assise: And yet he
chooses these and puts them on as Ensigns of delight and honor.

Once more; Do not men choose a present Agony to keep off an afterevil, they
tear their bowels with a Vomit to prevent a Surfeit, they cup and scarifie, and
with all artifice or pain upon themselves kill a Disease, yea they are well
content to prolong torment so they may but prolong life; and though the
preservation of it prove only continued pangs, and all they can effect is
only this, that they are longer dying, yet they are glad to be so in all
cases, except where the prescription is Virtue, and the death prescribed
against Eternal.

Now why do you choose thus only in Sin and Hell? It Is clear the very pleasure
you change Heaven for, cannot invite you from this Life, and then you that will
suffer any thing rather than you will dye, Why against all resistance will you
dye for ever?

It is Secondly, because you know not what it is to dye the second Death? at
least your notions of it are so slight and easy, that they cannot fright you
from a pleasure or cope with a temptation to it; and so though present
satisfactions are not able to engage you upon present ruin they can upon the
after-death.

Indeed the Sinner would have reason if it meant no more than has been taught
of late by one that has gained many Proselytes among the Virtuosi of Religion;
After the Resurrection the Reprobates shall be, says he, in the state that
Adam and his Posterity were in after his Sin (i. e.) the state we are now in,
Live as we do, Marry and give in Marriage, and cease to be when they have got
some heirs to succeed them in Tophet. Poor unhappy Souls these! that never had
any sin to merit being there, nor any Sentence to condemn them thither but this
man's: Who must put them there successively one after other, to find employment
for Everlasting fire. A Doctrine such as had an Angel Preached from Heaven by
S. Paul's award he must have been Anathema; when the Devil made Religions, and
Theology came from the bottomless Pit, he never found out such an Engine to
conveigh men into it as this pleasant notion of the punishment of sin therein;
as if Leviathan were made to take his pastime in that Lake also, by such
interpretations, which surely were contrived to make out the Assertion of that
Romish Priest, who says, that those in Hell love to be there; Tho. de. Alb.
nay more, that 'twas impossible for God to do a kinder thing for them than to
put them there. Doctrines to be abhorred as Hell it self; and yet upon these
grounds he builds their Church by demonstration, so strong as that the Gates of
Hell cannot prevail against it; and in truth they have no reason to assault it
on these terms. But to pass by such dotages and frenzies, you will be able sure
to check all those presumptions which grow from slight impressions of the
second Death, if you but take that prospect of it which the close of this time
gives: look forward through this season, which is designed for you to prepare
the way of the Lord to his Passion in, and you shall see the Death that does
await iniquity.

If you behold him coming to Jerusalem with Hosannas and Palms about him, as if
Death were his Triumph, his Passion so desirable, that he rode to meet it,
which he never did at any other time; and then complaining he was straightened
until it were accomplished; Luc. xii. 50.
as he had throws of Longing after it, Matt. xxvi. 30.
and singing when he went out to it, you would believe the Sinner never chose
his death, sweetened by his most pleasant sin, with a more cheerful eagerness.
But then open the Garden and you see his apprehensions of it throw him on his
Face to pray against it. Mat. xxvi. 39.
See how he sweats and begs, his very Prayer is a Passion, the zeal of it is
Agony! and can thou choose that he so dreads and deprecates? and when he
durst not meet the apprehensions, will thou stand the storm? see what a sting
death has, when it makes out-lets for such clots and globes of Blood, and
stings the Soul so too, that it pours out it self in Sweat. And then he sinks
again under the deprecation of it, and prays that that Cup may pass from him.
Blessed Savior! when thou had just now made thy Death thy Legacy, thy
Sacrament, do thou entreat to escape this death? if this Cup pass from thee,
what will the Cup of Blessing profit us? thou had but now bequeathed a Cup to
us which was the New Testament in thy Blood, and now will thou not shed that
Blood? But do thou refuse thy Cup? Oh 'twas a Cup of deadly Wine, red with
God Indignation, poisoned with Sin! And can the Sinner thirst for the Abyss of
this, the Lake that has no bottom? and when he goes again, and prays the same
words the third time, be yet not only so supine as not ask to escape it, seldom
and very slight in any Prayer or wish against it, but also so resolved to have
it, as to gape that he may swill it down to everlastingness? Follow him from
that Garden and you see him even dying under his Cross, he cannot bear that
when it is laden with sin, Heb. i. 3.
who yet upholdeth all things by the word of his Power. It Is said the time will
come when the Sinner will cry out to the Hills to fall on him, Luc. xxiii. 30.
any weight but that of iniquity, the burden of that is intolerable, it is
easier for him to bear a Mountain than a Vice, and yet Christ says he has a
beam in his Eye, Matthew. vii. 3.
and can he shrink at any weight whose part, that is most sensible, tender to
an expression, can bear that which shoulders must fall under, only Pillars can
sustain? Oh yes; that which did sink the shoulders of Omnipotence: Then the
Mountains rather and the Rocks to cover; but in vain, they will not cover, for
thy very Groans will rent them: Christ's were so sad that his did, they tore
the Rocks, and that which is much more inflexible, the Monuments: Death started
at them, and the bonds of the Grave loosened, and the Dust was frighted into
Resurrection; and more, the Hypostatick Union seemed rent by them, the God to
have forsaken his own Person. And can the Sinner hope to stand this shock? will
the courage of his Iniquity make his heart harder than those Rocks, more
insensible than the Grave, and better able to endure than he that was a God?
and will you die into this state eternally? which it was necessary for him to
have the assistance of Divinity in his Person, that he might be able to endure
one day, and which yet notwithstanding made one day intolerable.

The sum is this, a Person so desiring Death and yet so dreading it, and
sinking under the essays of it, and this Person the Son of God, and that dread
merely because there was sin in the Death, (for if this were not in the cause,
no Martyr but had born death with more courage but that Son of God) all this as
it does leave no Reason for the Sinners choice of death Eternal, so neither
does it leave a possibility of bearing it: And if so, give me leave in God's
Name to Expostulate, the last employment of these words, Why will ye die?

After this killing Prospect, while the damp of it is on you, let my Bowels
debate with you, which yearn more over you than they did over my Beloved Son in
whom I was well pleased; when I have sent my only Son, God, one with my own
Self, to be made Man, that he might suffer what was necessary to be suffered to
preserve you from eternal sufferings; when I have laid on him that was brought
up with me from everlasting, Prove. viii. 30.
and that was daily my Delight, all your Iniquities and my own Indignation,
that so you might be freed from both: When I have found out, made an Expiation,
with which I am more pleased than ever your transgressions offended me, which
has quite blotted out your sins and my Displeasure; when your Redemption from
death is made, the Ransom paid, the Price is in my hand, why do you then refuse
your selves, your own Eternal Blessedness which was thus dearly purchased and
is ready for you? Why will you seize that Indignation which you are redeemed
from, and force those sufferings on your selves, which have been laid already
and inflicted on another? It Is a small thing that you refuse me, the return of
my Expense, that which I gave my Son for; but do you renounce Happiness because
my Love and Blood is in it? and will you die because you may, and I desire you
should live? when my Son went from the essential felicities of my Bosom to
embrace Agonies, and died for you; why will you also die? as you have slain his
Person, will you Crucify his Kindness too? and crucify your selves rather
than have it? and having used him most despightfully, will you therefore use
his favors so? and not let his Death and Passion do you any good? contemn his
methods of Salvation, his divine Acts of making you for ever Blessed? is your
Savior and Life it self so hateful to you? and after such Redemption of your
persons is there no redemption of your Will from perishing? nothing of value
that can bribe your choice against it? nothing that can betroth you into a
desire of Life, and take you off from your resolves to die? had I set no
advantage on the other side, if sin had sweetened misery to your Palate, it had
been no such great despite and contradiction to Appetite; but when Heaven and
the Joys of God are in the Scale against it, to prefer Misery is Wretchless
beyond aggravation. Oh why will you rather die? Those very things that tempt
your Wills were they abstracted from the death they do inveigle you into, were
they sincere and innocent, if they were set against that Life, that blessed
life, immortal Life, would vanish quite in the comparison when you should see
they are but frolicks of delight, that never take you but when you are turned
up to them, in moods and fits; and the complacencies you take in them are but
starts of Appetite, that swells and breaks out to them and then falls again,
and so the pleasures die even in the birth, and therefore cannot satisfy;
indeed do but disquiet an immortal appetite such as man's is, so that it were
impossible to choose a life, these rather, although there were no misery
annexed to them, if you considered: For it were to resolve that a few drops
were more than an immence Ocean of Delight, a Moment longer than Eternity, a
Part were bigger than the Whole, an Atome greater than an Infinite. Now there
is nothing then that can prefer these to your choice but the Death only; and Oh
will ye without and against all Temptation, Will ye die?

O thou my Soul! take other Resolutions, thou see the things that men with so
much care and sin provide to make their lives delightful here, although success
answer their care, are vain and helpless things, and life it self as vain, and
I must die, and drop from Heaven; and therefore be thou sure to take a care
their treacherous comforts do not make me die into the everlasting want of them
and of all comforts.

The Artificial pleasures of the Palate whether in meats or drinks, forced
tastes, that do at once satisfy and provoke the Appetite, will relish ill when
I begin to swallow down my spittle; but sure I am, I am invited to the Supper
of the Lamb, to drink new Wine with Christ in my Father's Kingdom; The fatted
Calf is dressing for my Entertainment, and shall I choose to be a while a
Glutton with the Swine, rather than the eternal Guest of my Father's Table and
Bosom? and refuse these for a few sick Excesses which would end in qualms, and
gall, and vomits, if there were no guilt to rejolt too, and which will kindle a
perpetual Fever? The Honors and the Glories of this Life will lose their
shine when I am going to make my Bed in the Dark, in a black lonely desolate
hole of Earth; my Gayeties must die, when I must say to Corruption, thou art my
Father, and to the Worm thou art my Mother and my Sister: And if there were
pride or ambition in them, their Worm will never die, that Pride will make me
fall as low as Lucifer, that Glory will go out into utter darkness, and that
Ambition change my Honor into everlasting Shame, Envy, and Torment: But sure I
am that there are Glorious Robes, and Thrones, and Scepters in God's Promises;
and let thy gayety, my Soul! be in the Robe of Immortality, the Throne of thy
Ambition that of Glory.

When I shall lie tortured or languishing in my last Bed, Palaces and
Possessions will no more relieve me, than the Landscape of them in the Hangings
can do it. And if there were Covetousness, Bribery, Sacriledg, or Injustice in
them, I shall be carried out of these, and have no other Habitation assigned
me, but with the Devil and his Angels, shall inherit and possess nothing but
the Almighty's Indignation for ever.

But in my Father's House are many Mansions, Places prepared for me, and an
Inheritance as wide as Heaven, as Endless and Incorruptible as Eternity, and
God Himself: And sure if I may choose, there I will live where there is neither
Will nor possibility to die; where there is Life, fullness of Joy, Pleasures for
Evermore. To which, etc.

The Sixth SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL.
PSALM LXXIII. v. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee:
MY Text is the result of the Pious man's Audit, the foot of the account in
summing up his whole that he has either in Possession or Desire; and instead
of nice Division of the Words I shall observe in them these Subjects of
Discourse.

First, the different tenure, or condition of Estates in the two different
Countries we relate to, this here is a Land only of desires, the other is a
place of enjoyments, Have in Heaven, Desire on Earth. Yea

Secondly, Though our estate here in this Earth be present, and that other seem
removed far off, yet the possessions of that are present and in hand, but the
most native satisfactions of the Earth are still at distance, only the object
of our aims and expectations I have, now I have in Heaven, on the Earth I but
desire.

Thirdly, Here is the matter of both these desires and enjoyments to the Pious
man; No Person or no thing (for so it bears also) but God: There is nothing
upon Earth that I desire besides thee. And as to Heaven the negation is
expressed emphatically by a Question, Whom have I in Heaven but thee?

Yet least this Question should look like an Expostulation, and he that asks it
seem unsatisfied with his Portion, we will therefore,

Lastly, see the Importance of it to the Christian, since our Savior is gone
up into Heaven, see whom the Christian has there: And if the Psalmist could
find none but God, and David (if he were the Author) could not see the Son of
David there, yet since Christ is set at the Right hand of God, the Christians
present Interest in Heaven is such, that looking with contempt on all that
worldly men applaud themselves in the enjoyment of, rejecting all but thee O
Christ, he justly triumphs in resolving of this question to himself, and being
satisfied in having thee, he does renounce even the desiring any thing but thee.

Of these in their order beginning here on Earth, where our tenure even of
earthly things is but desire, this World does give no satisfactions in hand,
but still they are only the objects of our Expectations and wishes.

When God has given Man an erect Countenance, Eyes that do naturally look
toward him, and the very frame of him is such, that Heaven is his constant
Object; it were no wonder if his looks and thoughts were always there, since
both the duty and necessity of that does seem impressed upon him in his making,
and to desire things above, is, as it were, the Law in his members.

But when he swims in delicacies here upon the Earth, is immerst in the
plenties of all kinds, that these should give him nothing but desires of
themselves, that the delights should not be present to him, but he should still
pursue and need that which he is encompast with, that while with open mouth and
in a most intemperate current he swills down the pleasures, yet his open mouth
should gape only with thirst, and he be sensible of nothing but the want of
these, is strange even to astonishment: Yet such it seems the nature of them
is. When S. John would enumerate all that is in the World the particular that
he gives in is thus, 1 John ii. 16. All that is in the world, the lust of the
Flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. He does not say, the
objects of these Lusts that are to serve and satisfy them, for there is no such
thing as satisfaction, but only lust; and if we make enquiry into the
particulars we shall find it.

To begin with that of the Eyes, Covetousness, or the love of Money: It Is
evident that where an Object is not useful to the faculty, it cannot satisfy,
for satisfaction is fulfilling of our needs and uses, but Money is not useful
to the sight, nor indeed does it prove useful to, or serve any of the Covetous
man's occasions or faculties; rather the contrary in every kind, he does bereave
himself of good because he has it; He is in agonies of trouble and
solicitude, lest he should need, and not have that, which when he has
acquired he will still need, and will not have enjoyment of. Nor is it possible
it should be otherwise, for since there is no natural original or cause of this
his Appetite, for it is not emptiness that makes him hungry, who is more
ravenous the more full he is, whose most empty bowels shrink and cling
together, and having learned not to expect repast, while his bags and desires
stretch, and are enlarged by being stuffed.

Nor is it fear of future want that makes him eager to provide so, for why
should he be so unsatisfied in his providing against want, that will want more
the more he is provided?

And since as there is no natural cause, so there is also no natural measure
for this Appetite of his; for Natures measure is our real uses of the Object.
But this man heaps up useful things that he does never mean to use: Since
therefore it has neither bound nor cause in Nature, it is monstrous, and must
needs be an unlimited lust, incapable of satisfaction: And all this man's
Wealth does purchase nothing for him but desires, and is not the content but
the Lust of his Eye.

And the same reasoning will conclude the next, the Pride of life, which is the
Lust of a Sense as wholly unconcerned in all the Pomps and garnishes of Pride,
as the Eye is in Wealth: it is a Lust of the Ear, all is but the man's passion
to hear himself, his trappings, or condition commended. The Learned man that is
proud, does think of no return for all his toyls and watches, all the present
racks and tortures of his mind, and all the after-ones that he does pull upon
his body, but to be spoken well of: He fasts, mortifies, and denies himself
more than the Covetous man can do, merely to fill himself with wind; he
reconciles the Babel of all Languages, and Sciences too in his own head but for
a word, only to hear an Euge, and this with such solicitude that if the breath
of men's Applause should fail him he would straight expire, as if his Soul
breathed only at his Ear. If my pride lies in gayeties, all Natures Wardrobe
must be rifled, the beauties of the Universe desloured, the Art and Sweat too
of all Nations employed to attire my person, or to dress my Room, rather indeed
to dress the Tongues and furnish, out the talk of other persons, who must
entertain mine Ears with the discourse of my own splendors; which is all the
use I can make of it; the Eastern Rocks must send me Diamonds, merely to dart a
line of light into another eyes, which may return to me in a report that I
have such fine Jewels, and I have nothing else of all my sumptuous glories but
the mere Echo of their shine, which is reflected and beat back to me in
commendations. With so much expense anxiety and sin, I do provide only for
other men's discourses, or it may be, envies. Now these are none of my
enjoyments, and therefore I have nothing of them but the Lust and the desire.

As for those of the flesh, the third remaining kind, they seem indeed to be
exempted from this reasoning; the sensual person gorges his desires, and in
Solomon's phrase makes his Soul enjoy good: Yet the same Solomon salves that
appearance too, in saying when provisions increase, they are increased that eat
them; Eccles. v. 11.
and what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them
with their eyes? My broad and my cramb'd Tables do not more enlarge or serve my
appetite, give me no satisfaction but only that of seeing many Dishes full,
and many men consuming them, as if Luxury also were a lust of the Eye. It has
been said indeed, that the Eye is the Gluttons most unsatisfied and greedy
part, and it must needs be so if its lust lie to all that other men devour, and
if it crave not only for the man's own stomach, but for throngs of Clients,
Parasites, and attendants. And it is too plain the other Twin Intemperance lusts
by the same rules and laws: It does not only claim its seat in the Eye, which
makes it self a Judge of Liquors for the Palate, and does not choose them by
the uses of their moisture, but by their body, by their air, and by the mode,
and other Rules of the authentic standard Drinkers; as if men thirsted in the
fashion only: But this Eye also, as the Riotous man's did, gapes for company,
and thirsts to see the Vice go round, it drinks in nothing with so much delight
as the Wine, when a weaker Companion returns it back again in Vomit, at that
foul horrid spectacle it sparkles and triumphs. Now 'twere in vain to ask
Solomon's question, What good is there in this? or what enjoyment? to urge that
meats and drinks cannot give satisfaction to the Eye that has no Palate, and
then cry out Oh Prodigy that it should Lust thus! As for the other kind of
Riots, where with arts of Epicurism men contrive to feast and entertain their
private Appetites, and put a Patrimony into sauce for their own Palats, men
sordidly Luxurious. It Is evident that these are studied to provoke, men choose
such Wines as they may longest drink, and with elaborate condiments make forced
hunger as well as dishes, so that the Riotous design only to Lust, and the
whole mystery of Luxury is to create desires.

Lastly, for that one that has engrossed the name of Lust, it gives in a full
Evidence against it self. For the Adulterer, much more irrational than the most
greedy Miser; is insatiate in desiring what he has, and his Lust will not use
his remedy, lest so it should allay and quench the Lust: And whilst with so
much fever of desire, he courts nothing else but the change, and values that
alone equal with all the discontents of this life, all the miseries of that to
come, and will go to the Devil merely for variety, as it is plain: Adultery
has nothing proper to it self but the desire, is a mere looseness of the Fancy,
which ranges in wild lusts, and which has no enjoyment that is peculiar to it
but the lusting only; so it is also plain that this Lust must be endless, for
that principle of Change which gives it all its incitation must never let it
rest; for then it is not variety. S. John said therefore most expressly, All that
is in the World is Lust; men only can desire here, pursuing their desires just
as they do their shadows, no eagerness or have can bring them nearer, still
they only pursue, yea like him that would hugg and force a Cloud, his empty
arms return upon his breast with strokes; and while they seek to catch the
Object wound his Bosom: And thus it must be till we fix our passion there,
where only there is satisfaction even on God; the object of the pious man's
desire, and my next Part.

Nothing besides thee, or with thee: so it signifies also.

There is nothing upon Earth that I desire with thee.

Had he said, Nothing without thee, the emptiness of every thing below which
the Lord and his Blessing is not in, had made this his determination just and
necessary: But sure when God has put other needs in my making, and has
provided supplies for them, those also are as just and necessary objects of
desire, while they are with and under him: But yet, he that had brought all his
affections into David's frame, might well say he desired nothing upon Earth
besides, nothing with God; for he had weaned his very Flesh and all the craving
appetites of Sense from their own objects, and had fixed them upon God in all
their strength and vigor. My Soul, says he, thirsts for thee, (elsewhere,
my Soul gaspeth unto thee, even as a thirsty Land,) and my flesh also longs
after thee, Psalm lxiii. 1. Psalm. xxxvi. 9.
How! My Soul thirsts for thee? with thee indeed is the Well of Life: But
Thirst is an Appetite, gasping a consequent defailance and impatience of the
Body; to both which the Soul is a mere stranger, as it is also to the ways by
which the Body does desire; ^or the Soul is drawn by moral engagements, by
persuasions and motives, there is place for deliberation and Choice in her
Desires, she can demur in her pursuits, divert her Inclinations, and quench a
Desire with a Consideration; but the Flesh pursues in a more impulsive manner,
is drawn and spurred on by such impetuous propensions as are founded in matter:
You can no more persuade a thirsty Palate not to thirst, than you can woo a
falling Stone to stay its have, or invite it to turn aside from its direction
to the Center. Yea but the Soul also exerts it self in all these appetites of
flesh and matter, and with all their violence when it looks on God, when we
have once had a taste, or when indeed we but discern our needs of him, whether
our Temporal, or Spiritual, those of the Soul or Flesh, all the desires of both
then fly at him, and with a tendency most close and uncontrollable, then
nothing besides him. For all the appetites of Body crowd into the Soul that
they may catch at God, that Thirsts and Gaspes. And the Soul does put on the
violent impetuous agitations of the Bodies Appetites; My Soul thirsts for
thee, and my Flesh also longs after thee. What Longing is, whether an
Appetite or Passion of the Flesh or Mind, whose signatures are more express
indeed upon the Flesh than those of any other, yet whose impulses are so quick
and so surprising, as they were Spirit; I shall not now enquire: but sure if
the Flesh long it should be for some carnal Object, for that is proportioned to
it; Flesh and the Creature use to close indeed, and they imbibe each other, as
if they knew to fill and satisfy each other; yea some there are that have
brought down their Souls to the propensions of Flesh, have given to their very
Spirits an infusion of carnality, for they mind only fleshly things. But by
the rates of David's practice it should seem the pious man does the just
contrary; sublimes his Flesh into a Soul, drains all the carnal Appetites out
of it, weans it from all its own desires, and teaches it those of the Spirit
only, makes it long for God. Now he whose flesh is defaecated thus, and as it
were inured to the condition which it shall put on, when it awakes from its
corruption, as if it were already in that place, whose happiness and desires
have no use of Body, and were in that state where their Bodies neither hunger
or thirst, for these he has translated from his flesh; it is his Soul only
thirsts, and that for God: As if he were indeed like Angels now, how can this
man desire any thing on Earth besides the Lord, who is and does already what
they are and do in Heaven, where we have nothing but thee?

But notwithstanding this exalted temper, though we should arrive at this
Seraphick constitution of desires, and though God has now made himself to us
the proper object of these appetites, for since God struck the Rock for us
which Rock was Christ; 1 Cor. x. 4. John vi. 32, 34. ver. 55.
since the true Bread came down from Heaven, if our Flesh long for God there is
a satisfaction ready, he has made his Flesh be meat indeed; if our Souls
thirst for God, he can furnish drink for a Soul, the Blood of God.

But yet while this Soul sojourns in this earthly Tabernacle, the man will
still want other supplies, and may be not desire them; or can he choose indeed?
For they that tell us stories of some men, whose hungers and thirsts after God
as they devoured all other desires in them, so also gave themselves no other
satisfaction but panem Dominum, that (...) Supersubstantial daily Bread, the
Lord; these men I say, would find it hard to make out how bare Species could
nourish and sustain a bodily life. Yea Christ himself when he was upon the
Earth did hunger, and although it was his meat to do his Father's Will, John
vi. 54.
yet when he was an hungered Angels came and ministered unto him, Matthew. iv. 11.
and then may not our earthly needs desire something besides him?

That while we are upon the Earth all those necessities are in our constitution
is certain; but that we need not desire for them, or any thing besides Him, is
as certain: Because to them that desire him all these things shall be added,
they are annexed by Promise, Matthew vi. 33. it is for such to be sollicitous who
would have something they must have alone; something that cannot come along
with God. But if I be assured that all my needs shall be supplied in him, I
need desire nothing besides him; now this Promise he must perform; for he that
when he put Man in a state of Immortality in Paradise, provided him a Tree of
Life that might for ever furnish and sustain him: For that Age also that he
does design a man a being for his Service here upon the Earth, he must allow
him necessaries for his being and his Service, otherwise he can nor serve, nor
be: And then if they be certain what need he desire them? (...) says S.
Chrysostom; These are not objects for our careful wishes, but our trusts and
confidences, we may assure our selves of these if we have him, these are his
Appendages, and then why should I put them with him into my Devotions? when my
Soul lies gasping toward God in Prayer, my desires seizing on his
Blessednesses, to take them off from him, and to make my desires turn aside to
little earthly things and fix them there, is to affront not my God only, but
my Prayer too; and when these things are sure, seems to betray a mind too
Earthly and too apprehensive of these needs: Surely I were most strangely
necessitous, or strangely greedy, if both God and that which shall be added to
him were not enough for me: More wretched, or else more unsatisfied than Hell,
if the Almighty were not sufficient for me; if he be my provision, then I need
desire nothing besides him.

But yet Necessities will crave; Hunger does croak aloud, Thirst makes the
insensate Earth to gasp; as if with open mouth it gaped not only to receive
but beg Gods showers, and God expects to be entreated for these things: Psalm.
Cxlvii. 9.
He feeds but those young Ravens that do call upon him, and the young Lions
roar to him and seek their meat at God: Psalm. Civ. 21.
The eyes of all things wait on him for that; Psalm. Cxlvi. 15.
yea, this our Psalmist in this very Psalm desires other things; and Christ
himself has put into his little Summary these needs and these desires, Give us
this day our daily bread; and my Text does but regulate not exclude these
desires, if we shall read it in the old Translation, there is none upon Earth
that I desire in comparison of thee (...) There Is none or nothing that I desire
or delight in equally with thee, like thee, so we translate the same word, ver.
5. I shall not doubt to beg what my needs crave: But if God, and any the most
signal earthly advantage stand in competition, and I cannot have one with the
other, his Providence or his Commands have made them inconsistent, that I will
not desire with him, then he shall be my Choice alone: Rather Obedience and my
God than any satisfaction how desirable soever!

This is the Touchstone of a Pious man's desires; it is not unusual for
inclinations to things below, more to possess our thoughts, employ our
faculties than any other, and we are far more sensible of their impressions,
more busy in the pursuit, and more tender in our cares of them: But if upon
contest betwixt God and our inclinations, upon debate betwixt a Pleasure and
Command, we can decree for God and for Obedience, pass Sentence with the
Precept, we are safe, here the desire is not inordinate. It Is a known instance,
and you may have seen, a tender Mother spending almost her whole time in
caressing her little Infant, you would think she had Eyes for no uses but to
view it, and that she had her Arms and Breasts but to embrace and suckle it, to
whom these are so wholly given up as if they had no part for any other, as the
Husband, had no share in her entertains and caresses of whom are far more
slight and not so pressing: But should it come to this pinch once, that she
must straight resolve to part with one of these, however close her Arms would
grasp her Child to rescue him (to force whom thence were like the tearing of
her bowels from her) yet would she give those bowels to redeem her bosom guest,
and the Husband would be the Choice; so that although the other inclinations
were more expressive, these are the stronger and the better settled. So it may
happen, we may be more sensibly affected to some dear things here below, our
thoughts, and Eyes, and our embraces cling and fasten more to these; but if it
come to this that we must leave one, break with the Duty or the Passion; if we
resolve however not to part with God, but lay hold there and let the other go,
then our affections are not only regular when we desire nothing in comparison
with him, but our desires are enjoyments, seize and take possession of him, and
we have him: So my Text implies here, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? importing
that we have him: Which brings me to the other parts that yet remain to be
discoursed of.

Three things are here to be considered.

1. That Heaven is the place of Possessions in opposition to this Land of
Desires. 2. That God is the possession there. 3. That the Pious man has this
possession in present.

The first of these is so much common place, I shall not stay upon it; those
only qualities that make this World to be a Land of Desires, have no place
there, to wit, the instability and emptiness of all things in it, he that lays
hold on them does but grasp Mercury, which the more he clasps the more he
forces it to slip away, and he retains only the soil and the defilement of it,
like Lightning which but passes by, stays not to cherish, only dazels, and, it
may be, scorches: So the shine of Earthly glories startles the mind, amuses us,
inflames desires of them, and goes out. But then above the tenure is Eternity,
and that assures immutability; yea, if it be nunc stans, an indivisible
Infinity of permanent duration, whose every point does coexist to every point,
a perfect and entire possession, all at once, of an interminable life that
never can be all possessed; then nothing can pass by us, or cease from us, but we
shall always every moment have, what we shall have in every any moment: Our
enjoyment also being like him that we enjoy, all in the whole and all in every
part; being not only endless in the mass, but every moment of it is immortal:
And then there can be nothing but enjoyment; no place for desire there, where
there is nothing absent, where all past and all futurity is always present; and
where also the Infinite and all-sufficient God is the Possession; which is my
next Proposition, and that God himself affirms.

Genesis xv. i. I am thy shield and thy exceeding great reward. Yea, this he has
present possession of, which my third Proposition and my Text asserts, in
saying, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? importing thee I have.

The things we call most our possessions he both personal and real, and our
portions and inheritances: Now David claims God under both these dues, Psalm.
Cxix. 57, 16. 6.
Thou art my portion O Lord and the lot of mine Inheritance; as other men
maintain themselves by these, so I live upon thee: And that we may not think
that God is such but in Reversion, those are present possessions which men reap
the uses of in present to themselves.

Now what is there of God the Pious man has not the present uses of? 1 Pet.
iii. 12.
His Eyes are over him, and his Ears are open to his Prayers, watch to attend
each motion of his heart, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 27.
and underneath him are the everlasting Arms to carry and sustain him, Hagg.
ii. 23. Jer. xxii. 24. Psalm xvii. 8. 36. 7.
his right hand wears him as his signet, and his left hand pours down Blessings
on him; his wings are spread for him to nestle in that warm security, and hide
him in the shadow of; his bowels found and turn within him with compassion over
him, Isai. lxiii. 15. Psalm. Cxxxix. 2.
and himself self is about his Bed and about all his paths; not so much to spy
out his ways, Isai. xxx. 18.
as to preserve him in them all, and he waits that he may be gracious. In a
word, all the Securities that Gods Preserving Mercies signify, the watches of
his Providence, the Blessings that fulfill his Attributes of goodness, all are
exerted upon his occasions, are made the present objects and the satisfactions
of his nearest senses, and he may taste and see how gracious God is. Psalm.
xxxiv. 8.


And then give me O Lord! seizin of this the Pious man's Estate, I shall not
envy other men's possessions; though one lay House to House, and Land to Land
till he become the Lord of his Horison, and his Eyes cannot travel out of his
Demesne: For notwithstanding that we may have known ill Courses or ill
Accidents consume all this, or Force throw him out of all, and that great Lord
have no House but a Goal, nor Land enough to make a Grave: But sure I am, that
I shall be provided for in all necessities, unless there happen such a one for
which there is no relief in God; nor can I be disseis'd, they must void Heaven
e're they can disfurnish me: For thee I have in Heaven.

But yet, though chance nor violence cannot put me out, yet I may forfeit this
Possession too; Isai. lix. 2.
for Sin will separate betwixt me and my God, cast me out of his presence and
enjoyments, as sure as it did Adam out of Paradise. And then alas! if I had
none but him in Heaven, he is now become my Adversary, holds possession against
me, as he did that of Paradise with flames; so he does Rain snares, fire and
brimstone thence, and this is all the Sinner's portion, Psalm xi. All that I am
like to get, unless I have a person that will attribute the cause, or mediate,
there is no hopes of a recovery for me if I have none in Heaven but thee.

Now here my last Consideration will come in.

If while my Soul lies grovling under fearful Apprehensions of its Forfeiture,
casting about for help and finding none upon the Earth, if it look upwards and
enquire whom have I in Heaven? have I none there but my offended Adversary God?
it may resolve it self with comfort he has other interests there. For,

First, I have an Intercessor there, Romans viii. 34. a Master of Requests, one
that will not only hand in my Petitions, get access for my Prayers and my
tears to God, but will make them effectual: For says S. Paul, Seeing we have a
great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, let us come boldly to the
Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy and find Grace in time of need, Heb.
iv. 14. 16. For though my supplications have not strength nor ardour that can
mount them into Heaven, and are too impure, however washed in my repenting
Tears, to draw nigh to the Lord, yet being put into the High Priests Censor
with the Altar coals to give them holy flame, and wrapped up in his Cloud and
Smoke of Incense that will cover all the failings of my Prayers, they may get
access into his Ears and his Compassions. Indeed how can they choose when
Christ does join his Intercessions? for my requests will go where the High
Priests do go; he carries them, now He himself does sit at the right hand of
God: The intercessions that are made for me are made upon the Throne, and
therefore cannot be repulsed from thence, and such desires command and they
create effects.

But should my Prayers fail, Psalm iv. 1.
and should God hide himself from my Petitions, withdraw himself and hide his
face from them, although they be even before his face. Yet.

Secondly, I have an Advocate there too, 1 John ii. 1, 2. If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins; one that not only pleads for me, but brings the
satisfaction of my Forfeiture in his hands, makes the just value plead; appears
there with his Blood, and proves a recompense.

It Is Jesus Christ the righteous Advocate, that does propitiate and atone son,
what he pleads for; purchase what he begs. It Is true, that poor Worm, says he,
has provoked thee often Lord! but thou did smite the Man that is thy fellow
for it; Zech. xiii. 7.
Behold my Hands, and look into my Sides, see there thy Recompense; will thou
refuse that Satisfaction thy self did contrive, and thy beloved Son did make?
why did a Person of the blessed Trinity descend from Heaven and Divinity to be
made Sin and be a Curse; but to Redeem him from the Curse and Sin, and to
entitle him again to the possession of Heaven and God? Why was I Crucified but
that thou might be atoned and he be pardoned? Thus he solicites for us
there, presents himself in our stead, as our Attorney. He was not a public
Person only on the Cross, but he is so at the right hand of God; as he was
there our Representative and bore our sins, so he is here our Representative
and bears our wants; was there our Proxey to the Wrath of God, is here our
Proxey to his Mercies and Compassions. He looks upon himself as in our case,
whose Cause and Persons he supplies, and so is prompted to desire and beg for
our poor sakes, and he looks upon us as on himself, and so obtains as for his
own beloved sake, pleads as our selves, and then as to himself he does decree
Sentence and grant: For

Thirdly, I have there a Judge, and this is he, who sits at the right hand of
God to Judge the quick and dead; I might have said a Savior, for he was exalted
to a Savior to give Remission of Sins: Acts v. 31.
But my Judge is as kind a word. For however there be some will cry for Rocks
and Hills to hide them from his Face, yet this they are afraid of is the Face
but of the Lamb, Apoc. vi. 16.

And it is strange that they who can look upon Hell, and charge Fiends in a
sin, should tremble at a Lamb, and fly him so: But to the Faithful and sincere
endeavoring Christian though be sins, as his Advocate is his propitiation, so
his Judge is his Sacrifice; is that Lamb that does take away the sins of the
World, is his ^in-offering, his expiation only removed off from the Altar to
the Judgment Seat, indeed the Mercy-Seat, the Throne of his Atonement, and his
Absolution: Where his Judge notwithstanding that his Forseit shall Decree
Possession to him, Mat. xxv. 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.

Lastly, 1 Cor. xv. 23.
we have our first fruits, for so S. Paul does call our Savior; and then in
whatsoever sense that which is done to the first Fruits is applicable to the
Harvest (all this being hallowed in their Consecration) in that sense we our
selves are raised to the right hand of God together with this our First Fruits.
And now O Lord! whom have I in Heaven but thee? I have my self in pledge and
earnest there.

And then they that rather than have these Interests, these Heavenly
possessions in present, will have only desires here on Earth, are certainly of
a preverse and Reprobate choice. Sure it would make Consideration sick to think
of the comparison betwixt the after-expectations of a Pious man, and those
things which our worldly persons call present Enjoyments; how for the little
spangles of their pride, they are so taken with its rustling Pomp, they reject
Glory that can never wither, fade, or sully; forfeit the being clothed upon
with Immortality. How they lose all that everlasting Heaven means, for little
things that go by in a Whirlwind, come in storm and so they pass away; refuse
inmortal Hallelujahs for a Song, cast away solid Joys, and an Eternal weight of
Blessedness for froth, for the shadow of smoke. Perchance this may be said for
them, the nearness of the object does impose upon them, they choose something
in present rather than dry future hopes. But then when that advantage to lies
on the other side, their Choice has no Temptation; when the Pious man's
possessions are in hand, the others only in desire; in view indeed they may
be, he does catch at and pursue them still; But the hinder Wheel of the Chariot
that presses and with larger turns and rowlings hastens after, may as soon hope
to undertake the first, as that man reach a satisfaction; still it removes, and
he does only heat his appetite in posting after it, only get more desire. Now
it is prodigious that these great Men of Sense should be men of such Faith and
Expectation as to trust and hope in things that have so constantly, so daily
mocked their confidences and desires, yet be not only Infidels to all Gods
blessed preparations which they have nor reason nor Experience against, but
also have no sense nor relish of himself in present: Not taste nor see how
gracious the Lord is.

It Is said, that the desires of Earthly sensual things do make the greatest
part of the Torments of Hell: Now though this Doctrine be false and pernicious,
yet it is plain that Torment must attend strong passions, and most infinite
desires which are radicated in the Sinner's heart, and which he carries hence
and cannot there deposite, and to which yet satisfactions are impossible,
against his knowledge to be mad, to have what he knows all the World cannot make
it possible for him to have, this tears his Soul. Affections, these that may be
said in some sense to fulfill some of the expressions of the Torments of that
place, their Envy makes the gnashing of their Teeth, and their Desires are
their Vultures. Thus Tantal^s's riotous hunger that does gnaw his bowels, is
his Worm that never dies; and his intemperate thirst his everlasting burnings;
and his Water that he cannot reach or taste of, is his Lake of fire without
Metaphor; So that desire alone without its satisfaction, is so much of Hell,
and yet this is the worldly sensual man's estate exactly here on Earth; for he
has nothing but desires and lusts; and his condition is not easier at all, for
how is Tantalus more wretched than a Midas, or than any covetous wretch, who in
the midst of affluence and heaps, hungers as much as Midas did for meat and for
Gold too, and an touch neither for his uses? so that the Worlds delights are
very like the miseries of Hell, and men with so much eager and impatient
pursuit do but anticipate their torments, and invade Damnation here.

And if the case be so, sure there is no great self-denial in our Psalmist
here, when he resolves to desire nothing upon Earth in comparison of his God:
It Is no such glorious conquest of my Appetite to make it not pursue a present
Hell, and an eternal one annexed to it before a Savior: Yet the World does so.

Some there are that desire Money rather; and although when Judas did so, this
desire could not bear it self, but cast all back again; and though it did
disgorge, it burst him too; the Sin it self supplied the Law, and his guilt was
his Execution. Yet this will not terrify, men will do the like, betray a
Master, a Savior, and a God; only not for so little money peradventure.
Others, when the Lord paid his own Blood for their Redemption, yet if their
wrath thirsts for his Blood that does offend them, their revenge makes their
Enemies the sweeter blood, though their own Soul bleed to death in his stream.
To others the deservings of the Partner of an unclean moment, are much greater
than all that the Lord Jesus knew to merit at their hands or purchase for them.
And it is no wonder they are so ungrateful to their Savior, when they are so
barbarous to themselves, as to choose not to have present Divine Possessions
rather than not suffer the vengeance of their own Appetites; choose merely to
desire here, though that be to do what they do in Hell, rather than have in
Heaven. O thou my Soul! if thou will needs desire, propose at least some
satisfaction to thy Appetite, do not covet only needs thirst for a fever, and
desire merely to inflame desire and Torments: But seek there where all thy
wants will find an infinite happy supply, even in thy Savior; Romans ii. 4.
Ephesians. i. 7. Zech. xiii. 1. Hagg. ii. 7.
covet the riches of his Grace and Goodness, thirst for the fountain opened for
transgression, for the waters of the well of Life, desire him that is the
desire of all Nations; yet why should we desire even him? when we have him in
Heaven, and we have nothing upon Earth left to desire, but that God who has
exalted him unto his Kingdom in Heaven, would in his due time exalt us also to
the same place, whither our Savior Christ is gone before. To whom, etc.

The Seventh SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. Third Wednesday in LENT. 1663/4.
MARK I. 3. Prepare ye the way of the Lord.
I Shall not break this single short Command asunder into Parts, but shall
instead of doing that observe three Advents of our Savior in this Life, before
that last to Judgment: For each of which as it must concern us, there must be
preparation made by us. In pressing which I do not mean to urge you to do that
which none but God can do; It is not in man to direct his own ways, Jer. x. 23.
Prove. xvi. 1.
much less the Lords; The very preparations of the Heart are from him.
Therefore supposing the preventings of his Graces, I shall subjoyn, that the
Comporting with those graces, the using of his strengths to the rooting out of
our selves all aversation to Virtue, and all love of Vice; and planting other
inclinations, even Resolutions of good life, is the only thing that can make
way for Christ and for his benefits.

Now of those Advents, the

First was, when he came Commissioned by God to reveal his Will, to propose the
Gospel to our belief, the coming of Christ as a Prophet, which particularly is
intended in the Text. ver. i. 2, 3.
The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is written, prepare ye the
way of the Lord. The

Second was, that coming which the Prophet Isay did foresee, and in the
astonishment of Vision asked, Isay lxiii. 1, 2.
Who is this that comes from Edom? with died garments from Bozrah, traveling
in the greatness of his Strength? Why is he red in his Apparel, and his
garments like him that treads in the Wine-fat? And it was the Prospect of him
when he came to tread the Wine Press of the Wrath of God, to Sacrifice himself
for us upon the Cross, his coming as a Priest. The

Third is, when he comes to visit for Iniquity, coming coersively as a King
with his Iron Rod, to execute his threats on the rebellious; those that will
not have him reign over them: This coming also was considered in my Text; Matthew
iii. 2, 3.
for in the parallel place of S. Matthew. it is said, Repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, for this is he of whom it was spoken by the Prophet Isaias,
saying, the Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare yet the way of the
Lord.

For each of these in order, I shall show you what prepares his way, beginning
with the first, His coming as a Prophet, appearing in the World to reveal his
Fathers' Will, the Gospel.

Now the Preparative for this Appearance is discovered easily; we find both in
this Chapter, and the parallel places, that John came to make way for it by the
Baptism and Preaching of Repentance; and it was Prophesied of him, that he
should go before him in the Spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of
the Fathers with the Children, and the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just,
(to the minding of just things) so to make ready a people prepared for the
Lord, Luke i. 17. And this is a preparative so necessary, that the Nation of
the Jews affirm, it is merely for the want of this that he does yet defer his
coming: And though the appointed time for it be past, yet because of their
sinfulness and impenitence he does not appear; Talm. Hierof. Jaanlth. f. 64. 1.
adding If Israel Repent but one day presently the Messiah comes. And it is
thus far true, that though it hindered not his coming, yet it hindered his
receiving; although it did not make him stay, it made him be refused. I may lay
all down in this Proposition.

Where there is not the preparation of Repentance, where there are not
inclinations and desires for Virtue; if Christ come with the glad tidings of
the Gospel, He is sure to be rejected, his Religion disbeliev'd.

If the Word of the Son of God might be taken in his own case, this would be
soon evinced, John i. 11:
for when He came unto his own, they were so far from preparing his way, that
they received him not, but did reject and would not entertain him as one sent
from God; of all this he only gives this account, that he found no other
opposition but from vicious humors. John. viii. 43, 44, 45. Why do ye not
understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my Word: Ye are of your
father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do; and because I tell
you the truth ye believe me not. As if he should have said; the reason why you
do not regard me or my Doctrine, but reject us both, is not because my Doctrine
has not means to convince your understandings, but it is not agreeable to your
inclinations: The Works that I have done to make my person be received, and my
Words credible, are such as no heart how hard or blind soever can withstand;
but the Doctrine I bring along is most unwelcome, ye cannot abide to hear it.
Now as he that shuts his Eyes, or turns away his Face because he hates to look
upon an object, may not see it though it be all clothed with day; as visible
as Sunshine; so your blindness proceeds hence that ye hate the light because
your deeds are evil. Joh. iii. 19. 20.
Neither do you love to hear that which you have no mind to practice; and you
will not be persuaded to believe that is your necessary duty, which you are not
willing to perform; but will rather choose to think I do my Works by a
confederacy with Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; Matthew. xii. 24.
although it be apparent that those Lusts which you will do, and which my Works
and Doctrine come to drive out of the World, they are Lusts of the Devil; and
I, because I tell you the truth, truth I confess somewhat severe, and not so
agreeable, therefore you will not believe me.

And is it not strange when nothing can be acceptable to the Understanding but
as it has appearance of Truth, and when Truth comes with evidence and
demonstration, though it be but speculative useless truth, yet it does seize
and force aslent, that yet Christ's truths, which did not want conviction, for
they came to them with that infallibility which Miracles can give, should be
therefore not believed because they were truths? not strange at all: for his
truths were not for their turns, nor humors.

And therefore he says to them, Mat. xxi. 32. Ye repented not that ye might
believe them. As if they assented not with their Understandings but their
Appetites: And we our selves have seen too much unhappy evidence of men, whom
Libertinism has made Antimonians, whom a desire of being loose from duty has
made Solifidians, of them whom sensuality has made Atheists; men that become
Proselytes to their Lusts; the converts of their base affections.

And we cannot expect it should be otherwise. For certainly that men who are
averse to the duties of Christianity, and cannot bend their minds to the
observance of that which Christ's commands, should not care to believe they are
his Precepts or their duty is but very natural, they were unwise should they do
otherwise, it being far more reasonable to deny the duty and obligation, than
granting both, to trample on that obligation which they do acknowledge, and to
renounce that Duty which they do confess. Is it not far more prudent to believe
that there is not a God that does regard our foolish actions here below, (which
are not more worthy or more likely to enter into his considerations, than the
buzzings of flies into the notices and observations of a Statesman;) than if we
do believe one does severely mark, will take a strict account of, execute a
vengeance for them, yet not incline our minds to leave them? if we did suffer
this belief to creep into our minds, to lie close unto our hearts, sure it
would fret off our aversness to Piety and inclinations to sin; we durst not
entertain them both together, these thoughts would prove very ill company; they
would distract and tear the mind, our Souls would tremble and disjoint, and we
be sure to put one of them off.

Covetous and Adulterous Felix when he began to think that S. Paul's Sermon of
a Judgment to come might be true, Acts xxiv. 25.
straight be began to shake, and then immediately to turn the Sermon off, bid
S. Paul depart till another time. Nor can there any other reason be assigned
for this; for in the Systeme of Christ's Religion there is not any thing but is
so suited to the very Constitution of a natural being, that the Soul would
instantly embrace and suck in, if the prepossessions of Vices, which the mind
will not resolve to part with and repent of, did not infect, taint the Palate
with prejudices, did not keep out the belief. For the morality which it injoyns
did long before the birth of this Religion make its way into the Tenants and
the Faith of every Sect of whole Mankind, it broke through all the oppositions
of corrupted Nature and depraved Habits; nor could all the Devils arts (who
then governed the World) stifle or quench the Light of Reason, which through
all that darkness did discover such deformity in Vice, such strict agreement
betwixt that which we call Virtue, and a rational Creature, that they accounted
it, and truly, the essential duty of his nature; he that was wicked was reputed
false to his own being; as great an aberration from, and contradiction to
Nature, as an Animal that were insensible, or as cold fire.

In this all the most distant Factions conspired in despite of Principles. The
Stoic, who by fettering all Events, all Consultations and Designs in the lines
of inexorable Destiny does seem to make all Virtue worthless, all endeavors
toward it useless, yet requires it with as strict necessity as his Fate
prescribes with; his reasons are as ineluctable as her Laws. Nay he does seem
to break his Adamantine Chain, to make way for this Chain of Virtues, though
his Jupiter were bound by that, yet for the sake of these he leaves (...), our
appetites, and actions in our power, (...), that so there may be place for
doing well while it is in our choice, and we are free to do it. And on the
other side, the greatest enemies to their necessity and to choice too, the Sect
that made all actions and things in the whole World to be, not effects of any
Agent that intended them, but merely sports of Chance and matter; who taught
that their own souls were but the concretion of some Atoms casually met
together without any direction and to no end; yet the great Master of it in his
Ethics would not suffer any of this blind Contingency to have to do in Humane
actions, regulating them by strictest Rules and Laws, and in plain
contradiction to his Tenants (from which our Age derives the most of their
impiety) although he held there was no God looked on, nor after-life attended,
none that did see, or would reward or punish any of his actions, yet requires
highest Virtue, yea, and lived such too they say. In a word, many of them
raised Morality to such a pitch, as if it had arrived at the same heights from
whence our Christian Revelation did pretend to come. And there is nothing so
peculiar to Christ's Doctrine in the points of Morality, but you may find it
recommended by the Heathen as a thing which no external obligation did impose,
but the Law of their making did prescribe, which they read in themselves, and
Christian Morality is but a fairer and more perfect Copy of the impressions of
Reason on our Soul, cleared from the blurs and defects which they had been
tainted with; but Naturales Tabulae Natures Decalogue, wrote by the Finger of
the Lord: So that to quarrel with Christ for requiring it, is the same thing as
to be angry with our Savior because the nature of the Fire is such as does
require that it should burn. Nay many of them were so sensible of the unhappy
state of their Corruption, found so great pressures in themselves from the
weights of their vicious inclinations, discerned so perfect an antipathy
betwixt their being and their actions, that when with all the arts of Reason
and the practice of their Philosophy they could not ease themselves, they went
to Sorcery and Magic for a Cure, received Catharticks, and a discipline of
purity from Hell, the Region of uncleanness; the Devil making them believe he
would assist in casting out himself: Such were the stress, the restlesness, the
groans, the cry of Nature to be rid of its impurity. These poor Souls were
mistaken in their Method; but if the Devil by those worships of his which they
were used to, had not stopped the avenues, sure one would judge they had prepared
the way for Christianity; there being no obstuction to it, nothing that can
hinder its acceptance, but the low esteem and aversation of Virtue: For if men
believe the Moral truths, they have no reason in the world to doubt the
Supernatural, these being intended for the most part as encouragements to those
other, as God's last attempts to kindle in us love of Virtue by such strong
incentives; that, that wherein Philosophy was ignorant, and the Law weak, as
having neither Promises nor Terrors equal to the force of our Corruptions, that
the Gospel might effect, as having both to the utmost possibility of Divine
Contrivance: Now this requires us to believe those Supernaturals mostly for
this reason, by believing them to make us perform what it enjoins. And it is
apparent that because men would not do this, therefore they will not believe
those. Show me but any one that is sincere and strict in Christian duties that
does doubt the Principles; if there be such an one be cannot doubt them long,
not only for Christ's Promise sake, John vil. 17. ^
If any man will do my Will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of
God, he will soon know that Doctrine is from God that does prescribe such
Godlike lives; nor only for the Churches judgment, which did make Synesius a
Christian Bishop before he did believe the Resurrection, upon that confidence
they had of him by reason of his Piety: But in reason why should he that does
embrace the Piety, disbelieve that which was proposed to his belief only to
urge him to embrace, only to crown that Piety? Indeed he that accounts his
Vices but slight tricks of wit, or folly; only pleasant satisfactions to the
desires of his Nature; (for he understands no nature but his carnal one) he
has no reason to believe there was a Passion of the Son of God, Romans viii. 3.
by making him a Sacrifice for sin so to condemn sin in the flesh; is not
prepared to think that there is an Eternal weight of Indignation due and ready
for it. He that has but mean thoughts of Virtue, counts it only pedantry, or
as it were the Flatus of the Mind, making the Soul Hypocondriack, it is
impossible that he should think God was Incarnated and died to teach it by his
Doctrine and Example, and to purchase graces to enable us to live it; or that
there is a Resurrection to reward it, a Trinity engaged in working out
Salvation for it. I must confess I would believe, that men persuade themselves
that the reason of their disbelief is only this, that these things are not
testified sufficiently; because I find the Man in Hell would have one sent to
his Brethren from the Dead, to testify unto them of that place of Torments,
Luke xvi, 28. as if those Truths did want witnessing. But this is not because
enough has not been done for their conviction in the truth of Christ's
Religion; for there is hardly any thing besides in the whole World that men
believe, but they believe upon less grounds. The whole World was convinced in
such a manner, as that millions chose to die rather than not confess it; that
many Ages proved but Centuries of Martyrdom unto that Truth; all Torments were
more eligible than the belief of this Religion, which was confirmed so, that
against all arts and power of Opposition, against the Wit and Fury of the
World, though all the Subtlety, and all the Strength of Earth resisted it, yet
it overspread the Universe. Besides it is most prudent to believe it too, for
if there be another World what then? There was enough done therefore; but
Corruptions suffer them not to attend to that which has been done. And it is no
wonder they should do so at this distance, for they contrasted with Christ's
Miracles when present; and they were so uneasy under the conviction of them,
that rather than be pressed so by the mighty power of his Works, they did design
to rid themselves of him that wrought them, John xi. 47. you may find them
struggling with his demonstrations to keep off the Evidence, What do we? for
this man does many Miracles. Yea, they do conspire against the Miracles
themselves, and would put Lazarus also to death, because he was raised from the
dead; they could not let the Evidence and the Conviction live, but they must
murder that too. Nay more, as if the pertinacy of their prejudices could do
mightier Works than Christ, and could control, and were above the power of his
Miracles, it is said to have bound his hands, and he could do no mighty Works
at Nazareth because of it, Mar. vi. 6. At least as says Theophylact, (...), he
could not do them where men were not capable they should be done. So that
Christ did pronounce from Reason and Experience, Luke xvi. 31.
If they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead. Such an amazing argument might probably
astonish, but would not convince, unless it met with honest inclinations; for
after the surprise of it were over and had vanished, then the corruption that
Bosom Sophister, would stir, and goad; and urge incessantly; so that to ease
himself, the Man must find out some cross Scruple to weaken the force of that
Evidence, and the Conviction would vanish like the Ghost. And if we should
examine the Experience of our selves and others, we should find that just
according to the rate of virtuous inclinations and dispositions of heart to
part with sin, so are men prepared for the belief of Christ; so are their cares
and regards of his Religion: He that is honestly inclined opens his Soul to
Christianity, for it speaks to his heart, it is right to the grain of his Soul,
he looks upon the Promises as made to him, and lays them up as Gods
encouragements of his inclinations, every thing in the Gospel fits the temper
of his mind. And he that is but pretty well disposed, that loves Virtue for the
most part, but does allow himself some one corruption, he always hearkens to
Religion where it sets it self against those Vices, which he hates, but as to
his own particular evil inclination there he is a little Infidel, cannot
persuade himself that God will be so stern against a single pleasure, that one
petty indulgence should be so considerable, that it should provoke to those
extremities the Bible threatens; and can by no means believe S. James, ^es ii.
10.
that he that offends in one point thus, is guilty of all. And they upon whose
constitutions there are weights and Plummets, that incline them to some vicious
courses, and by loose Education have those pronenesses of temper pampered; and
by having their inclinations followed and indulged taught them to crave, then
to get head and to command; and then by conversation with others that mind
nothing but satisfaction of those bents of the Brute part, that allow
themselves all the desires of constitution, are come to swill the pleasures,
profits, and the Honors that do wait on those practices: Or whosoever by
whatever steps arrive at an habit of doing thus, and a great liking of them,
and so to improbity of Heart, to utter aversations of the strictnesses of
Piety, all which they have lived so out of: It Is known that not enduring to be
bound up in those narrow paths of Piety and Virtue, they burst all the
Obligations to them; seek little things to cavil at, or to deride, hoping with
those their poisoned Arrows, through the skirts, and the Extreamer parts to
send a Wound into the very Vitals of Religion; for they aim at the Heart, when
they pretend to strike only the out Lap of its Garments; and to say all at
once, grow downright Atheists. And though as once at Corinth, now again the
World by Wisdom knows no God; there being Skill and Manage in this Mystery of
Infidelity, and it requires Study, Wit, and Parts; yet they proceed just by the
Method of King David's Fool, Psalm xiv. 1.
first, he says in his heart there is no God, before he say it in his thoughts
and Opinions: He wishes it, and so comes to believe it, the Atheism is rooted
in the Seat of the Affections, and it branches thence into the Mind, at least
into the Mouth, and finding Hell the greatest check to their Delights, which
they cannot determine with themselves to leave and to repent of; therefore
because they will not quench it with their tears, they study how to put it out
with Arguments: And merely for this reason, that they will not live like Men,
they resolve therefore to believe that they shall die like Beasts. But alas!
they must live for ever with the Devil and his Angels, it that Christ whom they
reject, does not lay hold on them, and rescue them from thence as he is in his
passage to his Cross, the next Way we must prepare for him; and my next Part.

The Solemn days approaching will discover to you this Way, namely, the Passage
from the Garden in Gethsemane to Golgotha; There you will see he does begin his
Journey with the Amazements of an Agony, and ended it in something like the
horrors and the outcrys of Despair; he travailed under such a load as made his
life gush out through all the parts of his whole Body, the weight of it did
make his Soul faint by the way; and when he was upon the Tree, crushed it out,
and made it expire sooner than the stress of Nature would have done, and forced
it to burst out away in Prayers and strong Cries, that so he might sooner
escape from under that sad pressure. And then do but consider and look on him
under that representation which S. Paul does show of him, how all that time
that he was creeping under that dire burden in that dolorous way, he was merely
pressing on with all the haste he could to overtake us in our course, and
rescue us from Ruin. For that Journey was a Race, and we the Prize. (...), I
have been laid hold on, says he, Phil. iii. 12. laid hold on in the Agonistick
sense, as in a Race, he so expresses it: And that he was laid hold on by these
sufferings, the Epistle to the Hebrews does evince; (...), says Chrysostom,
in that Way he pursued me till he caught me; his Agony was but his strife to
overtake me, his Sweat the issue of his Race: When he came down from Godhead in
his Incarnation, he pursued us then into our nature, he laid hold of our Flesh,
Psalm. Cxxix. 15.
and followed us from Heaven to the lowest parts of the Earth. But when he went
thus to his Cross here, he pursued us then into our guilts, he laid hold of our
sins, and took them up and bore them on the Tree, then he descended into Hell
to follow us. This as it was formally done once for all, so in its virtue,
influence, and blessed effects, it is still in doing, as to thee, and me, and
all of us; and the approaching season is to represent it so. Now sure we need
no motives to prepare the way for him who runs that he may obtain our
Salvation, who though he labored under such a dismal burden, yet still presses
on to catch us, so to rescue us from sin and Hell: If he think fit, and can
endure to strive thus, I will make all ready, and stand fair to have my guilt
seized from me, and to be laid hold on for my Blessedness, to be the Prize, the
Crown of all Christ's Agonies, that which he thinks worthy with so much
struggling to contend for.

Now the same Preparation is required here, that made way for his other coming,
that is, Repentance, in one word, a disposition and sincere desire of heart to
part with every evil and corrupt affection, to quit every sin. Sin lying in the
way made it so dreadful, God laid upon him the iniquity of us all, and that
weight threw him prostrate on the Earth, and sunk him into (...): And yet if
any were more galling, 'twas the weight of those that were clogged with
Impenitence, this was more heavy, more afflictive to him than his Cross. To
bewail this and the issues of it he left off to consider his own Sufferings and
required others also to do so, Luke xxiii. 28.
Weep not for me, weep for your selves. And sure it was for want of such Tears
to dilute and temper his sad Potion that his Cup was so amazing to him: Luke
xxii. 43, 44.
It was for this the Angel that came from Gods presence to comfort him, left
him still in Agonies, could not do it, because the joys and comforts of that
presence are at Sinners that Repent, Luke xv. 10. And God himself in Hoseah
seeing Ephraim would not reform cries out, Hos. xiii. 14. Isai. i. 24. Prove. i.
26.
(...). Consolatio abscondita est ab oculis meis: Comfort is hidden from mine
Eyes; so the LXX also. Now they that refuse to do themselves this Honor that
the Angel could not do, to comfort their God in his Agony, how will he ease
himself on them? How will he laugh at their Calamity? be comforted in their
Destruction at his coming as a King in Executions? the next Way that we must
prepare, and my last Part.

A Progress this, I confess, that is not usual to our King, nor is according to
the Method of his Government: Isai. xxviii. 21.
God called it his strange Work under the Law, and much more is it so under the
Gospel, when he Governs by the Law of Faith: Heb. xl. 1.
For Faith being the evidence of things not seen, shows us Rewards and
Punishments not present, but at distance, out of sight, in the World to come,
to keep us in our Duty. And then why should the Ax be now laid to the root of
the Tree? when as there is to be an universal Conflagration, where every Tree
that bears not good Fruit shall be cast in? And upon this we see events do
not discriminate deservings, things happen to the good and bad alike; we may
have seen the wicked in great Power, spreading himself like a green Bay Tree;
like a triumphal Garland, as he were all Ensign of Victory, all verdant
spreading Conquest. Yea, and when the Ax is at the root of the Tree, we know
not whether it designs it for the Temple or the Kitchen, to make a Fire, or to
make a God. The Day that comes shall declare all, when the delay both of
Rewards and Punishments shall be compensated with interest: And it does scarce
seem equal to inflict them twice. But yet O Lord! in days when Scoffers appear:
2 Pet. iii. 3, 4.
that walk after their own lusts, and say, where is the promise of his coming?
For except that the Fathers fell asleep, some men are dead and others risen in
their place, all things else continue as they were from the beginning, there
always were vicissitudes of Flourish and Decay in every Nation, and in these
things there are no footsteps of a Providence or Judgment: In days when men
resist and deny thy Hand because they do not feel it; and since thy Judgments
are removed out of their sight, defy Thee too, and dash thy self out of the
World; in such days it is but just that thou should come to their conviction,
and confute them with thy Judgments into Ruin. And truly since it must be
horrid provocation that makes him come beyond the compass of his Covenant to
Revenge, the Executions are mostly very fatal, as if they were what they seem
to prevent, the last Day, and the final Doom upon such Nations. For to the Jews
they look as if they had fulfilled all that the Prophecy was mistaken to
foretell, and were as irreversible and utter as the Sentence of the Day of
Judgment.

Now to prepare for such Approaches of the Lord our King, there is one only
means, that is, resolving Fealty and Allegiance to him, and that not formal
only, or but idle Homage, but renouncing all Confederacy with his Enemies,
Sin, and the Devil, and serving him with all the heart and all the strength.
For he is that King in the 19. of S. Luke, who did not only cause his
contumacious Enemies, such as would not have him to reign over them to be slain
before him, v. 27. making his way over their Necks whose Hearts he could not
set up his Throne in; not did only cause those Servants who were so far from
preparing his Way, that upon confidence he delayed his coming they smote their
fellow Servants, and did eat and drink with the drunken; were unjust to others,
and indulged themselves in all licentious living, cause them to be cut asunder,
and to have their portion in the Region of weeping, where these intemperate
should have only tears to drink, and for their Riots only gnashing of teeth,
Teeth ready to revenge their former Luxuries on themselves, gnashing as to
devour one another, Matthew. xxiv. 48. But he is that King too that Executed
Sloth as well as Treason, in Matthew. xxv. 30. who having given one a Talent,
trusted him with abilities of doing service in the station he had put him in,
which for his not endeavoring to do, though he corrupted not his faculties,
because he buried them and did not use them, but indulged to idleness,
condemned him therefore to utter darkness, to the proper Mansion of the
slothful, all whose time can be nothing but night, since his whole Life is but
as sleep. But in a word, S. Matthew has said all, Repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; as it is written, prepare ye the way of the Lord.

And here to stop, and to reflect at once upon our selves and this which has
been said: And first, on this last way by which he comes as a King in
Executions.

Here I cannot but take notice, that we have some that do design and act among
us as if they were this King's Harbingers, his Pioneers rather, to prepare the
way for his invasion on us; or were his forlorn hope sent out to give the onset
of his Executions, and were sure of Him in the reserve to second them: Truly
their Threats and their Attempts are big and Insolent, and most men's
expectations are not very comfortable.

To say with some, this Confidence of theirs is built on the non^execution of
the Laws (which seems slighter than in the old Comparison of Cobwebs) for
notwithstanding their fine close contexture, there are holes left for Spiders
to creep through; and not the great Flies only, every ruffling and befriended
Sinner whether by his Money or Relations, but the lesser too, now they have
learned to fly in Swarms, break through, to say that were a Complaint out of my
sphere.

And * truly when I think on the temper of their fury, how it is hardened in the
fire of Execution, charges Death not only in the Field, but on the Scaffold
too; I must needs think it has some stronger Ingredients, and there is
something of Religion in it.

Now really there can be nothing else of that but an opinion of the great
defection of Virtue in their Enemies: Open Profaneness, public License, living
without fear of God or Man, makes them look upon them as men designed for
excision. Achior is said to give this counsel to the Captain of the Host of
Babel, when he went against Judaea.

My Lord and Governor, ^^dith. v. 20, 21.
If there be any Error in this People, and they sin against their God, let us
consider that this shall be their Ruin, and let us go up and we shall overcome
them: But if there be no iniquity in the Nation, let now my Lord pass by, lest
the Lord defend them, and their God be for them, and we become a Reproach
before all the World. And sure that they who when they were a formidable Body,
furnished with Principles as bad as now they can be, and with Weapons too; and
fleshed with Victories and mischief, should at once depart from these
advantages, quietly lay them down and all their Interests; and now when they
are scattered and disfurnish'd, destitute of every strength but what our selves
afford them, that they should make Attempts which no Courage can sustain, nor
Reason countenance; all this I say, admits of no account but this, that they
who were amazed at Gods exertings of himself, when they saw him appear so
visibly on our behalf, and locked upon us as a party purified in the Furnace of
Affliction, and the dross and scum gone out of us; (for we had some Reputation
then:) Now seeing the return we make to God, as we had been delivered to commit
Abominations, they are grown confident God is engaged against us, that we have
filled up our measure, have been Fatted for a Sacrifice and are ripe to bleed:
And if our supineness give them Weapons, and our iniquities give them Courage,
there are enough will count our slaughter an Obligation to the Lord. O! give me
leave to contradict the Counsel of my Text, prepare Not this way of the Lord,
do not thus make ready for his coming by provoking him to hasten it in Fury;
rather Block up all Passages and stop his March; you have wherewith at hand;
The duties you are now practicing, those of this Season, Humiliation and
Amendment, are Barricadoes strong enough against him, he cannot break through
them. He had sent out his Executions against Israel, and Ahab did but Fast and
put on Sackcloth and they straight retired, were beat off for a whole Life, 1
King. xxi. 29.
See thou how Ahab humbles himself? because he humbles himself I will not
bring the evil in his days. The habit of Repentance, if Piety and Virtue get
but Countenance, it will divert him in his March; and it must needs, for it
prepares his other way, that to the place of Expiations, to the Throne of
Grace, his Cross; the Second thing.

And should we not prepare his Way to that by our Repentance, we were false to
our own actions that pretend to do it, unjust to the time that calls for it,
but most unkind to Christ and to our Souls.

What in that fatal Race, and under all that load he did stretch and press on
so to lay hold upon us, to seize our sins and Sacrifice them in himself, that
then we should retain them, should not let him have them, but cling to them
still; that when he was upon the Cross with naked Breast and open Arms, as it
were ready to receive all wounds sin could inflict, and every wickedness of
ours had a stab at his Heart, that we should still reserve the envenomed
Poniard, keep the malice of the wickedness to Crucify Him to our selves
afresh, and kill our selves also for ever! That we should suffer him to swoon
and Die under the burden of our guilt, yet we our selves resolve to keep and
not to quit the guilt! For do not you deceive your selves, Christ did not take
away the guilt of any one sin, from any man that does not part with it, but
still retains the sin; that would imply a contradiction: Such men are so far
from preparing the Lords way to his Cross, that that whole Journey was to them
in vain: They will not let him have their sins to bear upon the Tree, deny
their Priest a Sacrifice for them when he was going to the Altar.

Indeed they that come to the Celebration of his Passion thus disposed, plant
troubles in his way to his Cross, and make it more grievous; yea they obstruct
his passage thither even when they wait upon him to it: Those that come with
indevotion to attend that sad Procession, such as they usually go to their
Prayers with; these are so far from making his Way smooth and easy, that it is
they that throw him in that Journey prostrate on his Face, and cast him into
Agonies of Prayer, so to expiate and instruct their little sense of that to
which such Sufferings were due, and which must have such deprecations. They
that come thither with their swelling scornful Prides and their Ambitions, lay
Hills in his way, and when he is so heavy laden and so weak, they make him
climb up Precipices, whence their Scorns too throw him down again with his
Cross and Encumbrances upon him. All these heights must be levelled and the
Mountains be brought low, if we prepare the way for him. The Gaudy people, they
that spend the severe hours of this sad Season, and of the preparation for that
Passion in the Arts and labors of Attire, that mortify and punish themselves
only in cares and in Contrivances to make and dress up Beauties, and the study
of these enters with, thrusts out the grand concerns of their own Souls, and
the employments of this time, even which they are about: These doubtless are
attired in Funeral conformity to wait upon him to his Cross, on which he had no
other dress but the rags of his own Skin: Come they not rather to expose his
nakedness, and shame him from themselves, that so he may go by and not take
notice of them in his passage, nor be concerned for them in his Sufferings? The
Hypocrites either to God or to their Brethren, that have only the Ceremonies,
the Civilities of Honesty of Religion, make show of both, but yet are false to
God, and insincere with Man, cruelly betraying or deluding, yea enraging those
necessities which with fair speeches they pretend to smooth and salve; they act
over again the treacherous malice of his Persecutors, who under the kindness of
the Cup of Consolation which was given to them that were condemned to Die,
namely, Wine mingled with Myrrh to cheer the Heart and cloud the
Understanding, and so lessen sense of Suffering, in scorn and mischief gave him
Vinegar and Gall, which though it counterfeit the other taste, serves only to
prolong life for more future Torment. The Swearer stabs him all along his
Journey; and the Men of Black Designs and Malice, they pour Venom in those
Wounds.

But why stand I thus to enumerate particulars? All such come not to the
Redemption of the Day, but only to the Scene: Amidst other like Entertainments
of this Holy severe Time which the Theater affords, they come also to see the
Tragedy of Jesus, to behold the dead march to Golgotha, indifferent and
unconcerned in that (as in the rest) whether there were such a procession in
earnest, or whether he did come at all indeed; which casts me on his other
coming, the last thing, his coming in the first Revealing of the Gospel.

And here I hope I shall have no reflections to make as to preparing for this
coming. Christ certainly did find his Way prepared so to this Nation, that we
believe he was more early entertained in it, than almost any where in the whole
Gentile World: And ever since his cares for it were so particular, that they,
who would fulfill the Revelation in this Church, seem to err with some reason,
when as his regards were so peculiar for this, as if he had not concerned
himself in any other. And sure none other ever had so long, such opportunites
and advantages; so that I cannot press you to prepare the Lord's Way, since he
is among us. Righteous art thou O Lord! and wonderful in thy Mercies! yet if I
might plead with Thee concerning them, I would enquire what have thou done here
all this while after thy so long abode among us? what are we the better? The
last attempt of God to reclaim Man, when he had showed the World all other
means were fruitless, was by Thee his Son! by whom he did conveigh all the full
measures of his Graces; and now what effect of these is there in us? Show me
how all this care and cost has made us be more just, sober, or chaste; in any
way more virtuous than those Heathens whose Religion came from Hell? Luke x. 18.
We find Thee saying, I beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven, his Power
vanishing like that which does but flash and perish, never can be recollected.
But alas! that falling flash has kindled foul heats that will break out into
Fire and Brimstone. Idolatry it is true, is profligated hence; the Devil is not
worshipped as he was with a Religion of Impieties, Uncleanness, Drunkenness,
and the like: But yet the same things are now made to consist with thy
Religion, as well as with that of the Devil, and we can do all those things and
be Christians. Some, as if their Profession were a Charm which made them
shot-free from Gods threats do they what they will, they will adventure any the
most desperate Impiety and choose Damnation in a sin, and yet believe, be
confident, and so secure. On others it does work indeed the Form of Godliness,
makes them such perfect Pageants of Religion, that they often fall in love with
their own Vizour, and please themselves as if their dress were Nature, while
yet under that form there are the greatest falsnesses, and black treacherous
designs, the most unjust and Bloody practices that even make the Form of
Godliness look dismal; and yet all this joined with so much superciliousness,
with such difference to Christ, that you would say the Pharisees were now all
of Christ's side. And is this all the Lord came hither for? to be a Sanctuary
for the profane, a Cloak for Hypocrites? Give me leave to relate a Story I
have read of four or five Vessels of Portugals who were Shipwrack'd to the
drowning of almost five hundred men, Voyages of Mendez Pinto, Chap. 19.
only fifty three escaped, and they were left naked and hurt upon an Island
Desolate, as the Israelites Wilderness, which needed the same Miracle to
sustain them, and found the like: For God as it were rained Fish upon them; and
so did that which kept them alive, till at last they espied a large Boat of
Chinese making to the shore to take in Water in that Island, and the people
coming all to Land for their refreshment; which they seeing, resolved to make
themselves the Masters of their Boat and Goods, and go away in it: A man would
have thought their own sad state in that Land of Desolation should have taught
them Compassion; at least Gods Mercies to them should have taught them Justice
to others. But when men have received great signal instances of Gods Protecting
mercies, they think then that they are his Favorites, and then they may do any
thing: They therefore got into a Wood near the Shore and Boat, and it was
ordered among them, that when the Captain should pronounce Jesus three times,
then they should run out of the Wood and seize the Vessel.

Lord! would not such a word be a Spell and Charm against unmerciful, inhumane,
and unjust Designs? would it not exorcize all impious Contrivances? It is no
new thing to preface mischief with an holy Name, and bring in Jesus in the
Prologue to Iniquity; to talk of God and act the Devil. They seized it, and
driving from the Land, left the true Owners of the Vessel to possess their
misery; Being secure, they searched and found no person in it but a Child of
thirteen years of age, and they fell to what Victuals they met, and having
eaten, with hands lifted up they praised God solemnly, and then proceeded to
cut out and share the Silks and Riches of the Vessel: The Boy seeing all this,
and drowned in Tears would not be comforted by them, who promised him all
friendly usage; but he desired rather to go Die with his Father than live with
such wicked people: Being reprehended for that Speech, Would you know, said he,
why I said it? Because I saw you when you had filled your Bellies praise your
God with hands lift up, and yet for all that, like Hypocrites, never care for
making restitution of what you have stolen, but be you sure that after Death
you shall feel the rigorous Chastisement of the Lord Almighty. The Captain
admiring would needs persuade him to be a Christian: Whereunto earnestly
beholding him, he answered; I understand not what you mean, declare it first,
and you shall know my mind: And being told by them of the blessed Author and
the purity of our Religion, what God did to Redeem us from our sins, and what
holy Laws he has left us: With Eyes and Hands lift up, he weeping, said;
Blessed be thy Power O Lord! that permits such people to live on the Earth that
speak so well of Thee, and yet so ill observe thy Law as these blinded
Miscreants do, who think that Robbing and Preaching are things that can be
acceptable to thee: And so returned to his Tears and obstinacy.

To see the strictness of the Christians Obligations, and the looseness of their
Lives, to see their Practices dash against their Professions! It Is such a thing
as makes them be the Scorn of honest Heathen Children. And is this all that men
are required to prepare the way of the Lord for? Is this all he can do after so
many Centuries of the abode of him and his Religion among us? While there is no
more of his influence appears, I must suspect he is not here, the Lord is not
among us, but is gone. And certainly if it be possible to drive him out, if
there be any Art of doing that, we have Professors of that Mystery, and the
Drolls are they. That men should sin against him by transgressing of his Laws
is no wonder, for there is invitation to it in the Blood: That some did count
him an Impostor is not strange, they had not met it may be, with means of
Conviction, or were prepossest with prejudice; but while men own his Person and
Religion, to have a God only to make them sport, as it has no temptation, so
it has no measures of its guilt: Atheism is an honest refuge from this Vice;
it being much more sober and rational to think there is no God, than it is to
make a mock of him whom they profess to be so. This is indeed to prepare his
way to his Cross, for so the Jews and Soldiers did, they put a Scepter in his
hand only to take it out and smite him with his Scepter, they bowed the knee
and cried Hail King, and so humbly spit in his Face, and they put a Crown, but
'twas of Thorns, on his Head: thus they Worshipped him in scorn and Crucified
him with his Dignities. And so we serve Religion: When we would have a Scene of
Mirth, that must be put in a ridiculous disguise to laugh at, the Son of God
must enter Travesty, and our Discourse is nothing but the Gospel in Burlesque.
And is it not time for him to retire? But O prepare not this path for him to go
away in. The Heathens thought it much more possible to Chain their Deity, than
to be safe if he were gone, Any the strangest contradiction is more easy, than
Security without him. Now if you but make up S. Peter's Chain, that will hold
your God sure: 2 Pet. i. 5.
Add to Faith (that is the first Link that unites us to him,) Virtue, and to
Virtue Temperance, and the other Graces named there. Malach. iii. 7.
If he were going; yet Return unto me, and I will return unto you says the
Lord: If you do but prepare to meet him in the Duties of this Season, you are
sure to find him at his Cross: and if we do but lay hold on him there, and by
the mortifications of a true Repentance partake in his Death; He that is the
Way and the Life will through that dust and ashes from that Death, make a way
for us to his Eternal Life. To which, etc.

The Eighth SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. October 9. 1664.
1 JOHN V. 4. This is the Victory which overcomes the World, even our Faith.
THese Words, though they explicitly make only one single Proposition, yet
they imply several.

First, That the State of Christianity is a state of Warfare; He that is born
of God must fight we see, for he must overcome; which is the

Second; In this War he must not satisfy himself with being on his Guard;
defensive, looking to secure himself, but he must Assault and Conquer, nothing
else will serve his turn but Victory.

Thirdly, The Enemy which he must have no Peace with, but must vanquish, is the
World.

Fourthly, Faith is sufficient forces to assist him in his Conquest.

Fifthly, Faith where it is rightly made use of is a certain Victory.

But I shall not handle these in Thefi thus, but for the more practical
treating of them shall make and answer three Enquiries.

First, What the way is that the World does wage War in? where its Strength
lies? and how it manages that force so as to get advantage over men? and how it
does improve each such advantage till it gets a perfect Conquest?

Secondly, What the strengths of Faith are? how it charges, breaks the forces
of the World, and does enable the Believer to overcome?

Thirdly, How far the Believer must pursue his Conquest? what must be the
measures of his Victory? that he may know how to vanquish it so as that the
World may not rebel again; not do like Joash smite three times, then leave, but
Smite until he make an end of danger: Having answered these, I shall endeavor
to apply all to our selves.

Now for the better handling of the first of these, I must show you how the
Will of Man may be attaqued and taken.

To which purpose I observe, that whatsoever liberty there is in humane choice,
yet every appetite seems in some sense determined in its tendencies to fix on
that which appears simply best for it, for that instant which it chooses in; I
do not say that whenever Reason peremptorily concludes a thing is best that
the Will is determined instantly to that; for by a too unhappy evidence we
know, that if the lower Soul does but becken the Will another way, she can
suspend and stop her prosecutions, and too often finds cause to go along with
that against the dictates of the Mind: But this I say, that in her last
Executive Determinations she always tends to that which has the fairest and
most vigorous appearances of being best for her at that present time. If it
seem strange how, since the Understanding can account the certain expectations
of an happy everlastingness much better for the present, than a momentany
worldly satisfaction; (for we have our Rules and our proportions by which we
rate and choose Reversions rather than Possessions, and those of the other
World exceed these beyond all the measures of proportion, and the Understanding
does inform impartially of this:) How then if the Will can let those go and
take these it can be said always to choose the better for the present? if it
may be said to do so though it let those go, then by what wash or Chymick
Artifices does she blanch or paint these so as to make them look better for the
present? Now we may discover how these both may be, if we only reflect upon
the manner of the actings of our own Souls. Where the things that stand in
competition for our choice are both of the same kind, and have one common
measure of their good or ill; (as for example, are both painful, or both
profitable, or delightful) and no con^ideration of any other motive comes into
the Balance; here the Will must needs choose the best, refuse the worst. For
merely out of aversation to pain to run into the stronger Pain, avoid the less;
or out of Covetousness to refuse greater Wealth; or for delights sake only to
prefer that which is less delightful, are practical contradictions. Where the
Objects are of different kinds, one for example, profitable or delightful, but
not without sin; and the other Virtuous, and spiteful Reason taking Virtues
part, suggests the motives to it, Gods Commands, his Promises, and Threats;
here, though the inferior faculties prostitute all their baits, they cannot
equal those proposals to the Will it is true; yet by their importunacies still
pressing her, goading her by their stings, they can and do prevail with her to
call the Understanding off from her attention to those other motives, and
employ the thoughts upon the present Object that does importune her so, and
which by the agitations it does cause within the sensual part, puts the mind in
disorder presently, distracts the thoughts, then seizes them; so that the
Understanding being now intent to this, the better motives are let go and sink,
and then the only ones in view are those of sense, which straight the Will
rushes into the embraces of, and the other being vanished and no better than
appearing, it is plain in those she sixes on the best. But if the mind will not
be taken off, but Conscience fly in the Man's Face and will not let him rest,
nor his Will fix, why then in this unquietness of hers she sets the thoughts on
work and will not let them fix till they find out some salvo that can satisfy
Carnality and Conscience too, that will let the Man have the sin and not
deprive him of Gods Favor: And if either application of Gods Decrees and
Promises without Condition absolutely to himself, and the assurances of Faith
and trust will do it, (as we may know it will in some) or if not that, then if
hopes of mercy, resolutions of repenting afterward and leaving off the sin,
(as this does do with most) then it is evident in choosing to obey his
inclinations, with such salvo the man chooses that which does appear best for
the present. But if the mind unsatisfied with these, and not daring to trust
such rotten planks against the very face of storm, object the uncertainty, at
least, of these Principles, and the unsafeness of those after-hopes, not fit to
be security against God's Threats, and would convince the man that conscience
of resisting a temptation, and by that keeping himself free from the clutches
of the Devil, and the fears of Hell, together with present assurance of God's
favor, are more satisfying at the present than the pleasures of the sin: Yet
those pleasant apprehensions of the Conscience of resisting re-encountering
with the seeming impossibility of resisting always that which presses so, and
will some time or other seize upon him, and finding the temptation to have
sharper stings than his Religious fears of things which are not present, and of
which he has had no experience: And besides, he having never had any great
sense of God's favor and rewards, the Landscape of them is but dim and faint
upon the mind like those representations blind men have of Beauty (to whom if
you discourse of exact features, perfect harmony of colors, of a graceful
presence, cheerful air, and a good mine, and all those other know not what is,
that being seen commit a Rape upon men's faculties, yet his conceptions of them
are but very dark, who never has had any notices of these but such as his Ears
give) and though the Understanding chance to be positive and resolute in its
determinations concerning them, yet still the apprehensions of them are not
clear; futurity, which is one sort of distance, making objects, as all things
afar off do, look but confused, and their Ideas not distinct, nor bright or
brisk, therefore they move the Will but very coldly: Whereas the other pleasure
being known, the apprehensions of it are more vigorous, the draught is strong
and lusty on the Fancy, there is force in every line, the very image of it
lives, and therefore is more efficacious, and by that prevails, that looking
fairest and most tempting at that present, so that from this experience of our
selves in every sort of instance thus deduced, the Will does seem always to fix
on that which appears simply best for it, for that instant which it chooses
in; the man still takes what he likes better at that present, and he likes
better that which looks better for that present: And things are made to look
better by these Arts which I have showed you.

This being now the temper and the disposition of the Will, and such the method
of her actings, this is the thing the World makes use of, here is its strength,
namely, in making things look better for the present. Which how it manages so
as thereby to get advantages upon us, how it does improve each such advantage
till it get a perfect Conquest, I shall give you in few words; by showing you
how the World gets first possession of our Souls, and there raises in us
passionate desires that expect present satisfaction, which it has at hand to
serve them with, which by these arts are made look better than any other
expectations.

It was observed by the Philosopher most truly, that a Child is born only an
Animal, is to be Educated, and brought up into a Man: His reason is the birth
of time and institution, for a while nothing but sense does live in him. Now
all that while he is incapable of being affected with any other things, but
such as strike the senses, things of this present World; and by that means only
such possess his mind and inclinations too, the uses and advantages of every
thing about him are those he is first sensible of, and those alone: and so the
World does make the first impressions on our Souls, it does prevent all other
in our inclinations, has our first love and enjoys our first embraces, from
which it must be with great reluctance that we are torn; and whereas these
impressions should be weakened and defaced by the infusion of other Notions and
Principles, and the Soul should be weaned from too great liking of these
sensitive satisfactions by the cares of those which should be as assistant
souls to us, denying us every thing that was not very requisite or very
moderate, that we might learn to want them, and be taught not to desire them.
The contrary alas! is practiced every way, as soon as e're the mind is capable
of being trained into the World's snares we betray it into them, we teach it
how to understand and be affected with the bait, and those pomps which we but
just before made them renounce, we make them before any things know, and be
pleased with; and the first blossom of the mind wherein the Soul exerts it self
for the most part is Pride: And for the rest the old complaint is true, ante
palatum eorum quam os instituimus, we teach their Palates sooner than their
Tongues, and they can cry for what they cannot name; and yet among their first
half words they can name Dainties; and what will he not lust for when he is
grown up, that is taught to desire provocatives e're he can chew them? Thus we
teach the gayeties and the delights of the World how to insinuate into and take
the heart; we water and keep warm the seeds of Worldly Inclinations that are
there, make them sprout and cherish them, nurse up original propensions into
temper: And as Understanding grows up, we impregnate it with Principles and
arts of serving them, turn Reason into a sagacity and skill of catering for
those Inclinations, making them like Aristotle's observation backwards,
educating them into Creatures of mere sense, teaching them to be rational
understanding Brutes. Yet the World thinks sic fiunt homines, this is called
making them Men betimes: And when they are thus made, when the age of
satisfying all their inclinations is come, and when Temptations are understood,
and multiply by Conversation, and the World has Objects for them all at hand;
Objects, that what ever way they turn their Eyes are still before them and
thrust themselves into the mind and the advantages that do attend them, and by
constant importunacy stir and work desires and serve them too; then we are in
that state in which the World has those advantages I told you of, whereby it
does not only war against the Principles of Reason and Religion in us, but it
also leads the Will into Captivity, and enslaves her to it self. For it is
plain the World has got possession of the heart, and has a strong party of
heady passions, which whenever a Temptation does alarm them, presently are
up, raise a mutiny, and with the heat of Fancy and commotion of affections they
disorder the Understanding so, that it cannot rally up considerations against
the assault, but either it concludes, or disputes very faintly: If it do make
an effort and struggle, it is but with a slender company of thin weak notions
of things afar off, which the man has had no proof of, nor has any great
confidence in; which while it is in recollecting and enforcing, the World has
its powers ready, seizes on the Will by the means of a corrupted fancy that
does give it earnest, foretast, even the possession of the well-known pleasures
that it does invite to, and so melts him down into the sin. Now while the
present Profits, Pleasures, Honors that I have from the World fill me, while
they feed and cloth me, and provide me all that my necessity or wantonness can
wish, and furnish me in hand with whatsoever any of my natural or my forced
Appetites do gape for, and lull me with that constant variety of those delights
which it procures, the use of which has so drunk up my Spirits, and my Soul
has so imbibed the joys, that I know not how to retrench from them, nor from
that which is to furnish them. Must I leave all these for things that I have
had no taste nor relish of? leave all in present for some future hopes which I
have no great confidence of compassing if I should try? and which I also see
that very few venture for? Whereas Mankind is swallowed up in the pursuit of
these, and to be stored with them does not only serve my needs and Luxuries,
but it is the only state of Reputation and Honor. It Is not from a rich stock
of virtuous qualifications, nor from great and glorious Actions that Esteem and
Dignities do generally grow, but from worldly advantages, these constitute
conditions, and these are their only Characters. And being it is so, they that
are in a Sphere above the ordinary ranks of people, must contrive those things
that are become essential to their condition; and they must have worldly Pomps
although with the expense of Piety, or Charity, and Justice, yea, of every
Christian Duty; of Morality indeed, and Heathen virtue, of Humanity it self:
They will extort, be ravenous and cruel, will be false and treacherous, cheat
and betray to get, and purchase at the price of the most disingenuous, sneaking
and unmanly sins: To undermine another they will dig to Hell, as if they meant
to give fire to their Mine with the flames of that place whence they have the
malice and the arts to do it: And as if they did not care to sink him thither
who stands in their way to stop their rise; they are content to dye their
purple with their own most guilty blushes, and the blood of any one that is
their Rival or Competitor.

Add to this, that when these pretenses of Condition have got footing in the
heart, besides those passionate desires which they stir for themselves, they
work out most unquiet Emulations, Envies, Discontents at others. In whatsoever
any other does exceed me, his Abundance is my want, straight I am in necessity,
not from my own needs, but from his possessions, and I suffer his enjoyments; I
labor, fret, and sink under the burden of his Honors, and his greatness is
inflicted on me. Nor can I ever be at rest till I am got from under the sad
pressure of that deep necessity of having what I see another have. And thus it
will be, till Ambition have no further Object, till there be no greater heights
to mount. And now this Lust is in its pride, and the victorious World in its
Triumphal Chariot. Not that I dare pretend that I have showed you all the
Chains by which it drags captive Souls after it, or all the Arts of Tyranny
that it does execute: I could name many more, but he alone is able to discover
all, Matthew. iv. 8, 9.
that in the twinkling of an Eye did once show all the Kingdoms of the World,
and all the beauty of them, and who promised to bestow them all for but one
single act of Worship, and whose gift the Glories of it are for the most part,
and purchased by those very means. My business is to pull it down from this
great height, and show you how to triumph over these Conquests; which my Text
says is done by Faith, for this is the Victory that overcomes the World even
our Faith: Which how it does, is my second next Enquiry.

It seems a prejudice to this Assertion of my Text, that the great pretenders
to Faith, the men that lay the whole stress of their Everlasting Being on
believing only, have been branded to be very Worldly; and the Factions of
Godliness were the mysteries and arts of Thriving; as if their Faith laid hold
indeed upon the Promises of this Life, and if it overcame the World, it was for
them to seize and be possessors of. But this is not the Victory my Text
secures, a Conquest for the Faith only of Mahomet to make: And while Christian
Votaries do only mind such Conquests, and are candidates of Turcism, do they
not call it in, and make way for their Sword and their Religion? But the Faith
that lays hold on Christ's Promises cannot consist with any such affections.
For since Christ's Promises are made only to those that overcome all such
desires, and that do it to the end, and none other can be safe; It is
impossible for him that does not overcome to trust upon those Promises, and to
apply them to himself by Faith: For at once to believe I shall be saved, and
yet believe those sayings which affirm none such can be saved, these are most
inconsistent. It being then as casie to make contradictions be at peace, as
Faith and Worldliness, they cannot suffer one the other; it follows: He that
has this Faith in sincerity must needs overcome the World. And to show you in
a word how it is done, you need not but to consider, that Faith is as S. Paul
says, the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen,
Heb. xi. 1. Which as the Syriack translates, does say, that Faith is such a
certainty of those things that we hope for, as if we actually had them; and it
is the revelation of those things that are not seen, it has so strong a
confidence in God, that the Believer assures himself of all Gods Promises and
Threats, as much as if they were in sight; and though we see them through a
glass but darkly, yet we see them by it, 1 Cor. xiii. 12. it being (...) (...).
It represents the things of which we have no demonstration from Sense or humane
reasoning, as convincingly to the mind as if they were before our Eyes: And it
is (...), the substance, the subsistence and the very being of things that are
not yet in being, but in hope: So that the Eye of Faith, like that of God, does
see those things that are invisible, and futurity is present to it. Now by this
alone it is of force to break the powers of the World, which as we saw while
the things of the other World were looked upon as at a great distance, afar
off, taking advantage of their absence stormed the mind with present forces,
and had supplies at hand for fresh assaults, so overcame it. Whereas, had the
powers of the World to come been present (now by Faith they are made so we see)
the other which are so inferior that there is no more comparison than of
immensity to a point, a moment to Eternity, could not stand before them. It Is
too notorious that this is the case: For should a man cry fire in the House,
how it had seized the strengths of it, were blotting out the glories of it in
thick Smoke, devouring all their shine in flame, we would leave our Devotions,
our most eager pleasures to prevent this, and no speed were swift enough to
serve our cares and fears. Isai. xxx. 33.
But though a Prophet of the Lord cry Tophet is prepared, the pile thereof is
Fire and much Wood, and the Breath of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone
kindling it, and do this till his Lungs crack, not one heart is moved, nor
brings a drop of tear to quench the flame, because these fires are not present
as the other, neither have men any sense of them, were they alike convincing,
alike present to the apprehension, 'twere impossible according to what we have
demonstrated (that the Will in her choices and her aversations, where the
Objects are of alike kind, and have one common measure of their good and evil,
is determined to avoid or take that which appears the greatest always; 'twere I
say impossible) not to fly these which the Devils do believe and tremble at,
James li. 19.
with greater dread wherever they appear: Now a strong lively Faith must paint
them out and show them in each sin the World insnares into. Neither would any
of those rotten planks, which, while the Will does fluctuate betwixt her
worldly inclinations and these fears, and is tossed about, offer themselves, as
I declared to you, for her to escape upon, though she does dash her self upon
God's Threats choosing the present sin; such as the application of Decrees or
Promises made absolutely to himself without any condition, confidence in Gods
Mercies, hopes of Pardon; none of these would be security to one that were
convinced in earnest. He that did believe and as it were discern that height
which his ambition goads him to aspire to, were upon the brink of the
bottomless Pit, whither when he arrived, that very sin that tempts him with the
glories of the prospect, would then tumble him down headlong into that Abyss,
he would no more dare to ascend it by such false and guilty steps upon such
hopes of mercy, trusts on Promises or Decrees, than he would dare to throw
himself off from a Pinnacle in confidence God was Almighty and Almerciful, able
enough, and kind enough to stretch out his right hand and catch him in the
fall, Psalm xci.
or trusting to that Promise, He will give his Angels charge concerning thee,
and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone: Or leaning upon any such Decree as makes the term of life
immovable and fatal; Job 7.
neither to be hastened or retarded; none of these will make him mad enough to
break his Neck, neither would the same presumptions encourage him to cast away
his Soul, had he but equal apprehensions of the danger. And it is plain, all
the temptations of the World, and all these false encouragements cannot work
upon a man, when Death once looks him in the Face; and the great Champions of
Profaneness are tame then, not that God's Threatenings are more true, or made
more evident to sense or reason than they were before, but their Faith is
active, and they apprehend more strongly then.

To see my self trampled upon by pride and malice, or worse yet, begging of him
whom my blood it may be helped to streams of plenty, begging like Lazarus the
portion of his Dogs, Dogs that are taught to snarle and bite, and make more
sores, not lick them; this is a state more killing than my want, able almost to
tempt a man to any courses. But then if with the Eye of Faith I do but look
beyond the gulf, and there behold the Rich man in his flames begging for
water, and although it be the Region of eternal weeping, yet not able to
procure one drop of his own tears to cool his Tongue. O then I see it is better
to be Lazarus, although there were no Abraham's bosom! But if my Faith look
through that bosom also into that of God, and there behold the Son of God
leaving all the essential felicities of that Bosom to come live a life of
Virtue here on Earth, and to teach us to do so; choosing to do this also in a
state of the extremest poverty, consecrating want and nakedness, contempt and
scorn, making them thus the Ensigns of a divine Royalty.

And to encourage us not to sink under any of the Worlds assaults, he has
proposed Rewards of Virtue, such as God is blessed in; did my Faith give me but
a constant view of all this, sure the paint and varnish of these little things
below, the twinkling exhalations of the glories of this World could not dazzle
my mind and captivate my Soul, I should burst these entanglements to catch at
those. It Is evident, and it is acknowledged, that when our belief shall be all
Vision, and our expectation possession, when our Understanding shall become all
Sense in Heaven, and we see and taste and have those glories, then we cannot
sin, cannot be tempted from them: And therefore by the measures of the nearness
of these Objects, of our sight, and of our interest, so are our strengths to
stand and overcome Temptations. Now Faith is sight, gives presence we have
seen, 1 John v. 1.
and it gives interest too, He that believes is born of God, says the Apostle,
and therefore has a right: Now to be born of one is to receive from him a
principle of life: He then that has received from God a Principle of life such
as he can derive, life like his own, such as is led in Heaven; when he does
consider his original and looks upon himself as born of God, and consequently
heir of Gods possessions, which his Faith gives him a prospect of, how will he
look down on the tempting glories of this World, on all that makes it grateful
and desirable, as upon abject things, and slight and undervalue whatsoever
worldly men, poor Souls! do fear or hope, or long for, and pursue? The
Mathematics say that the whole Globe of Earth to one that looks upon it from
the Fitmament is but as a point, and sure it is demonstrable it must be so: And
then how low and how contemptible must it needs seem to him that looks on it as
from the Region of the Blessed, from Gods Mansion? and when his Soul having
defecated and freed it self from all earthy, muddy, gross affections, and
become expedite and light, expatiates through those unbounded, unfathomed
extensions of Heaven and glory, and looks upon all as his own, that he is very
shortly to come to take the full enjoyment of, and has already seisin of it by
his Faith, how will he despise those narrow, those ridiculous bounds which the
great ones of this World with Fire and Sword contend for? when he ^ees this
little point half covered with the Sea, almost as much too hid from us and not
to be discovered by our arts or industry; of that which is, much Desert, some
parts Frozen, some burnt up, and not inhabited; and then the little remnant of
this point to be the strife and the vexation of Mankind, while multitudes of
Nations tear one another bowels, spill the Blood and Souls of Myriads for some
little patch or other of it; and those that are not doing so, yet in their
sphere too they oppress, deceive, do any thing to get; and all the rest are in
perpetual hurry of vexatious employments, or of toilsom pleasures, or of
ruining Vices: Will he not look on this more unconcerned than we do on the
busy labors of a little World of Ants about a Molehill, which Philosophers
compare us to? The spectacle is much more to be pitied indeed; the crowds and
Squadrons of those Ants, though they should have as many traverses and walks as
men have, they have not Soul enough to have their guilt: Probably had they
Humane understandings, they would then divide their Molehill into Empires,
would be false and treacherous to one another, Cheat, Defraud, Oppress and
Murder one another for the present share; and had they Reason, they would be
more Brutes, than now they are but Pismires: For Beasts have less folly too
because they are not Men. But he whose Faith mounts him to Heaven his
Birthplace, where he nestles in the secret Bosom of his Father, he needs not
be concerned in any of the carriages of this World, he is above them all,
without the sphere of their attraction or magnetism, without the dangers of
temptations from them: The World is but as his slave, and it has no command
upon him, he treads it all under his feet, and therefore certainly has
overcome it: the Condition and degree of which Victory is the next and last
thing we are to enquire into.

If you ask the Stoic who is this great Conqueror that overcomes the World,
he will answer somewhat to this purpose. It is not any of those great
successful Robbers that with Armies forage Nations; it is not he that peoples
the whole Sea, filling it with his Navies; nor he that sets his Confines on the
remotest parts of the Inhabited World, that can call all his own that the Sun
views, so that it shines not out of his Dominions: But the Man that has
conquered his own Inclinations to the things below; he that has raised his
mind above the Crosses or Contents of this World, that can march among them
both dreadless and unconfus'd; the man whose Soul is nothing dazzled by the
brightness of Wealth, it shall not blind his Eyes, but through the varnish or
the glory that the shine of it does shed, he can discover and will hate an evil
action: he that can severely look on all those blandishments that Prosperity
furnishes and decks out pleasure in, and can sit continent and abstemious in
the midst of its delights, that when it is all Halcyon day with him, nothing
but Sunshine, and he swims in the calm streams of flowing Plenty, is not melted
by one or other, does not become loose and dissolute at all; the man also that
is not shaken by the tumults of Adversity, when like an Earthquake she
renverses all, his mind then stands unmoved, that does not so much suffer, as
receive and welcome all that happens, as if he would not have it happen
otherwise: In a word, it is the man that has raised his mind above all
casualties, the man that does but remember that he is a Man, that is, considers
if he do abound, and the World prostitute it self to his Delights, that this
cannot continue long; or if the World conspire to make him miserable, remembers
that he is not so, except he think he is so, a man greater than his perils,
stronger than his desires: And thus far the Stoick's Wiseman is victorious.
Christ's Believer goes a little farther: That man has the World Subject to
him; but the Christian does not stay at that, he must not treat it as a
Subject, but a Traitor, one whose Service is Conspiracy, that does attend on us
only to watch and to betray us, to know our weak part, and to storm us there.
Therefore as the Lord commanded Israel concerning Amalek, that did by them as
the World does with us in our journey to Canaan, comes upon advantages and
smites the feeble, Deuteronomy. xxv. 17, 18, 19. Therefore said the Lord, remember
what Amalek did to thee by the way, how he met thee by the way and smote the
hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint
and weary, therefore thou shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under
Heaven, etc. So must we also with the World, put all to death, not spare the
best and goodliest as Saul did; yea more, put all to the pomps and cruelties of
Death as Gideon used the men of Succoth, Judge. vlli. 16.
tear their flesh with thorns and briars; or as David used the Ammonites, 1 Samuel xii. 31.
put them under Saws and Iron Harrows; so the Christian must serve the World:
Whatever Instruments of Tyranny that used upon his Savior on the Cross, those
he must exercise on it again, those Thorns, those Nails, that Spear he must
employ like Gideon's Briars, and like David's iron Harrows, it must be
Crucified, and then he is a glorious Conqueror, Gal. vi. 14. God forbid that I
should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the World is
Crucified to me and I unto the World. He that does march under the Banner of
the Cross that Conquering Ensign, as he thereby declares himself upon such
terms of enmity with the World that he does look upon himself as one despised
by it, counted as an accured thing, for so was that that was Crucified, as it
is written, Gal. iii. 13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on the Tree: So also he does look upon his
Standard as the Instrument of Execution to the World, on which it must be
Crucified unto him, and so it is: He is so taken off from finding any stirring
delights in the glories of it, that he accounts it a dead thing, that has no
more attraits than a Carcass; yea, he does look upon this World as on a
detestable and accursed thing, as it was indeed; whose Thorns and Briars do not
only scratch and tear, and do it most when we embrace it most, but also are a
Refuge for the cursed Serpent to lurk in, and add his Stings to their sharps,
that Devil Serpent that was doomed into it, and is always in it, and then most
when it is most Paradise. Now he that has thus used the World, he that has
nailed it to the Cross of Christ has overcome the World.

Should we now cast an eye at once upon our selves and that which has been
thus deduced tracing all back again; then

First, It would appear so evident that I were vain, if I should stay to prove
that those which have such desires to any of the profits, heights or pomps, or
any dear thing else whatever of this World, as that they are impatient if they
miscarry in them, and full of strange complacencies if they do answer their
desires, these have not overcome the World to any such degree. For had I
overcome and Crucified it, sure I should not be so affectionate as to desire,
court, and pursue what I had Executed; I should as soon adore the Paintings of
my Enemies Tomb, embrace and make love to his Carcass: And were I Crucified to
it, had I but one Thorn of my Savior's Crown struck through my Head, but one
Nail in my Foot of those that nailed him to his Tree; were my Soul fastened to a
Cross, how were it possible I should run gadding after the gay follies of the
World, hasty in my desires of it: Nor could I be impatient if the World do not
answer my desires and expectations, disquieted and discomposed, if I be
disappointed, when any thing in it is not subservient to my heights, and I miss
of those respects I looked for; were the World vanquished, Crucified to me,
should I look for services from my dead Enemy whom I had slain? or be troubled
if the person on the Cross did not do fitting reverences to me? or be impatient
if I had not respects and the Attendances of Pomp from one upon the Gibbet? or
if I were Crucified to it, certainly these heats would not warm the dead; these
are none of the troubles of an Executed person when he is racked upon that
instrument of Death, he is not grieved because the Nails were not of Silver,
the Spears head not bright, or the Cross was not hung with Arras: And suppose
it were, sure I were very weak if I should please my self with that, and let
such poor contents thrust out all the just sadness of my Sentence and demerit:
And yet it is as strange to find delights in having any of the Worlds
advantages, and pride my self in the possession if I be Crucified to it. But
much less is it Crucified to them that will do actions of injustice for the
sake of any of the Pomps or profits of the World; there are that grind, and
screw, and rack all that they have to deal with; others that deceive and rob in
Vizours, plunder in the disguises of fair words and of false arts; Some that
dress their Pomps in none of their own trappings, such as they never mean to
have a right to, because they never mean to satisfy for them if they can avoid
it; they furnish the grandeur of their own condition with the goods of others
which they never care to make their own by any recompense, at least not in such
ways and seasons as the needs of those that owned them, and the rules of
Justice do require; they cram and sauch their Dishes with the vital Blood
indeed of those who starve for want of, and who own all that which does provide
them their excesses. Now would a man do this to entertain, and feed, and dress
the Carcass of his vanquished, his dead Enemy? would he be so vain, so guilty
to provide to deck the Cross on which he Crucified his Foe? least of all would
he retrench from the proportions of Charity or Piety, deny the calls of Mercy
and compassion or Religion for his profits sake, or to furnish out the trains
of Pomp, take the Lords portion to serve the dead World with? If it were
overcome and Crucified, they would not feed it with hallowed things (and the
Poor's portion is such,) nor rob the Altar to give it excesses, take
Consecrated things to make a cursed Carcass gay and proud, Matthew. xxv. 45.
strip Christ's Body, starve their Savior (so He does interpret to deny a
portion to the naked and hungry) to make Pomps and Riots for an Executed World.
In any of these cases he is far from being overcome: And if so, the

Second Proposition will apply it self to such, and must conclude they have no
Faith; for if they had that were a Victory; and however goodly they pretend,
they are but Infidels: But it may be they will boldly own the Consequence, for
now adays it is not gentile to believe any thing of Christ's Religion. And sure
it is for the Reputation of the gallantry and courage of our love unto this
World, that when the covetousness of the Gadarenes would not suffer Christ in
their Coasts, and for their Swines sake drove him out, when that of Judas would
not let him be upon the Earth, but for thirty Silver pieces did betray him up
to Death; that of this Age proceeds, and will not let him be in Heaven neither,
but it scoffs him thence, and his Faith from the Earth: And because they like
this World so well, they will not suffer there should be any other. It is not
my part to Combat these; I undertook only to show a way to overcome the World,
if they will not use it let them enjoy their Bondage. And yet without all doubt
these candidates of Infidelity and Atheism have faith enough to do the work in
good degree; for certainly there is none of them but does believe but he shall
die, and it is easy for his Faith to look through that thin vapor which our
life is styled by, to the end of that small span, and there see a Bed, though
gay now and soft as the sleep and sins it entertains, then with the Curtains
close, the gayety all clouded in a darkness, such as does begin the
desolateness of the Grave; if you draw the Curtain to his Faith it sees a
languishing sad Corpse which nothing in the World can help or ease,
forethrowded in his own dead hue, himself preluding to his winding sheet, in
which within a little while he shall be cast from the society and sight of men,
and shall have nothing else of all his Wealth and Pomp: To see all this is no
great monstrous difficulty for his Faith. Now though while he is in his
prosperity and health, and the World serves every of his desires, and if I
should tell him all his superfluities, all that is beyond a mere convenience
are but empty things, mere shadows of delight, that only mock his fancy;
should I tell him that the silver furnitures of his Tables, and those more
wealthy shining ones those in his Cabinet, and the Silken ones of his Rooms,
and the more exquisite pieces of rich Art which people must have skill to
understand the pomp of, must have been the Disciples of the Pensil to discern
how they do serve Pride; tell him these are phantasms, only dreams of Pomp,
advantages no where but in imagination, I shall not persuade him, but he will
despise me. But then if he will ask his Faith how all these will look to him in
the state which is now before his thoughts, what his opinion of them will be
then? he knows he may as well go to his Pictures now, and entertain his Mirth
and Luxuries with them, and hearken to their painted sounds, and dine upon the
images of Feasts, as hope in that sad hour from all his Wealth to find coment
or ease, though his hand sweat under the weight of Winter Jewels they will not
heal one aching joint: His Plate the greatest Riot of his Table will not make
one morsel taste savory; yea more, he knows that then all the worldly uses of
these superfluities such as satisfying curiosity, and emulation, and the
estimation of the World, to be the talk of people, and the like; these will
appear most evidently to be insipid things, mere conceits of delights; things
of which there can be no real enjoyment or advantage any time. And if it then
appear evidently that in themselves they are so, then they are so always; and a
constant Contemplation of that time will make them always seem so. So that a
Faith that cannot see into another World, that will but look through this,
must needs take off our hearts from the entanglements of those advantages, when
it appears how small a thing can dash them all so as that we cannot enjoy them
while we have them, and that the enjoyment of them while we do is but imaginary.

And really when we consider how unquiet and disturbed a thing Man is, except
he raise himself above the Power of all these, how till the Mind escape out of
the whirl and circuit of the Worlds allurements, it cannot but be in perpetual
agitations; at every ebb or flow of things without, there is a tide within of
swelling or sinking affections; every change abroad does make a change of
thoughts and of designs, cross Accidents have cross Passions, and I am as much
an Universe of various thwarting contradictious affections, as the World is of
motions.

How the Beasts are free, serene and quiet Creatures in comparison, for they
not understanding many Objects, consequently have few inclinations, and their
satisfactions very obvious; whereas the Comprehensive mind of Man that looks
into a world of things, and out of them creates a world of temptations, finds
out varieties of Pleasures or of Profits, and then starts as many eager
affections in himself to pursue them; his copious understanding does but
procure him various Lusts, and his Reason does but make him sagacious in
searching out occasions of disquiet. Nor is it possible it should be otherwise,
for while my inclinations are chained to those external movements, and my
slavish mind attends upon those inclinations, I must needs suffer as many
servitudes as the world has changes of temptation: And then putting these two
Considerations together, how unsatisfying and how uneasy too it is to be
engaged in the Advantages of this World, which are merely Dreams of good things
that disturb our rest and make our sleep unquiet, with the working of
Imagination, yet do but delude the Appetite, and we find we have had nothing
when we awake; sure if I thought there were no other World, yet would I not be
greedy after the great things of this, when it is more easy far to want them,
here would I indulge my self the sensuality of a Contented mind, the luxury of
an Ataraxy, of an indifference as to all these things, of being quiet and
untroubled by not having them, free from the hurry and disorder of them. The
Moralists did so account it certainly, when they called this living according
to our Nature, as if all the other were a Violence upon us; and upon the same
ground they accounted it not hard to overcome the Allurements of this World, it
was only not to invade and use a force upon themselves and vanquish their own
natures: And sure we that are Christians, and are so no farther than as we have
this Faith here in the Text, we must not count it hard; we who have the
Revelations and Example of the blessed Jesus, all that he has done to make it
easy, now says he (...) Courage, for I have overcome the World: They are but
broken forces we are to resist, we have the Strengths of Heaven on our side,
and therefore sure we may adventure to encounter them; and if we do begin to
faint, we have an Almighty Captain of Salvation, and if we have but Faith to
lay hold on him, and be not false to our own selves, but keep our hold, if we
be foiled, Christ must be vanquished too, and we may fear impossibilities as
well. When those poor Heathen marched on naked, had none of our Weapons to
assault the World, or to defend themselves, had neither Shield of Faith, nor
Helmet of Salvation, no Sword of the Spirit the Word of God, and yet mastered
it in great degrees, shall we that are harnessed turn our selves back in the
day of Battle? and confute this Scripture; and make good that they do overcome
the World most easily who never heard that Jesus was the Son of God? It Is not
only base for us to faint most who have most advantage, but it is a
contradiction for them to be overcome that have the Victory: Now this is the
Victory that overcomes the World even our Faith; the Victory that overcomes
both Worlds indeed; it tramples upon this, and lays hold upon that to come,
out-doing what S. Paul sings of it in his (...), Heb. xi. His Heroes through
Faith subdued earthly Kingdoms, but by Faith we overthrow the Kingdom of the
Prince and God of this World, and the Kingdom too of the Almighty suffers
violence from it, and our Faith takes that by force, forces even a right to it:
By it they stopped the mouths of Lions in the Wilderness; by it we stop that
roaring Lion's mouth that compasses the Earth seeking whom he may devour; by it
they quenched the violence of Fire, we the Everlasting burnings; by that Women
received their dead raised to life again: by it we shall rise to Immortality of
Life and blessedness, receive all that we do believe, more than we can
comprehend, receive the end of our Faith the salvation of our Souls: Which God
of his Mercy state us all in for the sake of Jesus Christ the Author and the
Finisher of our Faith, and the Captain of our Salvation: To whom with the
Father, etc.

The Ninth SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. Sixth Wednesday in LENT, 1664/5.
GAL. II. 20. I am Crucified with Christ.
THE Ancient Observation of this Time would justify my Choice, make the Text
Seasonable in the most Severe sense it can put on, when in their Exomologeses
they ate only the Bread of Sorrow, and tears were their Drink day and night,
so as that in the Agonies of their Repentance they did Crucify without a
Meraphor, and mortify the Body of Flesh as well as Sin. But it seems to have
happened in our Sins as in our great Diseases, men are grown more skilful, and
have found out much more grateful ways of Cure, there is no need of going
through a discipline of Torments, a whole course of Medicinal Cruelty, but they
can heal, at least palliate with more ease and speed. Besides that,
Christianity is now of a more delicate and tender make, and cannot bear
austerities, neither come I here to call for them, or to provoke their
Constitutions; if they have found a softer and more pleasant way to Heaven, on
Gods Name let them walk in it; only in our walk we are now coming within ken
of the Cross of Christ, and we can bear commemorations of his Passion; they
make the closing Ceremony of this Season, which was set aside on purpose by the
preparations of Humiliation to fit us for the performances and expiations of
that Day, by Repentance to put off our Old Man, the whole Body of Sin, that we
may hang it on his Cross as we go by. That is the only use of this time, and
the only application of that Day. Which I crave leave to show you how to make
at once: And without this that Ceremony howsoever solemn, will be merely
Pageantry, not Worship; the observation but dramatick; and we shall have no
part in the Atonement, only in the Scene of that days Tragedy, rather than
Sacrifice: He only Celebrates that Passion, only he partakes that Offering,
who can say with S. Paul, I am Crucified with Christ.

In which words we shall first endeavor to discover what this Person is,

Secondly, What the Nature is of that Condition and estate which S. Paul does
affirm here of that Person; and that

First, In it self, Crucified; I am Crucified.

Secondly, In its adjunct; with Christ, Which because it cannot signify
conjunction in time, he is not now upon the Cross, that I might say, now I am
Crucified with him, nor when He was, was I, that I might say then I am
Crucified with Christ; but we shall find it has other importances. First it
implies a likeness to Christ's Passion, I am Crucified as he was, so it means
through the whole Romans vi. and the being crucified with Christ is what S. Paul
elsewhere expresses by the being made conformable to his death.

Secondly, It imports more, even Communication and partaking with him in his
Passion, being planted together in the likeness of his death, Romans vi. 5. and I
am Crucified with Christ, does mean I have a fellowship of his Sufferings, as
he words it Phil. iii. 10.

Thirdly, It means also a conjunction of causal Relation, that there is a
Virtue and Efficacy in the Cross of Christ to work the Sinner into Crucifying
of his sin so the particle must needs import, Ephesians. ii. 6. (...) he has set
us together with him in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Where we are neither
in conformity, nor fellowship, but only in our head and in our cause; so I am
Crucified with Christ does mean his Passion has an influence to Crucify and
cause in me the death of Sin.

Of these in order; and

First, what this Person is? I say not who? we know it was S. Paul, but what?
Gal. v. xxiv. Coll. iii. 5.
and the reason of the Enquiry is because we find indeed elsewhere crucifying
the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts required, and we are also bid to
mortify our members that are on the Earth; such as Fornication and
Uncleanness, Covetousness and the like. But these are not I, how am I mortified
in these? Is it because it may be they are grown so dear to me, that I am
Crucified in their destruction? and long practice and acquaintance has riveted
them into my very heart? Now the Wen we know though an excrescent tumor, but
an accessory bag of noxious humors, yet if it lay hold on any noble part, take
in some Nerve or Artery, then he must cut the thread of Life that cuts it off:
So he must rent my heart indeed that tears my pleasures from me; Life it self
does seem to have so little salisfaction without them, that it is a death to me
to part with them. Or else has the Old Man no Soul? is he all Flesh? and has
Iniquity debased the whole of him, so that his very Spirit is become Body of
Sin, so as that Wickedness should be our very Being, be all one with us, and I,
and my corruptions prove denominations of one importance, signify the very
same? so it is indeed: Besides the carnal part that is sold under sin, and
consequently does deserve the Cross, that punishment of Slaves, the part also
that is in the quite opposite extreme, that lusts against the flesh, that must
be made away. Be ye (...) ansform'd by the renewing of your mind, Romans xii. 2.
And if there be any sublimer and more de^^^cated past in that, it must submit
to the same Fate, (...) in the spirit of your mind, Ephesians. iv. 23. Corruption
has invaded that: To (...) the diviner ruling part, is grown a slave to the
Beast part of him, it has debauched its notions whereby it should discriminate
good from evll, so that now it can discern no natural difference between them,
but does measure both merely by his present inclinations and concerns, and the
eternal Laws of Honesty are blotted our, and principles of interest and
irreligion raised there in the place, and buttress'd by false reasonings and
Discourses. Now all these Fortresses of Vice that maintain and secure a man in
sin must be demolished, 2 Cor. x. 5.
all such imaginations cast down, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and every thought brought into Captivity to the
obedience of Christ: That Spirit of the mind must be destroyed, and we
transformed into persons of new notions and reasonings. But above all the
remaining part of Man, his own Will must be mortified, which besides its
natural (...) and (...), by perverse inclinings to solicitations of flesh is
most corrupted, and most dangerous, in that which way soever it inclines, it
draws the whole Man after it: If any thing in us be crucified in a Conformity
to Christ, it must be this; for in that death wherein Christ offered up himself
upon the Cross (where although the Divine Nature gave the value, 'twas only
the Humane Nature made the Offering) there it was the crucifying his own Will,
that above all other the ingredients made his Death a Sacrifice, and the price
of our Redemption. God that had given him his Blood and Life, might call for it
again when and how he saw good, and being due, it was not properly a price that
could be given him for sin; but his free voluntary choice, his being willing to
endure the Agonies and Contempts of the Cross, his stabbing his own natural
desires with a resolute determination, Luke xxii. 42.
Not my will, but thine be done: This his own Will was his own Offering; and
such is ours, if we be Crucified with Christ, made conformable to his death; if
we present our selves a Sacrifice acceptable to the Lord; for our will is not
given up to him, till it do perfectly comport with his; but that it cannot do,
till we renounce our own desires, till we have brought our selves to an
indifference in outward things, to such a resignation as she is storied to have
had, who being in her Sickness bid to choose whether she rather would have
Health or Death, made answer, Vehementissime desidero ut non facias voluntatem
meam Domine, this above all I desire, that thou will not do my will, I would
have thee not do what I desire and would have. So that (...), the whole of us,
the Spirit, Soul and Flesh, go to make up this Person; and the body of Sin is
the Old man entire. I, whole I am nothing but a mass of guilts, my Senses are
the bands of wickedness, that procure for my evil inclinations, my members are
the weapons of unrighteousness, my Body is a Body of Sin and Death, and the
affections of my Soul are Lusts, its faculties are the powers of Sin, yea, and
the Spirit of my mind, that Breath of God is putrefied; that (...), that
Angel-part of me is fallen and turned Apostate; and however I be partly Son of
Man, and partly Son of God, yet I am wholly Child of Wrath, and so fit to be
Crucified.

Which calls me to the next Enquiry, to the nature of the duty here intended, I
am Crucified.

What is designed by it S. Paul does perfectly declare Romans vi. 6. Our old man
is crucified with Christ that the body of Sin might be destroyed, that we
should no longer serve sin: So that it means a through Repentance, and
abandoning of former evil Courses: A Duty which there are few men but in some
instants of their life think absolutely necessary, and persuade themselves they
do perform it. At some time or other they are forced to recollect and grow
displeased and angry at their sins, and have some sad reflections on them, beg
for mercy and forgiveness, and do think of leaving them; and when they have
returned to them again, they shake the head, and chafe, and curse at their own
weakness, and renew their purposes it may be; and do this as often as such a
Season as this is, or other like occasions suggest it to or move them: And with
this they satisfy themselves, and hope if God do please to take them hence in
some such muddy, gloomy fit of their Repentance, all is well. Now shall we call
this being Crucified? are there Racks and Tortures in this discipline? has a
Spear pricked them to the heart, and no blood nor no water, no tears gush out
thence? has it made no issue for some hearty Sorrow to purle out?

Indeed I must confess, the Scripture does sometimes word the performance of
this Duty in expressions that are not so sower, but of an easier importance;
Ephesians. iv. 22.
as first, put off the Old Man, as if all were but Garment; put it off I say,
not as they stripped our Savior in order to his Scourgings and his Cross, but
intimating to us what an easy thing it is to cast off Sin for them, who do
begin with it betimes, before it get too close to the heart. (...), etc. says
Theophyl* even as easy as putting off thy Clothes, and thy Repentance is but
as thy Shift, thy change of life like changing thy Apparel.

But alas! for all the easiness which this expression hints, where the sins
also lie in the Attire, as besides emulation, pride, vainglory, great
uncharitableness and inhumanity, cruel injustice and oppression often do, when
many are undone through want of those dues which do furnish other men with the
excesses of this kind: when the sins therefore lie in the Attire, and they may
put them off without a Metaphor, yet it is so hard that it cannot be done;
sometimes the worth of a whole Province hangs upon a slender thread about a
Neck, a Patrimony thrust upon one joint of one least Finger, and these warts of
a Rock or a Shellfish with the appendages eat out Estates and starve poor
Creditors; for whom indeed they should command these stones to be made bread;
but that is a Miracle too stubborn for their Virtue. And then how will they
proceed to the next expression of this Duty? Circumcise your selves to the
Lord, and take away the foreskin of your hearts, Jer. iv, 4. These are harder
and more bloody words, they differ in the pain and anguish that they put us to,
as much as to uncloath and flea would do. It appears indeed this punishment of
fleaing often went before the Cross. To (...) says Ctesias of one, having his
Skin pulled off he was Crucified: And the scourges in some measure did inflict
this on our Savior, when they put off his Clothes they stripped his Skin also;
left him no covering but some rags of that which whipping had torn from his
flesh. Yet this expression sounds harsher, when it bids us circumcise the
foreskin of our hearts, and tear it from thence, flea that: When long
Conversation with the pleasures of a sin has not only given them Regallias,
but has made them necessary to us, so as that we cannot be without them; when
Custom craves with greater fever than our thirst; when if we want it, we have
qualms, saintings of Soul, as if the life were in that blood of the grape, when
men can part as easily with their own bowels, as the Luxuries that feed them;
if you take away their Dishes, then you take their Souls which dwell in them;
when the sins of the Bed are as ne^dful and refreshing as the sleeps of it;
when to bid a man not look, not satisfy his lustful eye, is every jot as cruel
as that other, I^ thine eye offend thee pluck it out: For if he must no more
find pleasure in his sight, he has no use of it; yea if this be indeed a
kindness not to leave him Eyes to be to him the same as Appetite to Tantalus,
that which he must not satisfy, and is his hell: It Is easy if the Lust be got
no further than the Eye to pull them out together; but if through that it shoot
into the Blood and Spirits, mix heats with those, if it enwrap the heart, twist
with its strings, and warm the Soul with its desires; so that it Spirit all the
motions, all the thoughts and wishes of the heart; when it is thus, to make the
heart to stifle its own motions, stab its thoughts, and strangle all its
wishes; to untwist and disentangle and to tear it thence, if this be to be
Circumcised with the Circumcision of Christ,* and he that has not the sign of
this, the Seal of the New Covenant, as he that in the Old had not the other,
was, must be cut off; our long habituated hardened Sinners must not think that
there is any thing of true Repentance in their easy, perfunctory, slight
performances; there is something like Death in the Duty, which yet is required
of us farther under variety of more severe expressions; for we are bid thirdly
to slay the Body of Sin, Romans vi. 6. to mortify our members, Col. iii. 5. and
to Crucify, Gal. vi. 14. which how it may be done, the next consideration of
S. Paul's condition in the Text, and my next part declare. I am Crucified with
Christ, that is, first as he was, by being made conformable to his Death.

And truly should we trace him through all the stages of his Passion, we should
hardly find one passage but is made to be transcribed by us in dealing with our
sins.

First he began it with Agony, Matthew. xxvi. 37.
when his Soul was exceeding heavy, for it labored with such weight of
indignation as did make the Son of God to sink under the mere apprehension:
Verse. 38.
And he was sorrowful unto Death, so as that his whole Body did weep Blood. The
Sinners passion, his Repentance is exactly like it, it begins always with grief
and sense of weight, whoever is regenerate was conceived in sorrow, and brought
forth with pangs, and the Child of God too is born weeping. And for loads, the
Church when she does call us to show forth this Death of Christ, as if she did
prescribe that very Agony, requires that we should find that Garden at the
Altar, makes us say we are heartily sorry for our misdoings, the remembrance of
them is grievous unto us, the burden of them is intolerable. So that the
Sinner's Soul must be exceeding heavy too.

Secondly, There he is betrayed by his own domestic, sold for the poorest
Price imaginable, as a Slave for thirty pieces of silver. I shall not mind you
what unworthy things the love of Money does engage men to; to sell a Christ, a
Savior, and a God! and rather than stand out, at such a base rate, as we scorn
to buy a sin at; every single act's engagement to Damnation, costs more than
the Ransom of the World is sold for; and the Blood of God is purchased cheaper
than any one opportunity of Vice does stand us in! But I only mind you here,
that he shall have a better hire that will but be a Judas to his own
iniquities: do but betray the Regent sins, deliver them up and thou shall have
everlasting Heaven.

Thirdly, We find him next carried before the High Priest. And the strictest
times of Christianity would serve their sins so, to receive his doom upon them,
to be excommunicated into Reformation: But I shall not urge how we can discover
to a Physician our shames, all our most putrid Guilts as well as Ulcers, and
make him our Confessor in our most secret sins; neither will I be inquisitive
why the Physicians of our souls are balk'd; but will pass this part of the
Conformity, and follow Christ to Pontius Pilate. And for this part we our
selves are fitted, the whole furniture of a Judicial Court, all that makes up
both Bench and Bar is born within us. God has given us a Conscience whereby we
are a Law to our selves, Romans ii. We have (...), which the Jews did want; such
evidence as is sufficient to condemn us; the same Conscience that is privy to
our doings, and stands by our thoughts, and sees through our intentions, is a
thousand witnesses: And that there may be a Prosecutor, our own thoughts accuse
us says S. Paul; and if we will give them way, will aggravate each
Circumstance of guilt and danger, bark, and howl, and cry as loud against us,
as the Jews did against Christ, for Sin is of so murdering a guilt it will be
sure to slay it self: and that he may not want his deserved Ruin, the Sinner
makes his own Indictment, yea, and his own Sentence too, for our own heart
condemns us, says S. John: And when ever it does so, Oh that we would follow
it through all the gradations that brought Christ to Death! and use our
wickedness as he was used; strip it from its Clothes, bare it from its fair
pretexts it uses to be dressed in! Lay our anger naked from all those excuses
which our provocations, that either wrath or humor will be sure to think
intolerable, do make for it! strip our Pride and Vanity from those paints and
dresses which the Custom of the Age, that does require and warrant strange
things, dawbs the sin with! use our Luxuries and Intemperances so, and the
other greater and more thirsty dropsy, that of Wealth, and of unjust unworthy
gains, which there are richer Luxuries in too! And there are none of these but
have their pleas, their colors which they set themselves out in, to please the
Appetite and to deceive the Mind, all which we must strip off; and then when we
have laid them naked, spit upon them, vomit all our spleen and contumelious
despite at that which has made us so ugly in Gods sight; scourge it with
Austerities, and buffet it as they did Christ, and S. Paul did himself, 1 Cor.
xvi. 27. And when the Body of Sin is thus tamed and weakened, it will be easy
then to lead it out and crucify it. A Crucifiction this that does make our
Good Friday be a day of Expiation and Atonement to us: A sight which next to
that of his own Son upon the Cross, is the most acceptable to the Lord; when he
does see us execute his Enemies although they be our selves, and Crucify the
dear Affections of our bosom as God did. This is indeed to be conformed unto
the death of Christ.

If I might have leave to go before you and to let you into the Example, draw
the Curtain from before the Passion, I would call my Sins out, drag them to
behold that Prospect, hale them into the Garden, show them how he was used
there. You my Extravagancies of my youth my mad follies and wild jollities,
come see my Savior yonder, how he swoons when guilt began to make approaches
toward him! and can I make my self merry with nothing else but that which made
him die? tickle, cheer, and heighten my self with Agonies? You my intemperate
Draughts, my full Bowls and the riotous Evenings I have past, look yonder what
a sad night do these make Christ pass! look what a Cup he holds, which makes
him fall lower to deprecate, than ever my Excesses made me lie. You my lazy
Luxuries, Fullness of Bread, and Idleness, whereby I have controlled Gods Curse,
and only in the Sweat of others Faces eat my Bread, and in that dew drank up
the Spirits of those multitudes that toil to faintings to maintain my dissolute
life, see how he is forced to bear the whole Curse for me! how the Thorns grow
on his head, and how he Sweats all over. You my supine Devotions which do
scarce afford my God a knee, and less an heart, not when I am deprecating an
Eternity of all those Torments which killed Christ! look yonder how he prays,
behold him on his Face petitioning, see there how he sweats and begs. You my
little Malices and my vexatious Angers, that are hot and quick as Fire it self,
and that do fly as high too, that are up at Heaven strait for the least wrong
on Earth! look how he bears his, how his patience seems wounded only in a
wound that fell upon his Persecutors! and when one that came to apprehend him
wrongfully was hurt, Matthew. xxvi. 51.
as if the Sword of his defense had injured him, he threatened and for ever
cursed the black deeds of that angry Weapon, Verse 52.
and made restitution of what he had not taken, made his Adversary whole whom
he had not hurt! Luke xxii. 51.
See how with his cruel Judges he is as a Sheep, that not before his shearers
only, but before his Butcher too, is dumb. You my Scorns, and my high Stomach
that will take no satisfaction but Blood and Soul for the faults of
inadvertency, for such as not the wrong, but humor makes offenses: lookhow
they use him, they buffet, and revile and spit upon him. Ye my dreadful Oaths
and bitter imprecations which I use to lace my speeches with, or belch out
against any one that does offend me in the least, making the Wounds and Blood
of God, and other such sad words, either my foolish modes of speaking, or the
spittings of my peevishness. There you may see what it is I play with so, you
may behold the Life of Christ pouring out at those Wounds which I speak so idly
of, and what I mingle with my sportive talk is Agony, such as they that beheld
afar off struck their breasts at, and to see them only was a Passion. Ye my
Atheisms and my Irreligion -- but alas you have no prospect yonder, it is but
faint before you who outdo the Example; whatsoever Judas and the rest did to
the Man Christ Jesus, you attempt on God, you invade Heaven, Sentence,
Cruicifie Divinity it self.

And now having showed my Sins this Copy of themselves, what they are in their
own demerits, when my bowels do begin to turn within me at that miserable usage
which Christ underwent, it will be a time to execute an act of Indignation at
my self, who have resetted in my bosom all these Traitors to my Savior; made
those things the joy and entertainment of my life which had their hands in the
Blood of my God; and what a stupid senseless Soul have I, that was never
troubled heartily at that, which did make him almost out of hope? and if this
be the effect of sin, then it is time for me to throw it off, O my Jesu! sure I
am, I am not able to support the weight of that thou did sink under. Thou
did come to bear our sins in thy own Body on the Tree, therefore in thy Body
they were nailed to the Cross, and then certainly I will not force and tear
them thence: No, there I leave them, and will never reassume them more; which
resolution is the effect of that virtue and efficacy which is in the Cross of
Christ to the crucifying of sin, which is the second sense in which the
Christian does profess with S. Paul, I am Crucified with Christ.

There are some Learned Men, that when they would assign reasons sufficient to
move God to lay the punishment of our iniquities upon his Son, and execute that
Indignation that was due to us on the most innocent, most Holy Jesus, give this
only, that this was the highest and most signal way imaginable to discover
Gods most infinite displeasure against Sin, and by consequence to terrify men
from the practice of it: For if any thing in Heaven or in Earth could make us
fear, and from henceforth commit no such evil, it was surely this, to see Sin
sporting in the Agonies of Christ, Iniquity triumphing in the Blood of God: To
see those dire instances of the deservings of a Sinner, those amazing
prelusions to his expectations; and consider it was easier for God to execute
all this upon his Son than suffer Sin to go unpunished. Indeed they make all
that is real in the whole account they give of satisfaction made to God for sin
to consist in this, that the temporal Death of Christ (which God by virtue of
his absolute Dominion may inflict on the most innocent, taking away that which
himself had given, especially since Christ who had that right over his own
life, which none else had, did of his own accord submit to it; and he laid down
his life, who had a power to do so.) That Death I say, John x. 18.
might justly be ordained by God for an Example of his Wrath and Hatred against
Sin, and then might be accepted in the stead of their death, who were warned by
that example, and affrighted from committing sin. And truly there is color for
it, for all satisfaction seems either of a loss sustained, which is acquired by
compensation, or the satisfaction of our Anger, which is commonly appeased by
the sufferings of the injurious party; or else the satisfaction of our fears
and doubts, that we may be secure not to sustain the like again, which is most
likely to be best provided for by punishment: For sure one will not venture
upon that which he must suffer for the doing.

Now of all these the first, the satisfaction of compensation, as it cannot
properly be made to God who could sustain no real diminution by Man's sin: Job
xxxv. 8, 9.
For though thy wickedness, says Job, may hurt a man as thou art, yet if thou
sinnest what do thou against God? or if thy transgressions be multiplied,
what do thou to him? but only as the breaking of his Law does in S. Paul's
expression dishonor him amongst men; so also it were easy to demonstrate that
this one example does exalt more of Gods attributes, and to a greater height,
Romans ii. 23.
than either if his Law had been obeyed or executed, if that either were our
business, or if this sort of satisfaction did not properly belong only to the
offended party, not the supreme Judge or Governor as such, under which notion
God is here to be considered. As neither does the second satisfaction, that of
anger, the Judge being to be like his Law, that has no passions or affections.
And truly ^^e the things that do satisfy our angers and revenges are no real
goods, the satisfactions of them are unnatural, and therefore surely not
Divine: Monstrous appetite that has learned to desire mischief, has also
taught us to delight in misery, and be satisfied with the griefs of others,
which being nothing to us cannot be our good: And although we are styled
Children of Wrath, as if our portion were to be only Plagues, our inheritance
Perdition, and the fearful issues of Gods Fury: Yet since to be angry signifies
in God no more than this, to testify what great abhorrency he has to sin, how
contrary to him, how not to be endured it is: It was impossible for God when he
had once resolved to pardon sin, to testify that more than by resolving not to
pardon it without such an Example; so that it did satisfy his anger perfectly.
But all true satisfaction lies in the provision that is made by punishment
against future offenses.

This is that which the Magistrate and Law requires, nec enim irascitur, sed
cavet; for by Punishment they cannot call back the offenses that are past, undo
or make them not have been: but they can make men not to dare to do them again,
nor others by their example.

This is the end why they annex Penalties to their Laws, expressly said so,
Deuteronomy. xix. 20. Which end therefore when they attain by Punishment, the Law and
Magistrate is satisfied. For it is not so much the Death of the Offender that
is satisfaction of the Law, as the Example of Terror that it gives; and
therefore humane Lawgivers have often thought fit to change the Penalty; and
where Death was appointed, to assign other sufferings that consist with Life,
and prolong Misery and Terror, as Proscription, and the Galleys, etc.
Accordingly to propose an Example of Terror to us, God laid all the severe
inflictions of the Passion-day upon his own Son. Now it is evident that the
example of a Man suffering for the breach of Laws does certainly hedge in those
Laws, keep them more safe from violence; therefore we see those Laws are best
observed which the Magistrate's Sword does most guard; and Experience would
quickly make it good, a Land would prove but a mere Shambles, and a Man's life
cheaper than a Beast's, if Murderers and Duellists shall get impunity more
easily than he that steals an Horse or Sheep. When on the other side, that
Nation from whom we most receive the fashions of our Vices also, whom the
honor of that sin is most peculiar to; though they seemed to value it above
Estate, and Life, and Family, and Soul, yet we know could be beaten from it be
some sharp Examples. And then when our Lawgiver, as he spoke his Laws at first
with Thunder and with Lightning, as if they brought their Sentence along with
them, and the very promulgation was a Copy and Example of their Execution: So
also he did write those Laws in Blood, to let us see what does await
transgression, how he that spared not his own dear Son, will certainly not
spare any impenitent, this could not choose but have some influence, if 'twere
considered. Should we call to mind the kindness God had at this time to lost
Man, how he so longed to pity him, that he resolved not to pity himself; how
yet in all those turnings of his bowels within him, his repentings over Man,
when his Compassion was at such an height as to give his well beloved Son to
satisfy for our transgressions; in the midst of all those inclinations to us,
at that very time how yet he did so hate our sins, that ^^athing else could
satisfy him, but the Blood of God: How he made the Son of God empty himself of
his Divinity and of his Soul, and all to raise a sum only to purchase one
example of that Indignation that attends a Sinner; it will be easy then to
recollect how unsupportable that Wrath will be to the impenitent in the Day of
his fierce Anger; when he shall have no kindness left for them, but the
Omnipotence of Mercy will become Almighty Fury: Who shall be able to avoid or
to endure the issues of it? shall I think to escape them when he spared not his
own Son? or shall I venture upon bearing that to all Eternity which that Son
was not able to support some hours? Thus as S. Paul expresses, God sending his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, a Sacrifice for sin, condemned sin in
the flesh, that is, he showed what did await iniquity, that men by so great an
example of his Wrath, might be frighted from the practice. Et si quis morte
Christi admonitus paeniteat, iste per mortem Christi peccato mortuus esse
dicitur, says Origin on Romans vi. 1. He who seeing that Example of Christ
Crucified for sin is warned by it into Repentance, he is crucified with Christ.
God dealing with us as Men do with a young Prince, that must be disciplined by
the correction of another for his faults; and in this sense also, our
chastisement was upon Christ, and by his stripes we are cured.

And now though I propose not this as if I thought this Reason were sufficient
of it self, which seems to give no good account how any could be ransomed e're
Christ suffered: (which yet certainly they were, the virtue of his Death
extending to all former Ages, as it proved most evidently Heb. ix. 25. a place
which Crellius himself does give no satisfaction to) if the satisfaction, of
his Death consisted only in its being an Example, it could no more satisfy
for the sins of former Ages, than it could be an Example e're it was in being:
If that Death were accepted in the stead of their death, who by that Example
are frighted into Repentance, what was accepted for their sins, who had no such
vision of it, as that it could not or did affright them, yet repented? Yet to
them that have beheld it in its vigor, they that can control this check to
Vice, and when to show us an Example it cost God the life of his own Son, after
the prospect of whose Cross he has not any Terror to propose, this being the
contrivance of the Divine Mind, and the stress of all his most Almighty
Attributes conjoined in one compounded Miracle, can yet make all this vain and
fruitless and have no effect, are not feared nor warned by it; but as if it
signified no peril to their sins, they can come once a year to entertain
themselves with the Example and go from the Agonies unconcerned to the sins
that inflicted them, and that show forth themselves in them: Who act as if
those were the only soft and pleasant things that crushed his Blood and Soul
out, as if those which did make the Son of God cry out as if he did almost
despair, were the only fit things to make men jolly: And do thus as they did
it in despite to this great method of Salvation, as if they did enjoy the
indignation of the Wrath of God, as if those Agonies like the other
difficulties of their sins did more provoke to them, or like the Paschal bitter
herbs that typified them, were as sauce to the Riots of their Vices. These
certainly are men of a most desperate appetite and courage. But it is much more
to be lamented that the Law of God does not seem better guarded by this dire
Example than it was of old among the Jews, when it showed the Sinner his
deservings only by the dying of his Breast, and had no other sense nor
satisfaction than the blood of Bulls and Goats: It is not very visible that it
has wrought upon consideration so as to make us more fear and beware; nay, we
may question whether the example of my Bullock dying for my sin, would not
restrain and terrify me more than that of Jesus crucified for it: If I were to
expiate the Blood with which I word my Anger and my Oaths, with the blood of my
own Flocks, if that Luxury which pluriders every Element and brings a little
Universe at once upon my Table to treat it self withal, were but to kill one
Heiser for the Temple, and I to expiate each surfeit by one such Beligious
Riot: Were I to quench the fevers of an Intemperance with a drink offering,
it is possible I should not be so prone to sacrifice to my Genius, if I must
sacrifice to God for doing so, and I should be more tender of my Beasts than I
am of my Savior. Now how comes this to pass? It is impossible that we should
be so apprehensive of our own demerits, should we see them represented in the
suffering of a Beast, as when they are showed to us in those of the Son of God.
What is it then? Should we account our selves to suffer in our Beast? His Death
were our own loss and punishment: And had we no communion in this Death of
Christ? was not that our own? or account we our concern and share in that less
valuable than in that of our Beast? Far be this from us, we are no further
Christians than we can affirm with St. Paul (who challenges a fellowship in
all Christ's sufferings, and boasts it, saying) I am Crucified with Christ.
Which brings me to the last sense of the words; I have a share and am a Partner
in that Cross, and all the satisfactions that were wrought upon it.

This is that (...) Phil. iii. 10. a partaking in Christ's Passion, having his
Sufferings communicated to us, made our own, as if we had been crucified with
him: as much as he that offered a peace offering was said to be (...) 1 Cor. x.
18. to communicate with the Altar, and partake the Sacrifice which he really
did. We read indeed there in the sixteenth verse, that in the Sacrament there
is (...) (...), the shedding of Christ's Blood is there communicated, reckoned
to us, but it is communicated in a Cup of Blessing.

And is this to be a Partner in his Crucifixion, to partake only the Sacrament
of Crucifixion? not to receive the Wounds and Torments, but the Benefits, the
pledge of the satisfactions of the Cross, the Seal of the Remissions that he
purchased on it? Blessed Jesu! we should have born thy pangs, and all the dire
things thou did suffer, ought to have been ours eternally; that Agony which
an Angels comfort could not calm, that dreadful Terror which expressed it self
in the cold Sweat of clotted Blood, that greater Terror which came so near
Despair as to make thee cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? all
should have been our portion to everlastingness, and spent their fury on our
Souls: And will thou have us bear no more of this than the remembrance? All our
Mount Olivet and Golgotha be only the Lords Table and his Entertainment? do
thou communicate thy Agonies in Eucharistick wine? and is this to be Crucified
with Christ? so he does account it seems. He that by virtue of the Cross of
Christ has crucified his body of Sin, Christ's satisfactions are accounted to
him, he is esteemed to have a fellowship in all the sufferings, to have had an
hand in all that was done for Man on the Cross, they are all reckoned his: And
as Christ bore the guilt of all our doings on the Tree, so he will have us bear
the name, and merit, and reward of his; for as S. Paul does express, Romans vi.
5. We are planted together in the likeness of his death, by being made
conformable to that in crucifying of our sins, we are inoculated as it were,
and both together ingraffed in into the Cross, and so there is derived to us
the virtue of that Stem, that Root of Expiation and Atonement; and by this
insertion being as the same S. Paul says, Phil. iii. 9. found in him, we have
his Righteousness. That poor Soul that does throw himself down in the strict
humiliations of Repentance at the footstool of the Cross, and there beholds his
Savior dying for him, and that is himself by Penitence incorporated into him,
graffed into his Death, and planted in his very Passion, as Origin and Thomas
interpret. He may take confidence to say, Behold Lord, if the satisfactions of
thy Eternal Justice be acceptable to thee, if the blood of God that is offered
up without spot be a well-pleasing Sacrifice, look down at once on thy Messiah
and on my poor Soul! turn not thy face from me, for whatever my guilts are, I
have an equal Sacrifice, those are my satisfactions, and that blood my
Offering, the Passion and propitiation of the Cross are (...). I am Crucified
with Christ.

We have gone through all the Parts, all the Considerations of this Expression,
and have no more now to take notice of but this, that all of them must go
together, that they never are fulfilled asunder, but he only whom the efficacy
of the Cross of Christ has wrought on to the Crucifying of sin, he only has
the satisfactions of the Cross imputed to him, he is planted with, ingraffed
into Christ: For if any man be i^ Christ, he is a new creature, old things are
done away, 2 Cor. v. 17. Whosoever is not such he has no interest in the Jesus
of that day. He may perchance in some one of those easy Saviors which these
times afford, wherein Opinions called holy, or a sanctified Faction give such
interests, and to be in a party is to be in Christ; or else he may depend upon
that Christ, that may be had with mere Dependence, that is ours if we persuade
our selves he is so. Now sure, he that is persuaded he is Christ's, is either
truly so persuaded or else falsely; if but falsely, that will not advantage him,
for God will never save a man for believing a lie; but that he should truly be
persuaded so without this Duty is impossible, for he that is Christ's has
crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts: therefore by good Logic he
that has not crucified them is not Christ's, and evidently whosoever is not
crucified at all, he is not crucified with Christ.

And sure I need not put you in remembrance, that the man in whom sin reigns,
and whenever his Lusts and Passions bid him go he goes, or come he comes,
or do this he does it, that the body of sin is not crucified in him; that
which were nailed and fettered on the Cross and slain there could not command
and rule him so.

Or if sins dominion be not so absolute but God has got some footing, so as
that his Law has power in the man's mind so as to make him make resistances
against his sin, and he dislikes it but alas commits it still, yet what he does
allows not, but returns to do it at the next Temptation, afterward would fain
be good yet does not find how to perform, something governs in his members,
leading that Law in his mind into captivity to the law of sin, this man
although he has the body of death, yet it is not crucified and slain; for it
does live and exercise the greatest tyranny upon him, forces him to serve and
to obey against his mind, it overcomes his own heart, and all inclinations to
good, and conquers God within him: Till men have left off the custom of the
works of sin, and all gross deeds of the flesh it were as vain to prove they
are not crucified, as that he is alive that walks and eats. Those works they
are the fruits of the flesh, the offspring of its lusts, and were that
crucified, and we by likeness to Christ's death planted into the Cross, we
could no more produce them, than that dead Tree the Cross could bear fruit, or
than a Carcass could have heat to generate, the Grave become a Womb, or the
dust bring forth.

Secondly, Yea more, they perform not the outward actions of life who have but
the image of death on them; and a man asleep works not, yet is alive, his fancy
and his inwards work; and if sin be only kept from breaking out, and men
commit not gross deeds of the flesh, but yet indulge to these things in
imagination and the heart, cherish them in fancy, and design, and wish, only
restrain the practice, or indulge to spiritual wickednesses; you may as well
say that a man is dead because he does not walk abroad, because he keeps within
doors, and lives only in his Closet or his Bed Chamber, as say that sin is
crucified, which while it stirs but in the heart, it is not dead.

Thirdly, Once more, we part from all acquaintance with the dead, the Corpse of
one that had the same Soul with us; howsoever we may have some throes of grief
to leave it, yet we put it from us, we admit it to no more embraces; but if
'twere the loathsome Carcass of a Villain Traitor that was Executed, we turn
from the sight as from a Fiend, it is a detestable and accursed spectacle. And
so he that has put his Body of sin to death would have great aversations to
it, yea how dear soever it had been, he would no more endure the least
acquaintance with it, than he would go seek for his old conversations in the
Chambers of Death; he would shun the sight of any the most bosom custom, as he
would the Ghost of his dead Friend, he would abandon it as a most ghastly
dreadful spectacle; he would also bury these his dead out of his sight. Thus he
must needs be disposed that has crucified his Old man.

And they that are thus dead with Christ shall also live with him, yea those
that are thus crucified with him, he has already raised up together, and has
made them sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. There already in
their cause, and in their right and pledge, and there hereafter in effect and
full enjoyment.

The Tenth SERMON, Preached at CHRIST-CHURCH IN OXFORD, November. 5. 1665.
LUKE IX. 55. Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of.
THE state of that great Controversy which the words suppose between the Jews
and the Samaritans as it then stood, seems briefly thus: Those that were
planted in the Regions of Samaria by Salmaneser, however great Idolaters at
first; having admitted in a while the God of Israel among their Gods, and after
having an High Priest of Aaron's Line, a Temple too built on that place where
Abraham and the Fathers of the Hebrews, 1 John iv. 20. Genesis xii. 6, 7. and 33.
18. compared with Leut. xi. 29, 3. and Judge. ix. 6, 7. Deuteronomy. xi. 29. Psalm
Cxxxvii. 3. Josh. iv (...). Epiphan. de Samarit. and Scaliger says Audeam
dicere eos adeo ab omni Idolol^tria abhorrere, ut in hac parti Judaeos ipsos
superare. vide Auth. de Emen. Tom. l. 7. p. 66^.
friends of God, did choose to offer Sacrifice; and on that very place where God
himself enjoined the Law and all the Blessings of it to be published to the
People, on Mount Gerizim; which therefore seem to have pretenses to vye with
Mount Zion, for there also the Lord commanded the Blessing. An Altar too, says
Benjamin in his Itinerary made of the same stones that God commanded to be
taken out of Jordan and set up for a memorial of his Peoples passage through
it: And besides all this having the Law of Moses too; when they had all these
pretensions to the God of Israel, they clave to him alone, and wholly threw off
their Idolatry. So Epiphanius does affirm expressly. And their Country being as
Josephus says, the receptacle of all discontented fugitive Jews, a great part
of it too planted with them by Alexander, they espoused the Worship of the
Jews, and came to differ very little either in the Doctrine or the practice of
Religion, Joseph. An. l. 11. c. 8.
(...), having all things as it were the very same, Jos. l. 2. contra Ap. p.
1063. Edit. G. L.
the only distance seems to be betwixt their Temples, (...), just as the Woman
states it to our Savior, Joh. iv. Our Fathers Worshipped in this Mountain, but
ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to Worship: So that if we
audit the account of the Samaritan guilt, they separated from the place of
Worship which God had appointed, and set up another; in a word, they were
Schismatics.

Whether this be such a guilt as should make those terms equivalent He is a
Samaritan and has a Devil, John viii. 48.
I shall not say; but it is such as makes our Savior say somewhat exclusively,
John iv. 22.
Salvation is of the Jews. All the Blessings and Salvations of the Law did
indeed hover on Mount Gerizim, see Hieron. in Epitaph Paulae.
were given thence, that was the place of them; but they were cut away when
Schism came: The Church is not a place of blessing when it is built against the
Church; The Altar has no Horns to lay hold on for refuge, but to push and gore
only, when it is set up against the Altar; And Gerizim is Ebal when it stands
in competition with Mount Zion. Well; this only thing does breed the greatest
distances imaginable in the Nations, nothing more divides than Separation and
Schism; and then these Samaritans as all Separatists do, grew such Opiniastres
and so violent in their way, as to deny humanity to those that would not join
with them; they would not grant the Civilities of Passage to one that intended
for Jerusalem to Worship: They refuse it to our Savior here because his Face
was thitherward, ver. 53. A Schismatic will reject a Christ if his Face be
fromward their new Establishment, if he but look toward the Ancient Worship:
At this the Sons of Zebedee are offended, zealous for their Master, as being
most particularly concerned in him, two of his nearest intimates; and their
zeal would needs break out into flame. 2 Kings i. 9, 10, 11, 12.
And why not? a rudeness to Elijah was revenged by him with Fire from Heaven,
which consumed twice fifty Soldiers and their Captains, though they came to do
the King's Command: And shall these hated Schismatics be rude to Thee? and
reject the Messiah, and yet go unpunished? Lord, shall we command fire to come
down from Heaven to consume them, even as Elias did? Which our Savior answers
with this sharp rebuke, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of.

Not to divide but to explain my Text, and so instead of parts present you with
some Subjects of Discourse.

By Spirit here is meant that disposition and complexure of Christian Piety and
Virtues, that course and Method of Religion which the Spirit does prescribe to
Christ's Disciples, and does guide them in; or in a word, the temper of the
Gospel is so called: And this in opposition to the Law, Romans viii. 15.
the difference of these being expressed by a diverse manner of Spirit; the one
is called Spirit of Bondage, the other Spirit of Adoption; so here Ye know not
of what Spirit ye are, ye do not judge aright, if you believe the temper of the
Gospel is like that of the Law: The course that I prescribe to my Disciples
differs much from that of Prophets under the Old Testament, you must be guided
by another Spirit than Elijah's was in calling for Fire, if my Spirit dwell in
you, For I came not to destroy men's lives on any such account. In this sense it
affords these Propositions.

First, To destroy Men's lives, or other temporal rights on this account merely,
because they are Apostates, Schismatics, or otherwise reject the true
Religion, or Christ himself, is inconsistent with the temper of the Gospel,
This is that which Christ reproves here, telling them that would do so, Ye know
not what manner of Spirit ye are of.

Secondly, Because the Spirit of Elias, which the Gospel Christian Spirit here
is set in opposition to, opposed the Magistrate, destroyed those that came
commissioned from the Prince, and Christ designedly does say ye must not do now
what Elias did, therefore, to attempt upon or against the Magistrate, on the
account of Christ, or of Religion, is inconsistent with the Spirit of the
Gospel.

First, Of the first that to destroy men's lives, etc.

But here I must observe, that since these fiery Disciples that did give
occasion for our Saviors rebuke, here were no Magistrates, nor did Christ
himself that gave the rebuke assume, Luke xii. 14.
but renounce openly all such Authority; John xviii. 36.
therefore no observation grounded on these words can control the Magistrates
just Power in punishing Offenses done against his Laws, although pretenses of
Religion and Conscience give color to those offenses; the Gospel does diminish
no rights of the secular Powers: Now Supreme Magistrates, though as such they
have no right to judge in Articles of Faith, to define what is true Religion,
what not; for then the Pagan Princes who had never heard of Christ, and yet are
as much Magistrates as any, would have right to judge what Doctrines Christ
delivered down to be believed.

But certainly when Christ Commissioned his Faith to run through all the World
not only independently from all the Powers of it but in perfect opposition to
them, they can have no right to judge in that, which whatsoever they shall Judge
we are alike bound to receive (the Faith of Christ) without any the least
difference to their judgment. But though they have no right to judge of this,
they have Authority to determine what Faith shall have the privileges of their
State and what shall not; which shall be publicly professed, and which they
will inhibit with Penalties: For sure the Privileges of the State and power of
Penalties are the proper rights of the Supreme Power, and therefore none but
that can judge and determine of them. In a word, since it is most evident that
the tranquillity of a State does depend upon nothing more than the profession
and priviledging of Religion; it follows that those Powers to whose Judgment
and Decrees the care and Tranquillity of the State is committed, must have the
power to judge and to determine what Faith shall be publicly professed and
priviledg'd by the State: In which Judgment and administration if they err, and
privilege a false Faith and inhibit the true; they use their Power ill, and are
responsible to God for doing so, but they do not invade or usurp a Power that
is not their own. Rather it is most certain if the Principles of any Sect, or
else if not they, yet the pursuance of any Principles do tend directly toward,
or are found to work Commotions and Treasonable enterprises, the Supreme Power
has as much right to restrain, yea and Punish them, although with Death
according to their several merits, as he has to punish those effects in any
other instances wherein they do express themselves.

Nor must Religion secure those practices which it cannot sanctify, but does
envenome. For by putting an everlasting concern into men's Opinions and actions
their undertakings are made by it more desperate and unreclaimable. What Wounds
and what Massacres must the State expect from them that stab and murder it with
the same Zeal that the Priest kills a Sacrifice? that go to act their Villainies
with Devotion, and go to their own Execution as to Martyrdom?

'Twere easy for me to deduce the practice of this Power from the best
Magistrates in the best times, if that were my business; who had only this
temptation to say thus much, that I might not seem to clash with the
Magistrates Power of coercion in Religious causes when I did affirm, that to
destroy men's Lives or other temporal Rights on this account merely because they
are Apostates, Schismatics, or otherwise reject the true Religion, or Christ
himself, is inconsistent with the temper of the Gospel.

If you would discover what the temper of the Gospel is, you may see it in its
Prophecy and Picture in the Prophet Isay, Isal. xi. 6, 7, etc. and 65. 25.
The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid, the sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child
shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den, and the Serpent shall eat the dust.
Whatever mischief these have in themselves, there is nothing of devouring, or of
hurt to one another in this state; it is like Paradise restored, the prospect of
the Garden of the Lord. Rather whereas there these Creatures only met, here
they lie down and dwell together: And the Asp and Serpent that could poison
Paradise it self, have now no venomous tooth to bite, no not the heel, nor
spiteful tongue to hiss.

But to speak out of Figure, the Gospel in it self requires not the Life of any
for transgression against it self, it calls all into it, and waits their
coming; those that sin against it, it uses methods to reform, has its
Spiritual Penalties indeed, whereby it would inflict amendment and Salvation on
Offenders: But because final impenitence and unbelief are the only breaches of
the Covenant of this Religion, therefore it does wait till life and
possibilities of Repentance are run out; and then its Punishments indeed come
home with interest, but not till then. The Law it is true was of another temper,
it required the life of an Apostate to Idolatry, whether 'twere a single
Person, Gal. iv. 1, 3.
or a City, Deuteronomy. xiii. To the Jew that was a Child, as S. Paul says, and so
not to be kept in awe by threats of future abdication, things beyond the
prospect of his care, but must have present punishments, the Rod still in his
eye; and was a refractory Child that seemed to have the Amorite and Hivite
derived into him, a tincture of Idolatry in his Constitution, that was as ready
to run back into the superstitions as the Land of Egypt, as eager for their
Deities as their Onions, and had the same appetite to the Calf and to the
fleshpots, to make the one a God, the other a Meal; to such a People Death,
that was the only probable restraint, was put into the Law by God who was
himself Supreme Magistrate in that Theocraty, against whom 'twas exact
Rebellion and Treason to take another God, and therefore was by him punished
with Death. But the Spirit whom Christ sends breaths no such threats, for he
can come on no Designs but such as Christ can join in, but says Christ, I came
not to destroy men's lives.

Secondly, The temper of the Gospel is discovered in its Precepts. I shall name
but one, Matthew. v. 43, 44. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor and hate thine Enemy: But I say unto you, love your Enemies,
etc. Where if Enemy did not mean the man whom private quarrel had made such,
and Him it could not mean, it being said to them that they must love that
Enemy, Exodus xxiii. 4, 5. But, as the Jews neighbor was every one of his
Religion, and he lived near him that lived in the same Covenant with him, so
enemy being opposed to that, must signify one not of his Religion: An Alien,
an Idolater, with any of which they were indeed to have no exercise of love or
friendship, no commerce: and to some Enemies, the Canaanites, no mercy, but
they were to hate them to destruction, Deuteronomy. vii. If so, then our Saviors
addition here, But I say unto you, love your Enemies, does say that we must
love even these; the Christian has no Canaanites, but the most prosligated
adversaries of his Religion he must love, and pray for them although they
persecute him: (Which makes appear it does at least include Enemies of
Religion, for Persecutions seldom were on any other ground, and Religion which
should have nothing else but Heaven in it, as if it had the malice and the
Flames of Hell, breaths nothing else but Fire and Faggot to all those that
differ in it.) But whether it be an addition and mean thus or no, since it is
sure that both they and we are bound to love the Neighbor, and Christ has
proved, Luke x. that the Samaritan, he whom our two Disciples would consume,
that Schismatic and rejecter of Christ is yet a Neighbor, therefore him also
we must love and pray for. Now it is a strange way of affection to destroy them,
to love them thus to the death, to get admission to their hearts with a Swords
point, to pray for them by calling for Fire down from Heaven to consume them.
S. Greg. Nazian. calls the founder of that Faction that began this practice in
the Church, (...), and if so, we know well of what Spirit he is that does call
for fire to devour those that differ from him in Religion; it is sure one of
this Legion, or it rather is the leader of them, that did dwell in Tombs, and
does in flames, things which he loves so to inflict; one that was the first
Rebel too, which leads me to my second Observation: That

Secondly, To attempt upon, or against the Prince on the account of Christ, or
of Religion, is most inconsistent with the Spirit of the Gospel. For it was the
Spirit of Elias who destroyed those whom the Magistrate did send, that Christ
opposes here the Spirit of the Gospel to, in this severe rebuke, ye know not
what manner of Spirit ye are of.

The other warm Apostle meets a greater check in the like case, S. Peter's
zeal, that they say made him chief of the Apostles, as it made him promptest to
confess the Lord, so it did heat him to be readiest to defend him; as fiery to
use his Sword as his Tongue for his Master: But his Master will not let a Sword
be drawn in his own cause; Matthew. xxvi. 52.
put up again thy Sword into his place: The God of our Religion will not be
defended by Treason, and from Murder by the wounding of another, nor will his
Religion suffer a Sword out of the sheath against the Power of the Magistrate,
no not in behalf of Christ himself; but goes beyond its proper bounds to
threaten things that are not Gospel punishments, even excision in this life,
Ibid.
to them that do attempt it, They that take the Sword, shall perish with the
Sword. Here the Gospel becomes Law, and turns zealot for the Magistrate though
persecuting Christ himself. Our Savior does not think it sharp enough to tell
S. Peter that he did not know what Spirit he was of, for when this Disciple
would have kept these sufferings from his Master only by his counsel, Matthew.
xvi. 13.
he replies to him, get thee behind me Satan: He was then of that manner of
Spirit; therefore now that he does so much worse, when he attempts to keep them
from him with a Sword, and drawn against the Power, as if Christ did not know
how to word what Spirit such attempts did savor of, he does not check and
rebuke now, but threaten and denounce. And it is obvious to observe, that this
same Peter who would needs be fighting for his Master, in few hours with most
cursed imprecations forswears him: Matthew. xxvi. 74.
And so irregular illegal violences for Religion usually flame out into direct
opposition to that they are so zealous for; The Arians were the first among
Christians that persecuted. See Athanas. ad solit. vit. agent. p. 815. 821. and
854.
fly in the face of that Religion they pretend to strive for; to let us see
they do not rise from Divine Zeal, and from true Piety, but from Hypocrisy,
Ambition, Revenge, or Interest; and that warm shine that kindles there
pretended Angels of Light, is but a flash of Hell, a glory about a fiend.
Therefore afterward none was more forward than S. Peter was to press
submission to the Magistrate, though most unjustly persecuting for Religion;
talks of no Fire but the fiery trial then, Verse 12.
in Epist. 1. Cap. iv. and If ye suffer for the Name of Christ the Spirit of
glory and of God rests upon you, Verse 14.
he knows what manner of Spirit such are of: When they are in the place of
Dragons, then the Holy Ghost and God is with them; when the darkness of the
shadow of death is on their Souls, even then the Spirit of glory rests on
them. Accordingly the after-Fathers urge the same not only toward Heathen
Emperors, Vid. S. Aug. in Psalm. Cxxiv. Vid. Athan. Apol. ad Constant. and Ho.
Epist. ad Constant. in Athan. Ep. ad sol. vitam agentes. Tom. 1. p. 838. Edit.
Paris. 1627. Vid. Greg. Naz. Orat. 20. am. Tom. 1. p. 350. Edit. Par. 1630.
Vid. Ambr. pro variis Actionibus Concion. 1. p 97. Tom. 5. Edit. Paris. 1632.
l. 2. Ep. 14. p. 206. Tom. 5. p. 270. Tom. 1. 1 Samuel xiii. 22.
but relapsed Heretics and Apostates: As Julian, and Constantius, Valens,
Valentinian; and upon the same account S. Ambrose says, Spiritus Sanctus id
locutus est in vobis, Rogamus, Auguste, non Pugnamus: The Holy Spirit spoke
these words in you, we beg O Valentinian, we oppose not. And S. Greg. Nazianzen
says, to do so was the Christian Law most excellently ordained by the Spirit of
God, who knew best to temper his Law with the mixture of what is profitable to
us, and honest in it self. They knew what manner of Spirit that of Christianity
was: It does assume no power to inflict it self: It Is not commissioned to plant
it self with violence, or destroy those that refuse or oppose it. It wages War
indeed with Vices, not with men: And in the Camp of our Religion as once in
Israel, there is no Sword found but with Saul and Jonathan his Son, only the
Princes Sword. Our Spirit is the Dove, no Bird of prey that, nor indeed of gall
or passion: If Christian Religion be to be writ in Blood, it is in that of its
own confessors only; if men's false Opinions make no parties nor mischiefs in
the State, we are not to make them Martyrs to their false Opinions; and if they
be not so happy as to be Orthodox, send them down to Hell directly: tear out
one another Souls to tear out that which we think an Error. Sure they must
not root out smutted Corn that must not root out Poppy; we may let that which
is a little blasted grow, Matthew. xiii. 29.
if we must let the Tares and Darnel grow. The Soldiers would not crucify
Christ's Coat, nor make a rent there where they could find no seam: John xix.
14.
But now men strive so for the Coat, that they do rent his Flesh to catch it,
and to gain an enclosure of the name of Christians tear all other members from
the Body of Christ; care not to sacrifice a Nation to a supposed Error; will
attempt to purge away what they call dross in a Furnace of consuming flame: The
Christian Spirit's fiery Tongues must kindle no such heats, but his effusions
called Rivers, came to quench such fires: Effusions that were mistaken sor new
wine indeed, but never looked like Blood. Nor are they that retain to this
Spirit, those that have him called down on them in their Consecration,
empowered for such uses. When Christ sent his Disciples to convert the World,
Luke x. 3.
Behold says he, I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves: And sure that does
not sound like giving a Commission to tear and worry those that would not come
into the Flock: The Sheep were not by that empowered to devour the Wolves. Our
Lords directions to his Apostles when a City would not receive their Doctrine
was shake off the dust of your feet; Matthew. x. 14. Luke x. 11.
let nothing of theirs cleave to you, have no more to do with them; cast off
the very dust that settled on your Sandals as you passed their Streets. And
surely then we must be far from animating to give ruin to, and seize the Sword,
the Scepter, and the Thrones of Kings, if they refuse to receive Christ or his
Kingdom, or his Reformation, or his Vicar. If I must not have the dust of any
such upon my feet, I must not have their Land in my possession, their Crowns on
my head, their Wealth in my Coffers, their Blood upon my hands, nor their Souls
upon my Sword. It will be ill appearing so when we come to give an account how
we have executed our Commission; and shall be asked, did I send you to inflict
the Cross, or preach it? to save men's Souls or to destroy their lives, yea and
Souls too? And when in those Myriads of Souls that have perished in the
desolations which such occasions have wrought their Blood shall cry from under
the Altar, as being sacrificed to that Duty and Religion which was the utmost
that they understood (if so be that there were no Treason to discolor it) and
they that did inflict all this appear but Christian Dioclesians, and stand at
that sad Day in the train of the Persecutions, on the same hand: O then those
Fires which these Boutefeus called for and kindled shall blaze out into
everlasting burnings!

And now it may seem strange that they who most of all pretend the Spirit of
Christ, are yet of the most distant temper in the World from that of Gospel;
always endeavoring to do that which our Savior here checks his Disciples for
proposing, and did threaten Peter for attempting. There are among our selves
that seem to live by Inspiration, that look and speak as in the frame of the
Gospel, as if every motion were impulse from Heaven: and yet as if Christ had
fulfilled his promise to them without Metaphor, baptized them with the Holy
Ghost and fire, only that they might kindle fire, and the unction of the
Spirit did but add Oil to those flames; as if the cloven Tongues of fire in
which the Spirit did descend, were made to be the Emblems of Division, and to
call for fire; these men's life, their garb, their very piety is faction: they
pray, rebel, and murder, and all by the Spirit. It Is true indeed they plead now
what we seem to say, that they should not be persecuted for not being satisfied
in their Conscience; so they mince their breaking of the Laws for which they
suffer. But do these know themselves what manner of Spirit they are of? or are
we bound not to remember when they had the Power how they persecuted all that
would not do at once against their King, their Conscience, and the Law? And we
do thus far know what Spirit they are of, and if they have not yet repented of
all that, then it is plain if they can get an opportunity they will do it
again, nay they must by their Spirit think themselves obliged to do it.

But these are not all: those that above all the World pretend to the
Infallible assistance of the Spirit, So the Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
and the whole Clergy of France in their general Assembly, in the censure of a
Jesuit's Book styled Admonitio ad Regem, published at Pa^ is 13. December. 1625,
say of them that for Religion's sake rebel against their Princes, fidem in
factionem convertunt. Alfonso de vargas relatio de Stratagem. Jesuitarum c. 55.
Jerusalem and Babel, or the Image of both Churches. p. 499.
our Church is bold in her Offices of this day to say, do turn Religion into
Rebellion; she said it more severely heretofore, and the attempts of this day
warrant the saying, when not like our Disciples that would call for fire from
Heaven on the Village that rejected Christ, these will raise up fire from Hell
to consume their own Prince and his Progeny, the whole line of Royalty, the
Church and Nation also in their Representative; and all this only for refusing
him that calls himself Christ's Vicar. v. g. confitetur maleficus se posuisse
pulverem. vel quid aliud sub tali limine and nisi tollatur domum comburendam,
Principem interiturum, quotquot urbem ingredientur egredienturque in magnam
perniciem, aut periculum venturos. Probabilior and tutior, and magis
consentanea Religioni, ac reverentiae huic Sacramento debitae, etc.
There are, I must confess, among them that renounce the practice, and say
'twas the device only of some few desperate malcontents, wicked Catholics,
and designed by the Devil: And they will allow their Father Garnett to have had
no other guilt, but that he did not discover it having received it in
Confession. And this gives me occasion to propose a story to your patience and
conjectures.

Not long before the time of this Attempt, a Priest of the Society of Jesus in
a Book he published, does propose this case of Conscience, Whether a Priest may
make use of what he has learned in Confession to avert great impendent
mischiefs to the Government? as for Example, One confesses that himself or some
other had laid Gunpowder, and other things under such an House, and if they be
not taken thence the House will be burnt, the Prince must perish, all that pass
throughout the City will be either certainly destroyed or in great peril; and
resolves it thus. It Is the most probable and safe Opinion, and the more
suitable to Religion, and to that reverence which is due to the Sacrament of
Confession, that it is not lawful to make use of this his knowledge to that end.
That his Holiness Clement the 8. had just before by a Bull sent to the
Superiors of the Regulars commanded most studiously to beware they make not
use of any thing which they come to know by Confession to the benefit of the
secular Government. Because indeed he does not know, nor ever heard it as a
man, or as a part of the commonwealth, or subject of the Government.
He adds, that in cases of Confession the Priest must not reveal though death
be threatened to him, but may say he knows it not, nor ever heard it, quia
revera non scit nec audivit ut homo, seu pars reipub. Yea he may swear all this
if he but mentally reserve, so as to tell you. It Is Del Rio in 6th. Book of his
Mag. dis. 1. Cap. Sec. 2. It seems it is safer to break all the Obligations to
Allegiance and to truth, Yea and particular provincial Councils, though
Bellarmine names many for my turn. Conc. Romans 1. and ^um (which was justified
also they say in Con. Tribur. Quint. Ostlens. Claramont Romans 7. and. 10.)
his duty and his Oaths, the Princes and Gods bonds, than the Seal of
Confession.

But I did not mention this to let you see the kindness these men have to
Princes and their Government: I shall avoid producing any the Opinions of
particular persons howsoever horrid in my arguments this day; but I only ask
whether it be not very probable this instance was the thing to be attempted on
this day? Whether the resolution was not published, the Pope's Bull if not made
yet produced at least to caution any Priest that should receive it in
Confession, and should be so honest as to abhor the Fact, Placentin. Romans 3.
Colonien. Rhemens. Claramont. And he names more Popes.
yet from betraying it and hindering the Execution of it. If it were the case,
this was not then any rash attempt of some few desperate malcontents; but a
long contrivance and of many heads, and its taking its effect was the great
care of their Church.

Well they are even with us yet* and lay as horrid Projects to the charge of
Protestants. Among our other Controversies this is one, whether are the worse
Subjects? bloody sayings are produced from Authors on both sides; yea there is
the Image of both Churches, Babel and Jerusalem, drawn by a Catholic Pen, and
then you may be sure all Babel's divisions and confusions make the draught of
ours, and are said to be the issue of the Protestant Doctrines: Whereas such
things are countenanced by some particular Authors of their Church, were never
owned by any public Act, or Doctrine of a general Council to which they
provoke us. I must confess our Calendar can show a thirtieth of January, as
well as a fifth of November. There are indeed that say, the Romanists hatched
that days guilt, and challenge any man to call them to account for saying so.
See Dr. Du Moulin' s answer to Philanax Anglicus p. 59.
But whether so or not; which Churches Doctrines such things are more suited
to, I will now put to trial, that we may know what Spirit each is of: And I
will try it by the public Acts and most established Doctrines of the
Churches, and here undertake to show the Church of England most expressly does
declare against all practices against the Prince for the cause of Religion. But
the Romish in those acts wherein she has most reason to expect infallibility
of Spirit, also in the public Acts of the Church representative, in General
Councils does abett the doing them, not only for Religion, but for the cause
of Holy Church.

First, If the Church of Rome have reason to expect infallible assistance of
the Spirit in any case, Accordingly the Schoolmen do account it de fide that
the Pope cannot err in this.
it is as much in Canonizing of a Saint as in any other, it being as unhappy to
determine a false Object for Religious Worship to their Church as a false
Article of Faith; there is as much need that there should be an infallible
proposal of the one as other; for when she does Decree by the Authority of the
Omnipotent God such a one is a Saint, received in Glory, and so renders him the
Object of their Worship, if he should chance to be a Reprobate; to cause the
People to fall prostrate to the Shrine of one that is damned, and call his
flames to warm Gods Altar and the Votaries breast, to make the whole Church
worship one that is in Hell, is liable to greater aggravations of impiety than
an erroneous Opinion in very many of their points of Faith can be.

But it is known their Church has Canonized one of this Nation, Becket, S.
Thomas the Martyr.
who though he was indeed illegally and barbarously Murdered, yet it is not the
Suffering, but the Cause that makes the Martyr, now he did not fall a Sacrifice
for his Religion, but was slain because he did disturb the State by suspending
all the Bishops that upheld the Kings just cause against him, See Daniel's
Hist. of Engl. in the life of Hen. 2. Anno 1170. p. 94. Edit. London. Anno
1634. Idem. Anno 1164. p. 85. Idem. p. 86. Nor are the Jesuits less favorable
to Fa. Garnet, who was Executed for this treasonable Powder Plot. For Mr. de
St. Amor in his Journal Part. 2. c. 11. says, that among other Prints of the
Pourtraitures of such as were canonises come ayant repandu leur sang pour la
Religion Chrestienne, Canoniged as having shed their blood for the Christian
Religion, one was thou; Pater Henricus Garnetus Anglus Londini pro fide
Catholica suspensus and sectus. 3 Maii 1606. Adding that these Prints are made
avec permission des Superieurs.
so that neither King nor State could live in peace for him; for opposing also
those Laws which himself had sworn to, Laws that were not only truly Sovereign
Rights, but are maintained even unto this day as Privileges by the Gallican
Church, and they not branded for so doing: In a word, he was slain for those
actions which his own Bishops condemned him for, as a perjured man and a
Traitor: And for persisting in them to the death he was Sainted.

Now whatever the estate of this man be in the next World, (I meddle not with
that;) Yet for Disobedience and Rebellion to place one in Heaven, whence for
those things Lucifer did fall; does seem to show what Spirit they are of that
Canonize such Saints: For the Church to pray to Christ that by the wounds of
this Saint he would remit their sins, Christ Jesu per Thoma vulnera quae nos
ligant relaxa scelera. Jesu bone per Thomae merita ^ostra nobis dimitte debita.
Portisor. seu Breviar. ad usum Eccles. Sarum. See Daniel's Hist. Anno 1172. p.
99. Fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit, Hanc precamus Assequamur ut
Thomae consortium. Missal. ad us. Ecc^es. Sar. Romans xiii. 2. Habetur Sententia.
Council. Tom. 28. p. 424. Edit. Reg. Par. An. 1644. Cum fratribus nostris and
sacro concilio deleberatione habita diligenti. p. 431. Constanter igitur and
actrrime in pleno and jam plenissimo Concilio Imperator Fred. quasi
toti-Ecclesiae contumax and Rebellis a 4. Mundi parts Inhabitantibus
accusatur. p. 457. Dominus Papa Sententiam Excommunicationis in pleno Concilio
non sine omnium audientium stupore and horrore terribili fulguravit. p. 462.
Dominus Papa and Praelati assidentes Concilio candelis accensis in dictum
Imperatorem -- terribiliter -- fulgurarurt. p. 463. Praelati omnes candelas
suas accensas inclinarant and extinxerunt excommunicatum Imperatorem
deponentes. Matt. Par. Nonne igitur hac non levia sed efficacia sunt argumenta
de suspicione Haeresis contra tum. Con. tom. 28. p. 431. Omni honor and
dignitate -- sententiando privamus; omnes qui eiljuramento fidelitatis tenentur
aftricti a juramento hujusmodi perpetuo absolventes: Auctoritate Apostolica
inhibendo, etc. Ibid. p. 431. Petav. Rationar, temporum. l. 9. c. 1. part
prima. p. 457. Edit. Par. Anni. 1652.
does express what rate their Church does set upon the merits of resisting
Princes, and disturbing States in the behalf of Holy Church: When such actions
make men fit to be joint purchasers with Christ in the Redemption of the World.
But when the French Histories say 'twas disputed long after in Paris whether he
were Damned or Saved, that the Church in her public Offices should pray to go
thither where he is gone to have his Society; though it express their most
infallible assurance of the condition of those men, who for their sakes resist
the Secular Powers, yet O my Soul! enter not thou into their counsels in this
world, neither say a Confederacy to whom they say a Confederacy: much less pray
to be in their Society, who by resisting S. Paul says, do receive unto
themselves Damnation.

Secondly, It is notorious that in their first General Council at Lions, Anno
1245. the Emperor Frederick the second, by the Sentence of the Pope and the
whole Council after long deliberation and producing several Arguments which
they say are not slight, but effectual to prove the suspicion of Heresy, is
deprived of his Empire, all his Subjects are absolved from their Oath of
Allegiance, and by Apostolical Authority forbidden to obey him: Therefore that
such things may be done in the cases of Religion has the Authority of a
General Council, 'twas that Council that Decreed Red Hats to Cardinals: Hats
red it seems not only with the Royal Purple, but with the Blood of Kings and
of Royalty it self.

Thirdly, I should have urged the well known Canon of the General Council of
Lateran, (the greatest their Church ever boasted of) which says, Celebrated in
the year of our Lord 1215. in which 412. Bishops, etc. Can. 3. Con. Tom. 28. p.
161. Ut ex tunc ipse vasallos ab ejus fidelitate denunciat absolutes, and
terram. etc. Ib. Mode super hoc ipse nullum praestet obstaculum, nec aliquod
impedimentum appenat, (...) nihilominus lege servata circa cos qui no^ hab^nt
Dominos temporates. Can. eodem.
That if the temporal Lord shall neglect to purge his Territories from such as
the Church there declares Heretics, he shall be Excommunicated by the
Metropolitan, and if he do not mend within a year complained of to the Pope,
that so he may declare his Subjects absolved from their Allegiance, and expose
his Lands to be seized by Catholics; who shall exterminate the Heretics,
saving the right of the chief Lord: Provided he give no impediment to this. But
the same law shall be observed to those that have no chief Lords; that is, who
are themselves Supreme.

This I should urge, but that some say that penal Statutes which are leges
odiosae, tantum disponunt, quantum loquuntur: Therefore this Canon since it
does not name Kings, it does not, they say, concern them, although it is plain
it do sufficiently enough. But that there may be therefore no evasion,

Fourthly, In the General Council of Constance, that part of it I mean that is
approved by their whole Church. The Pope and Council join together in
commanding all Archbishops, After Martin V. was made Pope. Sacro approbante
Council. Constant. per Apostolica scripta committimus and mandamus Conc. Tom.
29. p. 613. p. 617. 626. l. p. 626. p. 628. Though they be Patriarchs,
Archibishops, Bishops, Kings, or Queens, or Dukes, etc. Per excommunicationis
suspensionis and interdicti non privationis dignitatum personatuum -- and etiam
honorum ac dignitatum saecularium -- and per alias poenas, vias and modos. p.
629. The same Mandate also does in p. 614. enjoin them to require the
Emperors, Kings, Dukes, etc. to expel those Heretics from their Dominions;
see tenorem Lateran. Concilii quod incipit sicut ait. Namely cap. 27. of the
general Council of Lateran under Alex. 3. which Canon threatens thus. Relaxatos
se noverint a debito fidelitatis and hominii ac totius obsequii -- quicunque
illis ^liqu^ pacto tenentur annexi. Conc. Tom. 27. p. 461. Also in the 17 Sess.
of the Council of Constance under John 21. Conc. Tom. 29. p. 458. The Council
does define expressly Excommunication and deprivation to Kings also. Haec
sacrosancta Constant Synodus Ecclesiam Catholicam representans in spiritu
sancto legitime congregata, statuit, definit. and ordinatu quod qulcunque
cujuscunque status ac conditionis existat etiamis Regalis Cardinalatus, etc. --
Sententiam Excommunicationis ^^toritate hujus S. Concilii general. ipso sacto
incurrat -- and ulterius omni honor and dignitate sit ipso facto privatus.
Bishops, and Inquisitors to pronounce all such Excommunicate as are declared
Heretics in such and such Articles (and that of Transubstantiation,
half-Communion, and the Pope's Supremacy are among them) or that favor ot
defend them, or that Communicate with them in public or in private, whether
in sacred Offices or otherwise; etiamsi Patriarchali, Archiepiscopali,
Episcopali, Regali, Reginali, Ducali, aut alia quavis Ecclesiastica, aut
mundana proefulgeant dignitate: And Commands them also to proceed to
Interdicts, and deprivation of Dignities, and Goods, and whatsoever other
Penalties, vias and modos. Thus that Council though it took away the Peoples
right to the Blood of Christ, denying them the Cup in the Sacrament, gave them
in exchange the Blood of their own Kings, making them a right to that.

And that they extend the force of these Canons to the most absolute Princes,
even to him that pleads exemption most, to the King of France is plain, because
when Sixtus the fifth thundered out his Bulls against the then King of Navarre,
afterward King Henry the fourth of France, and the Prince of Conde, depriving
them not only of their Lands and Dignities, but their Succession also to the
Crown of France, absolving their Subjects from their Oaths, forbidding them to
obey them, he declared he did it to them as to relapsed Heretics, favorers
and defenders of them, Les declarant heretics relaps, chefs, fauteurs and
protecteurs de l' heresy come tells tombs dans les censures and les peines y
portees par les loix and les Canons, privez eux and leur descendans des toutes
terres and dignites, incapables de succeder a quelque Principaute que se soit,
specialement au Royaume de France. Absout leurs Subjects du serment de fideli.
te and leur defend de leur obeir. Histoire du Roy. H. le Grand. parl' Evesque
de Rhodez. ad annum. 1585. p. 68. andv. p. 71. Edit. Amst. anno 1661. Cap. unam
sanctam de Major and obedientia in extra. Com.
and as such fallen under the Censures of the Canons of the Church. Now there
are no other Canons that do take in Kings but these which can touch him, for
that of Boniface the eighth which says the Pope has power to judge all temporal
Powers, is declared not to extend to France. Cap. meruit* de privilege. in
extravag. communibus.

Thus by the public Acts of their Church, and by the Canons of their General
Councils we have found in causes of Religion Deprivation of Princes, Wars and
Bloodshed, and the other consequent Miseries are established; Rebellion
encouraged by a Law: And if Rebellion be as the sin of Witchcraft then we know
what manner of Spirit they are of that do encourage it; 1 Samuel xv. 23.
sure Witches have no spirit but the Devil for familiar.

But the Church of England on the other side, in her public Doctrine set down
in the Book of Homilies, established in the 39. Articles of her Religion, says
in express words, that it is not lawful for Inferiors and Subjects in any case
to resist and stand against the Superior Powers: that we must indeed believe
undoubtedly that we may not obey Kings, Magistrates, or any other, if they
would command us to do any thing contrary to Gods Commands. In such a case we
ought to say with the Apostle, we must rather obey God than Man. But
nevertheless in that case we may not in any wise withstand violently, or Rebel
against Rulers, or make any Insurrection, Sedition, or Tumults, either by force
of Arms or otherwise, against the Anointed of the Lord, or any of his Officers,
1 Book of Hom. 2 part of the Sermon. of Obed. Not for Reformation of Religion;
for what a Religion it is that such men by such means would restore, may easily
be judged even as good a Religion surely as Rebels be good men, and obedient
Subjects. 2 Book of Hom. 4 part of the Sermon. against wilful Rebellion. The very
same thing is defined in the first of the Constitutions and Canons
Ecclesiastical of the year 1640. for Subjects to bear Arms against their King,
offensive, or defensive, upon any pretense whatever, is at least to resist the
Powers which are ordained of God: and though they do not invade but only
resist, S. Paul tells them plainly, he that resists receives unto himself
damnation. This was the Doctrine of the Church in those her Constitutions; and
although there was no Parliament then sitting to enact these Canons into Laws,
yet since that time the Law of England is declared to say the same;
Subscription to the Act for uniformity. 14 Car. 2.
and we obliged by it to acknowledge, that it is not Lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever, to take up Arms against the King, by this Parliament, whose memory
shall be for ever blessed.

And now it is not hard to know what manner of Spirit our Church is of, even
that Spirit that anoints the Lords Anointed, that is, which Commissions them,
Gods Spirit, as we find it phras'd in Scripture: And it is obvious to each eye
that there is much more resemblance betwixt present Rome, and the Image of
Babylon, as S. John has drawn it in the Revelations, than there is of Babel
and the Church of England, as to those Confusions which seditious Doctrines
make, as the Romanists pourtrai'd her.

But far be it from me to conclude hence that all of their Communion do allow
their Doctrines: Though they stand on the same bottom that their Faith of
half-Communion, and Transubstantiation do; even Acts of the same Councils, yet
I doubt not multitudes of loyal Souls of this our Nation do abhor the Tenants,
by what Rule of theirs I know not I confess. Nor shall I enquire what Security
a Prince can have of the Allegiance of those, who by the most infallible Rules
of their Religion can be loyal only on Condition, by the leave of those who
are his Enemies, on whose will and power all their Oaths and duty are
depending. If the most essential interest of Princes will not move them to
consider this, sure I am I shall not undertake it: But I shall take the
confidence out of the premises to infer, that no Religion in the World does
more provide for the security of Kings, than the Christian as it is professed
in our Church does. And when we see the Interest of the Crown and Church were
twisted by God in the preservations of this day, nor could be separated in the
late dismal Confusions, but died and revived together in the Resurrection, they
that hate the execrable mischiefs of those times, or love the Crown, or do not
come to mock God when they come to give him thanks for his great glories of
this day, cannot choose but have good will for our Sion, cannot have an
unconcernedness for this Religion, a cold indifference to it or any other;
which where-ere it is, alas I fear betrays too openly indifference and
unconcernedness for Religion it self. For if I should appeal to our most
Sceptick Statists, and not beg one Principle of a Religion, but take their own:
Religion was contrived, they say, by pretending to engage a God to uphold his
Vicegerent, and by putting after, everlasting punishments before men's fears,
(for they saw present ones restrained not Treason) was contrived I say, to
uphold States: Then that must be the best with them that best upholds, and then
I have evinced the Christian is secure, as it is prosess'd by our Church. But
then shame to those who to gratify their lusts merely, labor to persuade
themselves and others there is no such thing in earnest as a Resurrection to
punishments: who by public raillery in sacred things, and turning all to
merriment, endeavor to take off the sense of all Religion, and have done it in
great measure; and so thrown down the best-Basis on which Government subsists:
which they themselves confess was necessary to be framed on purpose for it. For
if there be no after fears, he that is stronger than to need to fear the
present may rebel, kill Kings.

These Atheists are Fanatics, I am sure in Politics; more traitorous than our
mad Enthusiasts, or than the Canons of the Popish Councils: To these Sadduces
in Christianity we may say, ye know not what spirit ye are of, Acts xxiii. 8.
who know not whether there be any Spirit. But it is indeed because they are
all flesh themselves: Gal. v, 19, 20, 21.
But then if the works of the flesh be manifest, Adultery, Fornication,
Seditions, Heresies, Murders, Drunkenness, etc. we know what manner of Spirit
they are of; even the spirit that did enter into the Swine, the Legion indeed
of Spirits, one Spirit is not Devil enough to animate the flesh into so many of
those works. But the fruits of the Spirit that Gospel Spirit which we
Christians are of, Ver. 22, 23.
are love, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, joy in the Holy Ghost; and they that do bring forth such fruits are
baptized indeed with the Holy Ghost; and if with fire, fire that came down from
Heaven too, 'twas only to consume their dross that they may be pure metal,
fit as for the King's Inscription, meek Christians, good Subjects, so for Gods
Image to be stamped upon, that is, renewed in Righteousness and true Holiness.
Fire this that will sublime our very flesh into spiritual body, that we may
begin here that incorruptible which our corruptible must put on, when our vile
Bodies shall be made like to the glorious Body of our Savior: To which state
that Spirit which raised up Jesus from the dead bring us, by quickening our
mortal Bodies.

To whom, etc.
The Eleventh SERMON, Preached at CHRIST-CHURCH IN OXFORD, November. 8. 1665.
Being the Monthly Fast Day for the Plague.
LUKE XVI. 30, 31. Nay Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent. -- And he said unto him, if they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.
THAT God who purchased for us the possibilities of Repentance with the Son of
his Bosom, and requires nothing more in exchange of the Blood and Life of
Christ, but some unfeigned tears and reformation of our lives, that He should
be contriving methods to bring men to Repentance is nothing strange; for this
is but to take care that all that ever he has done for them be not in vain and
lost: But that in Hell, a place which nothing but Repentance can destroy; there
should be such designs seems stange, yet not if we consider the condition of
the place, whose Torments are not only of so dire a nature, that he that is
condemned to them wou^^ be alone in them, but were made so dire on purpose that
they mig^^ be preservatives against themselves; nothing being judged more
effectual to terrify men from those pains, than the exceeding greatness of
those pains, which he that feels thinks the relation alone will do; for he
said, Nay Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead they will
repent, etc.

The words do willingly suggest occasion for several Inquiries, and some of
those of the nicer and more curious kind, but truly I shall not attend to those
suggestions, but shall choose to handle some few of the most obvious and popular
Considerations that the words break into, and they are three.

First, The Rich man's Charity to his Brethren, his unsatisfied desire and care
that they may be brought to Repentance, expressed in these words, Nay Father
Abraham, though they have Moses and Prophets, yet let them have one method more.

Secondly, We have here his choice of that method, that which he thought would
do though nothing else would; in these words, If one went unto them from the
dead they will repent. In the handling of which, we shall examine what the
grounds were upon which this Rich man was so confident that that would work
upon them; and here we find he chose with several advantages.

First, One from the dead;

Secondly, That one Lazarus; and he

First, One out of Abraham's Bosom:

Secondly, One that had seen him also in his Torments and could testify of
them, v. 27.

Thirdly, We have here these fancied hopes all dashed in Abraham's answer, And
he said unto him, if they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

First of the first, the Charitable, careful contrivances this Rich man in Hell
had for his Brethren upon Earth: Nay Father Abraham, etc.

It is commonly reported of men who know themselves infected by the Plague,
that they desire to infect as many others as they can; they contrive to spread
the Contagion, and love society of Ruin; and we are sure it is so in that
Plague of the Soul, Sin. This humor did not content it self to debauch Heaven,
and unpeople Paradise, but all the Ages of the World make up its Triumph, and
every sin that ever was, and misery that shall be, is its issue. Lucifer's
pride would have a train of Angels and Mankind to wait upon him in Destruction:
And in such an attendance, though to his everlasting cost, he does still pride
himself; he feeds upon that Envy that devours him, and chears himself with
adding fuel to his flames that do torment him; and upon this account enjoyes
his own Agonies and God's Indignation: And then it is no wonder if his Agents
upon Earth enjoy the sport; and if the Devil does not more please himself to
see his Dominions enlarged and the business of Hell go forward, than wicked men
do in having others become like themselves; as if they did derive to
themselves, and possess the pleasure, as they do the guilt of those whom they
draw in; and the delight like the sin, were all in all, and all in every part
of the whole Company that join in wickedness. But it should seem it is otherwise
with the Sinners in Hell. Our Rich man here when he saw his own estate
remediless, so vast a gulf betwixt him an^ ^e Bosom of Comfort, that not the
least drop of refreshment, no (...) hopes nor wishes of it could pass thence to
him; but Torment sealed upon him by an irreversible Decree; he begins then to
contrive for his Brethren, how their falling into the like estate with him
might be prevented, ver. 27, 28. Nor satisfied with this, when Abraham replies,
they are provided well enough, they have Moses and the Prophets, the one
Preaching the Law to them, whose Rules they have made as familiar to them as
their dress, they put on daily Gods Commandments, and their duty; make his
Precepts their frontlets and their wristbands. And the other the Prophets, are
Commissioned from God to lay before their eyes the issue of transgressions,
give them a vision of the Judgments that await their sins, and come to them
burdned with the foreknowledg of the Sinners expectations; so that except they
will resolve to choose destruction wilfully to assault their own perdition,
there is no fear they should come thither; those tell them as much as any from
the dead can do: Ah! but thinks he, all those methods I had, yet I am here; and
then let them have one other; for as now after this little taste of Torments
were I to live again, I should most certainly avoid this place, and lead
another kind of life than that which does expire into this Tophet; So if one
went to tell them how it is with me, sure then they would repent and not come
hither; therefore I pray thee send; Nay Father Abraham, etc.

I cannot here assent to Cardinal Cajetan's account that all this earnestness
was only pride in our Rich man, and a desire to have the glory of his Family
advanced; which as he labored to raise here by Wealth, so now finding by sad
experience that was but a weak foundation to build a lasting House upon, and
that all the shine of it was but false treacherous light, such as did end in
flame with him; and having made discovery of other greater glories, that
Abraham and Lazarus possessed, he would have his Family as high and bright as
they; and this their Repentance, which he took such care for, was but in order
to that exaltation.

If it were so, truly it is the first pride I ever read of that would content
it self with no meaner a dress than the Robes of Immortality, and was ambitious
of the Throne of Glory. I have heard I confess of a proud lowliness, where the
humility is but the manage and the art of being lofty, is only assumed
condesc^ntion whereby men but descend to be extolled, and stoop to take
advantage for their mount: But never heard of any pride that aimed to raise it
self by the humiliations of Repentance, that laid its groundwork in that dust
and ashes, clothed it self in the sackcloth and neglected rudenesses of a
pious penitent sorrow: The prides of this side Hell are of a different garb I Am
sure, if theirs be such; if they design by those just means to settle the
inheritance of Heaven in their Families, sure the vices of Hell may be fit
patterns for our Religious performances, and 'twere to be desired that all
Christians had this man's ardencies and flames in their affections to their
Houses.

Yet neither can I from this one particular instance draw any general
proposition concerning the kindness of that place to Sinners upon Earth,
although all those that make this History not Parable would give me color for
it: But waving that, since Christ has so framed the (...), (which is a
relation of such words as they would have spoke, had they spoke on this
occasion) I shall take that as ground enough to apply it to the conviction of
those who are so far from these Charitable designs to the Souls of others, that
they contrive nothing more than how to have the company of their Friends in
those ways that lead to this place of Torment; prevail with them to join in
sinning, and show a Vice how to insinuate into them.

The kindnesses of our man here in the flames were divine God like Charities
compared to these. Our Savior says, Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones, for I say unto you that in Heaven their Angels do always behold
the Face of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. xviii. 10. Which one expounds,
if we neglect to do what is in our power to preserve the meanest Christians
from Vice, and slight their sinning, their Tutelary Angels that have continual
recourse to God, and are high in his favor, will make complaints of us in
their behalf, at least they will if we offend them, and any action of ours
prove an occasion of their sins. And if a favorite of Heaven shall accuse us
to the Lord for that, Then how will he complain of us when we tempt? when he
shall have to say against us, that we have ensnared and drawn such a Soul into
a Custom that will ruin it eternally; and when he shall bring against us an
instance out of Hell here, and the kindnesses of one among the Devils shall
come in Judgment against us; where we see the Rich Man thought not of his own
condemnation so much he thought of the averting that of his Brethren. We might
suppose a man in his condition could not consider any thing but his own
Tortures. O yes, to preserve others from them; yet, when the man in Hell does
so, the men on Earth do think of nothing more than to entice others into them.
And is it not a strange Age then, when to tempt is the only mode of kindness,
and men do scarcely know how to express themselves civil to their Friends but
by pressing them to sin and so be sick with them? as if this were the gentile
use of Societies, to season Youth into good Company, and bring the Fashionable
Vices into their acquaintance.

And it is well if they stay there; it happens so that Parts and Wit, Faculties
and Acquisitions do ingratiate men into these treacherous kindnesses, and
qualify them for the desires and friendships of such persons as entertain them
by softning them into looseness and then into profaneness; debauch their
manners, and then their Principles; teach them to sport themselves with Vice,
and then with Holy things, and after with Religion it self; which is a greater
Luxury than that their Riots treat their Appetites withal, the Luxury of Wit.
And thus they educate them into Atheism, and these familiar Devils are called
Acquaintances and Friends: And indeed the Companions in sin a man would think
should be dear Friends, such as pour an heart into one another in their common
Cups, shed Souls in their Lusts, are friends to one another even in ruin, and
love to their own Condemnation, are kind beyond the Altar-flames, even to those
everlasting fires; such communications certainly cement affections so that
nothing can divide them: And let them do so, but Lord send me the kindness of
Hell rather, one that will be a friend like this man in his Torments, that with
unsatisfied cares minded the reformation of his Friends, Nay Father Abraham,
but if one went unto them from the dead they will repent; which brings me to
the Choice, the second thing.

If a Ghost should indeed appear to any of us in the midst of our Commissions,
it would certainly hurry us from our Enjoyments; and there are no such ties and
unions by which the advantages of sin do hold us fixed and jointed to them, but
the shake and tremble we should then be in, would loosen and dissolve them all,
and make us uncling from them, if we may believe discourses that tell us such a
sight is able to startle a man however he be fixed by his most close Devotions;
for what the Jews were wont to say, we shall die because we have seen an Angel
of the Lord from Heaven, most men do fear if they should see the Spirit of a
dead man from the Earth. Indeed the affrights which men do usually conceive at
the mere apprehension of such an Apparition, do probably arise from a surprise,
in being minded hastily of such a state for which they are not then prepared so
as they would wish or hope to be, to which they think that is a Call, for we
shall die said the Jews.

But not to ask the reason of this now, but find the reason why our Rich Man
thinks when Moses and the Prophets cannot make a man repent, such a Ghost
should: We have it in ver. 28, they do but discourse to us, but one from the
dead could testify, he could bear witness that it is so as they say, speak his
own sight and knowledge, and therefore though they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, yet if one went unto them from the dead they will repent. For

First, One from the Dead could testify that when we die we do not cease to
be; and he would make appear that our departing hence is not annihilation, and
so would dash the hopes of Epicures; such as I was, and I may fear they are;
who as they live like Beasts do think to die so too: and who are rational in
this alone that they desire to be but Animal. And all the rest of men whether
worldly or sensual, that enclose their desires and enjoyments within this life,
and above all the Atheist that dares not look beyond it, all these would be
convinced by such an evidence. Indeed this would take away the main
encouragement of all ungodliness, which upon little reasonings how thin soever,
that there is no life after this does quicken and secure it self, Wisd. 2. and
therefore every Sect of men that did prescribe Morality did teach an after
life, nothing was more believed among the Heathen; Their Tribunal below, where
three most severe Judges were appointed, meant the same thing with our last
Assize, and their Elizian fields were but Poetical Paradise, their Phlegethon,
River of Fire, was set to express our stream of Brimstone flame: Thus
Resurrection in fable made them virtuous; the guess at it made Socrates die
cheerful, and though his hopes had faint weak Principles they had Heroic
almost Martyr resolutions.

And on the other side, of those that among them denied an after life, though
we are told that Epicurus was a virtuous man, yet his Sect did give name to
Vice; and is still the expression for it, and all that did espouse the Tenants
of it, (...)
did the Vices too; the Sadduces among the Jews are called Epicures, not only
for Opinions sake, because they did make God a body, and totally denied his
Providence, as Zakuth says, but Epicures also for their practice sake; Joseph
de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 12.
For they used to scoff at the Pharisees for afflicting themselves by Fasting
and Austerities in this life, Edit. Basil.
(...) when there is nothing at all of recompense for them in any life to come.
Yea and Josephus says of them they were the worst of all Sects, (...)
living like savage Beasts toward one another, and uncourteous to their own
Sect as to strangers; and this, says he, was but a natural effect of their
Opinion, which wholly denied the Immortality of the Soul, and all Rewards and
Punishments after this Life; which Principle one coming from the dead would
rectify, and so contribute to Repentance. Especially if

Secondly, That one were Lazarus, if he that at the Supper of the Lamb sits
next the Father of the faithful, and the friend of God, in one of the higher
Seats of Paradise, in Abraham's Bosom; if he would go and speak his knowledge of
the Pleasures of that Bosom which he tastes, and of the glories of that Place,
and but compare them with the little gayeties of my Fathers House; show them
the difference betwixt their Structures and that Foundation whose builder and
maker God is, betwixt the entertainments of their riotous Palats, and the
Festivals of the Blessed Trinity, then sure they would disrellish those, and
catch at these, which do exceed them by a whole Infinity, and will outlive
them an Eternity. And here should I attempt, what he would have had Lazarus
perform, to dash out the blessedness of that place, making the first draught of
them with notions of delight, not such as the Understanding cannot apprehend,
but such as seize the heart with pleasure in this Life, and that give it the
strongest agitations here; and sweetning that by those transcendencies which I
could fill it up with, and should I raise it then with shadow, evince that
reason, though it cannot fathom, can yet by sure Discourse conclude the
greatness of those Glories, which I would leave for your expectations to loose
themselves into; should I attempt all this I were an insolent undertaker. Yet
were it very easy to describe them so as that viewing them with the things
below, these would vanish in the comparison. And to do so much was the utmost
that our Rich Man could design by sending Lazarus, who if he could have been
believed might probably have done the work; for if Faith did but do what
Lazarus did, look into Abraham's Bosom, were it but turned into a little
Vision, and but as clear an evidence of things not seen as eyesight has of
its temptations, had the spiritual Object but that advantage the carnal has of
being present, (now it is the work of Faith to give it that advantage) sure it
would be impossible for the sensitive Objects, the pleasures or the Profits of
this World, which ae so far inferior to the other in desireableness, and only
make advantage of their being present, when the other is so far off, 'twould be
impossible for them to gain our wills consent at any time; and therefore when
those glories shall be present to the Soul, 'twill be impossible for any other
Object to steal, or ravish, any way to engage one thought away from them: In
Heaven they cannot wish to sin. Nay the flash alone of that glory fascinates
the heart; Peter, and James, and John, saw but a glimpse of it, and that
transfigur'd too, (only the other way that Moses and Elias were, for the glory
suffered an exinanition) and they but waked into the sight of it, so that 'twas
but an apparition of Heaven; and yet they never would have left the place which
it once lightened, Master it is good for us to be here, let us go down no more,
never converse with any thing beneath Mount Tabor, but let us build three
Booths, such Tents would be like that which He has spread, and such Booths be
some of the many Mansions of his House, who spreads out the Heavens for a
Tent for himself to dwell in. But the truth is while men do only hear of Joys
above, and have but thin neglected notions of them, and on the other side a
sense of present profits, pleasures, honors which the World affords, they will
not be affected with the future dry hopes of those as with all these in
present, will nor have as effectual a taste of the Supper of the Lamb, as of
their own delicious daily fare, nor be as much wrought upon by the Promises of
being Clothed upon with the white Robe of Immortality, and by the mentions of
a Crown, although of Glory, as they are pleased with their own Royal Purples,
they have much surer Conviction of the delights of present things, than of
those far removed futurities; but now if Lazarus would go from Abraham's Bosom,
he might Convince them from his own Experience, and then they would Repent.
Especially

Thirdly, because Lazarus has seen me in my Torments, and can give account of
them, wherefore I pray thee Father Abraham send him, for if such an one went
unto them from the Dead, one that could testify of this place, he would tell
them such sad stories of my condition here, how in lieu of all my sumptuous
fare I have nothing now but gnashing of teeth, streams indeed of Brimstone, and
a lake of fire, but everlasting fever of thirst for my delicious intemperate
Palate; my short-lived sins turned to eternal Agonies; sure this would prevail
with them to cut off their sins by Repentance, before Death cut off their sin
and them together; and so they might prevent the coming hither. And very
probably it might have taken; for upon such Conviction it is hard not to resolve
to change, for who is he that can resolve thus with himself, well I will now
content my self with everlasting Condemnation and this sin, for I see they are
consequent, now this I cannot leave therefore let the other come; they that
were once affected with the apprehensions of the greatness and the certainty of
that Damnation cannot resolve thus, and therefore we see fewer men adventure to
transgress Man's Law, whose Punishment is near and most assured, than God's
Commandments. And when their fears of the Lords Judgments stare them in the
face, they quickly tremble into the terrors and the agonies of Penitence. For
who dares sin, and who does not repent upon his Deathbed? he sinks at the
remembrance of his former draughts, when he does apprehend his next is like to
be in the Infernal Lake, he has the frost of the Grave on him when he but
thinks of his lascivious heats, and does think too that his hot lustful Bed
will turn him off straight into Tophet: And then if Lazarus could raise these
apprehensions in them, sure they would repent. It Is plain these were the
grounds our Rich Man built this his request upon, I do not lay them as
infallible, I make no question but that men are able to defy their knowledge,
and charge through their own belief to sin and to destruction; but commonly men
do not lay things deep enough to their heart to be thoroughly convinced in
earnest, and thus he believed; for had Abraham granted his desire, and sent
Lazarus to testify the Glories he had tasted in himself, and the Torments he
had seen their Brother in, all he could hope from this was but to make them
more believe the one and other; therefore he thought for want of this they
would miscarry, and this alone would do it; so that w^ may conclude, that in
the judgment of one that died without Repentance, having resisted all God's
Methods, and knew upon what score he did it, and suffered the deserved pains of
so doing; the reason why men do not repent, is because they are not
sufficiently convinced of the next Life, and of its two Eternities of Joy and
Torment, they do not credit them, but notwithstanding all that God has done
his truths want witnessing, for if one went unto them from the Dead, one that
could testify, they would Repent.

I should now make reflections on this and our selves together, and truly all
this would bespatter foully such as go on in a Vice, for it does conclude
concerning them that they do not believe Gods Truths, but in the midst of their
professions of Religion are Infidels; it is plain they are so in the
aknowledgments of one of their own Tribe, who in the anguish of his Torments
does confess this of them from his own experience: But worse things will appear
when we have seen that God has done all this to us with more advantage than
this man in Hell did think sufficient, or indeed desire; which was my next
undertaking, and I shall manage it in the same order.

First, If one went unto them from the dead, says he, they will Repent. And now
to answer that, Christ is come from the dead; an Article this is that made its
way through all the Swords, and all the Racks, and torturing Engines that the
powerful witty malice of a whole World could find out and execute: And shall it
find its death among the softs and glories of its own victorious profession?
when it was instant Ruin to ackowledg the belief of it, then Myriads ran into
the flames, at once to own and to partake Christ's Resurrection: but now they
that profess it are so well here in this Life, that in defiance of their own
profession, they will not think there is another Life.

It is not out of Principle they doubt (as it were easy to demonstrate) but
out of improbity; They have an aversion to severe Piety, and are uneasy under
any thing that does engage to it, and must therefore work themselves out; and
here they storm; Unkind men to themselves! not only in imprudence, who
adventure all upon such hazards; but in disparaging themselves, who being men
of reason, and that set it up to such an height as to make it contend with God,
and dispute out his Power of raising them again, yet can think such a reasoning
Soul was given them for no other end but to procure for, and to animate the
Organs of their sensuality. But this is dashed if Christ be risen, because His
Resurrection did make Faith that he would Judge the World in Righteousness, on
purpose to make them Repent; Acts xvii, 20, 21. So that this his first
expectation is most fully answered to us.

But Secondly, if Lazarus would go, one out of Abraham's Bosom then they would
Repent. And has there not a greater than Lazarus been with us? one not out of
Abraham's but Gods Bosom? even the Son of his Bosom, one that himself prepared
those Joys for them that would believe him and obey him: one that from all
Eternity enjoyed them in the Bosom of the Divinity. And who could better reveal
them to us than the Author and the God of them? who knew them more than he that
did create them and possess them? Yea when this Son of God would be Incarnate
and take Flesh, and was to carry it through all the Miseries that Sin deserved
and God's Wrath could inflict, he thought these Joys encouragement enough to do
it willingly, these Pleasures were worth Agonies which none but a God could
suffer, Heb. xii. 2. Now sure he that prepared these Joys did understand them,
and he that is the Word of God knew best how to reveal them too. And now how
poor a wish was that of our Rich Man? Let Lazarus go tell them: why a Person of
the Trinity has told us; indeed how could God do more than come himself to
reveal the truth of them, and himself die for them to reveal the greatness of
them? Good God! that no body could serve thy turn to tell us of the pleasures
of thy Bosom but the Son of thy Bosom! that thou should think it worth an
Incarnation to reveal them, and we not think it worth a little Reformation to
have them; that he should part with Blood and give his Life for those Joys, and
we not be content to forsake a Custom, to give away the pleasures of a Lust,
the neither pleasures nor profits of an Oath, the sick delights of an Excess,
nor the vexations of a Passion in exchange for them! what will Hell say to us
when one there said, if Lazarus will go they will repent? If

Lazarus, Thirdly, one that saw me in Hell, and so can testify the Torments of
this place, yet God has out done this too. Our Creed will tell us who
descended into Hell, and the Psalmish saying concerning him, God should not
leave his Soul in Hell. S. Austin asks, Quis ergo nisi infidelis negaverit
fuisse Christum apud inferos? 'Twere easy for me to produce enough besides
that say so. Clem. Alex, Origin, Hier. Greg. Naz. Fulgent. Eusebius. Emissenus.
Caesarius. Anastas. Jobius. Dam^scenus. Oecumenius, etc. But because we are not
agreed what he did there, I Will take a surer medium. That no Lazarus can
decipher the condition of a Sinner after the pleasures of his iniquity have
left him to the recompenses of it, so well as Christ who not only did prepare
the Plagues, and therefore can describe them, but also himself bore the pains,
and found a few hours bearing them to be too heavy for him, is most evident.
His Agonies will give you a relation beyond the skill of Lazarus that saw the
Torments, or of all that suffer them. Look but into the Garden, and see if you
do not behold there a more dismal Landshape than that which Lazarus had beyond
the Gulf, and was desired to give account of? there you shall find Christ at
the first approaches saying, my Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death, Matthew.
xxvi. 38. As if the only apprehension of his sufferings had inflicted them,
and he could not live under the thoughts of them: and then he went a little
farther and fell upon his face and prays, saying, O my Father if it be possible
let this Cup pass from me. And what was there in this Cup which so empoyson'd
it as to make it dreadful to the Son of God? Oh it is the Sinners potion that he
must swill to everlastingness, and when he was in this condition there appeared
an Angel from Heaven strengthening him, Luke xxii. 43. yet v. the 44. we find
him still in an Agony. Angels cannot comfort one that is sensible of the guilt
of sin upon him; and he prays more earnestly in that same place, Abha Father
all things are possible with thee, take away this Cup from me. He does not
leave an Attribute unattempted, he does adore the Majesty, for he falls upon
his Face and Prays: A Person of the Trinity prostrated in the dust to deprecate
those pains; he wooes him to it, Abba Father, can thou deny thy well beloved,
only begotten Son, thy Son that is thy self, when he comes to thee with such
tender compellations of kindness? with words of so much bowels? Abba Father: he
takes hold too of his Omnipotence, all things are possible with thee; and he
does it with all the earnestness possible to such a Person: for says St. Luke
there, he does it more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of
Blood falling to the ground, and what Agony is there in the Torment, when there
is Agony in the deprecation of them? such a Passion could not be prayed against
with earnestness enough, but that that very earnestness will prove a Passion:
Yea and he goes again the third time and prays the same words, as if, if
nothing else, importunity should prevail, and when we shall consider that the
Person doing this is the Son of God, to whom nothing could be truly
insupportable, yet that he should not be able to bear sin; the weight of that
we see makes him cry out My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? as if God
could forsake that Person in whom the Godhead was of his Person: Or indeed as
if the condition did even separate between him and himself.

And now could any from the dead have given such a frighting account? is there
not as much warning in this prospect, as if our selves had tasted all of it?
for is it not more that these Torments should be so terrible to him than that
they should be insupportable to us? Blessed Savior! if the first apprehensions
did assault thee with such killing fury, can we resolve to stand the storm? if
we do not resolve that, then if all this will not scare us, but notwithstanding
all these fears we will have our delightful, yea and our tormenting sins, what
other method will be able to recl^im us? they that hear not Moses and the
Prophets, nor yet Christ, neither will they be persuaded sure though any other
come unto them from the dead. And so I fall on my last part in these words.

If they hear not Moses and the Prophets neither will they be persuaded though
one rose from the dead. Here the expression should be first taken notice of:
For that is changed, it should go regularly thus, as in the proposal, Nay
Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead they will repent, so in
his answer, if they repent not for Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
repent though one rose from the dead. But here it is otherwise; as if to repent
and be persuaded, yea and to hear Moses and the Prophets were the same things.
And if it were our Age had got a fair pretense for bringing all Religion to the
Ear; but sure Repentance costs the eyes and heart more than it does that part,
and yet the Scripture uses often the like expression: So in 1 Timothy iv. 16. it is
said of Timothy, that by continuing in his Doctrine he should save them that
hear him. So also 1 Cor. xv. 2. by which ye are saved if ye keep in memory the
things which I have Preached unto you. It Is pity when the Ear and Memory are so
priviledg'd, that the Tongue has not the like advantage; but not every one
that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; yet to know has
as great, for this is Life eternal to know thee the only true God and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent, John xvii. 3. Which Life Eternal, and the being
saved, or justified, we may not think are so attributed to these, as if to
hear, or to remember, or to be persuaded, that is to believe or know, any or
all of these alone, shall be rewarded so; or that these necessarily do produce
all the rest that is necessary to attain those ends: But only that it is so
reasonable that they should produce them, that the Scripture does presume they
will; and therefore affirms, He that says he knows God and keeps not his
Commandments is a Liar. 1 John ii. 4. and he that sins has not seen him
neither known him, 1 John iii. 6. Nor heard of him it seems by the Text here:
For it is so irrational that they who have had notice of the advantages of
serving God, and the sad issues of Iniquity, should not reform; that the
Scripture does not suppose them guilty of it, but does choose to word it thus,
they hear not: A sharp rebuke for them all whose Religion is much hearing
without doing; the men whose Soul dwells in their Ear, and that dwells by the
Pulpit, that these should be adjudged as men that never heard; and so they
shall in every respect indeed, but in the innocence of not having heard, that
they do hear so much shall aggravate their Sentence: and yet their Crime is
that they hear not Moses and the Prophets, and then neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.

Where I note Secondly, that our Savior does not intend here to commit
Prophecy and Miracles, and set them one against the other, to show which were
most efficacious in begetting Faith: for Predictions being Gods exerting of his
Omniscience, as raising from dead is the exerting of his Omnipotence, the one a
miracle of Knowledge, as the other is of Power, Prophecy therefore is not to be
opposed to Miracle, because it works merely as one; indeed it is a miracle in
Expectation, or at distance, and the other present: Nor are they to be made to
vie, since both conspire, and both are best in different cases: Besides our
Savior is not talking here of begetting Faith, but making men repent, and the
whole meaning of the words is briefly this. Thy Brethren being Jews have Moses
and the Prophets, those contain all the motives of Repentance, Gods Commands,
his Promises, and Threats; even Heaven and Hell as themselves confess, all
these have been confirmed already by great Miracles, and as such have been long
since received by the whole Jewish Church, with so immovable an Opinion of the
truth of them, that there needs no new Miracle to give accession of credit to
them. And then what can one coming from the dead persuade? new motives he can
bring them none; Man's nature is not capable of any other kinds, for he can act
but from his affections, or his Reason; all which are baited to the height by
those motives they have; the Understanding and the Appetite whether it love, or
hate, or hope, or fear, (which set on work whatever we perform) all these I say
Heaven and Hell are Object for even to the utmost possibility of motion; If he
can bring no new ones, those they have when they are once truly believed then
they have all the vigor they can have; belief being the application of those
active motives to their work, but all the strength to act being in those
motives themselves; all I mean in opposition to the miracle. I know that there
are other strengths of Grace, but those do help as well the Miracle as Motive;
those have influence on the believing too, by their exciting and assisting:
(But this strength which may be common to both is not to be considered when one
vies with the other:) What therefore shall he go for who can give no new
motives nor strength to those they have? If any should not be confirmed enough
in that which Moses and the Prophets say, how shall they be convinced that this
Ghost is of more credit than they were? but if he should be so far heeded, as
to add new Confirmation to them, yet if improbity has been able to dead the
force of the activity of all that Moses says, although acknowledged, with that
veneration which the Jews receive Moses with, whose credit they themselves do
say no Miracle can be wrought so great as to be able to add to, or diminish
from: why then that same improbity within a while will with more ease work off
the force of this new Confirmation, so that it will be vain. Indeed it is
possible that the surprise of such a Miracle just as any other sudden and
amazing accident may make a man consider, what though he did before believe, yet
he did not mind nor lay to heart; yet when the astonishment of that is over,
the motives then are left to their own strength, and can work only by their
own activity, which we see has been able to do nothing; so that a Miracle at
most can be but a more awful remembrancer.

Now sure to bring this to our selves, we want none such, nor do they prove
much useful: Occasions of astonishment and such fatal remembrancers have come
and taken up their habitation in our Land, and make approaches toward, hover
over every place. Long Bills of mortality, and sad knells, and dreadful passing
bells, these are all messengers from the dead, that come posting to us swift as
Gods Arrows: And one would think we should take notice of their message, hear
them when they pass so near us, when they seem to call out to our selves, when
a thousand do fall besides us, and ten thousand at our right hand; wherefore
should not an Army of such Carcasses become as moving as one Ghost? should
Lazarus come forth with all his sores, they would not be so terrible as these
carbuncles and ulcers of the Plague: And the destroying Angel out of Heaven
with his Sword drawn, one would expect, should be as efficacious as a Preacher
out of Abraham's Bosom. And yet men do not seem to hearken any more to these
than they do to us, when we either Preach, or which they think much less, when
we read Scripture to them, that is, when they hear Moses and the Prophets. Men
have the same security as to their sins which they had in the freest times,
whatever fears possess them, they are not the fears of God, those that make men
depart from evil, none of those that fright into Repentance; we have no
Religious cares upon us now more than at other times, but Vice as if that also
had a Sanctuary under the Lords wings, and might retire under his feathers to
be safe, dreads no Terrors of the Night, nor Arrows of the Day, but walks as
open and as unconcerned as ever. And now should we behold a mad man on his
deathbed spending his only one remaining minute in execrations; the paleness
of a shroud upon his face, but Blood and crimson Sins upon his tongue; the
frost of the Grave over all his parts, but a lascivious heat in his discourse;
in fine, one that had nothing left alive of him but his Iniquity; would not an
horror seize you at that sight? and the same frost possess you but to hear
him? and yet his madness is his excuse, and his disease his Innocence. Should
we see one that had no other madness, no other sickness but his sin do thus,
would it not be more horrid? and is it not the same to see a Nation as it were
upon its Deathbed, visited with all the treasures of Gods Plagues, his tokens
on it, and every place and man in fearful expectations, and yet no allay of
Vice? Wickedness as outrageous as ever? while it is thus, with what face can we
beg of God to keep from us this Plague and grievous sickness? when we do only
mean to make this use of such indulgence, to cherish another Plague in our own
hearts? What can we say to prove it would not be a mercy to us to be suddenly
cut off, even in the midst of our iniquity? when by our going on in sin in the
midst of Destruction, we make appear if he should let us live, yet we would
only live to finish our iniquities: And longer time would have no other use but
to fill up a greater measure of sin. What answer do we make to all these
Messengers of Death that come so thick about us? what do we that may justify
Gods care in sending us so many warnings? But it is no Wonder if the only
neighborhood of Death have not been able to prevail upon us; have you not seen
one whom his own iniquity, or Gods immediate Hand, has by a Sickness, or by
some sad Accident cast to the very brink of Death, so as the Grave seemed to
begin to take possession of him? and all his hopes sickned and di'd? so that
recovery from that condition may be well, as it is in Scripture often called a
Rising? have you not seen him in that state, when he supposed that sinning was
now done with him, and the next thing was Judgment, when God's Tribunal seemed
to be within his view, and Hell to gape for him as wide as the Grave, both
opening to receive their parts of him at the same time, and himself ready to
divide himself into those two sad Habitations? With what effectual Sermon will
he then Preach to himself against his sins? and that you may be sure shall work
upon him; he instantly resolves against his Vices, he will not carry them along
with him out of this Life, but cast them off as too sad dangerous Company, nor
yet if God shall lend him life will he retain them, but it shall be a New Life
which he will lead: And yet when God has raised him up, after a while he
returns to his Vomit, his Sins recover with his Body* he owes his Innocence but
to his Weakness, nor is it more long-lived; his holy purposes decay as his
strength grows, and die as soon as settled health does come: And he who never
would commit the Sin again when he was Dying, mends into it again: And then
what hopes is there in this mistaken Method? when we see men come themselves
from the Deadunto themselves, yet cannot make themselves Repent. But if we are
not all concerned in this, take a more spreading and more visible experiment.
If ever one came from the Dead, this Church and State came thence: And by as
great a Miracle of Resurrection. But where is the Repentance such a Miracle may
have flattered our Expectations with, as I am confident the resolutions of it
did in that sad dying state? are not some men as violent in those wicked
practices that merited our former Ruin? and others in those cursed Principles
that did inflict it, as they ever were? it is said by many that have evil will
at Sion (and it is our concern to take a care they speak not truth) that in the
Church some that are risen up again have still the silence of the Grave upon
them, and are as dumb, as if their mouth were yet full of their monument Earth:
And yet as if it were not full of Earth, nor had been satisfied with it in the
Sepulcher, they gape still like the Grave that never can be satisfied. And we
see others who as if this Resurrection were but a start out of a sleep, or
lucid interval of former madness, have their hands ready not only to tear off
the hair, the unessential accessory beauties of the Body of the Church and
State, but to scratch the Face, pull out the Eyes, and tear open those Wounds
which their last fit of Fury did inflict, so to let life out again. And as for
the Community of the Nation, it is true we are as it were risen from the Grave,
but have we not brought up with us the Plague sores? are not the Spots upon us
still? the Venom, Ulcer, and infection about us? Yea more contracted Stench and
Putrefaction? such as Death and the Grave do add? and coming from the dead we
will not yet part with these, but dress our selves in those infected and
defiled grave-cloaths, and rise into corruption, and so confute Gods Method of
a Resurrection. 'Twere happier if we would so far confute the Text, that coming
our selves from the dead, we would renounce communion with all Deaths
adherencies; begin the incorruptible, which shall be consummated when we shall
rise again a Church triumphant: when Death shall be swallowed up in Victory,
and neither Sin nor Repentance shall be any more, but Holiness, and Life, and
Glory too shall be Immortal and unchangeable.

To Which, etc.
The Twelfth SERMON, Preached at CHRIST-CHURCH IN OXFORD, December. 31. 1665.
LUKE II. part of the 34. verse. Behold this Child is set for the Fall and
Rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against.
AND Simeon Blessed them, and said, etc. A Benediction sure of a most strange
importance: If to bring forth one that is to be a large Destruction, if to be
delivered of a Child that must be for the Fall of many, and the killing of the
Mothers self, be blessed; if Swords and Ruins be Comforts, then my Text is full
of these: But if this be to Bless, what is it to forespeak and abode ill? Yet
however ominous and fatal the words are, they give us the event and the design
too of the Blessed Incarnation of the Son of God, the Child of this Text and of
this Season: A short view of Gods Counsel in it; and the Effects of it. The
Effects in these Particulars.

1. This Child is for the Fall of many.

2. For the Rising again of many.

3. For a Sign: With the quality of that sign; he is for a sign that shall be
spoken against.

2. The Counsel and Design of this is signified in the word here (...): he is
set, and preordain'd to be all this.

First of the first Effect, This Child is for the Fall of many.

And here I shall but only name that way whereby many men set this Child for
their own Fall, while they make his holy Time to be but a more solemn
opportunity of ^^^^ing: We know many celebrate this great Festival with
Surfeits and Excesses, the usual appendages of Feasting, Oath^ and Curses the
ingredients of Gaming; Dalliance and Lasciviousness the attendants of Sporting;
of all which this seems as it were the Anniversary, a set time for their
return. Thus indeed the Israelites did solemnize the Birth of their Idol-Calf,
They sat down to Eat and Drink, and rose up to Play. Exodus xxxii. 6.
And must we celebrate this Child too like that Calf, because he was born among
Brutes? And must his Votaries also be of the Herd? And he live and be worshipped
always in a Stable? Because God became Man, must Men therefore become Beasts?
Is it fit to honor that Child with Iniquity and Looseness, that did come into
the World upon designs of Holiness, to settle a most strict Religion? Nothing
can be more incongruous than this; and certainly there is nothing of Gods
Counsel in it. But to you whose time seems nothing else but a constant
Festival, always has the Leisure, and the Plenties, and the Sports of one, who
as to these things keep a Christmas all your life, this Season as it does not
seem to challenge those things to it self peculiarly, so I shall not now insist
on them; but proceed to those ways by which Simeon did Prophecy, This Child
would be for the fall of many in Israel. And they are three,

1. This Child whom I but now declared God had prepared to be the Glory of his
People Israel, Verse 31, 32.
yet his Birth was so inglorious, and his Life answerable to it shall be so
mean and poor, and his Death so full of shame and curse, that these shall prove
a scandal to his People, who shall be offended at them; and being prepossessed
with prejudices of a Pompous Royal Messiah, they will not believe in this, but
reject a Savior that comes upon those disadvantages, which will therefore
prove occasions of falling to them.

That is was so is expressly said, Romans ix. 33.
Behold, I lay in Sion a Chief Cornerstone, a stone of stumbling, 1 Pet. ii. 6.
and a Rock of offense. And that it was so upon this account is clear, John ix.
29.
the Great ones cry out of him, This fellow we know not whence he is: Mark vi.
iii.
They that seemed to know whence did upbraid him with it, John vii. 48.
Is not this the Carpenter? And therefore with a deal of scorn they question,
Do any of the Rulers or the Pharisees believe in him? Yea Christ himself knew
this would be so great a Scandal, that in the 11. Chapter of S. Matthew, in the
close of many Miracles which he wrought on purpose to demonstrate he was the
Messiah, he adds verse. 6. and blessed is he that shall not be offended in me.
As if he thought his mean condition would prove a greater argument against him
than his mighty Works were for him: And it were a vaster Prodigy to see the
Savior of the World, the promised Messiah, poor and abject; than to see one
cure the Blind, and heal the Lame, and raise the Dead; and they might think
they had a stranger Miracle to confirm their unbelief, than any he would work
to make them believe in him.

And really, that the Kingdom of the Messiah, which the Prophets did express in
terms as high as their own Ecstasies and Raptures, in transported words, as if
it vied with Gods Dominion, both for extent and for duration, should prove at
last an Empire only over twelve poor Fishermen and Publicans, and one of them
a Traitor too: And that He that was born this King, should be born in a Stable;
while he lived that he should not have an hole to put his Head in, nor his
Corpse in when he died, but his Grave too must be Charity; this would startle
any that did wait for the Redemption of Israel in those glorious expresses
which the Prophets traced it out in. To you indeed that are Votaries to this
Child, are confirmed Christians, these seeming disadvantages can give no
prejudice: However mean and abject his condition were, that cannot make you to
despise him, who from that must needs reflect how dear you were to God, when
for your sakes merely he became so mean an abject. 2 Cor. viii. 9.
He became poor, says S. Paul, that you through his poverty might be made
rich: He was made the Child of Man, that you might be made Sons of God; it was
to pay the price of your Redemption that he so emptied himself; (...). Phil.
ii. 7.
thus he valued you; and men do not despise merely because, and by those
measures that, they are esteemed, these are not the returns of love; its
passionate, obliging, ravishing effects do not use to be thus requited; this
his great descent cannot occasion your fall, who know he descended only to
assume you up to glory. But it is worth inquiry, why, since it was certain that
for this this Child should be the fall of Israel, that for this they would
reject him; and the meanness of his condition would prove an unremovable
obstruction to their belief, as it is to this day; Why yet he would choose to be
born in a condition so in the utmost extreme to his own nature, so all
contradiction to his Divinity, and so seemingly opposite to the very end of his
coming.

The Jew indeed will find no excuse for his Infidelity from this condition: For
whatever that were, yet those Miracles that made the Devils to confess him,
brought conviction enough to make Jews inexcusable. And it was obvious to
observe, that He who fed five thousand with five Loaves and two Fishes, till
they left more than was set before them, Matthew. xiv. 19, 20, 21.
needed not to be in a condition of want or meanness, if it were not otherwise
more needful he should not abound. God, that when he brought this first
begotten Son into the World, said, Heb. i. 6.
Let all the Angels of God worship him, might have put him into an estate which
all Mankind most readily would have done homage to: As easily have dressed his
Person with a blaze of Pomp and Splendour, as his Birthday with a Star; if there
had not been necessity it should be otherwise. And such there was. For when the
fullness both of Time and Iniquity was come, when Vice could grow no further,
but did even cry for Reformation, and when the Doctrine that must come to give
the Rules of this Reformation, was not only to wage War with Flesh and Blood,
with those desires which Constitution gives, but which perpetual universal
Custom had confirmed; and which their Gods also, as well as Inclinations did
contribute to; which their Original sin, and their Religion equally ^omented;
for Vice was then the Worship of the World, Sins had their Temples, Theft its
Deity, and Drunkenness its God, Adultery had many, and to prostitute their
bodies was most ^acred, and their very Altar-fires did kindle these soul heats,
whence Uncleanness' is so often called Idolatry in Scripture: And besides all
this, when all the Philosophy, and all the power of the World were engaged in
the belief and practice of this, and resolved with all their wit and force to
keep it so. When it was thus, the Doctrine that must come to oppose, control,
reform all this, must come either armed with Fire and Sword, design to settle
it self by Conquest, or come in a way of Meekness and of suffering: The first
of these Religion cannot possibly design, because it cannot aim to settle that
by violence, which cannot be forced; and where it is force, is not Religion. One
may as well invade, and hope to get a Conquest over thoughts, and put a Mind in
Chains, and force a man to will against his will. All such motives are
incompetent to demonstrate Doctrines, for however successful their force
proves, yet it cannot prove the Doctrines true; for by that Argument is proves
that Religion that it settles true, it proves that which it destroys was true
before, while it prevailed and had the Power. Had this Child come so, he had
only given such a testimony to the truth of Christianity, as Heathenism had
before, and Turcism has since: He might indeed, have drowned the wicked World
again in another Deluge of their own Blood: But sure, never had reformed it
thus. Therefore that Religion, that must oppose the Customs and the Powers of
the World, upon Principles of Reason and Religion, must do it by Innocence and
Patience, by doing good, (and which was necessary, then by consequence as the
World stood,) by suffering evil: parting with all, not only the Advantages but
the Necessaries of this life, and life it self too, where they stood in
competition, and were inconsistent with men's duties, and their expectations:
Heb. vii. 19.
And by this means they must show the World that their Religion did bring in a
better hope than that, which all the profits, pleasures, glories of this World
can entertain and slatter.

Thus they did, and thus they did prevail. For the first Ages of the Church,
were but so many Centuries of Men, that entertained Christianity with the
Contempt of the World, and Life it self. They knew that to put themselves into
Christ's Service and Religion, was the same thing as to set themselves aside
for spoil and Rapine, dedicate themselves to Poverty and Scorn, to Racks, and
Tortutes, and to Butchery it self. Yet they entered into it; did not only
renounce the Pomps and Vanities of the World in their Baptism, when they were
new born to God; quench their affections to them in those waters; but renounced
them even to the death; drowned their affections to them in their own heart
blood: ran from the World into flames, and fled faster from the satisfactions
and delights of Earth, than those flames mounted to their own Element and
Sphere: In fine, they became Christians so, as if they had been Candidates of
death, and only made themselves Apprentises of Martyrdom. Now if it were not
possible it should be otherwise than thus, as the World stood, then it was
necessary that the Captain of Salvation should lead on, go before this noble
Army of Martyrs; Heb. xi. 10.
if it were necessary that they must leave all who followed him; then it was
not possible that he should be here in a state of Plenty, Splendour, and
Magnificence; but of Poverty, and Meanness; giving an Example to his followers,
whose condition could not but be such. To give which Example was, it seems, of
more necessity, than by being born in Royal Purple, to prevent the fall of many
in Israel, who for his condition despised him.

I am not so vain as to hope to persuade any from this great Example here to be
in love with Poverty, and with a low condition, by telling them this Birth has
consecrated meanness, that we must not scorn those things in which our God did
choose to be installed; that Humility is, it seems, the proper dress for
Divinity to show it self in. But when we consider, if this Child had been born
in a condition of Wealth and Greatness, the whole Nation of the Jews would have
received him; whereas that he chose proved an occasion of falling to them: Yet
that God should think it much more necessary to give us an Example of Humility
and Poverty below expression; then it was necessary that that whole Nation
should believe on him. When of all the Virgins of that People, which God had to
choose one out to overshadow, and impregnate with the Son of God, Luk i. 48.
he chose one of the meanest, (for he has regarded the low estate of his
Handmaiden, said she,) and one of the poorest too, for she had not a Lamb to
offer, Luke ii. 24. compared with Lev. xviii. 6, 8.
but was purified, in forma pauperis. When he would reveal this Birth also,
that was to be the joy of the whole Earth, he did it to none of that Nation,
but a few poor Shepherds, who were laboring with midnight-watches over their
Flocks; none of all the great Ones, that were then at ease, and lay in softs,
was thought worthy to have notice of it: Lastly, Luke ii. 12.
when the Angels make that poverty a sign to know the Savior by. This shall be
a sign unto you, You shall ^ind the Babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid
in a Manger: As if the Manger were sufficient testimony to the Christ, and this
great meanness were an evidence 'twas the Messiah: From all these together, we
may easily discover what the temper is of Christianity. You see here the
Institution of your Order: the First born of the Sons of God, born but to such
an Estate. And what is so original to the Religion, what was born and bred with
it, cannot easily be divided from it. Leo.
Generatio Christi generatio populi Christiani, natalis Capitis, natalis
Corporis. The Body and the Head have the same kind of Birth, and to that which
Christ is born to, Christianity it self is born. Neither can it ever otherwise
be entertained in the heart of any man, but with poverty of spirit, with
neglect of all the scorns and the Calamities, yea, and all the gaudy glories of
this World, with that unconcernedness for it, that indifference and simple
innocence that is in Children. Matthew. xviii. 3.
He that receives not the Kingdom of Heaven as a little Child, cannot enter
thereinto, says Christ: True indeed, when the Son of God must become a little
Child, that he may open the Kingdom of Heaven to Believers. Would you see what
Humility and lowliness becomes a Christian? see the God of Christians on his
Royal Birthday. A Person of the Trinity, that he may take upon him our
Religion, takes upon him the form of a Servant; and He that was equal with God,
P^il. ii. 6, 7*
must make himself of no Reputation, if he mean to settle and be the Example of
our Profession. And then, when will our high spirits, those that value an hu^^
of Reputation more than their own Souls, and set it above God himself, when
will these become Christian? Is there any more uncouth or detestable thing in
the whole World, than to see the great Lord of Heaven become a little one, and
Man that is less than nothing magnify himself? to see Divinity empty it self,
and him that is a Worm, swell and be puffed up? to see the Son of God descend
from Heaven, and the Sons of Earth climbing on heaps of Wealth, which they pile
up, as the old Giants did Hills upon Hills, as if they would invade that throne
which he came down from? and as if they also were set for the fall of many,
throwing every body down that but stands near them, either in their way or
prospect? Would you see how little value all those interests that recommend
this World, are of to Christians? see the Founder of them choose the opposite
extreme: Not only to discover to us that these are no accessions to felicity*
This Child was the Son of God without them: But to let us see that we must make
the same choice too, when ever any of those interests affront a Duty, or
solicit a good Conscience; whenever indeed they are not reconcilable with
Innocence, Sincerity, and Ingenuity. It was the want of this disposition and
temper that did make the Jews reject our Savior. They could not endure to
think of a Religion that would not promise them to fill their basket, Deuteronomy.
xxviii. 1, 5.
and to set them high above all Nations of the Earth, and whose appearance was
not great and splendid, Mar. x. 30.
but looked thin and maigre, and whose Principles and Promises showed like the
Curses of their Law, called for sufferings, and did promise persecution;
therefore they rejected him that brought it, and so this Child was for the fall
of many in Israel.

2. This Child is for the fall of many by the holiness of his Religion: while
the strictness of the Doctrine which he brings, by reason of men's great
propensions to wickedness, and their inability to resolve against their Vices,
will make them set themselves against it, both by word and Deed: For they will
contradict and speak ill of, yea, they will openly renounce, and fall away from
it and him.

1. For that reason they will contradict, speak ill of him and of his
Doctrines: This is said expressly in the last words of my Text, He is for a sign
that shall be spoken against; that is, that very holiness both of his Life and
Doctrine, that shall make him signal, it shall make him be derided and
blasphemed. Isai. xi. 10.
As if his being a (...) for an Ensign lifted up, a Standard for all Nations,
were not for them to betake themselves to, but to level all their batteries
against. Accordingly we find they called him Beelzebub, Matthew. x. 25.
because he cast out Devils. And all this was foretold? For although he were
fairer than the Children of men, Matthew. iii. 22.
Psalm xlv. Yet Isai. liii. It is said, He has no form nor comeliness, when we
shall see him, there is no beauty in him, that we should desire him, he is
despised and rejected of men. Surely because his holiness did cloud and darken
all his Graces. Devotion in a Countenance does writh and discompose it, prints
Deformity upon it; and Eyes lifted up with ardency, look as bad as eyes
distorted, set awry. Nay Majesty when it was most severe and pious, never yet
could guard Religion from these scorns. David, that great and holy King, Psalm
lxix. 10, 11, 12.
says of himself, I wept and chastned my self with fasting, and that was turned
to my reproof; as if Repentance were among his Crimes, and he must be Corrected
for his Discipline. I put on Sackcloth also, and they jested upon me, they that
sat in the gate spoke against me, and the Drunkards made songs upon me. Sure
these jolly men are not companions to those Angels, Luke xv. 19.
in whose presence there is joy over one sinner that repents; that his Virtue
should be a rejoicing, and a song to them too: Certainly the penitent man's
tears do not fill their Cheerful bowls, nor his groans make those Airs which
they set their drunken Catches to. But that we may be sure it never will be
otherwise, 2 Pet. 3. 3.
S. Peter tells us, That in the last days there shall come scoffers, walking
after their own lusts. Now the men of our days have the luck to obey Scripture
thus far as to make that Prophecy to come to pass; for those scoffers are come
in power and great glory. Psalm i. 1.
The Psalmist tells us of a Chair of Scorners, as if these were the only men
that speak ex cathedra: And sure scoffs and taunts at Religion are the only
things that may be talked with confidence, aloud: They imprint an Authority on
what is said, and conversations that are most insipid on all other scores, get
account as they come up toward this practice: Hence they gain degrees;
commence ingenious as they border on these Atheistical and irreligious
Blasphemies; and when it is pure scorn, then it is in the Chair.

But it stays not there; For Secondly, Upon the same account of strictness of
Religion, men will fall off from, and openly renounce both Christ and his
Religion. This is that our Savior himself found, Light, says he, John iii. 19.
is come into the World, and men loved Darkness rather than the Light, because
their deeds were evil. Matthew. xxi. 32.
And he said of the Pharisees, They repented not that they might believe, as
knowing it impossible that they could venture to believe that Doctrine which
condemned those courses that they would not repent of.

And if I should affirm, that it is nothing else but men's unwillingness to be
obliged to those things, which if there be a God, and a Religion which this
Child was set to institute, they must account themselves obliged to; nothing
else I say but this, which makes them so unwilling to believe a God or Christ;
yea, openly renounce them both, and their Religion; I should have for proof of
this, not only the late instance of a Nation in the Indies; Congo.
which, by institution of the Portugals, was easily persuaded to embrace the
Christian Creed, and was Baptized into our Faith; but when they were required
to lead their lives according to Christ's Precepts, and renounce their Heathen
Licenses, they chose rather to renounce their Creed and Savior, and returned
instantly to their indulgent Heathenism. But to this experience, give me leave
to add this Reason, that it is not the Difficulty of the Mysteries of Faith,
and their being above our Comprehension, which makes them not to be received;
because there are as great difficulties in things that we are certain of. For
in the very Sphere of Reason, within the lines and measures of their own
Infallibility, in things of which she does assure her self by Diagrams and
sense, yet she is as much amazed, as at those Objects in the highest and
remotest Regions of Faith; Myster. (ut vocari solet) Asymp. toticum and Angul.
contingent. etc.
and Mathematics has her Paradoxes that stand in as great danger of a
contradiction as any of Religions Mysteries; while Reason cannot cape what she
demonstrates, but is to seek how those things can be possible which she proves
most certain; and they are incomprehensible to her, even when they are most
evident: And then sure if we can think there is a God, we must needs think He
can do things which we cannot comprehend, when it is plain our Reason cannot
comprehend what she her self does find out and create. It is not therefore
contradiction to Reason, but to Appetite, that makes things of Religion so
incredible; which I thus demonstrate to the Atheist.

Those very difficulties, to avoid which he denies a God; to wit, Those of an
Eternal Being that is of himself; those very things he must and does acknowledge
in the being of the World, if that either be it self Eternal (as the Atheist of
the Peripatetick Tribe will have it) or else if its atoms, out of which it was
concreted, were: (as those of Epicurus herd assert.) In a word, if they say the
World or its materials were made, they grant a God that made it; If they say
they were not made, they assert then an Eternal Being of it self; that is, they
allow those difficulties for which they pretend to deny a God.

There being therefore the same difficulties, (Greater I could prove them, from
the diverse natures of corporeal and spiritual beings; for we are sure, in
bodies that are still in motion, and so subject to succession, those things are
impossible; but if there be a Being that is not in motion, and by consequence,
not subject to the laws of our time, all these knots unty themselves, those
difficulties vanish and have no place: But to say no more than I have showed,
there being the same Difficulties in the Atheist's Hypothesis as in the other,
it is apparent, not the difficulties of belief, but practice, make him fix upon
his own against the common notions of the World. So that it is not his
understanding, but his Appetite frames his hypothesis; and without figure, it is
his Will that he believes with. And it is most evident, that because men do not
love the Precepts of Religion, would not have them be their duty, therefore
they would have the Doctrines of it not be truths; and in this they are the
Disciples only of their Lusts, and because they cannot resolve to be
otherwise, therefore they resolve not to be Christ's Disciples, but reject him
for his holy Doctrines sake: And so this Child is for the fall of many.

But it were strange if upon this account, Christ should be for the fall of any
of us; who have learned a trick to reconcile his severe Doctines and our Sins
together. Where Vice most abounds, though it be wilful, and men persevere in
it, they are so far from finding any reason to fall off from him, or from his
Gospel for this, that they therefore take the faster hold of it, rely upon Him
with the bolder, stronger confidence. As if good old Simeon were mistaken, when
he thought, because men would not leave those sins which Christ so threatened,
therefore they would leave him: Because they could not bear those his hard
sayings, to pull our the lust and the Eye too; cast away the treasures of
unrighteousness, and the right hand that receives them also; therefore they
would cast off him: For, for this reason they betake themselves to him more
eagerly, devolve and cast themselves upon him with assurance. It Is possible
indeed that the new Christian'd Indians might believe themselves obliged to
lead their lives according to the Vow that they had made in Baptism, knew not
how to live a contradiction, to be Christian Pagans; therefore they thought it
absolutely necessary to renounce the one; and to reject Christ and his strict
Religion was easier they thought. Our Savior also might suppose, that when he
brought Light into the World, men would not receive that Light, because their
deeds were evil: But our modern wickednesses that are of the true Eagle kind,
are educated, bred up to endure, and to defy the Light: Our deeds of Night
have learned to face both Sun and Men, yea and face the Sun of Righteousness,
and the light of those flames that are to receive them. Our Savior told the
Pharisees indeed, that they repented not, that they might believe; for thinking
it impossible they could assent to what he did affirm, except they would
consent to what he did Command, He therefore thought they were not abel to
believe, because they would not purpose to amend. But there is nothing
difficult in this to us, who at the same time, are so perfectly resolved that
every threat of Gospel is so Divine truth, as that we assure our selves, that
we could be content to die Martyrs to the truth of them, rather than enounce
one little of them; yet even then are Martyrs to those Lusts and Passions which
those Threats belong to: Who, at once, believe this Book of God, Luke xiii. 3.
that says, except ye repent ye shall all perish; and believe also, that
notwithstanding we do not Repent, yet by Believing we shall escape; not perish,
but be saved. And is not this directly to believe our selves into Damnation?
the third and the geat fall, which this Child is set for.

3. This Child is for the fall of many, to wit, of all those who on these, or
any other grounds do not believe in, or do not obey him; who shall not obey
him: who shall therefore fall into Eternal Ruin.

this our Savior does affirm, S. John iii. 19. This is the Condemnation that
Light came into the World, etc. This does aggravate the guilt, and Sentence. We
were fallen before indeed in Adam: And I dare not undertake to be so learned to
say whether; to determine with some men that was but a fall form Paradise into
the Grave, and we were forfeit to Death only: But I may adventure to affirm,
that in the second Adam, Sinners finally impenitent shall fall much farther
than we did in the first Adam: Rev. ix. 1, 11.
Now their pit shall have no bottom, but this light that came to lighten them,
shall be to them consuming fire and everlasting burnings. And all reason in the
world. For, upon that fall of ours in Adam, help was offered us: an easy way
not only to repair those ruins, but to better infinitely that estate which we
were fallen from; and a way that cost God dear to purchase; cost him, not this
Incarnation only, but the Death and Passion of his Son, and diverse other
blessed methods of Salvation: Now if we refuse the mercy of all this, and scorn
these miracles of condescending goodness, and defy those methods, that he
makes use of to raise us form our Fall, it is apparent we provoke and choose
deeper ruin; this refusal has in it such desperate malignity, as to poison
this great mercy of the Incarnation, and all the rest. It Is but a small thing
to say, that they who Stumble at this Rock of their Salvation, spurning at it
by their wilful disobedience, that these make an infinite mass of
loving kindness to be lost upon them, so as that Salvation cannot save them;
for alas Salvation ruins them the deeper, and this Child is for their fall.
The condition they were forfeit to before by reason of their breach of the
first Covenant was advantage, comfortable in comparison of that which Christ
does put them in: This is the Condemnation, that he came into the World; And it
had been infinitely better for them, that this Child too had never been born.
The unreformed have the least reason in the world to solemnize this Festival,
they do but cecebrate the birth of thie own Ruin: bow down, and do reverence to
their Fall: Had it not been for this, they had not gone to so severe an Hell.
So that they do but entertain the great occasion of their greater Condemnation.
Such it proves to them, and that it might be so, He was foreordained for it:
(...)* This Child is set for the fall of many, which does lead me to Gods
Counsel in all this: My next Part.

This Child is set for the fall of many, even by Gods direct appointment; for
says Grotius, Accedo its qui putant non nudum eventum sed and consilium Dei
significari. Grot. in loc.
I am of their opinion, who understand not the success alone, but the design of
this Child's coming, and Gods Counsel in it is intended here. And without
disputing of Gods antecedent Will, and consequent, this is safely said: God
designed this Child should be such an one, that they who had no inclinations
for Virtue, would not entertain the love of it, but counted it a mean pedantick
thing, and all its Rules and Laws unreasonable servitude, these loose men would
certainly reject Him and his Doctrines, which were so severe and strict, That
those who did pretend friendship for Virtue, and a service for Religion, but
withal must be allowed to maintain correspondence with the World, seek the
Honors and advantages of Earth, and will trespass on Religion where it
interferes with these, break with Virtue when their interest cannot consist
with it, that these false hypocritical pretenders, should be offended with the
mean condition of this Child, and of his followers in this World, and with the
poor spirited Principles of his Religion. In sum, they that upon these, or any
other grounds finally disbelieve, or disobey him, God designed this Child to be
a means of bringing sorer Punishments, even to everlasting ruin upon such.

A black Decree this, one would think. He that had so much kindness for
Mankind, to give away the only Son both of his Nature, his Affections, and his
Bosom to them; could he then design that Gift to be the Ruin of the greatest
part of men? This Child, Simeon said but just before my Text, is Gods
Salvation, which he had prepared before all people; and does he now say God
has set him for their fall? The Angels preached this was a Birth that brought
glad tidings of great joy that should be to all people; and is there so much
comfort in destruction, that most men should rejoice at that which is ordained
to be the great occasion of it to them?

But we have no reason to complain: It Is not unkind to deny Mercy to them that
refuse the offers of it; that will not accept Salvation, when their God himself
does come to bring it to them: tenders it upon condition of accepting and
amending: Which if they despise, and prefer Hell before Repentance, choose sin
rather than Gods blessed retributions, it is but reason to deny them what they
will not have, and let them take their chosen Ruin; to will their Judgment
which they will themselves; set and ordain Him to be that to them, which
themselves do ordain, and make him to be to themselves. So S. Peter says
expressly: 1 Pet. ii. 8.
He is a Stone of stumbling and a Rock of offense to them who being disobedient
stumble at the Word, whereunto they were appointed, Disobedience, where it is
obdurate, alters so the temper of our God, that it makes Him who swears he
would not have the Sinner die, yet set out his Son to make such sinners fall
into eternal Death. Makes Judgment triumph over Mercy, even in the Great
contrivances and executions of that Mercy; and while God was plotting an
Incarnation for the everlasting Safety of Mankind, prevails with him to decree
Ruins by the means of that Salvation; to Decree even in the midst of all those
strivings of his Mercies, that that Issue of his kindness should be for the
fall of such as they. Oh! let us consider, whether they are likely to escape
that which is set and ordained for them by God? Whether they can hope for a
Redemption, when the only great Redeemer is appointed for the Instrument of
their Destruction; and God is so bent on their ruin, that to purchase it he
gives this Child his Son. Yea, when he did look down upon this Son in Agonies,
and on the Cross, in the midst of that sad prospect, yet the Ruin of such
sinners, which he there beheld in his Sons Blood, was a delight to him, that
also was a Sacrifice, 2. Cor. ii. 15.
and a sacrifice of a sweet smell to him. For S. Paul says, We are unto God a
sweet savor of Christ in them that perish, because we are the savor of Death
unto death to them: As if their Brimstone did ascend like Incense, shed a
perfume up to God, and their evrlasting burnings were his Altar-fires, kindled
his holocausts; and he may well be pleased with it, for he ordained it.

It Is true indeed, This Child riding as in Triumph, in the midst of his
Hosannas, when he saw one City whose fall he was set for on this very account;
He was so far from being pleased with it, that he wept over it in pity. But
alas, that only more declares the most deplored and desperate condition of
such sinners. Blessed Savior! had thou no Blood to shed for them? nothing
but Tears? or did thou weep to think they very Bloodshed does but make their
guilt more crimson, who refuse the mercy of that Bloodshed all the time that is
offered? Sad is their state that can find no pity in the Tears of God, and
remediless their Condition for whom all that the Son of God could do, was to
weep over them, all that he did do for them, was to be for their fall; too sad
a part indeed for festival Solemnity, very improper for a Benedictus and
Magnificat. To celebrate the greatest act of kindness the Almighty could design
only by the miseries it did occasion: to magnify the vast descent of God from
Heaven down to Earth, only by reason of the fall of Man into the lowest Hell
of which that was the cause. My Text has better things in view: The greatness
of that fall does but add height to that Resurrection which He also is the
cause of: Behold this Child is set for the rising again of many: My remaining
Part.

Rising again, does not particularly and only refer to the foregoing fall here
in the Text, which this Child did occasion, as I showed you; but to the state
wherein all Mankind, both in its nature and its Customs, lay ingul^'d, the
state of Ignorance and sin: A state from which recovery is properly (...), a
resurrection and a reviving in this Life, and so called in Scripture often; as
Ephesians. v. 15. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep (...) and arise from
the dead. And Romans vi. 13. Yield not your members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin, but yield your selves unto God, as those that are
alive form the dead. Now to raise us from the death of sin into the life of
Righteousness, by the amendment of our own lives, to recover us into a state of
Virtue, is the thing this Child is said here to be set for. This was that which
God thought worth an Incarnation: Neither was there any greater thing in the
prospect of his everlasting Counsel, when he did decree his Son into the World,
than that (...), He is set for this. The Word was made Flesh; to teach,
practice, and persuade to Virtue: To make men Reform their lives, was valued at
the price of a Person of the Trinity. Piety and his Exinanition, yea his Blood
and Life, were set at the same rates; All of him given for our recovery.

The time would fail me if I should attempt only to name the various methods
he makes use of to effect this. How this Child that was the brightness of his
Fathers Glory, came to lighten us; shining in his Doctrine and Example: Heb. i.
3.
How he sent more light, The fiery Tongues, Illuminations of the Holy Ghost to
guide us in the ways of Piety: How he suffered Agonies and Death for sin to
appale and fright us from it. How he Rose again to confirm Judgment to us, to
demonstrate the rewards of Immortality to them that will repent and leave their
sins, and everlasting Torments to those that refuse this Grace; Grace purchased
with the Blood of God, to enable them to repent and leave. Besides all these,
the Arts and Mesnage of his Providence, in preventing and following us by
Mercies and by Judgments, importuning us, and timeing all his blessed Methods
of Salvation to our most advantage. Arts, God knows, too many, if they serve us
only to resist, and turn to wantonness and aggravation; if we make no other
use of Grace but this, to sin against, and overcome all Grace, and make it
bolster Vice; by teaching it to be an encouragement to go on in it, from some
hopes we entertain by reason of this Child, instead of doing that which he was
set, Decreed to make us do.

And really I would be glad to see this everlasting Counsel of the Lord had had
some good effects, some, though never so little, happy execution of this great
Decree, and that that which God ordained from all Eternity, upon such glorious
and magnificent terms, were come to pass in any kind, Now, certainly there are
no evident signs of any great recovery this Child has wrought among us, in the
World that is now called Christian. After those Omnipotent inforcives to a
virtuous life, which he did work out, if we take a prospect of both Worlds, it
would be hard to know which were the Heathen; and there would appear scarce any
other notice of a Christ among us, but that we blaspheme Him or deride Him.
Sure I am, there are no Footsteps of him in the lives of the community of Men:
And I am certain that you cannot show me any Heathen Age outgoing ours, either
in looseness and foul Effeminacies, or in sordidness and base injustice, or in
frauds and falness, or malignity, hypocrisy, or treachery, or to name no more,
even in the lowest, most ignoble, disingenious sorts of Vice. In fine, men are
now as Earthly, Sensual, yea and Devilish, as when Sins and Devils were their
Gods.

Yea, I must needs say, that those times of dark and Heathen Ignorance, were in
many men times of shining Virtue; and the little spark of Light within them,
brake out through all obstructions into a glory of Goodness, to the wonder and
confusion of most Christians: It Is true, we are pretty well revenged on them
for setting us Examples so reproachful to us; calling their Heroic Actions,
splendida peccata, only beauteous sins, and well-fac'd wickednesses; and we
have a reason for it; because they never heard of Christ, whose Name and Merit
it is most certain, is the only thing that can give value and acceptance to
men's best performances: While on the other side, we Christians comfort and
secure our selves in our transgressions from this Child, and form his Name. But
if this Child were set to raise us up from sin, and to establish stronger
arguments for a good life than the Heathen ever heard of, more especial Divine
engagements to Virtue; then if their Virtues were, because they never heard of
these engagements to them, sins; what censure will be past upon their Actions
that know all those engagements and despise them? a sharper certainly unless to
defy knowledge, and provoke against all Divine Obligations, all that God could
lay, shall prove more tolerable than to labor to obey without them, without
knowing why. It Is true, they had not heard it may be of the Name, than which
there is no other Name under Heaven given unto men whereby they may be saved.
Acts iv. 12.
Yet they endeavored in some measure to do that, which He that owns that Name,
and wrought the Covenant of those Salvations, does require. We know that Name,
and have it called upon us, and know too, that he that names that Name, (that
calls himself a Christian, 2. Tim. ii. 19.
owns the being a retainer to the Holy Jesus) must depart from iniquity,
otherwise it is no Name of Salvation to him, yet we neve mind the doing that;
and then which has the better Plea? the Heathen's sure were better, though he
were not virtuous.

And if so, give me leave to tell you, how not only this Child, but this
Resurrection too is for our fall.

In the first Chapter to the Romans we shall find, those Heathens, when they
did neglect to follow the direction of that Light within them, Verse 20. Verse
28.
by which they were able to discover in some measure the invisible things of
God; when they did no longer care to retain God in their knowledge; then they
quickly left off to be Men: And when they ceased to hearken to their Reason,
they soon fell into a reprobate sense. What was it else to change God into
stocks and stones? and Worship into most abominable wickedness? Ibid.
to make the Vilest creatures Deities? and the foulest Actions Religion? to
turn a disease into a God, and a sin into Devotion? a stupidity, which nothing
else but Gods desertion and reasons too, could have betrayed them to, and made
them guilty of.

And then, if by how much greater Light and means we have resisted, we shall be
proportionably more vile in the consequents of doing so; keep at equal rates of
distance from those Heathens, that the aggravations of our guilt stand at from
theirs; Whether, alas! are we like to fall?

It Is an amazing reflection, one would tremble to consider, how the Christian
World does seem to hasten into that condition which S. Paul does there
decipher: You would think that Chapter were our Character: But that we have
reason to expect we shall fall lower, into much more vile affections than those
Heathens did, as having fallen down from a greater height than they.

Consider whether men do not declare they like not to retain God in their
thoughts, when they endeavor to dispute and to deride him too out of the
World! It Is true, they have not set up any sins or monsters in their Temples
yet, as they did: But if they can empty them of God and Christ, and their
Religion, and make room, we may imagine easily whose Votaries they will be,
that live as if they thought themselves unhappy that they had not lived in
those good Pagan days, when they might have sinned with devotion, been most
wickedly Religious, and most God-like in unchastities and other Villainies; I
dare say none of our fine Gentlemen, or our great Wits, would have been
Atheists or irreligious then.

Think whether those are not already in that reprobate sense S. Paul does speak
of, who have case off all discriminating notions of good or evil, who say in
their hearts, and affirm openly, there are none such in truth and nature: It
would appear they were if we should try by those effects, verse 29, 30, 31. or
by that essential signature, verse. 32. they not only commit such things, but
have pleasure in them that do them; which because they cannot have from those
Commissions when they do not commit them, therefore their debauched minds must
be satisfied there is no evil in those doings, and must reap the pleasure only
of such satisfactions: That is, have the satisfactions and pleasures only of a
Reprobate sense. In fine, (because I dare not prosecute the Character) Men sink
so fast, as if they were resolved to fall as far below Humanity, as this Child
did below his Divinity.

O do not you thus break Decrees, frustrate and overthrow the everlasting
Counsel of Gods Will for good to you. He set, ordained this Child for your
rising again: Do not throw you selves down into Ruin in despite of his
Predestinations. He has carried up your nature into Heaven, placed Flesh in an
union with Divinity, set it there at the Right hand of God in Glory: Do not you
debase and drag it down again to Earth and Hell by Worldliness and Carnal
sensuality. Make appear this Child has raised you up, already made a
Resurrection of your Souls and your affections; they converse, and trade in
Heaven: And that you do not degenerate from that nature of yours that is there.
Then this Child who is Himself the Resurrection and the Life, will raise up
your Bodies too, John xi. 25.
and make them like his glorious Body, by the working of his mighty Power,
Phil. lii. 21.
by which he is able to subdue all things to himself. To whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost be all Blessing, Power and Praise, Dominion and Glory for
evermore.

The Thirteenth SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. November. 17. 1667.
St. JAMES IV. 7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.
THese Words are easily resolved into two parts: The first, a Duty; and the
second, to encourage the performance, an assurance of an happy issue in the
doing it.

The First, the Duty in these words, Resist the Devil; the happy issue in those
other, he will flee from you.

For the more practical and useful handling of these parts, I shall endeavor
to do these three things.

1. View the Enemy we are to resist, the Devil; see his Strengths, and what are
his chief Engines, his main Instruments of Battery, whereby he shakes, and does
endeavor to demolish the whole frame of Virtue in men's lives, shatters and
throws down all Religious, holy Resolutions, and subjects men to himself and
Sin.

2. See what we are to do in opposition to all this; and how and by what means
we must resist.

3. Prove to them that do resist, the happy issue which the Text here promises.

First of the first.

Though no man can be tempted (so as to be foiled by the temptation) but he
that is drawn away by his own Lust, an enticed, James i. 14. and all the
blandishments of this World, all the wiles and artifices of the Prince and God
of it, the Devil, are not able to betray one into sin, till his own Lust
conceive that sin, Verse 15.
and bring it forth; Man must be taken first in his own Nets, and fall into
that pit himself has dug, before he can become the Devil's prey: Yet Satan
has so great an hand in this affair, that the Tempter is his Name and Office,
Matthew. iv. 3. And the War which is now before us is so purely his* that we are
said to fight, Ephesians. iv. 12.
not against flesh and blood (those nests and fortresses of our own Lusts) but
against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this
World, against spiritual wickednesses in high places; that is, against the
Enemy here in the Text, the Devil.

Now to bring about his ends upon us he has several means. The first that I
shall name is

Infidelity. With this he began in Paradise, and succeeded by it: for he had no
sooner told the Woman that she should non surely die, Genesis iii. 4. 6.
and so made her doubt of, not believe, and consequently nor fear, that which
God had threatened, but she took of the forbidden fruit, and she did eat, and
gave it to her Husband too, and he did eat Now if a Serpent siding with her
inclination could so quickly stagger and quite overthrow her Faith; if she,
because she sees and likes a pleasing Object, can, in mere defiance of her own
assured Conviction, when the Revelation looked her in the face, and God himself
was scarce gone out of sight, straight give credit to a Snake, that comes and
confidently gives the lie to God* her Maker, offers her no proof at all of what
he says, but only flatters her desires with promises and expectations of the
knows not what Ye shall not die, but ye shall be as Gods; if in spite of
Knowledge she turn Infidel so soon and easily: It Is no great wonder if that
Serpent do, at this distance from Revelation, prevail on men, whose
conversation being most with Sense (their satisfactions also consequently
gratifying of their Sense) they do not willingly assent to any thing but that
which brings immediate evidence and attestation of the Senses, which the
Objects of our Faith do not (especially if it give check to and restrain those
satisfactions, as those do) on such men, I say, that do not care, no^ use, in
things that are against their mind, to apply the Understanding close and
strongly to reflect on those considerations which should move assent, and work
belief. Considerations which I dare affirm, if with sincerity adverted to (if
there be no improbity within to trash their efficacy, no sensual inclination
cherished that must hinder their admittance, as not being able to endure to
lodge in the same breast with those persuasions) would make disbelief appear not
only most imprudent, but a thing next to impossible. But in those that give
themselves no leisure, have no will thus to advert, it is not strange if,
through Satan's arts, in things of this remote kind they have only languid
opinions, which sink quickly into doubts, and by degrees into flat Infidelity.

S. Paul does fetch the rise of unbelief of Charistianity from hence, 2 Cor.
iv. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; In whom the
God of this World has blinded their minds: That is, if the Christian Doctrine
do not appear to be the truth of God to any, it is to obstinate persons only,
whom the Devil has besotted so with the advantages and pleasures of this
World, that their affections to these will not let the other be admitted. For,

The Carnal prejudice can cast a mist before the mind, or that a bright an
glittering Temptation of this World may dazzle it so as that it cannot see that
which is most illustriously visible, we have this demonstration.

Those Works which Christ and his Apostles wrought, which made the whole World
that was Heathen then, so many Millions of such distant Nations as could never
meet together to conspire an universal change in their Religions, made them yet
agree to lay aside their dear gods and their dearer vices, and do that to
embrace a Crucified Deity, a God put to a vile ignominious death, as one worse
than the worst of men; and a Religion that was as much hated, counted as
accursed as that God of it, He and Doctrine crucified alike; and a Religion too
that had as great severities in its Commands as in its Persecutions, that did
it self enjoin as hard and cruel things to flesh and blood as they that hated
it inflicted, the duties and the punishments equally seem executed on its
followers; and a Religion whose performances had no retributions here but fatal
ones, no otherwise rewarded but with fire and faggot, and whose after-promises
were most incredible: Those works that could produce all this, had certainly
Omnipotent conviction in them; sure we are there must be prodigy of Miracle
either in the causes, or in the effect. And yet the Scribes and Pharisees are
not wrought on by them. Their carnal Prejudices would not be removed, not by
the Finger of God: The mean and despicable, and, as to all their worldly
expectations and affections, the unsatisfying condition of our Savior, had so
clouded all his Works, and their own pride so blinded them, that they could see
no argument in Miracle.

Now it is the Devil, that God of the World, that has the power of its Glories,
and the managery of its temptations, who, by raising these affections, dazles
so and blinds the minds of men, that they should not believe. S. Paul affirms
it: And it is plain that unbelief is no one's Interest but Satan's. For it is
not Man's. Not the virtuous man's certainly: He Is concerned as much as
Happiness amounts to, to believe there is a God, whose cares and Providence
watch over him, whose Ears and Arms are open to him, whose Bowels yearn for
him, whose Blood did purchase him, whose everlasting Blessednesses do await
him. It Is his Interest to trust that Virtue, which the World so scorns or
pities, was yet worthy God should be Incarnated to teach it, die to purify us
into it, and will raise us up again to crown it. Neither is this Unbelief Man's
real Interest, abstracting from these prejudices of Religion. For if it were
Man's real Interest, then it were every man's wisest course to pursue that
Interest. But if every man did so, and should persuade himself into Infidelity,
and that Religion and a Deity were but dreams or artifices, and so arrive so
far as to have no fear of God, nor sense of Honesty or Virtue, the whole World
must needs return into the first confusions of its Chaos: Villainy and Rapine
would have right. When those Mounds are thrown down, there is nothing that can
hinder but that every man may lawfully break in upon and invade every thing.
There is no fence to guard thy Coffers nor thy Bed, no not thy very Breast:
Rather indeed there can be nothing thine. This is, it is true, Leviathan's state
of Nature; and it is so indeed with the Leviathans of Sea and Land, the wild
Beasts of the Deep and of the Desert. But to prevent the necessary and
essential mischiefs of this state amongst us Men, he will have Nature to have
taught us to make Pacts and Oaths: But if there is no such things as Virtue or
Religion, then there is no Obligation to keep Pacts or Oaths. And why should he
observe them that can safely break them? Here it is indeed that Doctrine ends;
to this their Infidelity does tend. And therefore it is no Interest of States or
Princes. This the Atheist will confess; Gods and Religions, he says, were
invented for the mere necessities of Governors, who could not be secure
without those higher Obligations, and these after-fears. And are they not kind
Subjects then who, by promoting Atheism, labor to break down that fence which
themselves account necessary? Or are they not good rational Discoursers too,
who labor to throw out a thing as false and vain, because it is necessary? So
necessary sure, that they who weaken these bonds of Religion, quite dissolve
those of Allegiance, all whose Sinews are made of those Sacred Ties, which if
you untwist, the other Cords are burst as easily as threads of Cobweb. Nay
these Doctrines lay Principles that justify Rebellion and King-killing. Nor if
there is no such thing as Virtue or Religion, then those are no Crimes. And it
is no wonder Treason has been loved, when Blasphemy has been so. They that
hear men droll on God Almighty, raille their Maker, and buffoon with Him, will
quickly learn to speak with little reverence of their Superiors. There Is no
Kingdom but the Devil's that can have support from Infidelity; it is the
Interest of that indeed. His work goes more securely on, when there are no
Religious apprehensions to check it: Allowed Vice cannot be at ease if it but
think those things are true. It is the infinite concern of wickedness, that the
Laws of Virtue and Religion should be only Spiders webbs, Snares for innocent
and lesser Flies, while venomous Spiders, can pass safely through them, and the
Wasps can burst them; are Entanglements only for the Weak, the Phlegmatic,
and Hypochondriack: and that there should be no God that can bring them to an
afterreckoning. They that flatter and betray, that hug and then trip up, or
that plot villainies and ruins under fair and godly vizards; must needs be
unwilling to believe that there is one who tries the reins, Jer. xvii. 10.
and se^rches hearts, and that will render every one according to his works.
The Drunkard, who nor must nor can keep the remembrance of his Cups, cannot
endure to apprehend he must be called to an account of them. The man whose Lust
prevents the Grave, that putrefies alive, and drops by piecemeal into rotten
dust ere he return to Earth, must needs be loath that there should be a
Resurrection, to collect the scattered, the soul atoms of his Sin and his
Disease, and show them at that dread Tribunal, before God, his holy Angels, and
Mankind. Such as these are the only men that are concerned against Religion.
Here we see whose Interest such promote who promote Infidelity. And truly it is
so much the Devil's Interest, that by those very measures that he weakens
Faith, he strengthens every sort of Wickedness: By the steps and degrees of
Infidelity men ascend toward the heights of sin: And when they have surmounted
all Religious apprehensions, then they are upon the Precipice of Vice. When the
Floodgates are removed, the Torrent must break in impetuously. For what is
there that can hinder? nothing certainly, if present Interest be not able: But
it is plain that Thieves, and Murderers, and Rebels, in fine, every one whom we
call Sinners, do pursue that which they account their present Interest: That
therefore if there were no other, would not be sufficient, since the Devil does
make use of that to work with under Infidelity. This indeed he batters, makes
his spreading ruins with: Therefore S. Paul calls him (...), Ephesians. ii. 2.
John. iii. 36.
the spirit that works in filiis diffidentiae, says the Vulgar: In the
Unbelievers, so it bears: in filiis insuasibilitatis, in the men that will not
be persuaded to believe. In these (...) they are his (...), Possessed and
agitated by him: it is he spirits what they do: their actions are his
incitations and motions: In sum, as to wickedness, they are mere Demoniacks.
This therefore is his chief and the first Engine.

The second Instrument by which he does demolish whatsoever hopes of Virtue we
are built up to is Want of Employment: And in order to this, he has so far
prevailed on the Opinions of the World, that they believe some states of men
not only have no Obligation to be busied, but to have no Calling is essential
to their condition; which is made more eminent upon this account that they have
no business. Wealth, how great soever, if with an employment or Profession,
makes a man only a more gentile Mechanic: But Riches and nothing to do make a
Person of quality. As if God had made that state of men, far the most generous
part of the whole kind, and best appointed for the noblest uses of the World,
to serve no other ends but what the Grasshoppers and Locusts do, to sing and
dance among the Plants and Branches, and devour the Fruits; and Providence had
furnished them with all advantages of Plenty for no better purposes. Such
persons think not only to reverse Gods Curse, and In the sweat of others faces
eat their bread, but reverse Nature too; for Job says, Man is born to labor
as the sparks fly upwards; Job v. 7.
in his making has a Principle to which Activity is as essential as it is to
fire to mount; from which nothing else but force can hinder it: As if man did
do violence to his making when he did do nothing; and it were his hardest work
and pressure, not to be employed; it were like making flame go downwards. I am
sure it is one of the busiest ways of doing Satan's work. Our Savior in a
Parable in the 12. Chap. of S. Matthew. from the 43. ver. says, When the unclean
spirit is gone out of a man, he goes through dry places, Verse 44.
seeking rest, and finds none: Then he says, I will return into my house
from whence I came out; and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, and
garnished. 45.
Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other spirits more wicked than
himself, and they enter in and dwell there. Where, under the similitude of a
man cast out of his habitation, who, while he wanders through none but desert
places seeking for a dwelling, he is sure to meet with none; but if he find an
House that is empty, swept and garnished, he has found out not a receptacle
only, but an invitation, an house dressed on purpose to call in and to detain
Inhabitants: He signifies, that when a Temptation of the Devil is repelled, and
himself, upon some working occasion, by a resolute act of holy courage thrown
out of the heart, as he finds no rest in this condition, every place is desert
to him but the heart of man, Matthew. viii. 29.
is indeed Hell to him, for he calls it Torment to be cast out thence; Luke
viii. 31.
yea he accounts himself bound up in his eternal Chains of darkness; when he is
restrained from working and engaging man to sin; so while he goes to and fro,
seeking an opportunity to put in somewhere, if he find that heart from which he
was cast out, or any other heart, (...), (so the word is) idling, not employed
or busied (so it signifies) such an heart is empty, swept, and garnished for
him, it is a dwelling that is dressed properly to tempt the Devil, fitted to
receive him and his forces too, prepared for him to Garrison, and make a strong
hold of, whence he cannot be removed; for he takes unto him seven other spirits
more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there. No doubt they are
the Patron-Guardian spirits of the seven deadly Sins, their Tu^elary Devils.
Some of those good qualities that are the attendants of Idleness you may find
decypher'd in the Scripture. S. Paul says, when people learn to be idle, 1 Timothy
v. 13.
they grow tatlers, busy bodies, speaking things which they ought not. It Is
strange that Idleness should make men and women busy bodies, yet it does most
certainly in other folks affairs. Faction, than which nothing in the world can
be more restless, is nursed by it. Where are States so censured, so new
modeled, as at certain of our Refectories, places that are made merely for men
to spend their time in which they know not what to do with? At those Tables our
Superiors are dissected; Calumny and Treason are the common, are indeed the
more peculiar entertainments of the places. In fine, where persons have no
other employment for their time but talking, and either have not so much Virtue
as to find delight in talking good things, or not so much skill as to speak
innocent recreation, there they talk of others, censure, and backbite, and
scoff. This is indeed the only picquant conversation; Gall is sauce to all
their Entertainments: And that you may know these things proceed from that old
Serpent, Romans iii. 13.
they do nothing else but hiss and bite. It Is the poison of Asps that is under
their lips which gives relish to their Discourses; it is the sting that makes
them grateful, venom that they are condited with.

More of the brood of this want of Employment you may find at Sodom; namely,
Ezekiel. xvi. 49.
Pride and Luxury: For says Ezekiel, This was the Iniquity of Sodom; Pride,
fullness of bread, and abundance of Idleness was in her and in her daughters.
And indeed the Idle person could not possibly know how to pass his hours, if he
had not Delicacies to sweeten some, Wine to lay some asleep, and the solicitous
deckings of Pride to take up others: But the studious gorgings of the inside,
and the elaborate trimmings of the outside, help him well away with them.

Good God! that for so many hours my morning eyes should be lift up to nothing
but a Looking-glass! that that thin shadow of my self should be my Idol, be my
God indeed, to which I pay all the devotions I perform! And when with so much
care and time I have arrayed and marshalled my self, that I should spend as
much more too in the complacencies of viewing this! with eager eyes and
appetite surveying every part, as if I had set out, exposed them to my self
alone, and only dressed a prospect for my own sight! and since Nature, to my
grief, has given me no eyes behind; that I should fetch reliefs from Art, and
get vicarious sight, and set my back parts too before my face, that so I may
enjoy the whole Scene of my self! And why all this? for nothing but to serve
vain Ostentation, or negotiate for Lust, to dress a Temptation, and start
Concupiscence. And that the half of each Day should be spent thus! the best
part of a reasonable Creatures and a Christians life, be laid out upon purposes
so far from Christian or reasonable!

And truly Luxury will easily eat the remainder up, that sure Companion of
Idleness. For when the Israelites were in the Wilderness, where they could not
eat but by Miracle, and the Rock must give them drink; yet, Exodus xxxii. 6.
having no Employment, they made Feasts: They sat down to eat and drink and
rose up to play. Nor would eating to the uses of their nature serve them, but
they must have entertainments for their wantonness. Had they been employed to
get their Bread, their labor would have made their morsels sweet: But since
God, as the Wiseman says, sent them from Heaven bread prepared without their
labor, they must have varieties to sweeten it; Psalm lxxviii. 19, 25.
they require him to prepare a Table also in the Wilderness, and furnish them
with choice. And although they had the food of Angels, Wisd. xvi. 20, 21.
able to content every man's delight, and agreeing to every taste, and serving
to the appetite of the eater, it tempered it self to every man's liking, and
what could they fancy more? The latitude of Creatures, the whole Universe of
Luxury could do nothing else; in every single morsel they had sorts, Variety,
all choice; as if that Desert had been Paradise, that Wilderness the Garden of
the Lord: Yet so coy is Idleness, so apt to nauseate, that they abhor the
constancy of being pleased. And though they were not sated neither, Exodus xvi.
18.
he that gathered much had nothing over, only to his eating, God as well
providing for their Health and Virtue, as Necessity, and dieting their
Temperance as he did their Hunger: Yet their very liking does grow loathsome to
them. When their Bodies were thus excellently well provided for, having no
employment, nothing to take up their Minds and Entertain their Souls, Psalm
lxxvii. v. 18.
they require (...) meat for their Souls, meat not to serve the uses of their
bodies, but to feed their fancies, their extravagant minds. Thus Idleness
requires to be dieted. And all this but to pamper and feed high men's
inclinations, so to make Temptations irresistible, and by consequence Vice
necessary.

It were easy to recount more of those ways by which the Devil does make use
of men's want of Employment to debauch their lives, and ruin all the hopes of
Virtue in them. S. Jude finds more of its effects at Sodom: They gave
themselves over to Fornication, Verse 7.
and went after other flesh, and are set forth for an Example, suffering the
vengeance of Eternal fire. Indeed these are most certain consequents of not
being employed: Quaeritur Aegysthus -- is too known an instance: 2 Samuel xi. 1,
2.
and great holy David is another. But its dire influence is sufficiently
visible in that which it rained down upon those Cities. Since it did fulfill
the guilt of Sodom, and made Heaven furnish Hell for it, and God himself turn
Executioner of fire and brimstone to revenge it; this shall serve to prove it
is one of the Devil's Masterpieces.

3. Ephesians. vi. 16.
Next succeed his fiery darts, as S. Paul calls them, namely, Persecutions, or
Calamities of any kind: Which he manageth either by inflicting pressures, and
he was so confident of the force of these, that he did tell God he would make
Job curse him to his face with them: Job i. 11.
Or if he find men in necessities and pressures, then by tempting them to get
from under them by methods which he shall direct; and he had such assurance of
the strength of this Temptation, that by it he tried our Savior, to find out
whether he were the Son of God or no, Matthew. iv. 3.
believing none but he that was so would be able to resist it.

Indeed the trials are severe which this Temptation does present, to draw men
from their Duty, and to overcome their Constancy; Whether it solicit by
inflicting punishment (as on the Mother and her Children, 2 Maccab. vii.) or by
offering to withdraw it, if they will submit to their unlawful terms (and so
they tried her youngest Son there, verse 24.) or at leastwise by some feigned
act, some ambiguous words or practices, will pretend compliance; (so they dealt
with Eleazar, Chap. vi. 21. whom they would have had to bring flesh of his own
provision, such as he might use without offense, and so only seem to eat
forbidden meat.) Each of which is as great a trial also, and to stand against
them reckoned up amongst as vigorous acts of Faith, as those that held out in
the greatest tortures persecuting malice could invent: Heb. xi. 17. They were
stoned, sawn asunder, were tempted.

Now to fetch an instance of the sad success of these, I shall not need to go
so far as to those Persecutions of Antiochus, nor those of the primitive times
of Christianity; when they had no other choices but these, to deliver up their
Bibles or their Lives; either to sacrifice to Idols, or at least procure a
Ticket which should certify that they had done it, or to be themselves an
Holocaust, and give those Idols a Burnt-offering with their martyr-flames.
Which made the Traditores, Lapsi, the Thurificati and the Libellatici to be so
numerous. Through Gods blessed mercy there is no use of such instances, as
there is no fear of such a trial; it is not death to be a Christian now: For if
the Son of Man or Satan's self should come to try us at those rates, 'twere a
great doubt whether the one or other would find Faith upon the Earth; Luke
xviii. 8.
whether they would sacrifice a life to our Religion, who are not content to
sacrifice a little interest or pleasure to it; Heb. xii. 4.
whether they are likely to resist unto blood fighting against sin, who will
not resist to tears nor sober resolutions. Alas! what Religion should we be of,
if God should raise a Dioclesian, come to tempt us with the fiery trial?
Martyrs as we are to nothing but our Passions and our lusts! Nor shall I
produce more known and near experiences, when, by reason of such storms of
Persecution, men made shipwreck, if not of their Faith, yet of good Conscience.
When by order or permissions of Providence they were brought to such a
straight, that either they must let go their possessions or their honesty,
acting against Principles, and Conscience of Duty: I shall not remember, how,
when God did shake his angry hand thus over them, they fled to the Devils
kindness, and made Hell their refuge, to save them from their Fathers rod: how
they grew so Atheistical, as to believe a Perjury or other crime greater
security, that would preserve their selves and their condition better than all
God had promised; were such Infidels, that they did rather trust their being
here to the commission of a sin, than to the Providence and the Engagements of
the Almighty. For indeed what need I instance in these greater cases, where the
trial was so sharp, as not to offer any easier choice than this, either to part
with Conscience or with all they had? God knows, we find less Interests will
do: The Devil by no more than this, driving the Gadarens swine into the Sea,
was able to drive Christ out of their Coasts. You have the story Matthew. viii.
from the 28. verse. A legion of those evil spirits did possess two men; and
finding Christ would cast them out, and by that Miracle so far show forth his
Power, that in probability the whole Country would believe on him, they fall
upon this project to prevent it; they besought him, if he would cast them out,
to suffer them to go into an herd of Swine there feeding; hoping by destroying
them to incense the Owners against Christ: And, to try them, he permitted this.
The possessed Swine ran violently down into the Lake, and perished. Now a man
would think the virulency of these Devils, which were so destructive when they
were at liberty and not restrained, would have endeared the mercy that had cast
them out of the poor men, and came to dispossess the Country of them; and that
their astonishment at so great a Miracle would possess them all with Reverence
and belief of him; and that they would therefore seize and possess him also,
and not let the mercy go: But, on the contrary, the whole City and Country
came out to meet Jesus, and in consideration of the loss of their Swine, desire
him to depart out of their Coast. Lo here an equal Enemy to Christ and all his
Miracles, that was indeed too hard for them. The Senate of Hell had no project
to keep out Religion like to this, to make Religion thwart an Interest. Rather
no Christianity than lose an Earthly satisfaction by it: Rather have the Swine
than Christ himself.

4. But if he chance to fail in this Assault (as by our Savior he was beaten
off) he has yet a reserve in which he places his last, strongest confidence;
with which he ventured to charge Christ, when it is probable he knew he was the
Son of God. Matthew. iv. 8, 9.
He takes him up into an high Mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms of the
Earth in the twinkling of an eye, and the glory of them, and says, All these
things will I give thee. He thought it was impossible for such a Prospect not
to make impression on the Appetite, raise some desire, or stir one Covetous or
Ambitious thought: which if it could but do, he made no scruple then to clog
the Gift with such conditions as that there, All these things will I give thee.
if thou will fall down and worship me. Ephesians. v. 5.
It Is said indeed, the Covetous man is an Idolater: And here we see the God he
does do homage to, and worship. The Devil does require, that those whom he
gives Wealth to (now it is he that gives it to the Covetous, to all indeed that
get it with injustice or with greediness;) he requires, I say, that these
should pay all their Religion to Himself: And the Ambitious, in however high a
place he sets them, must fall down to him. And truly these two dispositions can
give worship to no other God but such an one as is Abaddon, Rev. ix. 11.
the Destroyer of Mankind. For all the great Commotions of the World, all those
Convulsions that tear Provinces and Empires, all Seditions and Rebellions with
those Armies of Iniquities that attend them, and that wage their Designs, which
are upheld by legions of Villainies as well as men, all the Disturbances of
States and Church, are but attempts of Covetous and Ambitious spirits, men that
are unsatisfied with their condition, and desire a change, and care not how
they compass it: They can charge through Seas of Blood and Sin, over the face
of Men and Conscience, to get out of that condition, which they therefore are
not well content with, because something they like better beckens their
ambitious and their covetous Desires. Would you see what one of these will
venture at? When Christ our Savior was to be betrayed, when a Person of the
Godhead was to be delivered up and Crucified, the Devil had no passion to
employ on that Design so fit as the desire of getting money; and when that
desire was once entertained, John xiii. 2, 27.
we see he enters really in person, and possesses such a Soul: and when he is
there, he designs no farther but to warm and stir that passion: It Is sufficient
fruit of his possession, he has done enough in such an heart wherein he
dwells, if he but keep alive that desire of Money; For he knows that will make
the man adventure upon any guilt; for it made Judas undertake to betray Christ.
And as for the other passion which the Devil did design the glories of his
prospect to give fire to, though he could not stir it in our Savior, yet he
knew it vanquished him himself when he was Angel. What height is there which
Ambition will not fly at, since it made this spirit aim at an equality with the
Most High? Isai. xiv. ^4.
Heaven it self was not sufficient to content him, while there was a God above
him in it. And since this affection peopled Hell with Devils, it is no wonder if
it people Earth with Miseries and Vices.

5. The remaining Trial with which Satan did assault our Savior, when he
tempted him with Scripture and God's Promises, Matthew. iv. 4.
and sought to ruin him with his own privileges: with that also,

6. His being a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets; by which long
ago he did destroy an Ahab, in the 1 Kings xxii. 22. But since by sad
experience we know, he ruined the best King, purest Church, and most
flourishing State, by the same Stratagem. But these, with those other which S.
Paul does call his wiles, I must omit; sufficient has been said already to
enforce the necessity of resisting, Ephesians. vi. 11.
which is the Duty, and the next considerable.

Resist the Devil: That is, do not you consent to his Temptations: for there is
no more required of us, but this only, not to be willing to be taken and led
captive by him. 2 Timothy ii. 26.
For let him suggest, incite, assault and storm us, no impression can be made
upon us till we yield, and till we give consent no hurt is done. It is not here
as in our other Wars: In those no resolution can secure the Victory, but
notwithstanding all resistance possible, we may be vanquished; yea, sometime
men are overpress'd and die with Conquering, and the Victor only gains a
Monument, is but buried in the heaps of his slain Trophies. But in these Wars
with the Devil, whosoever is unwilling to be vanquished, never can be: For he
must first give consent to it, and will the ruin; for men do not sin against
their wills. Only here we must distinguish betwixt Will and thin Velleity and
Woulding. For let no man think when he commits deliberate iniquity with
aversness and reluctance of mind, allows not what he does, but does the evil
that he would not, what he hates that he does; that this is not to be imputed
to the Will; that in this case he is not willing, but here the spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak, and yields through mere infirmity: For, on the
contrary, the Devil finds the Flesh so strong in this case, that with it alone
he does assault the mind, and breaks through its reluctancies and aversations,
bears down all its resolutions, triumphs over all that does pretend to God or
Virtue in him. Where it is thus, let no man flatter or persuade himself he does
what he would not, when it is plain he does impetuously will the doing it. Let
him not think that he allows not, but hates that which he does; when it is
certain, in that moment that he does commit, not to allow that which he does
resolve and pitch upon and choose; to hate what with complacency he acts; or to
do that unwillingly which he is wrought on by his own Concupiscence to do, and
by his inward incitations, by the mutiny of his own affections which the Devil
raises, and when it is the mere height and prevailency of his appetite that
does make him do it (as it must be where there is reluctance before he do it,
his desires and affections there are evidently too strong for him) or at last,
to hate the doing that which it is his too much love to that makes him do, are
all impossibilities; the same things as to will against the will, desire
against appetite. But do but keep thy self sincerely and in truth from being
willing, and thou must be safe: For God expects no more but that we should not
voluntarily yield to our undoing. He has furnished us with his own complete
Armor for no farther uses of a War, Ephesians. vi. 11.
but to encourage us to stand. Take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil: And again, 13.
Put ye on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the
evil day, and having done all, to stand. There is no need to do more than this,
not to be willing and consent to fall; for no man can be beaten down but he
that will fall.

It were very easy for me to prescribe you how to fortify against those
Engines of the Devils battery which I produced to you. But that I may not stay
upon particulars, directing those whom he prevails upon through want of
Employment to find out honest occasions not to be idle (and sure it is the most
unhappy thing in the World, for any man to be necessitated to be vicious by his
having nothing else to do, and because, while the World accounts it a Pedantick
thing to be brought up by Rules and under Discipline, he cannot learn how to
employ himself to his advantage) to pass by these, I say, the universal
strength against this Enemy is Faith. 1 Pet. 5. 9.
Your adversary the Devil, like a roaring Lion, goes up and down seeking whom
he may devour; whom resist steadfast in the Faith. And that not only as it
frustrates all that he attempts by means of Infidelity, but it also quenches
all his fiery darts; Ephesians. vi. 16.
whatsoever bright Temptation he presents to draw us from our Duty, or whatever
fiery trial he makes use of to affright and martyr with. For the man whose
Faith does give him evidence and eyesight of those blessed Promises eye has
not seen, Heb. xi. 1.
and gives substance, (...). Heb. xi. 1.
present solid being to his after-hopes, and whose heart has swallowed down
those happy expectations which have never entered in the heart of man to
comprehend; what is there that can tempt or fright him from his station? To
make all that which Satan gave the prospect of prevail on such a Soul, the
Kingdoms of the Earth must outvie Gods Kingdom, and their Gauds outshine his
Glory, and the twinkling of an eye seem longer than Eternity: For nothing less
than these will serve his turn, all these are in his expectations. Or what can
fright the man whose heart is set above the sphere of terrors? who knows
calamity, how great soever, can inflict but a more sudden and more glorious
blessedness upon him; and the most despiteful cruel usage can but persecute him
into Heaven. It Is easy to demonstrate that a Faith and Expectation of the
things on Earth, built upon weaker grounds than any man may have for his belief
of things above, has charged much greater hazards, overcome more difficulties
than the Devil does assault us with. For sure none is so Skeptical, but he will
grant that we have firmer grounds to think there is another World in Heaven,
than Columbus (if he were the first Discoverer) had to think there was another
Earth; and that there are far richer hopes laid up there in that other World,
for those that do deny themselves the sinful profits and the jollities of this,
and force them from their inclinations, than those Seamen could expect who
first adventured with him thither. For they could not think to gain much for
themselves, but only to take soism of the Land (if any such there were) for
others covetous Cruelty; could get little else but only richer Graves, and to
lie buried in their yellow Earth. Nor are we assaulted in our Voyage with such
hazards, as they knew they must encounter with; the path of Virtue and the way
to Heaven is not so beset with difficulties as theirs was; when they must cut
it out themselves through an unknown new World of Ocean, where they could see
nothing else but swelling gaping Death, from an Abyss of which they were but
weakly guarded, and removed few inches only: And as if the dangerousest
shipwrecks were on shore, they found a Land more savage and more monstrous than
that Sea. Yet all this they vanquished for such slender hopes, and upon so
uncertain a belief. A weak Faith therefore can do mighty works; greater than
any that we stand in need of to encounter with our Enemy: It can remove these
Mountains too; the golden ones that Covetousness and Ambition do cast up: Yea
more, it can remove the Devil also; for if you resist him steadfast in the
Faith, he flies; which is the happy issue, and my last Part.

Resist the Devil, and he will Fly from you. And yet it cannot be denied but
that sometimes when the messenger of Satan comes to buffet, though S. Paul
resist him with the strength of Prayer (which when Moses managed he was able to
prevail on God himself, and the Lord articled with him, Deuteronomy. ix. 14.
that he might be let alone) yet he could not beat off this assailant, 2 Cor.
xii. 7, 8, 9. When God, either for prevention, as 'twas there, v. 7. or for
exercising or illustrating of Graces, or some other of his blessed ends, gives
a man up to the assaults of Satan, he is often pleased to continue the
temptation long; but in that case he does never fail to send assistances and
aids enough against it. My grace is sufficient for thee, ^aith he to S. Paul
there. And when he will have us tempted for his uses (if we be not failing to
our selves) he does prevent our being overcome; so that there is no danger in
those Trials from their stay. But yet it must not be denied but that the Devil
does prevail sometimes by importunacy, and by continuance of Temptation; so
that Resistance is not always a Repulse, at least not such an one as to make
him draw off and fly. It is not strange to find him siding with a natural
Inclination, with the bent of Constitution, still presenting Objects, laying
Opportunities, throwing in Examples, and all sorts of Invitation, always
pressing so, that when a man has strugled long he does grow weary of the
service, not enduring to be thus upon his guard perpetually, watching a weak
heart with strong inclinations, busy Devils do lay siege to; and so growing
slack and careless, he is presently surprised: Or else, despairing that he
shall be always able to hold out, lays hold upon a tempting opportunity, and
yields; by the most unreasonable and basest cowardice that can be, yields, for
fear of yielding; lest he should not hold out, he will not, but gives up; and
puts himself into that very Mischief which he would avoid, merely for fear of
coming into it. For which fear there is no reason neither; For it is not here as
in our other Sieges, where, if it be close, continuance must reduce men to
necessity of yielding, Strengths and Ammunitions will decay, Provisions fail,
and, if the Enemy cannot, their own Hunger will break through their Walls, and
make avenues for Conquest, time alone will take them; but in these Spiritual
Sieges, one Repulse inables for another; and the more we have resisted, the
Temptation is not only so much flatter, and more weak and baffled, but the
inward Man is stronger: Victory does give new forces, and is sure to get in
fresh and still sufficient supplies. James iv. 6.
For God gives more grace, says S. James: And, Matthew. xxv. 29.
they shall have abundance, says our Savior. So that where the Devil after
several repulses still comes on with fresh assaults, we may be sure he does
discern there is some treacherous inclination that sides with him: And although
the man refuse himself the satisfaction of the sin, the Devil sees he has a
mind to it, his refusals are but faint, not hearty; though he seem afraid to
come within the quarters of the Vice, he keeps, it may be, correspondence with
the incentives to it, entertains the opportunities, plays with the Objects, or
at best he does not fortify against him. Now this gives the Tempter hopes, and
invites his assaults, and does expose the person to be taken by him.

But where he sees he is resisted heartily, his offers are received with an
abhorrency, discerns Men are in earnest, watch to avoid all opportunities and
occasions, and prepare, and fortify, and arm against him, there he will not
stay to be the triumph of their Virtue. We may know th^^ by his Agents, those
that work under the Devil, whom he has instructed in the mysteries of waging
his Temptations. Where they are not like to speed (and as to this they have
discerning spirits) they avoid, and hate, and come not near, but study spite
and mischief only there. The intemperate men are most uneasy with a person
whom they are not able to engage in the debauch; the rudeness and brutality of
their excesses are not so offensive to the sober man, as his staid Virtue is to
them; they do not more avoid the crude egestions, shameful spewings of their
overtaken fellows Riot, then they do the shame and the reproach that such a
man's strict Conversation casts on them, which does in earnest make them look
more foul and nasty to themselves. In fine, every Sinner: shuns the Company of
those whom he believes Religious in earnest; it is an awe and check to them;
they are afraid, and out at it, as their Great Master also is, who when he is
resisted must be overcome: And as they that are beaten have their own fears
also for their Enemies, which are sure to charge close, put to slight, chase
and pursue them; so it seems he also is afraid of a sincere and hearty
Christian, for he flies him: So he did from Christ, Matthew. iv. verse 11. and so
the Text assures, If you resist him, he will fly from you.

And now, although we all did once renounce the Devil and his works, were
listed Soldiers against him, took a Sacrament upon it, and our Souls, the
immortality of life or misery, depend upon our being true and faithful to our
selves and Oaths, or otherwise; nor is there more required of us but resolution
and fidelity, only not to be consenting to our Enemies Conquest of us, not to
will Captivity and Servitude: Yet as if, in mere defiance of our Vows and
Interests, we not only willed the ruin, but would fight for it, we may find,
instead of this resisting of the Devil, most men do resist the Holy Ghost; Acts
vii. 51. Ephesians. vi. 16. 1 Thessalonians. v. 19.
quench not the fiery darts of Satan, but the Spirit and his flames, by which
he would enkindle love of God and Virtue in them. If he take advantage of some
warm occasion to inflame their courage against former follies, heat them into
resolutions of a change; as soon as that occasion goes off, they put out those
flames, and choke these heats until they die. If he come in his soft whispers,
speak close to the heart, suggest, and call them to those joys of which himself
is earnest; to all these they shut their ears, can hear no whispers, are not
sensible of any sounds of things at such a distance, sounds to which they give
no more regard, than to things of the same extravagance with the Music of the
Spheres. Nay, if he come with his more active methods, Genesis xix. 16.
as the Angels came to Lot, send mercy to allure and take them by the hand, as
they did, to invite and lead them out of Sodom; if that will not, Judgments
then to thrust them out, as they did also, come with fire and brimstone to
affright them; they not only like the men of Sodom, do attempt a violence and
Rape upon those very Angels, Verse 4, 9.
but they really ally debauch the Mercies, and profane the Judgment, having
blinded their own Eyes, that they might see no hand of God in either: using
thus unkindly all his blessed methods of reclaiming them, Ephesians. iv. 30.
till they have grieved him so that he forsake and leave them utterly. As if
they had not heard that when the Holy Spirit is thus forced away, the evil
spirit takes his place, 1 Samuel xvi. 14. As if they knew not that to those who
close their eyes and stop their ears against the Holy Spirit's motions, till
they are grown dull of hearing and blind to them, God does send a spirit of
slumber, that they should not see nor hear; and that for this dire reason,
Isal. vi. 9. Matthew. xiii. 14 15.
that they may not be converted, nor be saved. Five times he affirms it in the
Scripture. Yea, once more in words of a sad Emphasis, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 12, 13. He
sends them strong delusions that they may believe a lie, John xii. 40. Acts
xxv^i 26. Romans xi. 8.
that they all may be damned who believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness: And that, because they received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved. Blessed God! Is it so easy for such Sinners to
believe and be converted, that thy self should interpose to hinder it, and
hide the possibilities of mercy from their eyes, that they may never see them,
nor recover! What can then become of those for whom God does contrive that they
shall not escape? when instead of those bowels that did make him swear he would
not have the sinner die, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.
but would have him return and live, he puts on so much indignation at such
Sinners, as to take an order they shall not repent, and take an order that they
shall be damned.

And yet all this is only to those men, who, being dull of hearing the
suggestions of the Spirit, and not willing to give entertainment to his holy
motions, grieve him so, that they repel and drive him quite away; and so by
consequence only make way for the Devil: Whereas there are others that
directly call him, force him to them, ravish and invade occasions to serve him.
Some there are that study how to disbelieve, and with great labor and
contrivance work out arguments and motives to persuade themselves to Atheism:
Others practice, discipline, and exercise themselves to be engaged in Vice.
Some dress so as to lay bai^s, snares, to entrap Temptation, that they may be
sure it may not pass them: Others feed high to invite and entertain the
Tempter, do all that is possible to make him come, and to assure him that he
must prevail, when they have made it most impossible for themselves to stand
and to resist.

Some there are indeed whom he does not overcome so easily, but is put to
compound with them, takes them upon Articles: for when he would engage them to
a sin to which he sees they have great inclinations, with some fears, he is
fain to persuade them to repent when they have done; to lay hold upon the
present opportunity, and not let the satisfaction escape them, but be sorry
after, and amend. For where these resolutions of Repentance usher in
transgression, there we may be sure it is the Devil that suggests those
resolutions. But if he can get admittance once thus, by prevailing with a
person to receive him upon purposes of after-Penitence; he is sure to prosper
still in his attempts upon the same condition: For Repentance will wash out
another sin, if he commit it; and so on. And it is evident that by this very
train he does draw most men on through the whole course of sin and life: For
never do they till they see themselves at the last stage, begin repenting. When
they are to grapple with Death's forces, then they are to set upon resisting of
the Devil: And when they are grown so weak that their whole Soul must be
employed to muster all its spirits, all their strength, but to beat off one
little spot of phlegm, that does besiege the avenues of breath, the ports of
life, and sally at it, and assault it, once, again, and a third, many times,
and yet with all the sury of its might cannot break through, nor beat off that
little clot of spittle; when it is thus, yet then are they to wrestle with,
Ephesians. vi. 12. 2 Cor. x. 4, 5.
and Conquer Principalities and Powers, all the Rulers of the utter darkness,
pull down the strong holds of sin within, cast down imaginations, and every
high thing that did exalt it self against the knowledge of God, and bring into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; and with those feeble hands
that they are scarcely able to lift up in a short wish, or prayer, they must do
all this; resist the Devil, and take Heaven by force.

Now sure to put it off to such a fatal season is a purpose of a desperate
concern. In God's Name let us set upon the doing it while there is something
left of Principle and vigor in us, ere we have so grieved Gods Spirit, that he
do resolve to leave us utterly; and before the Devil have so broke us to his
yoke, that we become content and pleased to do his drudgery. We deceive our
selves if we think to do it with more ease when Constitution is grown weaker;
as if then Temptations would not be so ^rong: For the Habits will be then
confirmed, Vice grown Heroical, and we wholly in the power of Satan, Acts 26.
18.
dead and senseless under it, not so much as stirring to get out. But if we
strive before he have us in his clutches, we have an Enemy that can vanquish
none but those who consent to, and comply and confederate with him, those that
will be overcome: So that if we resist, he must be Conquered; and Temptation
must be conquered too, for he will fly, and then by consequence must cease to
trouble and molest us. This is the sure way to be rid of Temptations, to put to
flight the great Artificer and Prince of them, subdue and overcome him and our
selves: Rev. iii. 21.
And to him that overcomes thus Christ will grant to sit with him on his
Throne, as He also overcame, and sat down with his Father on his Throne.

To which, etc.
The Fourteenth SERMON, Preached at WHITE HALL. Last Wednesday in LENT, 1667/8.
PHILIPP. III. 18. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you even weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ.
THough many by the Cross of Christ here understand any sort of Suffering for
the sake of Christ or Religion (it being usual with the Scripture to entitle
Christ to every evil that befalls a man for doing of his duty,) yet others
looking on it properly as that on which Christ himself suffered, by the Enemies
of the Cross understand those that set themselves against the whole design and
influence of Christ's death upon it.

Now to name that in few words, the Cross of Christ not only is one of the
greatest Props on which our Faith of the whole Gospel leans, which it
establishes the truth of as Christ's Blood shed upon it was the sanction of the
Covenant on Gods part, who by that federal Rite of shedding Blood engaged
himself; and we may certainly assure our selves, he cannot fail to make good
whatsoever he has promised in that Covenant, who would give the Blood of his
own only Son, who was so holy, and who was himself to Seal that Covenant; and
his Blood is therefore called the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant. Heb. xiii.
20, and 10. 29.


But besides this extrinsick influence of it, all the blessed Mercies also of
the Gospel, are the Purchase of this Cross, and all the main essential duties
of the Gospel are not only Doctrines of the Cross, such as it directs and does
enforce, but the Cross also has an immediate efficacy in the working of them
in us: Gal. 4.
For S. Paul says by the Cross of Christ the World is Crucified to me and I
unto the World. On it the Flesh is also crucified with the Affections and
Lusts: And to say all that comprehensive Duty of the Gospel, Self-denial, is
but another word for taking up the Cross: And then as for the Mercies of the
Gospel on the Cross the satisfaction for our sins was made, the Price of our
Redemption paid, and that effected: There was wrought our Reconciliation with
our God; Lastly, that was the consideration upon which Grace was bestowed
whereby we are enabled to perform our duty: With good reason, therefore S. Paul
calls the Gospel (...), 1 Cor. i. 18.
the word or Doctrine of the Cross; so that the Enemies of the Cross of Christ
are in a word the Enemies of Christianity, and so the blessed Polycarpe in his
Epistle to these same Philippians seems to understand it: Poly. and Ignat. Ep.
p. 23. Edit. Usserian. pro persequentibus and odientibus vos, and pro inimi^is
crucis.
And they that walk as Enemies to it, are such as do not only hate the Duties
of the Gospel, those especially which the Cross directly does enforce; but
their course of life is ordered so as to break the very Frame and Power of
Christianity, they set themselves against all that Christ came to do upon and
by the Cross, resist, and wage War with the Doctrines, and by consequence
oppose the mercies of it.

The words being thus explained, I have no more to do but only answer two
Enquiries which they give occasion for.

The first is, What sort of men those are that walk as Enemies to the Cross,
and wherein their hostility does express it self?

The second is, What the danger and the sadness is of that condition, that they
should make S. Paul think it necessary frequently to warn them of it, and to do
it now with so much passion? For many walk, says he, of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, etc.

First for the first. And here I shall not strive to give you in a perfect list
of all that walk as Enemies to the Cross, but shall take that which S. Paul
has made ready to my hands in the next words.

And first the Enemies which he brings up in the front, are the Sensualists,
the Men whose God is their Belly.

Secondly, They whose glory is in their shame.

Thirdly, Who mind Earthly things, to which as being their confederates, and
near Allies I shall add

Fourthly, Those that he reckons up in the 1 Cor. i. the wise men of this World.

First, The Sensualists.

That Men who diligently mind the serving of their appetite in Meats and
Drinks, that study and contrive its pleasure, and with industry have learned,
and practice Arts of Luxury, and in those have set up their delights, that
these should be accounted Enemies of the Cross of Christ there is but too much
reason. For their course of life is perfect opposition to that Cross, and to
the whole design of Christianity, and to the very being of all Virtue. For
since Virtue is but moderation and restraint of Appetites and Passions, and
since sensuality indulges, and does raise and heat them: since the whole design
of Christianity, is to mortify the deeds of the Body, those our members upon
earth, that Body of Sin and Death; and since Voluptuousness quickens, pampers
and does make them vigorous; lastly, since the Doctrines and the Influences of
the Cross of Christ do aim at Crucifying the flesh with its Affections and
Lusts, and Luxuries do gorge and make them ramping, sure the Enmity is too
apparent to be proved.

It is the business of Religion to instruct and frame men into reasonable
Creatures: God himself chose to die upon the Cross that we might live like Men
here, and then afterward die into Sons of God, and become equal to the Angels.

He suffered on the Tree, that we might be renewed into that constitution which
the Tree of Knowledge did disorder and debauch. Before Man a^e of that, his
lower Soul was in perfect subordination to his mind, and every motion of his
appetite did attend the dictates of his Reason, and obey them with that
resignation and ready willingness which our outward faculties do execute the
Wills commands with; then any thing, however grateful to the senses, was no
otherwise desired than as it served the regular and proper ends and uses of his
making; there was a rational harmony in all the tendencies of all his parts,
and that directed, modulated by the rules and hand of God that made them: In
fine, then Grace was Nature, Virtue Constitution.

Now to reduce us to this state as near as possible is the business of Religion
(as it had been in some kind the attempt also of Philosophy.) But this it can
in no degree effect, but as it does again establish the subordination of the
sensual to the reasonable part within us: That is, till by denying
satisfactions to the Appetite (which is now irregular and disorderly in its
desires) we have taught it how to want them, and to be content without them,
and by that means have subdued its inclinations; or by taking down the Body
have abated of its powers and its provocations; and where it is stubborn,
heady, and rebellious, there by cutting off provisions from the flesh, and by
sharp methods vanquished and reduced it into a condition of Obedience; and
(whenever that is also necessary) weakens so that insolent untamed part of our
selves, that we make it lie fainting, grovelling at our feet (these are the
Doctrines of the Cross, and this the method of its Discipline:) And withal by
those rational and divine heavenly encouragements which above all Doctrines in
the World our Christianity suggests and furnishes with infinite advantage,
have so fortified the mind that it resumes its principality, governs, and
carries on the lower Soul in its obedience to Duty easily without resistance,
as they say the higher Heaven moves the inferior Orbs along with it although
their proper tendencies are contrary: At leastwise if impressions from without
or inbred inclinations stir, raise passions, and mutinies, yet the mind keeps
so much power that they shall not beat it off, and force it from its
prosecutions of good; nor shall, unless by a surprise, engage its consent in
the pursuit of evil. This is that which Religion aims at, thus to make us men,
teach us to live according to our nature, to put Reason in the Throne, and
vindicate the Spirit from the tyranny of its own Vassal flesh.

But sensuality is most perfect opposition to this whole design; for it
renverses that subordination without which there is no possibility of Virtue as
I showed you; and it puts that whether Lust or Passion in the Throne, which
either constitution, conversation, or whatever accident, did give possession of
our inclinations to: And makes the strangest prodigy of Centaure where the
Beast is uppermost and rides the man; where the Beast is God indeed; for the
sensual man acknowledges no other God but his own belly, so S. Paul does
character him here. And truly if we look on the attendances, and careful
services he gives it, and how studiously and wholly he does consecrate himself
to please it, one would think it most impossible he should have any other God:
but if we number the drink offerings, and meat offerings, the whole Hecatombs
he gives it, and whereas other Deities had only some peculiar appropriate
Creatures for their Sacrifices, how this Votary rifles the Universe, goes
through the whole latitude of beings for Oblations, one would think he did
out^number all the Heathen Legions in his Gods; and yet all this is only for
his Belly. Now he that deifies his Appetite, and that is so attent and so
sollicitous in its service, he that sets up such an Antigod as this to Christ,
appears a scornful insolent Enemy to Him, his Cross and his Religion, near the
state of those men whom the Wiseman couples with the sensual, persons of an
impudent mind, the very disposition of those Enemies of the Cross of Christ
whom S. Paul brings up in the second place,

Those that glory in their shame.

Amongst the uses of the Cross of Christ, one chiefly meant, was by the
ignominy of that most accursed infamous punishment to represent the vileness of
Iniquity; to which shame and confusion were so due, that there were to be
Contumelies as well as Agonies in the Death that was to expiate it; And it
seems not sufficient that the Blood of God be shed for it, but that Blood must
be stained too with the imputation of a Malefactor; Christ was to suffer the
insulting scorns and vilifyings of his Crucifiers, his Honor must be
sacrificed as well as his Life, Barabbas must be preferred even before that
Pers^n of the Trinity to whom sin was to be imputed, and who was to bear the
just shame of it, such infinite debasement and contempt being a most essential
ingredient in the wages of Iniquity, of which this Cross of Christ was the
express.

And then how is it possible for men to wage a more professed hostility against
the Cross of Christ, than by endeavoring to put Reputation on the thing on
which that Cross was set to throw Disgrace? by raising Trophies to themselves
for that which raised a Gibbet to their Savior? giving themselves a value for
the thing which has such infinite diminution in it, that it made the Son of
God esteemed worse than Barabbas.

These men are too successful Enemies of the Cross that thus triumph over it,
and when it was erected as an Ensign to display the vileness of iniquity, and
to shame sin out of the lives of mankind, vindicate and rescue sin from that
contempt, and throw the Cross and shame upon Religion it self; while they exult
in their commissions as in commendable things, and too truly verifying the
Apostles aggravations against wilful Sinners, Crucify to themselves the Son of
God afresh and put him to an open shame, while they put scorns on that contempt
he suffered: For the Agonies and Contumelies he endured on that account of sin
must needs be most ridiculous to them who count Sin gay and Honorable. Thus
they trample and insult upon his Passion, thus tread underfoot the Son of God
even on his Cross, and upon that footstool they exalt themselves by putting sin
in countenance and credit with the Age* For it is plain it is so when men once
can glory in it* For our actions raise a glorying in us only in relation to
the sentiments of others, that growing from a confidence of having praise and
value for them in the World. So that they must assure themselves that most men
or the most considerable will applaud their Vices; otherwise they could not
glory in them, but would be ashamed. And such a judgment we may safely pass
upon an Age or Nation, where great Crimes not only have impunity but
Reputation; and men glory in them. Had it been so in the Heathen World when
Christ and his Cross first appeared there, Christianity had wanted one of its
convincing pleas. Tertullian in his Apology for our Religion to them that
blasted it with all imaginable imputations of Impiety, discourses thus:

Omne malum out timore out pudore Natura perfudit: Te^tul. Apolog. c. 1.
Nature has dashed every Vice with fear or shame; all Malefactors labor to
lie hid, and if they are laid hold upon they tremble, and deny when they are
accused, hardly confess it to the Rack; and when they are found guilty they
bewail, upbraid themselves, and aggravate confessions of their Crimes.
Christianus vero quid simile? But what does the Christian like this? None of us
is ashamed of his Religion, or repents, except it be because he was not sooner
of it: If he be branded for it he rerejoyceth, if you accuse him of it he does
own it, triumphs in it; if he be condemned for it he calls his Execution his
Martyrdom, his sufferings his Crown. Quid hoc mali est quod naturalia mali non
habet? Now what strange kind of impiety is this that has none of the natural
affections of it? not the shame nor fear, tergiversations or repentance, or
deplorings of it? Quid hoc mali est cujus reus gaudet, cujus accusatio votum
est, and poena faelicitas? What a kind of evil's this, which he that is found
guilty of is glad? to be accused of it is his ambition? to suffer for it is his
happiness?

Alas, the World has taught Vice now adays to use this plea with a much
greater confidence, and he that would apply this argument to our experiences
might plead thus for the Religion of sin. For now they are but piteous puisny
sinners who feel those things which in Tertullians days were natural and
essential to sin, to blush, and be ashamed, and have regrets. Men do not only
own it as those primitive persons did their Christianity, but they outvie the
Martyrs heats; for they accuse themselves, and boast of their performances in
Villainy, yea falsity, belie themselves in sin, and usurp Vice, steal the
glorious Reputation of exceeding sinfulness, as if the impiety were meritorious.

And truly as that Christian Confidence and Magnanimity brought in the World as
Proselytes to the Cross, so this other confidence brings Sholes of Votaries to
Vice: For when once there is no need to be ashamed of it, there are but very
few but will venture to commit it. And indeed this sort of men do manage their
hostility so dexterously, as to use those very Weapons Christianity was
successful with, against it self. 'Twas by a discipline of shame (for that was
the great strength of the Church Censures) that our Religion did at first
prevail almost to the exterminating Vice out of the World: The temporal Sword
was never so victorious as this weapon of our Spiritual Warfare was, which yet
in those times drew no blood, unless it were into the face, in blushes. But
since men have found or made pretexts to glory in iniquity, and several Crimes
are become honorable; Virtues are dressed up as mean, poor spirited, sneaking
qualities; some look melancholic, sad, are hypocondriack, some pedantick, some
unmanly, some irrational, and worse; so that men are now ashamed of Duty; it is
a disparagement to own the doing it: Thus they have as it were excommunicated
Religion. It is accounted a contemptible, or at best foolish thing; which is
the very sentence of the third sort of Enemies the Wise men of this World,
those (...) that mind earthly things (the fourth sort) in which all their
wisdom lies. Which two last sorts of Enemies I shall attaque together.

The Cross of Christ amongst its other ends was set to be an instrument whereby
the World is to be Crucified to us, Gal. vi. 14.
and we unto the World; to be the means whereby we are enabled to prevail upon
and overcome our worldly lusts and inclinations; and to slight, yea and detest
all the temptations of its Wealth, Delights, and Heights, when they attempt to
draw us into sin or take us off from Duty. Now to this it works by these three
steps.

First, showing us the Author and the finisher of our Faith nailed himself to
that Cross; his joints racked on it, his whole Body stripped, and nothing else
but Vinegar and bitter potions allowed his thirst: Matthew. xvi. 24.
and thus convincing us that if we will be his Disciples we must take up his
Cross and follow him, at leastwise we must have preparedness of mind to take it
up when ever it is fixed to Duty; to renounce all profits, honors, and
delights of this World that are not consistent with our Christian profession:
This is the Doctrine of the Cross of Christ; it being otherwise impossible to
to be the Disciples of a Crucified Master. And when this great Captain of our
Salvation was himself consecrated by his sufferings, and had for his Standard
his own Body lifted up upon the Cross, we that are listed under him, and with
that very badg the Cross too; crucis Consecranei, Votaries and fellow Soldiers
of that Order, if we shall avoid our Duty when it is attended with a Cross, or
straightened any ways, and the provisions of this World are cut off from it, and
betake our selves rather to the contents of Earth; we do not only shamefully
fly from our Colors; Fugitive, and Cowards, Poltrons in the Spiritual Warfare;
but are Renegadoes, false and traitors to our selves too, such as basely ran
away not only from our Officer, but from Salvation, which he is the Captain
of; and which we cannot possibly attain, except we be resolved to follow him,
and charge through whatsoever disadvantages to attend Religion, vanquishing all
those temptations with which the World assaults us in our course to Duty. Thus
the Cross of Christ first shows us the necessity we have to renounce and
Crucify the World.

But to encourage and enable us to do so, it does also show us

Secondly, The certainty of a good issue in the doing it, assures us, that
those who deny themselves forbidden satisfactions here, that will be virtuous
maugre all the baits and threats of Earth, will embrace Duty when it is laden
with a Cross, although so heavy as to crush out life, and kill the body;
assures us that those lose not, but exchange their lives, shall save their
Souls, and that there is another World wherein their losses shall be made up to
them, and repaired with all advantage. To the truth of this the Cross of Christ
is a most pregnant and infallible testimony. For as by multitudes of Miracles
Christ sought to satisfy the World that he was sent from God to promise all
this, and justified his Power to perform it by experiment, raising some up from
the dead; so when they said he did his Miracles by Beelzebub, he justified it
^urther with his Life; affirming that he was the Son of God (no it is impossible
but he must know whether he were or no) and consequently sent and able to do
all he promised, and resolved to do it also for our more assurance in himself,
that he would raise himself up from the dead within three days; and saying this
when he was sure he should be Crucified for saying so, and sure that if he did
not do according to his words, he must within three days appear a mere Impostor
to the world, and his Religion never be received.

Now it is impossible for him that must needs know whether all this were true or
no to give a greater testimony to it than his Life. For this that Blood and
Water that flowed from his wounded side upon Cross, which did assure his Death,
is justly said to bear witness to his being the Son of God, and consequently to
the truth of all this, equal to the testimony of the Spirit (whether that which
the Spirit gave when he came from Heaven down upon him in his Baptism, or the
testimony which he gave by Miracle; 1 John v. 8.
) for there are three that bear witness upon Earth, the Spirit, the Water and
the Blood. Thus by his Death Christ did bring Life and Immortality to light:
his choosing to lay down his own life for asserting of the truth of all this,
was as great an argument to prove it as his raising others from the dead: and
Lazarus's empty Monument, and walking Grave-cloaths were not better evidence
than this Cross of Christ.

4. Once more, this Cross not only proves the certainty of a future state, but
does demonstrate the advantage of it; and assures us that it is infinitely much
more eligible to have our portion in the life to come than in this life: That
to part with every thing that is desirable in this World rather than to fail
of those joys that are laid up in the other, that to be poor here or to be a
spoil, to renounce or to disperse my wealth, that so I may lay up treasures for
my self in Heaven, and may be rich to God; never to taste any one of these
puddle transient delights, rather than to be put from that right hand where
there are pleasures for evermore; to be thrown down from every height on Earth,
if so I may ascent those everlasting Hills, and Mount Sion that is above; that
this is beyond all proportion the wisest course it does demonstrate; since it
shows us him who is the Son of God, who did create all these advantages of
Earth, and prepare those in Heaven, and does therefore know them both: Who also
is the Wisdom of the Father, Heb. xii. 2.
and does therefore know to value them, yet for the joys that were set before
him choosing to endure the Cross and despising the shame. On that Beam he
weighed them, and by that his choice declared the Pomps of this World far too
light for that exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; 2 Cor. iv. 17.
that the whole earth was but as the dust upon the Balance and despised it,
and to make us do so, is both the Design and direct influence of the Cross of
Christ.

But as at first the Wise men of this World did count the Preaching of the
Cross mere folly, 1 Cor. i. 18, 19, 21, 23.
to give up themselves to the belief and the obedience of a man that was most
infamously Crucified, and for the sake of such an one to renounce all the
satisfactions, suffer all the dire things of this Life, and in lieu of all this
only expect some after Blessednesses and Salvations from a man that they
thought could not save himself, seemed to them most ridiculous: So truly it
does still appear so to the carnal reasonings of that sort of men, who have the
same objections to the Cross of Christ, as it would Crucify the World to them,
and them to it; as it would strip them of all present rich contents, and give
them certain evils, with some promises of after good things, which they have no
taste for, nor assurance of.

Now this being in their account folly, then the contrary to this they must
think Wisdom: as it is indeed the Wisdom of this World; which Wisdom since it
does design no further than this World, and has no higher ends than Earth and
its Felicities, it must needs put men upon minding the acquist and the
enjoyment of these Earthly things, for that is only to pursue and to atchieve
their ends, to catch at and lay hold on their felicity; and accordingly we see
it does immerse them wholly in those cares. So that it is no wonder if their
God and Religion can get no attendance from them, it being most impossible they
should, when Mammon has engaged them in the superstitious services of
Idolatry; and when they sacrifice their whole selves to pleasure and make their
bodies the burnt offerings of their Lusts, and when Ambition, even while it
makes them stretch and climb and mount, causes them also to fall low,
prostrate, make their temper, nature stoop, lie down to every humor, and to
every Vice they think themselves concerned to court and please.

And though a man would think these so great boundless cares are very vain and
foolish upon several accounts; for common sense as well as Scripture does
assure us that this life and the Contents of it do not consist in the abundance
of the things that we possess; Luke xii. 15.
that it is all one whether my draught come out of a small Bottle or an
Hogshead; the one of these indeed may serve excess, and sickness better, but
the other serves my Appetite as well; the one may drown my Virtue, but the
other quenches thirst alike. And every days experience also does convince us,
that the least cross accident, pain or affliction on our persons or some other
that is seated near our hearts, or the least vexation or cross passion will so
sour all those advantages, that we cannot possibly enjoy them while we have
them; sickness makes the richest plenty only a more nauseous trouble, a more
costly loathing; then the poorest Soul that is in health is that great rich
man's envy.

And there is no man also but does see so far into futurity as to satisfy
himself that he shall die, and then the shadow of Death will cloud and put out
all these Glories. And universal Reason also does tell every man that to deny
himself or want his present satisfactions of this helpless dying kind, and
suffer present evils, is in prudence to be chosen for avoiding of a future evil
or atchieving of a good to come which do transcend those other infinitely, and
to all Eternity continue. Sure as no man pities the poor Infant in the Womb
because he lies imbrued in Blood, has no inheritance there at all, is
fettered, confined as it were in that dark Cell; if he be to be born to an
Estate, to live a full age here in gaiety of mind, and health of body, in
Reputation, and all plenty of delights, we never are concerned or troubled at
his other nine months Dungeon. So if this life be to the next as the Womb is to
this; and if our hopes be no more on the Earth than in the Belly; and we have
no inheritance or abiding place here, as we had not there; although the waters
of affliction, and to be in our blood should be as natural to us as to the
Child, yet if we thus press forward to the other birth, to be delivered into
immortality of joys, this state were not to be lamented, but endeavored for
with all our powers. Lastly, the same reason does assure us, that if those
futurities (which are most certain) were but only possible, yet to part with
every thing, and suffer any thing here to prevent miscarriage in relation to
those two Eternities is certainly the safest course, and then by consequence
the wisest. And this does appear a truth to all men when they go to die: And if
it be the truth then, it is always so.

Yet notwithstanding all this, he that minds these earthly things, whose heart
is set upon them, whose desires the World serves, provides to satisfy every
imagination of delight: His heart is so entangled in affections to them, and in
prejudices for them, and has so imbibed the impressions of them, that he has
no taste for any other, and by consequence no satisfying notions of them: And
if he has not then it is not possible that he should really and from his
heart, out of conviction and inward sense value these beyond the earthly ones:
and it is plain we see he does not; and if he do not, to deprive himself of all
the sweet contentments of his life, and tear out his own bowels that yearn
after them, and cling to them; and instead of those embrace a Cross, and do
this for things which he cannot value more, and counts uncertain, he must needs
think a mad folly: Consequently to contrive and seize the present to the best
most plentiful advantage is the wisest course; and therefore they that by
whatever arts do thrive, advance themselves, live high and in delights, they
are Wise men; because they do attain their ends, by means appropriate to those
ends.

And now the enmity betwixt the Cross of Christ and the wisdom of the World
appears: first, their designs are most directly opposite; the cross designs to
take us up from earth and from its satisfactions, which have also thorns and
briars in them, that Earths Curse, things that pierce and wound as fatally as
the Nails and Thorns and other cruelties of Christ's Cross; and to lift us
toward Heaven, to direct our hearts and our affections thither as our
harbingers, to take possession for us of those joys the Cross did purchase for
us, but no Cross can ever trouble. But the Wisdom of this World designs to lay
out all its cares and its contrivances within this World, minds nothing else
but earthly things, and does not lift an eye or thought to any other.

Secondly, Their Principles wage war: For earthly good things being the design,
the main end of this worldly wisdom, consequently that does justify all
courses without which men cannot gain those ends, by which they do, though they
be never so unlawful by the Rules of that which we call Virtue and Religion; it
does justify, I say, all such as prudent. But the Principles of the Doctrines
of the Cross of Christ are positive, that we must renounce all earthly
satisfactions, when they cannot be enjoyed without trangressing Christ's
Commands, and embrace Duty even when it executes it self upon us.

But Thirdly, there is no enmity so fatal to the Cross of Christ as is the
practice of those men who minding Earthly things, and all their wisdom lying as
to them, they therefore think themselves concerned to represent the Doctrines
of the Cross, which does so contradict their wisdom, as mere madness, and the
Cross it self as the Ensign of folly; And accordingly they do, treat it en
ridicul; and make the proper Doctrines of it, the strict duties of Religion,
matter for their jests, and bitter scoffs: They character Religion as a worship
that befits a God whose shape the Primitive persecutors painted Christ in,
Tertul. Apol. c. 16.
Deus Onochaetes, as if Christianity were proper Homage only to an Asses
person, Tertul. ad Not. c. 11. Ibid.
as Tertullian words it; And the Votaries transformed by this their service and
made like the God they worship, were what they were called then Asinarii
creatures only fit for burden, to bear, what they magnify, a Cross and
scorns. No persecutions are so mortal as those that Murder the reputation of a
thing or person; not so much because when that is fallen once then they cannot
hope to stand, as because those murder after death, and poison memory, killing
to immortality. They were much more kind to Religion and more innocent that
clothed the Christians in the skins of Bears and Tigers, that so they might be
worried into Martyrdom; Than they that cloth their Christianity in fools Coat,
that so it may be laughed to death, go out in ignominy and into contempt. If to
sport with things of sacred and Eternal consequence were to be forgiven, yet to
do it with the Cross of Christ: Thus to set that out as foolishness which is
the greatest mystery the Divine wisdom has contrived to make mercy and truth
meet together, righteousness and peace kiss each other, to make sin be
punished, yet the Sinner pardoned: Thus to play and sin upon those dire
expresses of Gods indignation against sin, are things of such a sad and
dangerous concern, that S. Paul could not give a caution against them but with
tears, For many walk, says he, of whom I have told you often and now tell you
even weeping, etc. Which calls me to my last Consideration.

Indeed the Cross of Christ does represent Almighty God in so severe a shape,
and gives the lineaments of so fierce displeasures against sin, as do exceed
all comprehension. There was a passion in Christ's Prayer to prevent his
Passion, when he deprecated it with strong cries and tears, yea when his whole
body wept tears as of blood to deprecate it; and yet he cried more dreadfully
when he did suffer it; The Nails that bored his Hands, the Spear that pierced
his Heart and made out-lets for his Blood and Spirits, did not wound him as,
that sting of death and torments, sin did, which made out-lets for God to
forsake him, and which drove away the Lord that was himself out of him. Neither
did his God forsake him only, but his most Almighty attributes were engaged
against him: Gods Holiness and Justice were resolved to make Christ an example
of the sad demerit of Iniquity, and his hatred of it: Demerit so great, as was
valuable with the everlasting punishment of the World, fallen Angels and fallen
Men; for to that did it make them liable. Now that God might appear to hate it
at the rate of its deservings, it was very necessary that it should be
punished, if not by the execution of that sentence on Mankind as on the Devils,
yet by something that might be proportionable to it, so to let us see the
measures God abhors it by, to what degrees the Lord is just and holy by those
torments, torments answerable to those attributes.

Now truly when we do reflect on this we cannot wonder if the Sinner be an
enemy to the Cross, and hate the prospect of it, which does give him such a
perfect copy of his expectations, when our Saviors draught which he so
trembled at shall be the everlasting portion of his Cup: For if God did so
plague the imputation of Iniquity, how will he torment the wilful and
impenitent commission of it.

But then when we consider those torments were the satisfaction for the sins of
man, methinks the Sinner should be otherwise affected to them: Christ by
bearing the Cross gave God such satisfaction, as did move him in consideration
thereof to dispense with that strict Law, which having broken we were forfeit
to eternal Death, and to publish an act of Grace whereby he does admit all to
pardon of sins past, and to a right to everlasting Life that will believe on
him, forsake their sins and live true Christians. John i. 36.
He there appears the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, Rev.
xiii. 8. Heb. ix. 26.
for that he does as being a Lamb slain, then he was our Sacrifice, and that
Cross the Altar. And the humbled Sinner that repents (for, notwithstanding
satisfaction, God will not accept a Sinner that goes on; by all those Agonies
his holiness would not be justified, if when he had forsaken and tormented his
own Son for taking sin upon him, he should yet receive into his favor and his
Heaven, Sinners that will not let go, but will retain their sins: but the
penitent) may plead this expiation: Lo here I poor Soul prostrate at the
footstool of the Cross lay hold upon the Altar, here is my Sacrifice on which my
fins are to be charged, and not on me, although so foul I am, I cannot pour out
tears sufficient to cleanse me, yet behold Lord, and see if there ever were any
Sorrow like the sorrow of thy Son wherewith thou did afflict him for these
sins of mine: And here is Blood also, his Blood to wash me in: and that Blood
is within the Vail too now, and that my Offering taken from the Cross up to thy
Throne, thou have accepted it, and can not refuse it now my Advocate does
plead it, and claims for me the advantage of the Cross.

Now that men should be Enemies to this, and when they are forfeit to eternal
Ruin, hate that* which is to redeem the forfeiture; that they should trample
on the Cross whereon their satisfactions were wrought; tread down the Altar
which they have but to lay hold on and be safe; wage war with, beat off, and
pursue a Lamb, that Lamb of God that comes to take away their sins: and make a
spoil and slaughter of their Sacrifice; hostilely spill upon the ground that
Blood, that was appointed for their Blood upon the Altar, for their blood of
sprinkling, and was to appear in Heaven for them. If men resolve to be on terms
of Duel with their God, and scorn that Satisfaction shall be made for them by
any other way than by defiance; and although their God do make the
satisfactions for them to himself, yet not endure it, but choose quarrel rather;
this is so perverse and fatal an hostility as no tears are sufficient to bewail.

But possibly men slight these satisfactions because some terms are put upon
them which they know not how to comport with; the merits of the Cross must not
be accounted to them but upon conditions which they are not able to perform;
they are required to master all their wicked Customs, their untamed appetites,
and settled habits, to keep under their Concupiscence, to calm their
inclinations and their passions: Now on such severe articles friendship with
the Cross they think is too hard bought.

But therefore Secondly, the Cross was the consideration upon which Grace is
o^^er'd us, whereby we are enabled to perform all this; the power to will and
strength to do, all necessary aids from Heaven are granted to us as Christ
merited them for us by his Sufferings; and that Blood he shed upon the Cross it
is the Fountain, it is the Ocean of all Grace: And if temptations storm thee,
lay hold on that Cross, it is the Anchor of Salvation thou have hold on; tell
thy God although thou art not able to resist and stand, thou have the price of
strength, that which did purchase it was paid down for thee on the Cross, and
is at his right hand, he has it: give me therefore grace for it, let me have
the value of that Blood, the Blood of God in spiritual succors, which may make
me able to resist thy Enemies, and do thy will. Now God will never be unjust to
deny any man those aids that were so dearly purchased for him, and for which he
has received the price.

And then that men should be Enemies of the Cross which is their Magazine of
strength against their Enemies! As men that do resist the having Grace, lest it
should change their inclinations! as men that will not be empowered against
Vice, but will oppose the Aids of Heaven, fight against the succors that are
given them, and destroy their own forces, lest with them they should be able to
encounter sin and overcome it! Thus wilfully to run against and charge their
Anchor of Salvation; to poison to themselves the Fountain the whole Ocean of
their graces, is the state of them only that do resolve and that had rather
perish.

Once more, on that Cross was wrought a reconciliation betwixt God and Man; and
that upon such terms of honor to us Men, that God does seem to condescend as
far in this his Treaty, as in coming down from Godhead into Flesh; there is
Exinanition in his yieldings and compliance. He sent his Son to move us to be
reconciled, as if he did acknowledge us the offended party; and as if he meant
to give us satisfaction, in his Blood, he dies upon the Cross to effect that
Reconciliation. When our Savior would magnify a Love he thus expresses it,
John xv. 13.
Greater love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his
friend: Romans v. 8, 10.
But behold here is greater love, for Christ commended his love to us in that
when we were Enemies he died for us, only out of hopes to make us friends;
Cant. viii. 6.
Love strong as doath indeed, that brought him to the Grave who could not die.
Ibid. 70.
(...), affection violent as Hell, that brought God to (...), and made him
descend to Hell: For so low he stooped; thus he humbled himself to persuade us
to be reconciled, and to prevail with us to be at peace with God.

And is a Reconciliation with the Lord so hateful to us, that we will be
Enemies to the Cross that works it? are we so assured of worsting God Almighty,
that we will resist whatever makes toward a peace with him? are the Sinners
expectations so tempting? do we look for such advantage from the Covenant we
have made with Death, and the agreement we are at with Hell, that we will have
the League defensive and offensive? will be foes to their foes? and will have
War with God because he is their Enemy? are we thus resolved to be revenged
upon the Triumphs of the Cross? Col. ii. 15.
and because our Savior spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphing over
them on it; therefore set our selves against that Trophee of his Victories over
our friends the Devil and his Fiends? is the love of Christ so injurious to us
that we will be Enemies to the Expresses of it? and when his affection threw
him down so low for our sakes, humbled him to Hell to beg and to procure our
friendship, will we go to trample on him there rather than not go thither, and
rather than we will not be for ever there?

W^^ (...) for this! O blessed Savior, that thou did pray against thy Cup
(...) earnestly, because of Man's ungrateful (...) to it^ because th^^ ^ast to
(...) God Almighties Indignation in it, and the Si^^ers hatred for it? because
it was the Cup of the Lords (...), and (...) squeezed into it all the d^egs of
his Wrath, and (...) into it? and when the one will make thee drink it up, the
(...) it in thy face? was it not because thou were to take a Cross up which
thou could not bear the Torments of, and (...) will not endure the blessings
of? but most despitefully treads down that (...) thou art sinking under it
laden with their weight? this is, alas, a state so sad that neither S. Paul's
tears, nor Christ's blood has sufficient compassion for.

And yet though one wept the other dyed for them, these men have neither tears
nor pity for themselves. Yet one would think this were a subject worthy of
them: It Is storyed of Xerxes, that when he took a view of his vast Army which
he went to Conquer Greece with (an Army such as the Sun never saw, and it could
scarce see that, which the Historian says did Coelo minitari tenebras, as it
covered and drank up the Sea, and took up and devoured the Earth, so it did
seem to darken Heaven too: An Army which consisted, says Herodotus, when
mustered at Thermopylae, of Five Millions, Two Hundred Eighty Three Thousand,
Two Hundred and Twenty Men, besides Laundresses, Harlots, and Horses; and it
had Twelve Hundred Galleys for Sea Fight, besides Twenty Hundred Ships for
carriage.) When upon this view he had for a while gloryed in his happiness to
behold and Gommand so many Nations, and so Powerful a Fleet and Army:
notwithstanding on a sudden he burst into tears on this Consideration, that in
one Hundred years there should not one survive of that great mavelous
multitude: (And truly through his folly in one hundred weeks scarce any one but
was the prey of Enemies, and Death and Infamy.) But it is a sadder Contemplation
to reflect on the far greater Army of the Enemies of the Cross, who, if they do
not end that quarrel, will in fewer years be all dead and in Hell. I know not
whether such a sad reflection called out S. Paul's tears, but sure I am it does
deserve their own: And there is nothing will avail in their behalf without
their tears. It may be tears are piteous things for such brave Sinners: But
then what will these insulting Enemies of the Cross do, when they shall see
that Sign of the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven? When this Cross
shall usher in the great Assize? When they shall look on him that they have
pierced and Crucified upon it? And when that Crucified offended Enemy shall
come there to be their Judge? That takes himself to be offended much more in
his kindness, than his Person; and will judge this more severely that we would
not let his Cross and Passion do us any good, than that we Crucified him on it.

Let us then be cautioned in the fear of God to be no longer Enemies to that
which is to reconcile our judge to us. If we have his Friendship on the Cross,
we may be sure to have it on the ^udgment Seat. He that on the Cross parted
with Godhead and with Life for us, will on the Bench adjudge us that
Inheritance which his Cross did purchase for us. He sits there to pronounce
happiness upon all faithful (...) Christians, to proclaim Come ye blessed of my
Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.

To which, etc.

SERMON XV. WHITE HALL. November. 15. 1668.
MARK X. 15. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of
God as a little Child, he shall not enter therein.
THE Kingdom of God, especially as it is concerns the forepart of the Text,
signifies nothing else but that of the Messiah, or in one word, Christianity;
and that both as to the profession and the practice, the Doctrine and the life
of it: For so the (...), by which Theophylact expounds the words, the Preaching
of the Doctrine is it self called the Kingdom of God by our Savior, Mat. 21.
43. It Is not delivering of a message only in weak empty words, it is
Jurisdiction and exercise of Sovereignty: And the Commission that authorized to
it was the delegation of the Powers of Omnipotence: Mat. 28. 18. 19.
All Power, says our Lord, is given to me both in Heaven and in Earth, And
(which the Syriack adds in that place also) Joh. 20. 21.
as my Father sent me, so send I you, go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
teaching them to observe whatsoever I have Commanded you. As if this were
execution of the greatest and most Kingly Power, and every Doctrine had the
force of Proclamation, every denunciation were Sentence; as it will be
certainly to them that do not give obedience to it.

Which obedience is Secondly, and that most properly entitled the Kingdom of
God; Romans 14. 17. for by that he Reigns; without this our great universal Lord
were a Prince of no Subjects, had a Kingdom but of Rebels only: So that to
receive the Kingdom of God is by the obedience of Faith to submit to the
Gospel, to receive the Doctrines of it by believing, and the Precepts by
obeying them: The duty which our Savior here directs, and which with such
severity he threatens nonperformance of, even with exclusion from that blessed
Immortality of Joys which the Kingdom of God imports, which is that sense it
bears in the last words of my Text. In which we must consider,

First, the Object both of the Duty and the Threat a Kingdom, and that the
Kingdom of God.

Secondly, our concern and duty in relation to that Kingdom we have only to
receive it. Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God.

Whatever bustl^ men are well content to make to g^t possession of any Earthly
Dignity or Power, sometimes to wage War with their Conscience and all
obligations, violate all Rights both Humane and Divine, and assault greatest
difficulties and yet greater guilts, to invade men's Crowns, and other rights,
there is no such need in this; we have no more to do but let this Kingdom come,
and not resist the having it. For therefore also,

Thirdly, the manner we are by our Savior here prescribed to receive this
Kingdom in is, as a little Child. Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of
God as a little Child, as one that cannot stand against the power of a Kingdom
when it comes; that has not strength nor malice, neither force nor will to
oppose; which they that do must needs keep themselves out of it; Which is,

Fourthly, the thing threatened, they shall not enter therein; there being
neither reason, nor indeed a possibility men should possess that which they
will not receive.

Lastly, Christ's asseveration is added to all this, Verily I say unto you
whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, h^ shall not
enter therein.

But because the main thing Christ intended in the Text (which he so often
repeated upon several occasions) was by the significative emblem of a little
Child, visibly to inform us of some dispositions that are absolutely necessary
to the entertaining Christianity, either in our minds by Faith, or in our lives
by practice; I shall therefore wholly attend that design of his in the words,
and handle them particularly as they seem here to be spoken in relation to the
Doctrine of it. This being most of use now in an Age when men not only tear
Religion with disputes, but aim to baffle it with reproaches quite out of the
World: Now against such the Text is positive, Whosoever shall not receive the
Kingdom of God, the Doctrine of Christianity as a little Child, be cannot enter
therein, neither into the possession of the Promises of Christianity, nor
indeed into the profession of it.

And here I need not labor much to find that in a Child which Christ requires
of those that come to be Disciples in Religion; for it is plain that Children
being impotent, unable to sustain or to direct themselves, they give themselves
up to the aids and the directions of others, those especially whom they are
committed to, and with whose cares of them they are acquainted; to whose
guidance they resign themselves entirely, laying hold on them in any dangerous
appearance, and not trusting to themselves at all: And when their Age first
makes them capable of having any thing infused into them, being empty and
unseason'd Vessels they will easily receive all and sincerely without taint:
And being neither filled beforehand with prejudicate opinions, nor with windy
vain conceits of their own skill or knowledge, they must needs take in without
any let (...) hindrance whatever is infused, and submit themselves to be
directed wholly by their teachers, without contradiction or dispute, for they
Judge not, nor examine, but receive. Now such a resignation seems the proper
disposition which our Savior expects in a Disciple. It is plain that his
pretended Vicar and that Church expect it, that men shall submit their Faith
entirely to the Church, believe whatever she proposes as revealed by God
merely on that account as she proposes it, for otherwise it is not a right
faith: Yea she requires that men give their assent to the determinations of her
head, the Pope, in matters of fact also, where they are as competent to Judge
as he; and though with all their industry, and using the same means, they
cannot find the fact to be as he determins, yet they are obliged in conscience
to that superior to depart from their own Judgment, and to yield and sign their
assent to his determinations. Witness the matter of Jansenius. Yea their great
Cardinal is positive that Si Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibe^do
virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, virtutes malas, nisi
vellet contra conscientiam peccare. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 5. sect.
ultima.
If the Pope could err so far as to call evil good, good evil, to prohibit
virtues or command vices, the Church were bound in conscience to believe those
vices good and honest, and those virtues evil. So far he.

Indeed if that Church be the Mother and Nurse of all Christians, it is from her
breasts only they must seek the sincere Milk of the word: Now that she is so,
they must take her word, as Children do their Parents words that they are so.
And indeed this is properly to receive the Doctrine as a little Child, not
judge, nor reason, not examine, but believe it. And such legendary doctrines as
well as Histories, which they deliver are most fit to be received by such as
Children. Yet as if this had been the proper method among Christians always, in
S. Austin's time we find the Manichees derided Christianity, that discipline of
Faith because by Irridere Catholicae Fidei disciplinam, quod juberentur homines
credere, non autem quid esset verum certissima ratione docerentur. l. 1.
Retract. c. 14.
that men were commanded to believe and were not taught how to distinguish
truth from falsehood by clear reason, and again, that it De util. cred. c. 1.
ante Fidem nobis quam rationem imperari.
requires us to assent before we have a reason for it. And long before that
Origin. adv. Celsum. l. 1. p. 8. editio Cantabrig, C. 1.
Celsus did advise the Christians to receive no doctrines but on the account of
reason, credulity being the inlet to deceit, saying, they that without grounds
believe, are like those that admire and ^e satisfied with juglers, and take
appearances and sleight of hand for truth, adding many of the Christians,
neither would receive, nor give a reason of their faith but used to say (...),
do not you examine, but believe, it is your faith shall save you; and as if from
the beginning it were so we cannot but have heard the story of that man that
reading Genesis where Moses says, In the beginning God created the Heaven and
the Earth. And he said let there be light and there was light, etc. Swore at
him, saying, this Barbarian only asserted boldly but proved nothing. As if
Argument and Reason never had place in the Jewish or the Christian Religion,
only those who were the in^titutors of each Religion, did deliver it; others
had no more to do but to believe it, that is, to receive it as a little Child.

Whether these reproaches, and the Oath of these known enemies may go for
proofs that it was so, I shall not now enquire. But it is certain on the other
side S. Paul requires of his new Christian 1 Cor. 14. 20.
Corinthians, that they be not Children in understanding, that they be in
malice Children, but in understanding Men. Now a Man and a Child differ not in
this, that the one has an understanding reasonable soul, and the other has
not; but in that the one cannot use his understanding or his reason, and the
other where he acts as man does: So that our Religion in requiring that we be
in understanding men, does require of us that we use our reason in it.

And since assenting to a thing as truth is an Act of the highest faculty of
the soul of man as it is properly and truly reasonable, namely as it
understands and judges, it is not possible a man should really believe a thing
unless he satisfy himself that he has reason for so doing. Yea, whether that
be true or not which many men so eagerly contend for, that the will though free
is bound, and cannot choose but will that which appears best at that time it
wills, yet it is sure that he who with his understanding, which is not free in
her apprehensions and judgments, but must necessarily embrace that which has
most evidence of truth: He I say who really assents to any proposition does
satisfy himself that he has better and more cogent reasons for that then the
contrary: And therefore it is impossible that any man can verily believe a
thing which he is thoroughly convinced is contrary to clear and evident right
reason, for he cannot have a better reason for the thing that is so; and were
it possible for any man to believe so, there could be neither grounds nor Rules
for such a ones belief; for there is nothing in the World, so false and so
absurd although he were assured it were so, but he might assent to it, for
whatever demonstrations could be offered why he should not, yet it seems he
might believe against acknowledged evident truth and reason, but this were
only wish, or fancy and imagination, not belief. And to prevent such Childish
weak credulity was the great work and care of Christ, so far is he from
requiring we should be as Children in this kind. For when he was ascended up to
heaven he gave some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, he
shed down the Holy Spirit and his gifts, that we might not be as Children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine; Ephesians. 4. 14.

First, For want of rational grounds instable in our Faith as Children are in
body, and in judgment also, taking all appearances for truths. If men were only
to believe, there must needs be as great variety of Religions as of teachers.
And though God has appointed that some Church should be as perfectly
infalliable as that of Rome pretends to be; yet since there are so many
Churches, and the true one therefore could be known no otherwise then by some
marks, there must be disquisition before Faith; and men must reason and examine
ere they can believe upon good grounds; for were they to receive Religion as a
little Child, be nursed up with the Doctrine as with milk, a Child we know may
suck infection from the poisoned breast of an unwholesom mother, or some other
person, for it knows not to distinguish; and so may be nursed to death. A soul
like theirs that is but rasa t^bula, white paper, is as fitted to receive the
mark of the beast, as the inscription of the living God, just as the first hand
shall impress. Therefore we are bid I Joh. 4. 1.
not to believe every Spirit, not every Teacher though he come with gifts,
pretend and seem to be inspired, but try them; and our Mat. 24. 24.
Savior forewarned the Jews of false Christ's that should come with signs and
wonders. Something therefore must be known first and secured, before the
understanding can be thus obliged to give up its assent; and 2 Cor. 10. 5.
Captivate every thought into obedience, as S. Paul directs. Now what that was
here to the hearers in the Text is easily collected, namely that he was the
Christ that does require it: And S. Paul expresses it in the forecited place;
where he says we must bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, to wit, of that Christ, who as he does himself profess that if he had
not done among them the works which no other had done, they had not had sin:
John, 15. 24. If his demonstrations had not convinced them it had been no fault
not to believe: So when he had made appear he was that person whom their
prophesies had pointed out, the Messiah, the Son of the living God, and this
not only his Mat. 16. 16.
Disciples had acknowledged; but the John ^. 12.
multitudes; yea, when his miracles had made one of the Pharisees confess, John
^. 2.
Rabbi we know thou art a Teacher come from God; for no man can do these
miracles, except God be with him. Then if the Mat. 19. ^.
Pharisees dispute against his Doctrine of Divorce, urge the authority of Moses
and Gods Law; and the v. 10.
Disciples press the inconveniences that will happen, If the case of Man be
such with his wife; he may answer them: He that will not receive my Doctrines
without dispute, that is to say, He that will not receive the Kingdom of God as
a little Child shall not enter therein. Luke 19. 38.
This King that comes in the name of the Lord may well determine how we shall
receive the Kingdom of God. If he propose strange precepts to our practice, it
appears that he is sent from God, and Gods commands are not to be disputed but
obeyed; if his revelations present dark unintelligible Mysteries to our faith,
his promises offer seeming impossibilities to our hope, why yet he has made
proof he comes from God; and surely we are not so insolent as to doubt that God
can discover thing above our understanding; and do things above the
comprehension of our reason. Therefore since we are as Children to all these,
it is but just we should receive them even as little Children: With a perfect
resignation of our understandings and of our whole souls. Here it is most true
what S. Austin says, De utilit. cred. c. 14.
Those are not Christians who deny that Christ is to be believed, unless there
be some other certain reason of the thing besides his saying, Si Christo etiam
credendum negant ^isi indubitata ratio reddita fuerit Christiani non sunt. For
to them that are convinced of that, it is such a reason that he is the Christ.

There is indeed no other name now under heaven, to whom we are obliged to give
such deference, for however the modern Doctrines dare assert, that Christ has
given the very same infallibility which himself had to all S. Peter's successors
as often as they speak ex Cathedra; and that in matters both of right and of
particular fact; yet not to countenance this monster by admitting combat with
it, nor to put my self into the circle which these men commit who talk of the
Authority of the Church, to which they require us to resign our Faith. I shall
not stay to rack them on that their own wheel: This I dare affirm, it is
impossible for any person or assembly to produce a delegation of authority in
more ample terms then the great Council of the Jews could show, signed both by
God and Christ. According to the sentence of the Law which they shall teach
thee, and according to the Judgment which they shall tell thee thou shall do;
thou shall not decline from the sentence which they shall show thee, to the
right hand, nor to the left, faith God, Deuteronomy. 17. 11. compared with 2 Chronicles.
19. 8, 9, 10, 11. And our Savior says, They sit in Moses Chair, all therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, Mat. 23. 2. Let them of
Rom^ produce you a better and more large commission. Yet did not this suppose
that Council was infallible either in the interpreting the Law, or in attesting
of tradition, or in judging of a Prophet, or that the Jews were blindly to give
up their assent and their obedience to their sentence; God did not mean the
people should imagine that when he prescribed a Sacrifice for expiation of their
errors in their Judgment when they found it out. Lev. 4. 13. As their own
(...). Tad. Shegagoth. c. 12. 13. V. (...) l. 3. c. ^ p. 465. Or see, Ai^sworth
upon that place of Levi^^^^.
Doctors do expound it: Therefore God supposed that they might err, and we know
that their Traditions did evacuate the Law, Mat. 23. 15. They judged and slew
true Prophets, v. 37. They declared the Messiah an impostor, Mat. 27. 63. and
blasphemer, and for that condemned him, Mat. 26. 65. and decreed what the
Apostles told them they must not obey, Act. 5. 25.

But though there be no such Authority that is absolute, over the Faith of Men
now upon Earth; yet if this Jesus did acquire such by his Works; if by the
Miracles he wrought, his raising others from the Dead, his own Death and his
Resurrection, he sufficiently justified the Divinity of his Doctrine; (And if
those Miracles were true, they were not doubt sufficient) and if those that did
pretend they were eye witnesses and ministers of all this, his Apostles and the
Seventy Disciples, and those others that accompanied him, who conversed with
him continually, and could not therefore be deceived if they profess they heard
and saw all this, and Preached it in the face of those that would have
contradicted if they could, and rather than their lives have proved all false;
yea Preached it every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word
with signs following. If they consigned that Word in Writing also which they
Preached, to be a measure and a Standard of that Doctrine to fnturity; which
Word so Preached and Written by agreeing, would in aftertimes give mutual
illustrious evidence to one another; and if any Heter ^^^^ies should at any
time creep by degrees into the Articles or the external practice of the Church,
they might he easily discovered by those Records.

And if the multitudes that heard, and saw, and did receive all this, and which
were grown extremely numerous almost in every Nation of the then known World,
while those Apostles and Disciples lived; if these delivered what they must
needs know whether 'twere true or not, delivered both that Doctrine and those
Books of it as most certain truth, by Preaching, and by Writing, and by Living
to it, and by Dying for it, and engaging their Posterity to do so; and they
also did that to all Ages; if all this, I say, be true, then it is easy to
conclude that we are to receive the Doctrine of that Jesi^, and this Book the
Records of it, with the resignation of a little Child, and absolutely to submit
our Faith to them.

But that it was thus; first as sure as any of us here, who have not seen the
thing can be, that Christianity is now professed; the Bible now received in all
the Regions round about us throughout Europe, or indeed that there are ^^ch
Regions and places, so sure we may be, for we have the testimony of the World,
that for example in the days of Dioclesian 'twas over the World professed both
with their mouths and lives; owned in despite of Spoil, of Torments, and of
Death; and they did value the Records of this Doctrine so much dearer than
their Lives or their Estates, that in prosecution of those vid. Eus^b. l. 8. c.
3.
Edicts, wherein the Christians were required to deliver up their Bibles to be
burnt, in one Month vid. Baron. Annal. ad annum. 302. number. 22. and 26.
17000, were put to death: And the Persecution lasted at that rate for ten
years time; so that in Egypt only it is said there were slain Spondanus ad
annum 302. number. 4. Severus l. 2. hist ait, Omnis ferisacro martyrum cruore
orbis infectus est.
144000, and 70000 banished. ( The Laity it seems were allowed Bibles then.) Or
put the case higher in Adrian's, or Trajan's time, who both lived within an
There were ^ut seven years betwixt the death of S. Joh. and the Persecution of
Trajan, some say but one.
Hundred years of Christ, who Martyred them 'till weariness slackned the
Execution, and they gave off only as it were that so they might cease to
persecute themselves; and we have the Plinius. Procon. Ponti. and Byth ni^.
vid. ipsius Ep. l 10. Ep. 97. Tertul. Apol. Eusebius. Ecc. hist. l. 3. c. 3^
Officers engaged attesting this, all which must needs be as notorious as the
Light.

Now Secondly, it is most impossible those so vast multitudes of every Nation
should have met together, forged a Code of Doctrines, and agreed so uniformly
in professing a Religion, and in dying for it; for we may as easily believe
that there were never any men before this Age we live in but that these began
the kind, as that those of that Age began the Christian Religion.

Thirdly, it is as impossible that their immediate Ancestors who lived in the
Apostles Age, who heard their Preaching, received their Writings, saw the
Miracles they did, if they did any, and many of them must have seen Christ also
after he was risen if it were so; yea multitudes of them were themselves
parties in the gifts of Tongues and Miracles, if there were any, and so could
not be imposed on, but must necessarily know whether they were truths or
forgeries: It is as Impossible, I say, so many should agree together to betray
all their Posterity into the profession of a Religion from which they could
look for no advantage but the certain total Ruin of themselves and their
posterity; it was not possible they could have done this if they had not
thought all this was true; and since they did know whether it were true or not,
if they thought it was true, they did know it was, and if they knew it was,
then it is certain that it was so; and these Scriptures, and the Doctrines
Christians deliver (so far as they have not varied since that time from these
Authentical Records) they have the Seal of God, Miracles to attest they come
from God.

I might have urged completion of Prophecies to prove the same. First those in
the Old Testament of the Messiah, which so eminently came to pass in Christ,
that they sufficiently clear those Books to be Divine: Next Christ's
predictions in the New, particularly those about Jerusalem, which says
Eusebius Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 7. Hist Eccl:
He that will compare with what Josephus an eyewitness and no Christian,
writes of it (or what our selves know of that Nation and that place indeed) he
must acknowledge the Divinity of his words. But enough has been said to prove
they come from God, and therefore we must so receive them as the Word of God,
with perfect resignation of our Souls, and submission of our judgments, denying
every apprehension that would start aside from and not captivate it self to
that prime truth which cannot be deceived nor lie; and renounce all discourses
Reason offers that resist such abnegation of it self and all our other
faculties, that is, receive this word of the Kingdom as a little Child.

I do not here affirm, by saying this, that our Religion does disdain, or keep
distance from the service of any of Man's faculties, for it sometimes admits
them not as Ministers only, but as Judges: It Is plain the senses were the
first, I do not say conveyance only, but, Foundation of Faith, which was built
on the first believers eyes and ears; they heard the Doctrine, saw the
Miracles, were sure they saw and heard them, and so, supposing the signs
sufficient to confirm the Doctrine to have come from God, were certain of their
truth, without any Authority of a Church to influence that faith into divine:
And S. John therefore does not only call in, and admit, and urge their
testimony, I Joh. 1. 1, 2.
That which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of Life, that declare we
unto you; But our Savior in the highest point of Faith appeals directly to
their Judgment: Joh. 20. 27.
Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand and
thrust it into my side, and be not faithless but believing: And S. Austin also
gives them the decision of a point of Doctrine which of all others now troubles
the Church most; for speaking of the Eucharist, he says, Quod ergo videtis
panis est. and calix quod vobis etiam oculi vestri renuncia^t. Aug. sermon, ad
infantes.
that which you see is Bread, and it is a Cup, it is that very thing which your
eyes tell you it is. Tertul. de Anima. c. 17.
Tertullian also long before that had appealed to them in that very cause. And
in an instance where their sentence passes, it is not strange if Reason also
take the Chair, and do pretend to Judge. And truly when the Scripture that does
call those Elements Mat. 26. 29.
Christ's Body and his Blood, does also call them after Consecration I Cor. 11.
26. 27.
Bread and Wine; and since they must be called one of them by a figure, for
they cannot be in Substance both; and since that Scripture has not told us
where the Figure lies, has not expressly said, it is this but in resemblance,
that in Substance: Here if Reason that has Principles by which to judge of
Bodies, which are exposed to all the notices and trials of our several
faculties, and to which a Trope is not a stranger, it can judge of figurative
speeches; when it therefore finds if it admit the figure in that form This is
my Body, (...)
It Is but just the same which was in the Jews Sacrament the Paschal Lamb: which
they called the Body of the Passover, though it were but the memorial, Talm.
Baby. tit. Pesachim. c. 10. sec. 3. Mai^on. Yad. titulo (...) c. 8. sec. 7.
a figure which was always usual in Sacraments, and is indeed essential to
Sacraments: And which is used in all things that are given by exhibitive signs.
But if it should resolve it to be Bread and Wine only in a figure, besides a
most impossible acknowledged Consequence, that a man can be nourisht by them,
which the Romanists dare not deny; nor yet dare grant that men can feed upon a
trope, be nourish't with a figure; besides this, if reason shall resolve that,
it must judge against all Rules it has of judging by, and judge in
contradiction to known Principles, and trample on all Laws of sense and
understanding, which (especially when the Scripture has no where defined
expressly) must be most unreasonable; yea most impossible, to judge that true
(that is to say, believe that thing) which it sees is most irreconcilable with
known truths. Here therefore Reason is not insolent if it give verdict by its
proper evidences; men are not bound to swallow contradictions as they do the
Wafer, or receive as a little Child, that discerns the Lords Body, no more then
it does the repugnancies that are consequent to their Hypothesis concerning it.

Or to make another instance, when the Scripture says, God is a Spirit, yet
does also give him hands, and eyes, and ears, and wings, and these of strange
prodigious dimensions; neither tells us which of these is proper and which
figure: Here if Reason that can prove God cannot be a Body, and cannot endure
his God should be a monster, shall be called in to pass sentence; they that
make Philosophy interpret Holy Writ in this case, and give the last resort to
Reason, do no more usurp or trespass on Religion, then they that make use of
Authors, or a Dictionary judge of the sense of any Greek or Hebrew word in
Scripture.

But notwithstanding this we may not think the mysteries of Faith are to be
measured by the Rules of natural Reason, so to stand or fall as they approve
themselves to its discourse or Principles: for though it be impossible that any
Revelation can contradict right Reason (truth cannot be inconsistent with
truth:) yet it is very possible God can reveal those truths which we have
neither faculties analogal, nor Principles or notions proportioned to, nor any
natural ways of judging or examining. And if those faculties which are not
capable of cognizance will judge; and judge of things removed from all our
notices; (such as Spiritual, Infinite, Eternal being is) and do it by
principles gathered from the information of our Senses, and by analogy with
things of another kind; corporeal finite things that are about us; reason need
not be informed how liable such judgments must be to mistakes; and how that
which we call repugnancy in one may have no place in the other. Here therefore
to submit ourunderstandings, and believe is but modest justice, and to receive
as Children what our Heavenly Father says.

And therefore they that will presume to comprehend what ere they are commanded
to believe, and those that will believe nothing but what they are able to
comprehend, are alike insolent, if not pernicious. It Is true God by the Gospel
has revealed and brought to light many things which before appeared only as
he himself did in the Temple, in a Cloud; namely concerning the Divine nature,
Persons, Properties, and the Eternal being, and the Incarnation of his Son; but
still, as God himself is said to do, these also dwell in Light, that no man can
approach unto. Which he that will needs gaze and pry too near to, must be
dazzled into blindness, and be only so much more in the dark. But he that
proudly does conceit his little spark of Reason can bear up with that Divinity
of brightness, and enlighten him to look through all those inaccessible
discoveries, with Lucifers assuming he has reason to expect his fall. The The
Schoolman.
one of these that will needs clear all mysteries, the The Socinian.
other will take them all away; the one that with his Pencil will presume to
figure him who is the brightness of Gods glory, and trace out the lineaments by
which that everlasting Father did impress the character, and express Image of
his person on him, and the other that with a bold hand dashes out the Person
from the Nature; the one that will untie the knots of the Hypostatick union;
and the other that will cut them and the union too asunder; the one that will
needs prove by Reason whatsoever is in Scripture, and the other that speaking
of Christ's Satisfaction, says Ego quidem etiamsi non semel, sed saepe id in
sacris monimentis scriptum extaret, non id circo taman ita prorsu^ se habere
crederem. Socin^s, de Servatore. l. 3. c. 6. 2 Vol. 204.
for my part if it were not only once but oftentimes set down in holy
Scripture, yet would not I therefore believe it, because forsooth it was
against his reasonings: Neither the one or other of these sure receive
revelation as a little Child, not like young Samuel, Speak Lord for thy Servant
hears.

But these, as all extravagance is wont, are profited into much worse: The one
that would be proving, making reasons for, the mysteries, often God knows
framed only shadows, and the other by their light of Reason being able to
dispel and make those shadows vanish, that so easy victory encouraged them to
frame reasons against, and to attaque the mysteries themselves; and then others
finding there was something that was taken to be reason not agreeing with some
chief heads of Religion, as they had been still received; took occasion thence
to conclude against the whole Religion; and by scruples at some Articles taught
themselves to dispute all the Creed; and now a difficulty in one Doctrine makes
the rest suspected, and regarded only as things made to amuse, and the unusual
wording of a Command is thought ground enough to turn all Christian duty into
Raillery.

For instance; If Christ intending by prescribing patience, to teach men how to
escape not only from the guilt, and present torture that a Spirit which will
needs return each slight offense is subject to, but also from the future and
eternal recompenses of revenge, shall in phrasing his injunctions but bid them
Mat. 5. 39.
turn the other cheek, no Gentleman can be of his Religion; and that is cause
enough I hope not only to renounce, but scorn it. If in mere compassion meaning
only to make virtue easy, by advising us against the snares and the occasions
of Vice, he word his Counsel in prescriptions to Mat. 5. 29, 30
pull out the right eye, cut off the right hand: His Religion is a much worse
Tyranny then the Covenant And the men of Jabesh Gilead said unto Nabash, make a
covenant with us and we will serve thee. And Nabash answered them, on this
condition will I make a Covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right
eyes and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel. 1 Samuel 11. 1, 2.
Na^ash offered to the men of Jabesh Gilead, and they think themselves as much
concerned to make parties against it: In fine, if that he might at once
instruct us how to pull up 1 Timothy 6 10.
the root of all evil, he forbid us Mat. 6. 19, 20
to lay up treasures upon the Earth, and tell us that our treasures should be
laid up in Heaven, and say it is Mat. 19. 24, 26.
impossible for a rich man to enter into Heaven; here they cry out mainly he
supposes us, and treats us just as Children: This Command requires indeed that
they who do receive it should be Children, whom we use to cheat of gold by the
same methods, telling them it is not good for them at present that it shall be
laid up for them; and therefore when Religion does attempt to deal with men so,
it is concluded it designs to cozen them, as they think it does indeed, and is a
cheat, and all that minister about it are mere fourbes: And truly if we rackt
the Consciences of dying men, and if so be they would give so much to this
Cloister or that Order promised them remission of their sins, and worse than
Judas, sold the purchase of Christ's Blood at those base rates, and betrayed the
Redemption so, on Gods name let them so account us; but if we do attempt on
nothing but men's vices, and would only steal their Souls from Hell, and cheat
them into piety and blessedness, these we hope are very unreproachful frauds.
But alas! to talk to them of these after-things, of Heaven and Hell is
altogether as much liable to their contempt as the commands are. If we tell
them of a Resurrection to Judgment, and of everlasting fire to punish wicked
men, because their reason cannot comprehend how flame can hurt a Soul; or for
the Body how devouring fire can repair the food it preys upon, that it may keep
alive and nourish torment to eternity; or how each man's peculiar dust that is
digested into several men's being and so become no one man's peculiar, when it
shall be also blended with the ashes of the Universe, can be singled out and
parted to its proper owner, when there are so many own it, because their reason
cannot comprehend all this, therefore Scriptures lake of fire must be no more
then the Poets Acheron; and Resurrection was framed (as the apparition of a
Ghost is wont to do) to fright men merely; and however it is attested Christ did
never rise, but all is fable: Thus from such premises as these our rational
disputing men conclude.

And here I shall not ask how these men dare presume, that if there be a God
who has declared that he will bring such things to pass, yet he must be unable
to affect them, if they cannot comprehend the manner how he does them; or be
confident they can look through those beams that come out of his hand, Hab.
III. 4.
in which the hiding of his Power is: But this I shall say to our men of
reason, theirs is the most unreasonable way of arguing in the world; to dispute
against plain matters of fact, the being and the Works of such and such so many
ages since, and witnessed by a greater testimony then the World can show for
any other thing; and ever since appearing in their visible and vast effects, as
the Conversion, Suffering, Faith, of the whole Earth almost. Now to attempt the
confutation of such matter of fact by reasonings drawn from difficulties in
some things which those men are witnessed to have delivered, or to conclude,
that there can never have been any such persons in the World, because they
cannot understand all that those persons taught, or possibly because they can
take some occasions to buffoone on what they taught, is most ridiculous. Thus
History must have been false, and several known places not to have been,
because the story has been turned into Burlesque: Thus he that with the
Ancients cannot comprehend how it is possible that there should be Antipodes,
or the Earth can be any thing but a plain flat, otherwise he thinks the
inhabitants must fall down to Heaven; may as rationally despise all the
discoveries of the Earth, assure himself our constant Navigations which
persuade us it is a Globe inhabited on both sides, bring home from the Indies
nothing else but false relations, and that indeed there are no Indies.

I need not urge how Christianity approves it self even to the reasoning of the
sober part of mankind; and the morality of it had the suffrage of the World
before it self appeared: For while the evidence stands good, if the matter of
fact be true, the Doctrine must be true, and the commands obeyed: and to use
such arguings to resell such matter of fact is just like that which Zeno did
attempt, namely, by subtilties to prove it was impossible there could be any
motion, while another did disturb his Lecture by his motion up and down the
Schools; it is the same thing as to take a bowl to cut with, or the vessels of
the Danaid's to carry water in: For such reasonings are alike improper for that
work.

And indeed these arguings are not the exceptions of reason, but the struglings
of men's vices against Religion. And it must be impossible so many Thousands
would give up their Bodies, rather then their Bibles to the fire in
Dioclesian's days, because it is a book which they can find no other pleasure
in but that of railling it, or helping them with subjects to be profane upon.
It must be false that Christ did feed 5000 with 5 loaves and 2 small fishes,
Mat. XIV. 20. 21.
'till 12 baskets full of broken pieces did remain; yet not so much because
they know not how their eating could nourish the victuals so, and make it grow;
as because they are angry with the worker of the miracle, who forbids and
upbraids the excesses of their luxury, which can easily, and does daily consume
the price of that that would suffice 5000, without miracle on 5 single persons;
and all that when it is dressed according to the modern mode of eating well,
dissolved, turned into juyces, and exalted into the Elixir of the Epicure,
shall leave, alas! no broken pieces for the Alms-basket: This is the quarrel;
this does make the miracle impossible. And yet methinks upon the same account
they should allow, John II. 6. 7.
that at a feast he turned so many pots of water into wine, because that seems
to gratify the thirsts of their intemperance. In fine, we do not live as men
prepared or willing to be called to an account of all our doings, therefore we
have no mind to rise again to give it: When we are thus minded, it is not hard
to meet with difficulties that encourage the opinion that we shall not rise.
Which difficulties when we look into, we cannot find how it is possible we can
be raised, and it is easy then to think we cannot, that it is impossible,
especially when it is our will and interest to think so; and then it must be
false whatever is in Scripture that we shall. These are the processes of those
that reason against Christianity, such the grounds that they dispute upon: But
their reasons are but Sophisms of lust and interest, which will guild and paint
whatever they are much in love with, and it is no wonder they find colors for
it, and can think them reasons, for they always did so against present evident
conviction. When Moses by his miracles endeavored to let Pharaoh know who was
the Lord, and to persuade him to let Israel go; while God permitted the Exodus
VII. 11, 13, 22.
Magicians to counterfeit those miracles, it looked like reasonable indeed that
Pharaoh should not be convinced; but when they could not immitate, but did
confess Exodus VIII. 19.
the finger of the Lord, and Exodus IX. 11.
themselves suffered those plagues which they could not either conjure up or
down; then if Pharaoh will not be persuaded, it is plain nothing but his
interest, not the wonders which were brought by the Magicians, were the reasons
that prevailed with him; for those were not reasons against more and greater
miracles; yet they were effectual with him to the destruction of himself and
his nation. Again when they who knew the mighty works Christ did, and were Mat.
24. 29.
forewarned by him of false Christ's and false Prophets, that would come with
signs and lying wonders; God allowing Satan leave to struggle at his last
gasp, and to make a blaze when he was to fall from heaven as lightning, but far
beneath the glory of his only begotten Son: when they who knew both these,
chose yet to follow a Barchocab, a false falling Meteor, who came indeed with
greater show, and not with such strict mortifying Doctrines, nor only with the
thin encouragement of after-expectations as Christ did, for he gave them hopes
of present temporal enjoyments; but he did no wonder besides spitting fire (S.
Jerome says) and throwing great stones from his kn^e as from an Engine, Vid.
Raimundi Martini, pug. fidei, p. 262.
say his followers; which yet could not scare the Soldiers, neither did the
Roman Eagles (which were true-bred) fear those flames he spate, (...)
but destroyed some Four Millions, vide pug. fid. ibid.
millions of them. Now it is evident by the comparison of the several signs that
Christ and this Barchocab wrought, the only reasons that gave efficacy to that
slight imposture, and did make it overpower Christ's mighty works, was their
earthly desires and affections which Christ's severe Doctrines could not
gratify, and therefore 2 These II. 10.
they receiving not the love of the truth, but having pleasure in
unrighteousness, gave themselves up to delusions to believe a lie; Tert. Apol.
c. 23. Edatar hic aliquis sub tribunalibus vestris ex iis qui de Deo pati exist
imantur, qui aris inbalan^es numen de nidore concipiunt, qui ructando conantur,
qui anhelando profantur; nisi se damones confessi ^uerint, Christiano mentiri
non audentes ibidem. etc.
yet still those delusions went for reason with them. Once more Tertullian
challenging the Heathen says, Produce before your judgment-seats some, whom you
will, of those who are inspired by any of your Gods, when gaping ore the Altar
they have in its fumes (according to their custom) taken in the Deity 'till
they are great with it, and ructando conantur, while they are in travel with
him, as it were, have belching throws, that they burst almost 'till they are
delivered of the inspiration: while it is thus, let but any Christian adjure
them by the name of Christ, and if the spirits that they are possessed with do
not presently confess that they are Devils, ibidem illius Christiani
procacissimi sanguinem fundite, let the saucy petulant Christian lose his life.
He speaks of this as a known frequent trial. And Minutius Felix says, their
chiefest Gods have been forced out of their Votaries, and acknowledged they
were evil spirits. Now here was reason and experience; the miracle was so
evident, that Tertullian braging says, do not believe it if your eyes and ears
can suffer you; and the reason was more pressing then the fact, Nec enim
Divinitas deputanda est quae fubdita esthomini, it being most impossible that
that should be a God which a man could rule and triumph over, so imperiously
manage him, as with a bare command to force him from his hold, and make him
shame himself so villainously before both his adorers and his enemies, as to
say, He was a Devil. Yet the Heathens still found colors to do out all this
conviction; and their old acquaintance with their Gods, together with the
Custom of their vicious Worships, had more force with them then miracle and
reason. And while the Christian dispossessed their Deities, he was himself turned
out of all his own possessions; and although he made their God confess himself
a Devil, yet still poor he was made to suffer as a malefactor.

And it is not strange if men now stick as closely to their vices, as those did
to the Gods that patronized them, and it be as hard to exorcise the Devil out
of their affections and practices, as it was then out of Heathen Votaries or
Temples. They are as fierce against the Christian Religion for their lusts
sake, as those for their Venus, and the very same account that made those
Heathen Customs, or the lying wonders of false Christ's, or Pharaoh's Magicians
sings, be more persuasive then the other more real miracles; namely, because
they sided with their inclinations and interests. This very account makes
little difficulties (which Almighty God has left in our Religion, as he
suffered signs and lying wonders heretofore, for trials) yea, makes cavils,
mere exceptions, pass for reasons most invincible, be disputed, urged with
great concern and passion, against all those methods of conviction which God
has afforded Christianity.

Now if this be to receive Religion as a little Child, it is with the
frowardness of Children, when they are displeased or ill at ease; who resist
and quarrel with the thing that is to make them well or please them, and return
the Parents cares to ease and quiet them with little outrages and vexing. And
do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy Father
that has bought thee? Has he not made thee and established thee? Ask thy
Father and he will show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee, Deuteronomy. 32. 6,
7. Now have Children any other way to know their Parents, then to let their
Father show them, and their Elders tell them? Or should we cast off the
relation and renounce all the obedience due to it, because we are not sure of
it our selves? For ought we know those may not be our Parents, we have only
testimony for it: Thus we serve our God on that account; and yet Has he not
made thee and established thee? As he began us, so did he not nurse and bear us
in his arms, and carry us in all our weakness and difficulties, 'till he
brought us up to a full strength? 'Till by a miraculous and signal providence
he had established, settled us? and after all these cares bestowed upon us, do
we prove a generation of vipers only, such as do requite the bowels that did
bear and nourish them, by preying on them and consuming them? Or like the
offspring of a Spider, who, when he has spent himself with weaving nets,
Arist. hist. Anim. l. 5. c. 27. Plin. not. hist. l. 11. c. 24.
and working of them into labyrinths, to be the granaries and the defenses of
his brood, to catch them prey, and to secure them; then the strongest of his
young ones, when he is by these his cares established and grown ripe to destroy,
makes those threads fatal to his parent, which he spun out of his bowels to be
thread of life to him. And shall we be such Children to our Father that
established us? Make all his plenties turn to poison in us, and invenome us
against himself? make his miraculous mercies furnish us for the abuse and
provocation of him? His blessed Providence serve only to afford us arguments
against it self; help to confute it self because it has so prospered, does
still suffer us? but after all this, is he not thy Father that has bought
thee? who to all his titles to us, his endearing obligations, notwithstanding
our despites and provocations of them; yet did give the life of his own Son to
purchase over again the same relation to us, that we might have right to the
inheritance of his Kingdom: And then however we have hitherto affronted, let us
be content now to be bought and hired, Romans VIII. 7.
to receive that Kingdom of God as his Children; for if Children then heirs;
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, who died to make us Kings and
Priests to God and his Father.

To whom be glory, etc.
A SERMON PREACHED IN St PETER's WESTMINSTER ON SUNDAY, January vi. 1660.

AT THE CONSECRATION OF THE Right Reverend Fathers in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop
of Bristol, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Norwich, NICHOLAS Lord Bishop of Hereford,
WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Gloucester.


By RICHARD ALLESTRY D. D. Canon of Christ-Church in Oxford, and one of His
Majesty's Chaplains.

LONDON: Printed by John Playford, in the Year 1683.

Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Bishop of London, and Dean of His
Majesty's Chapel Royal.
My LORD,
WHEN I consider with what reluctancies I appear thus in public; I have all
reason to suspect and fear, lest this offering, which like an unwilling
Sacrifice was dragged to the Altar, and which has great defects too, will be
far from propitiating either for its self or for the votary. But I must crave
leave to add, that how averse soever I was to the publishing this rude
Discourse, I make the Dedication with all possible zeal, and ready
cheerfulness. For I expect your Lordship to be a Patron, not only to my Sermon,
but to my Subject. Such a separate eminence of virtue and of sweetness mixed
together may hope to ingratiate Your Function, to a Generation of men that will
not yet know their own good, but resist mercy, and are not content to be happy.
And for my self, Your Lordships great goodness and obligingness has encouraged
me, not (...) to hope that you will pardon all the miscarriages of what I now
present, but also to presume to shelter it and my self under your Lordships
Name and Command, and to honor my self before the World by this address, and
by assuming the relation of*

My Lord, Your Lordships most humbly devoted and most faithful Servant, RICH.
AL^^STRY.

SERMON XVI. IN St PETER'S WESTMINSTER. January 6. 1660.
ACTS XIII. 2. The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them.
AND as they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the holy Ghost said, --

Although that ministering to God by prayer and fasting, be the indicted and
appropriate acts to preface such Solemnities as this; and that not Sermons, but
Litanies and intercessions, are the peculiar adherents of Embers, and of
Consecrations; and those vigorous strivings with Almighty God by Prayer are the
birth-pangs in which Fathers are born unto the Church: Yet since that now this
Sacred Office is it self opposed, and even the Mission of Preachers preached
against, and the Authority that sends despised as Antichristian, whilst
separation and pretense unto the Holy Ghost set up themselves against the
strict injunction of the Holy Ghost to separate; the Pulpit that otherwhiles
has fought against it, must now atone its errors, by attending on the Altar,
and the bold ungrounded claims of Inspiration, that false Teachers have
usurped, be superseded by the voice of the Holy Ghost himself, who in this case
becomes the Preacher, and says, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them.

My Text is a Commission parole from Heaven, in it you have,

First, the Person that sends it out; (...), The Holy Ghost said.

Secondly, the Persons to whom it is directed; implied in the verb (...)
separate, more particularly expressed in the foregoing words. Verse 1. 2.


Thirdly, the thing to which they were empowered by the Commission, or which was
required of them; set down in the remaining words of the Text, wherein you have.

1. The Act enjoined; (...), separate.

2. The Object; (...), separate me Barnabas and Saul.

3. The end for what; (...) for a work.

4. The determination of that work; (...) for the work whereunto I have called
them.

Of these in their Order: and first,

I The Holy Ghost said. Of those five things for want of which the second
Jewish Temple sunk below the first, (...) 1.
and its Glory seemed faint in the comparison, the Chiefest was the Holy Ghost;
(...) 2.
who became silent; his Oracles ceast then, and he spoke no more by the
Prophets. (...) 3.
A thing not only confessed by the Thalmudists, (...) 4.
(who say our Rabbis have delivered to us, that from the time of Haggai, (...)
5.
Zechary and Malachy, (...)
(...) The Holy Ghost was taken away from Israel) but so notorious in
experience, The Ark of the Covenant, with the Propitiatory and Cherubi^s, the
Vrim and Thummim; the fire that came down form Heaven to confume the burnt
offerings; the Glory of God that appeared between the Cherubi^s; and the Holy
Ghost that spoke by the Prophets. See Gemar. c. 1. in Joma. See also Galat. l.
4. citing the same out of R. Elias, R. Solomon, R. David.
that when St. Paul meets Disciples at Ephesus, Acts 19. 1. and asks them if
they have received the Holy Ghost, whether at their Baptism the Spirit came
down upon them as he did then on others; they answer ver. 2. We have not so
much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost, any extraordinary effusions of
the Spirit, whether he do come down in Gifts and Afflations, such as we know
were usual in the first Jewish Temple, but have not been for a long time, and
we have not yet heard they are restored, (for of this pouring out of the Holy
Ghost they must needs mean it, not of himself, of whom they could not doubt,
nothing was more known in the Jewish Church.)

But as our Savior did supply the other four with all advantage, and so
fulfilled the Prophecy, and made the glory of that Temple greater: so for the
fifth, the spirit, he was restored in kind with infinate improvement, that of
Joel fulfilled, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, for they were all
baptized with the Holy Ghost; baptized in rivers of living waters, which did
flow out of the belly of themselves, for this he spoke of the Spirit, which all
that believed on him should receive Joh. 7. 39. so that Joel did scarce feel or
fore see enough to prophecy of Hag. 2. 10.
this abundance, but the inundations were almost like Christ's receivings,
Joel. 2. 28. John 3. 14.
without measure. Nor were his Inspirations as of old, dark and mysterious
Oracles, direction in rapture, where the Message it self was to have another
revelation, and it must be prophecy to understand as well as utter: But in the
Gospel his effusions run clear, and transparent as the Water that expresses
them, revealing even all the unknown languages that were the conduits and
conveighances; all plain express direction, such as that of the Text.

Now amongst all the several uses of the Holy Ghost for which he was poured out
in this abundance, amongst all the designs he did engage himself in, and
advance, he does not seem to have a greater agency nor to interess himself more
in any, than in qualifying for, and separating to Church-Offices. This seems to
be his great work: And indeed how can he choose but be particularly concerned
in those Officer which are his own (...), his gifts? Timothy's is expressly
called so, in each of his Epistles, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6. And when our
Savior, Ephesians. 4, 8. is said to give the gifts of the Holy Ghost to men, it is
added how, ver. 11. He gave some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
namely because those gifts enabled for those Offices, and all the reason in the
World that he should have a special hand in giving, where himself is to be
received. Receive the Holy Ghost, that was from the beginning, and is yet the
installation to them: And if we take them from their divine original, 1 Pet. 2.
25.
from that great Pastor and Bishop of our souls, who was the maker of them too,
Thus he was consecrated; the spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel, Luke 4. 18. And when he comes to ordain
succession, he says, as my Father sent me, so send I you: And he breathed upon
them, and said, Receive the Holy Ghost, Joh. 20. 21. And after bids them tarry
at Jerusalem 'till they should be endued with power from above, Luke 24. 47.
That is, endued with the Holy Spirit, Act. 1. The present Barnabas and Saul
were sent by his Commission in the Text; and v. 4. And Saint Paul tells the
Elders of the Churches of Asia, the Holy Ghost made them overseers, (...), Act.
20. 28. Timothy had his Office, (...), by immediate designation of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Ep. ad Corint. p. 54. edit. Junii.
Clemens Rhomanus says, the Apostles out of those they had converted, did
ordain Bishops and Deacons (...), having first tried them by the Holy Ghost,
and so taught by his revelation who should be the men. Apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 23.
And Clemens Alexandrinus says, John after his return to Asia, ordained
throughout all the regions about, (...), such as were signified and designed by
the Holy Ghost. So that Oe^^menius pronounces in the general, (...), the
Bishops that were made, they made not inconsiderately on their own heads, but
such whom the Spirit did command. Chrysostom said as much before, and On 1 Timothy
4. 14.
Theoplylact. Nor can we doubt that he maintains his interest in this affair
even at this day: But that our Veni Creator Spiritus, come Holy Ghost eternal
God, Matthew. 28. 20.
does call him to preside in these so concerning Solemnities; For Christ, when
he commissioned his Apostles, assuring them, behold I am with you even to the
end of the World; which promise he performs only vicria Spiritus prasentia, by
the presence of the Holy Ghost, who is his Vicar, as Tertullian expresses; nor
can the Spirit be with them till then, but by making them be till then; which
being done by Ordination, that Ecclesiastical procreation, (for so they derive
themselves to the Worlds end;) upon the strength of that promise we may assure
our selves he does assist as truly, though not so visibly, as when he said
here, separate.

The Holy Ghost's concernment being thus secured, I have this one thing only to
suggest; that they who set themselves against all separation to these Offices
and Orders, in and for which the Holy Ghost has so appeared, (what they be I
dispute not now) they ^ight against the Holy Ghost, and thrust him out of that
in which he has almost signally interessed himself. And they that do entitle
the Spirit to this opposition, do not only make Gods Kingdom divided against
it self, or raise a faction in the Trinity, and stir up division betwixt those
Three One Persons; Matthew. 12. 20.
but they set the same Person against himself and make the Holy Spirit resist
the Holy Ghost. You know the inference pressed upon them that did this but
interpretatively in the Devils Kingdom, and did make Satan cast out Satan: And
is it not here of force? And they who make the Spirit cast out the Holy Ghost,
contrive as much as in them lies Gods Kingdom shall not stand. I will not
parallel the guilts. Those Pharisees blasphemed the Holy Spirit in his
Miracles, ascribing that to Beelzebub which was the immediate work of the Holy
Ghost: (and such indeed do sin unpardonably, because they sin irrecoverably;
for Miracles being the utmost and most manifest express wherein the Holy Ghost
exerts himself, they who can harden their understandings against them have left
themselves no means of conviction, and cannot be forgiven, because they cannot
be rectified or reclaimed.) These others do blaspheme the Spirit in his
immediate inspirations and (...), ascribing to the spirit of Antichrist all
those Offices and Orders, which these gifts of the Holy Ghost were power'd from
Heaven immediately to qualify for, and separate to; things in which he has as
signally appeared as in his Miracles: and as he made these means to convince
the World, so he made those the Officers of doing it, and set them to out last
the other. Now in the same nearness that these two guilts come up one toward
the other, just to the same degree these sin the sin against the Holy Ghost.
For the Holy Ghost said, separate.

So I pass to the second, 2.
to those whom this Injunction is directed to. And thence I do observe in
general, that

Notwithstanding all the interest and office that the Holy Ghost assumes in
these same separations, yet there is something left besides for Man to do.
Although he superintend, they have a work in it: He is the Unction, 1 John 2.
20.
but it must be applied by laying on of hands. I have called them, says he in
the Text; and yet to them that ministered, the Holy Ghost said, do ye separate.
I do not now examine what degree and order of men they were whom the Holy Ghost
here commissions for this Office. The Judgment of the Ancient Church in this
affair is enough known, by the condemnation of Epip. haer. 75
Aerius, and by the Fate of Vide Athana^. Apol. 2. How this judgment did derive
it self down into the Reformation, may be seen from the account of the
Fratres-Bohemi, who sought over the World for Episcopal Ordination, and were
never quiet in their consciences 'till they had obtained it. Vide Johan. in
Coment. Ratio Disciplinae ordi^isque Ecclesiastici in unitate Fratrum Bo^emorum.
Ischyras and Colluthus: and for the present instance, in which they are called
Doctors that are bid to do it, there has enough been said to prove (...) a
Title of a Bishop; to which I shall only add, that it was a variation of Name
that stuck by them until Bede's age, in which, what Bishops signified does
come under no question; for he does say, Bed. Eccl. hist. l. 2. cap. 2.
that Austin called together to the Conference, Episcopos sive Doctores, the
Bishops or the Doctors of the Province. Besides that there was then in Antioch
a Bishop (...), Suid. in voce (...).
In the time of Claudius Emperor of Rome, and of Euodius, whom the Apostle
Peter had ordained at Antioch, those that before were called Nazarenes and
Galileans, were called Christians: A thing which happened a little before this
separation in the Text, as you find Chap. 11. 26. But who they were that used
to separate for every Execution of these holy Offices, will appear from the
Instances that I shall make to prove the present Observation, that, besides
that of the Holy Ghost there was an outward call: And whom soever the Spirit
sent, he commanded that they should have Commission from Men. And all my former
Testimonies for the Holy Ghost, bear witness for this too. The Text is
positive; here was a Conge d'estire for Barnabas and Saul. Timothy had his
Office (...), be designation of the Spirit, 1 Timothy 4. 14. yet (...), with
laying on of hands, ibid. yea (...), by the laying on of my hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
And Timothy was placed at Ephesus, as Titus also left at Creet, to ordain
others in the same manner; Tit. 1. 5.
St. Paul providing for the succession of the Rite and Ceremony as well as of
the Office. And in St. Clement's Testimony, (...); the Spirit tried, but the
Apostles constituted. And down as low as Trajan's time, when St. John's date
was almost out, his life and his Commission expiring, and the Churches of Asia
to be provided with succession, the Men were (...), signified by the Holy
Ghost: But the Chron. Alex. says, (...) that he went clean throughout Asia and
the adjacent Regions, constituting not only Bishops, but others of inferior
Clergy: And even in the lowest thus it was; when the first Deacons were to be
made, Men full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom were to be looked out, Act. 6. 3.
But yet that did not authorize them, the Holy Ghost and Wisdom did not make a
Deacon: For besides that, the Apostles will appoint them over their business,
ibid. and they are brought to them, and they do lay their hands upon them, v.
6. Thus it was in those times of full effusion of the Holy Ghost: Men always
had to do in giving that Commission: so that whoever pleads an Order of the
Spirit for his Office, (although such a Commission of the Spirit, if he had it,
would evidence it self, and if it were, it would appear, 1 Cor. 12. 7.
for 'twas the manifestation of the Spirit that was given to every man to
profit withal; yet) if we yield him his pretensions, and let his own
incitations pass for inspirements, and his strong fancy for the Holy Ghost, if
the Holy Ghost did call him, who did separate him? Whom the Holy Ghost calls,
he sends to his Officers to empower; they both work, He says, do ye separate.

And here a Consideration offers it self unto those holy Fathers, whom the
Spirit makes his Associates in separating men to sacred Offices; that when they
set apart even to the lowest stalls of the Church, they labor to perform it so
that the Holy Ghost may be engaged, and act along with them in the performance:
Separate such as they may presume the Spirit has called, and will own. He does
not call the ignorant, or appoint blind eyes for the Body of Christ, or make
men Seers to lead into the pit. The Holy Spirit calls not the unclean, or the
intemperate; Mar. 5. 13.
we know it was another fort of Spirit that went into the swine: nor does he
ever say, Separate me those who separate themselves, the Schismatics: the
Spirit calls not such as break the unity of the Spirit; nor sets into the rank
of higher members in Christ's body those who tear that body, and themselves from
it: the factious, those that will not be bound neither in bonds of peace nor of
obedience, but break all holy ties, that make commotions, and rave and foam,
sure it is the Legion that sends them, Luke 8.
and not the Holy Ghost. He whom the spirit will call, must not be under the
reputation of a Vice, but should be of a good report, lest he fall into
reproach, and so into the snare of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 7. i. e. lest he fall
into reproach, and then his teaching do so too, and men learn to slight or not
heed the doctrines of such a one as is under scandal for his life, and so the
Devil get advantage over them, and do ensnare them. Theophyl. in locum.
(...). For to be to any an occasion of falling, is to be the Devils snare. Now
Christ's Matt. 4. 19.
Fishers of men, those whom the Holy Ghost appoints to spread nets for the
catching Souls to God, their lives must not lay snares for the Devil, and
entangle Souls in the toyls of perdition. Those also that come to you out of
Ambition or of greediness of gain, the spirit calls not neither: He calls we
see (...), to a work; so that they who seek more then they can well attend the
labor of, or are qualified for the work of, they are not of his sending. But
of all men the Holy Ghost will least deal with the Simoniacal, that come not to
a work, but to a market, that contract with Patrons for the spirits call, or,
worse than their master Simon, would hire the Holy Spirit himself to say,
Separate me them: The Successors of the Apostles have a Canonical return to
these, Your money perish with you. Act. 8. 20.
They whom the Holy Ghost does call must have his gifts and temper; St. Paul
has set all down to Timothy and Titus, and those who minister in this
employment, if they will be what he has made them, joint Commissioners with
him, and his Co-workers, they must order it so that he may work and act, which
he does not but where he calls, nor does he call but those whom he has
qualified: And it is of those only whom he has called, that he says, (...),
Separate.

The Third particular, the thing enjoined; And the Holy Ghost said, Separate.

The separateness of the Functions of the Clergy, the incommunicableness of
their Offices to persons not separated for them, is so express a doctrine both
of the Letter of the Text, and of the Holy Ghost, that sure I need not to say
more, though several heads of Probation offer themselves: As first the
condition of the Callings, which does divide from the Community, and sets them
up above it; And here I might tell you of 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13. 7.
bearing rule, of Mat. 19. 28.
thrones, of Rev. 1. 20.
stars and Rev. 1. 20.
Angels, and other words of as high sense, and yet not go out of the Scripture
bounds, although the dignity did not die with the Scripture Age, or expire with
the Apostles: the age as low as Photius words it thus, Phot. ep. 54.
(...). That Apostolical and Divine Dignity, which the chief Priests are
acknowledged to be possessed of by right of Succession. Styles which I could
derive yet lower, and they are of a prouder sound than those the humble ears of
this our age are so offended with. But these heights it may be would give
Ombrages; although it is strange that men should envy them to those, who are
only exalted to them, that they may with the more advantage take them by the
hands to lift them up to Heaven. Those nearnesses to things above do but more
qualify them to be (...), in Theoph. and to draw near to God on your behalf,
that those your Matt. 18. 10.
Angels also may see the face of your Father which is in Heaven, and those
stars are therefore set in Apoc. 1. 20.
Christ's right hand, that they may shed a blessed influence on you from thence.

The (...) and the (...), The Work and labor of the work, (the one is the
(...), and the other Saint 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Paul's word) require a whole man, and therefore a man separate: and if St.
Paul, one of our separated persons here, who had the fullness of the Spirit, and
the fullness of Learning too, that was brought up in the Schools, and brought up
in Paradise, taught by the Doctors, and taught by the mouth of the Lord in the
third heaven, snatched from the feet of Ga^aliel to the presence of God, 2 Cor.
12. 1, 2, 3, 4.
to have a beatifical Vision of the Gospel, if after all this he cry out, who
is sufficient for these things? sure they are not sufficient, who in those
little intervals which their trades and necessities afford them, fall into fits
and fren^ies of Religion, have a sharp Paroxysme of irregular convulsed
Divinity, as if they were its (...), possessed with their Theology 'till their
weariness, and not knowing what to say do exorcise them.

But not to speak only to the wild fancies of this Age, the Scripture says of
the men of these callings, Heb. 5. 1.
they are taken from among Men, and ordained for Men in things pertaining to
God. And such discriminations are evinced by all the expressions of a Church in
Scripture. It Is called the body of Christ: Now the parts of a body, as where
they are so separate that they divide from one another, Col. 1. 24.
they do not make a body, but are an Execution; so where they are not separate
in a diversity of Organs, for several faculties and operations, it may be a
dead Element, as similar bodies are, but cannon be that body which St. Paul
describes, 1 Cor. 12* Which is not one Member, but many, ver. 14. And if they
were all one member, where were the body? v. 19. and indeed all that Chapter is
inspired for this Argument. In Christ's Church it is as impossible that every
one can be (...) an Overseer, as that every part in the body can be an Eye: And
the whole frame of Man may be nothing else but a Tongue, as well as every
Christian may be a Preacher: And if it might, where indeed were the hearing? as
St. Paul does ask. The Church is also called a Ephesians. 2. 21.
building, and 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Gods house: Now it is true that every Christian is by St. Peter called a
lively stone, and all of them built up a Spiritual house, an holy Priesthood,
1 Pet. 2. 5. and they all are a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
separate people, verse. 9. Yet all this is no more of privilege than is affirmed
in the very same words of the Jewish Nation, Exodus 19. 6. Where yet God had his
separated Levites, Priests and Highpriests too. But sure it is manifest enough
that in this building, as in others, stones have their separate places and
distinct; every one can not bear up the Corner, or be a pillar and
foundation-stone; much less can every one place it self in the Ephod, assume to
be one of the Urim and the Thummim-stones, and there break out in Oracles, and
give Responses; and every rubbish stone set it self in the Mitre, and shine in
the head ornaments, as if it were one of the precious stones of Sion. In fine,
(to speak now out of Metaphor,) not only the transactions of the Text, which is
a precedent for men to commission such and such, but also all Scripture rules
direct a Choice; and where there is Election, there is also dereliction, and
both evince a separation: And if all the Nations in the World have had their
distinct Officers for Religion, and, as it were, to signalize the separateness
of their function, in many Nations they did live apart from Men: The Priests
had their ady^a as well as the Deities; dark solitary Groves were made choice
of, not so much for the God, as for his Officers retirement; so that every
appearance of him also was a Vision, and the Priest was revealed as well as the
Oracle* and all this at the first to make a kind of sacred Pomp for the
solemnity of awfulness, (though afterward it often proved but opportunity for
foul performances.) And if to this uniform practice of the World Gods
attestation be set, who ordered it in his own Government; nor that as a
Levitical or Jewish administration, but it was practiced amongst his own from
the beginning, and when dominions were but greater families, there were still
distinct persons for the employments of Religion; that was the office and the
privilege of the Vid. Tharg. Hierosolym. Genesis 9. 3. and Jonath. ibid. and
Solom. Iarch. Glossam ad Exodus 19. 22. and ad cap. 24. 5.
firstborn: Esau was called profane for sell^ng that Vide Isido. Pelusio. l.
2. Epist. 47.
birthright of his: (And the word in the Text here, (...) separate, is the
same which God does word the sanctifying the firstborn for him with, Exodus 13.
2.) 'Twere easy to deduce all this out of all ancient Jewish Records. And when
the practice ever since has been the same in Christ's Religion; after all
this, sure nothing else but absolute defection of the Notions of Mankind, and
blotting out all the impressions of Universal Nature and Universal Religion, or
else an absolute Command from Heaven, could alter this Establishment; from
which command we are so far, that it is the Holy Ghost himself that said
expressly (...) separate.

Now this (...), this Separateness in Function, does infer upon us a
separateness in Life and Conversation, and they who are thus set apart from the
World, must keep themselves unspotted from the World. To separate and
Consecrate are but two words for the same thing: Jac. 1. 27.
Separate three Cities is the Command in Deuteronomy. 19. 2. and they sanctified
three, Josh. 20. 7. Our Offices assume them both, and all are holy Orders. Now
separate and pure are both so primitive, and so essential notions of holy, that
truly I cannot determine which of them is original, and which secondary: Our
Consecration does challenge both; and as we will be separate in our calling, so
we must be separate in our lives, not Romans 12. 2.
conforming our selves to the World, for I Joh. 15. 19.
have chosen you out of the World, says Christ. A torrent license of an Age
must not carry us along; an Universal Custom of the World must be no precedent,
and can be no excuse for us to do what is irregular. We are (...) separate; and
that the World does such things is no more a plea for us to do so, than that
because the World is Common ground, therefore the Church is so too, fit to be
put to all the uses of the field, or of worse places. Were it a reasonable
argument; because I see that the whole Country's tilled, why should I not break
up the holy places, and plow the Temple? Why, so we are enclosed for God, and
separated for the uses of Religion, and to preserve our selves pure for them.
Matt. 5. 14.
Our Savior says that the Community of Christians is a City upon an hill; and
then sure the consecrated Persons are the Temple of that City, the separate
places of it; and then as they are most in sight (the Church is ordinarily the
most visible building) so truly he that sees one of them, it should be as if he
saw an open Church, where there is nothing else but holy duty, as if his life
were Liturgy, public Service* and Worship of God. Has your zeal never rose,
at least your indignation, at the profane fury of this Age, which never made a
stop in violation of things sacred, when to its heap of other Sacrileges, it
added most contemptuous defilements of God's ho^^^s; making the place that 1
Cor. 11. 10.
Angels met us in to Worship, and God Exodus 15. 17.
dwelt in to Exodus 20. 14.
bless us there, the place appointed for the Divinest Mysteries of our
Redemption, for the Celebration of Christ's Agonies, for the Commemoration of
the blessed Sacrifice, the place for nothing but Christ's Blood, then to become
the place of a most odious and insolent uncleanness? If I had worded this more
aggravatingly, it had been only to infer that then to see a consecrated person
to polute himself with those black foulnesses that made hell and made fiends,
is sure a sadder and a more unhappy spectacle. If an Apostle become wicked,
John 6. 7.
he is in our Savior's Character a Devil; Have I not chosen Twelve, and one of
you is a Devil? Yea if the good Saint Peter do become a scandal; Mat. 16. 23.
tempt to that which is not good; Get thee behind me, Apoc. 1. 20.
Satan. Christ calls his nearest Officers Stars; Emblems of a great
separateness those, that teach them how far their Conversation should be
removed from Earth; for they are of another Orb, Heaven is the Region of
Stars: But they are Emblems of a greater purity; there is nothing in the World
so clean as light, it is not possible so much as to fully shine; it may
irradiate dung-hills, but they do not defile it; you may Eclipse a Star but
cannot spot it; you may put o^ the light, you cannot stain it. It Is a word for
God's purity: only his light is glory; and as his holiness is so separate that
it is incommunicable, so his Light is inaccessible; Yet sure they that are
stars in Christ's right hand, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Apoc. 1. 20.
they do come near, and mix their light with his; and they of all men must be
pure and holy, whom the spirit calls to that place, as he does all whom he
calls to that separation that he did Barnabas and Saul, the Persons and the
next Part; Separate me Barnabas and Saul.

I intend not to make particular reflections upon these persons, although the
Character of Barnabas be registered the 11. Chap. v. 24. He was a good man, full
of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost, and the good influence that that had upon the
people follows; And much people was added to the Church. And as for Saul,
though he began the Christian persecution, and was baptized in the first
Martyr-blood, and breathed out threatenings, Acts. 9. 1.
so that nothing but thunder could out-voice him, and at last was born as an
(...), as an untimely birth, aborting through those wounds which his own hands
had made in the Church, 1 Cor. 15.
and making himself a birth with ripping up her bowels; yet this Abortive
proved the strongest birth, and 'twas a Miscarriage into the chiefest Apostle.
As he began the after-sufferings of Christ in Stephen; so he fulfilled the
(...), and made up all that was behind, in himself, being in deaths more than
those he inflicted. Col. 1. 24.
The sound of his preaching was louder than that at his Conversion, out-voic'd
the thunder; for this went out into all lands, as if himself alone meant to
execute the whole Commission, Mat. 16. 15.
Preach the Gospel to every creature: which he did almost, Romans 15. 10. 2 Cor.
10. 16.
not only preaching to those places where Christ was not named, without the
other Apostles line; but even where the rest employed themselves, he wrought as
much as they, in Asia as Saint John, at Antioch as Peter; yea and at Rome too,
having as much to do in their foundation: If I had said more, I could have
brought the Popes own Seal for evidence; where not only both are, but Saint
Paul has the right hand: And truly if they had had the luck to think at first
of founding all their pretensions on Saint Paul, his care of all the Churches
would have born them out, 2 Cor. 11. 28. John 21. 15.
as well as feed my Lambs does now. But these considerations I pass; though
they would give a Man that has done mischief in the Church a pattern for the
measures of his future Service to the Church. The thing I shall concern my self
in, is the solemn separation here of those who were before separated to the
work of the Gospel; Barnabas sent by the Church of Jerusalem to Antioch, Act.
11. 22. and Paul not only separated from his Mothers womb, Gal. 1. 15. but
chosen by express Revelation, and by the laying on of Ananias's hands Acts 9.
17. Putting on his hands he said, the Lord has sent me, that the might be
fille^ with the Holy Ghost.
that so he might receive the Holy Ghost, qualified to Act. 9. 15. and 22. 14.
Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles and to Kings. In which work both of them had
for some years ^ercised themselves. Yet here is a new consecration, and they
are taken up to a condition more separate and distinct from what they were
before. And all those vast advantages in which these persons did excel; the
one of Faith and fullness of the Holy Ghost, the other, besides those, of
express and immediate mission from Heaven; and the most strange success their
labors had been blessed with, all these I say, did not qualify them to assume
these powers which the Holy Ghost commands another separation to enstall them
in: And 'twas this (...) that called Paul to be an (...). Separate for the
work, that is, for the Apostleship. Oecumenius upon this text. And so Theoph.
(...) Theoph. in Act. Apostol. p. 2. and in locum p. 118. Vid T^eoph. in locum
p. 119.
Apostle, Romans 1. 1. (as from this time he is always called Paul, not sooner.)
Nor do we find any least footsteps of their being Apostles before, though
Barnabas were sent to Antioch, yet he does not undertake what Peter and John
did at Samaria in the very same case; for they confirm and give the Holy Ghost,
Act. 8. 15, 37. but Barnabas does nothing but Exhort, Act. 11. 23. and he and
Paul together Preached the Word abroad, but we find nothing else they
enterpriz'd: but from this time they exercise Jurisdiction, settle Churches,
and ordain them Elders in the Churches, Chapter 14. 22, 23. and (as it does appear)
singly derived these powers to others, to be exercised by them singly. To Titus
most expressly, Tit. 1. 5. the like also to Timothy, with all the other Acts of
Jurisdiction, (of which their Epistles are the Records) particularly that of
Censures, which Paul himself had inflicted on offenders in the Churches he had
planted. Powers these, which by such steps and by degrees of separation an
Apostle himself receives, and does not execute 'till he ascend the highest,
that which they have a new solemnity ordained from Heaven to enstate them in,
by a new laying on of hands, and the holy Ghost himself commanding, separate.

The separateness of this highest order in the Church is a doctrine handed down
to us both by the writings of all Ages and the practices; (two things, which as
they scarcely do concur in such a visible degree in any other things in our
Religion, so also when they do concur, they make and secure tradition beyond
all contradiction, give it sufficient infallibility: and truly he that does
refuse the evidence which such tradition gives to all the motives of believing
Christianity, if he be not a Socinian, he must be an Enthusiast, and can
receive his Religion only from Revelation.) Now the matter of fact of this
tradition is a subject for Volumes, not for a discourse, and it has filled so
many, that there is nothing left unsaid, or to be said against, as to the main:
And they that pick some little sayings seeming against this order out of those
Ancients which were themselves of it, and wrote much expressly for it, and think
by those means to confute it, do the same thing with that Romanist, who tore
some little shreds, that look as if they favored some opinions of the
Romanists, out of the Books of Protestants, most of which were directly writ
against the Church of Rome; and putting those together went about by them to
convince the world there never were any such things as Protestants, but they
that did profess to be so were all Papists.

But I will say no more then my Text has done, which evidences it not a
separation only of Degree, but Order, by a new Ceremony, and commissionating to
new powers. If I would stay on words, it is expressed here by one that speaks
very great distances, (...), separate, which does in Scripture word the
distances that the censures of the Church do make, Luke 6. 22. and still in the
Greek Liturgies, when absolution is given, it is said to be (...). Goari. p. 684.
(...), to free them from all curse and separation; as if to pass into the
bounds of this uncalled, were such a thing as to leap over the Censures of the
Church, over the Line of Excommunication; and to break through this wall of
separation, were to break through Anathema's and Curses: Yea, it is used to
express the distance betwixt the Lord's two hands, his right hand and his left,
at the day of Doom, Mat. 25. 32. betwixt which hands there is a (...), a most
insuperable gulf.

But these I shall urge. Indeed the Fathers of the Church have been in these
last days counted (...), separate in the severest sense, cast out as the dung
of the Earth; and the calling it self was under reprobation, as if it separated
only to the left hand of God: But so it was with their Predecessors in the
Text, Saint Paul says of himself and the rest of his Order, that they were
counted (...) and (...), as the filth of the World, and the offscouring of all
things, 1 Cor. 4. 13. and as if they were called only to ruin, and consecrated
for a sacrifice, he says, the Lord has set us forth as men appointed to death,
verse. 9. Indeed since God has pleased to own you as his Churches, Angels, we
are not troubled if some have counted you as the offscouring of the Earth,
while we know Angels do relate to Heaven: And let them consider how they will
reprobate those to the left hand of God, whom Christ calls stars in his right
hand, and he is at the right hand of his Father; and while you were accounted
so you did but follow them that went before in Sufferings as well as Office;
and to do so was part of the (...), the work that they were separated to; which
is the next part, For the work.

I shall but run this over, and reflect upon it as I pass, according as it is
of persent Concernment; and

First, Saint Paul's work was to Preach the Gospel, and we find him doing it
from this time forward to his End. The high Priest of the Jews was called the
Angel of the Lord of Hosts; of which name an Heathen does give this account,
that he was called so, because he was, (...), the Angel or the Messenger of
Gods Commands: so Diodorus Siculus. And Malachy gives the same reason, Mal. 2.
7. he was the Substitute to him upon Mount Sinai, and gave the Law also, Apoc.
1. 26.
only without the thunder. Our Governors succeed into the Name, they are the
Churches Angels; and when we hear the word from them, we have it as it were
from Heaven again, and we receive our Law too (...), by the disposition of
Angels. Acts 7. 1.
Indeed the Case now is not like Saint Paul's, the Gospel then was to be first
revealed to all the World, and by continual inculcating secured against the
depravations which all the malice of the Devil and the World sought to infuse,
and the unskilfulness of infant Christians did make them apt to entetrain: But
now we are all confirmed Christians: Yet truly the time is now such as did give
occasion for Saint Paul's charge to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. a time wherein
they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap
to themselves teachers. He therefore that is in Timothy's place must heap up
Reproofs and Exhortations; or he must heap good sound dispensers of them: Such
as will feed the Lambs with sincere milk, not chafed and heated with commotion
and busy restless Faction; not embitter'd with overflowings of a too-ful gall;
not sour'd with eager sharpnesses of a malicious or a dissatisfied mind; not
impoisoned with the foul tinctures of a scandalous life, nor the Corrosive
infusions of Schismatical and turbulent opinions. He that caters thus for his
flock, and provides such as by doctrine and by practice do instruct them to
live quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty; He, like the Angel
on Mount Sinai, gives the Law to a Nation together, preaches to his whole
Diocese at once, Continually.

The second work was praying for, 2.
and blessing them: This does begin, and close every Epistle; that he asserts
of himself constantly, and it is well known the (...), gifts of those times
inspired for this Work. Now thus our Angels also are Angels of Incense, the
High Priests Office in especial: Those that did daily Minister performd a
service of Incense too, that did accompany the prayers of the people, and sent
them up in perfume; but the High Priests Incense was part of the Lev. 16. 12,
13.
Expiation, and was the Cloud that covered the transgressions of the people
when he came with them all about him before the Mercy-seat. And they who shall
consider that the prayer of Moses (Now Moses and Aaron were among the (...).
Greg. Naz. Orat. 6. ad Greg. Nyssen. (...) Aben. Ezr. ad Psalm. 99.
Priests, Psalm. 99. 6. and He was the chief (...). Greg. Naz. ubi supra (...),
Philo de vita Mosis l. 1, and 3.
Priest) did withhold the Arm of God when it was stretched forth in fury to
destroy, and did commit a violence upon the Lord, such as he could not grapple
with, but seems to deprecate, and fain avoid, and says, Let me alone, that I
may destroy them, Exodus 32. 10. If thou will permit me, my fury shall prevail
upon them, says the Arabic, but if thou pray it cannot; therefore let go thy
prayer, says the Chald. and let me alone. And they who shall consider also
that his prayer did maintain a breach against the Lord, when he had made one,
and was coming to enter in a storm of indignation, then this made head against
him, and repuls't him, Psalm. 106. 23. Had not Moses his chosen stood before him
in the breach, to turn away his wrath lest he should destroy them.
They that consider these effects, will certainly desire the Prayers and
Benedictions of those Gods chiefest Officers of blessing, those that are
consecrated to bless in the Name of the Lord; and will have them in love for
his works sake.

Their Third work is Government, which may be some do look upon as privilege
and not as work; the expectation and delight of their ambitions, and not the
fear and burden of their shoulders. But ambition may as rationally fly at
Miracles as Government, and as hopefully gape after diversity of Tongues, as at
presiding in the Church, the powers of each did come alike from Heaven, and
were the mere gifts of the Holy Ghost, (...) Miracles, gifts of healing,
Governments, diveasities of tongues.
1 Cor. 12. 18. It was so in the Law; when God went to divide part of Moses
burden of Government amongst the Lxx, he came down and took off the Spirit
that was upon him, and gave it to the Lxx, Number. 11. 25. A work this that may
have reason to supersede much of that which I first mentioned: For
notwithstanding all Saint Paul's Assistances of Spirit, he does reckon that
care that came upon him daily from the Churches amongst his persecutions, and
it sums up his Catalogue of sufferings, 2 Cor. 11. Such various Necessities
there are by which Government is distracted, and knows not how to temper it
self to them. For sometimes it must condescend: Paul notwithstanding
Apostolical decrees made in full Council that abrogated Circumcision, ( as the
Holy Ghost had declared it void before,) yet is fain to comport so far with the
violent humors of a party as to Circumcise Timothy, at the very same time when
he delivered those decrees to the Churches to keep, Act. 16. 3, 4. yet
afterward when Circumcision was looked on as Engagement to the whole [That
sense he puts upon it in the Epistle to the Galathians, c. 5. v. 3.]
Law, and to grant them that one thing, was but to teach them to ask more, and
to be able to deny them nothing; then he suffers not Titus to be Circumcised,
nor gave place to them by submission, no not for an hour, Gal. 2. 3, 5. Thus
the Spirit of Government is sometimes a Spirit of meekness, does it work by
soft yieldings, and breaks the Adamant with Cushions which Anvils would not do:
The Ocean with daily billows and tides, helped on with storms of violence, and
hurried by tempests of roaring fury, assaults a rock for many Ages; and yet
makes not the least impression on it, but is beat back, and made retire in
empty some, in insignificant passion: when a few single drops that distill
gently down upon a rock though of Marble, or a small trickle of water that only
wets and glides over the stone, insinuate themselves into it, and soften it so
as to steal themselves a passage through it. and yet Government has a rod too,
which like Moses's can break the rock, and fetch a stream out of the heart of
quarre; and which must be used also: The Holy Spirit himself breathed tempest
when he came, blew in a mighty boisterous Wind: nor does he always whisper soft
things, he came down first in a sound from heaven, and spoke thunder; nor did
it want lightning, the tongue was double flame. Of some we knowwe must have a
Compassion, but others must be saved with terror, Jude 22. 23. which drives me
on to the last piece of their work.

The Censures of the Church, the burden of the Keys; 4.
which (passing by the private use of them in voluntary penitences, and
discipline upon the sick) as they signify public exclusion out of the Church
for scandalous Enormities, and readmission into it upon repentance, have been
sufficiently evinced to belong to the Governors of the Church. The Exercise of
these is so much their work that Saint Paul calls them the Weapons of their
spiritual Warfare, by which they do cast down imaginations and every high
things that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bring into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. A blessed
victory even for the Conquered; and these the only Weapons to atchieve it with.
If those who sin scandalously, and will not hear the admonitions of the Church,
were cast out of the Church; if not Religion, Reputation would restrain them
somewhat: Not to be thought fit Company for Christians would surely make them
proud against their Vices. Shame, the designed Effect of these Censures, has
great pungencies, the fear of it does goad men into actions of the greatest
hazard, and the most unacceptable; such as have nothing lovely in them, but are
wholly distastful. There is a Sin whose face is bloody dismal, and yet because
it is countenanced by the Roysting Ruffian part of the World, men will defy
Reason and Conscience, Man's and God's Law, venture the ruin of all that is
beloved and dear to them in this World, and assault death, and charge and take
Hell by violence; rather then be ashamed before those valiant sinners, Satan's
Hectors: and, they must ^ever come into such Company if they do not go boldly
on upon the sin, is of more force with them than all the indearments of this
World, than all their fear of God, and Death, and that which follows. Now if
Religion could but get such Countenance by the Censures of the Church; and
every open sinner had this certain fear, I should be turned out of all
Christian company, shall be avoided as unfit for Conversation; would it not
have in some degree the like effect? and if the motive beas much exactly, would
not men be chaste or sober or obedient for that very reason for which they will
now be killed and be damned? Without all question Saint Peter's Censure on the
intemperate, 1 Cor. 5. must needs be reformation to him: It Is such a sentence
to the drunkard, not to company with him, whose Vice is nothing but the sauce
of Company; and who does sin against his Body and against his faculties and
against his Conscience, is sick, and is a Sott, and goes to * Hell merely for
Societies sake. Now the infliction of these Censures is so much the work to
which Church Governors are called by the Holy Ghost, that they are equally
called by him to it and to Himself; both are alike bestowed upon them: Receive
the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye retain they are retained, John 20. 22. And in the
first derivations of this office, it was performed with severities, such as
this Age I doubt will not believe, and when they had no temporal sword to be
auxiliary to these Spiritual weapons.

And now to make reflections on this is not for me to undertake, in such a
state of the Church as ours is; wherein the very faults of some do give them an
Indemnity, who having drawn themselves out of the Church, from under its
authority, are also got out of the power of its Censures: So Children that do
run away from their Fathers house, they do escape the Rod; but they do not
consider that withal they run away from the inheritance: And many times in
those that do not do so, but stay within the family; long intermission of the
Rod, and indulged license makes them too big and heady to be brought under
discipline. And is it not so with us? Among many of those that stay within the
Church, (I know not whether I do well to say so, when of these I mean there is
little other Evidence of their doing so but this, that they will swear and
drink of the Churches side; blessed Sons of a demolished Church, who think to
raise their Mother a Temple by throwing stones at her:) by reason of the late
overthrow of Government and discipline, and the consequent licenses, Vice has
been so nursed up, not only by an universal, barefaced, uncorrected practice;
but by principles of liberty, that can dispute down all Ecclesiastical
restraints, and have set up the Religion of License: that now sin is grown so
outrageous, as to be too strong for discipline; nay rather than it should be
set up, it is to be feared they would endeavor to reverse all in the Church,
and enterprise as much in their vices quarrel, as others have done for mistaken
Religion. And indeed to what purpose were the Censures, whose first and
medicinal effect is shame, amongst men, where it is in very many instances the
only shameful thing not to be vicious; where men stand candidates for the
reputation of glorious sinners, take to themselves sins they have not
committed, that are not theirs, and usurp Vice; sins and damnations hypocrites?
What work is here for discipline? But this state wants not precedents; the
censures of the Church were not only laid aside in the Vastations of the Arian
heresy and persecution; when the weapons of the Churches warfare were too weak
to make defense against all their cruelties and impieties: and before that in
Diocletian's days against the Lapsi: But we find also that Saint Paul is forced
to break out only in a passionate wish, (...), I would they were even cut off
that trouble you (cut off by excommunication he means) Gal. 5. 12. When he saw
the ill humors were too spreading, and too tough also; Sedition and Sehisme,
wide and obstinate; so that neither his authority could reach, nor his methods
cure, but were more likely to exasperate them: Then he does excommunicate them
only in desire* And again, 2 Cor. 10. 6. And having in a readiness to revenge
all disobedience when your obedience is fulfilled. It becomes therefore every
one that has good Will for Sion, to labor to fulfill his own obedience, that
so the Church may be empowered to use Christ's Method for reforming of the
rest. And thet that will not do so, must know they shall not only answer for
their sins, but for refusing to be saved from them, that they resist all
medicine, as men resolved that nothing shall be done toward their Cure, as men
that rather choose to perish, and prefer destruction. And for the seasons and
degrees of putting this work into Execution, Wisdom must be implored from that
Spirit of Wisdom that calls unto this work: The last Part; Whereunto I have
called them.

The Nature of the calling of the Holy Ghost is a Subject that would bear a
full discourse. But waving those pretensions which Necessity, and inward
incitation do make to be the Calls of the Holy Ghost I shall positively set
down that the call of God and of the Holy Ghost; to any Work or Office, (for I
enquire not of his calling, to a privilege or state of favor,) is his giving
abilities and gifts qualifying for that Work or Office: The call immediate when
the gifts were so, but mediate and ordinary, when the abilities are given in
his blessing on our ordinary labors. It Is so in every sort of things, Exodus
31. 2. See I have called Bezaleel, and I have filled him with the Spirit of God
in Wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of
Workmanship, to devise cunning works, and to work in all manner of Workmanship;
and behold I have given him Aholiab, and in the hearts of all that are
wise-hearted I have put Wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded
thee: And he repeats the same again, Chap. 35. 30. adding that he has put in
his heart that he may teach both he and Aholiab; so that giving this skill to
work and teach is named Gods calling. So in another case, the Lord does say of
Cyrus, I have called him, Esaias* 48. 15. which he explains in the 49. I have
holden him by my right hand to subdue Nations before him, to loose the loins of
Kings, I have girded him, So when Isaiah says, the Lord has called me from
the Womb, or rather says that of our Savior, Isa. 49. 1. he tells you how,
ver. 5. he formed me and prepared me from the Womb to be his servant, to bring
Jacob to him. And throughout the New Testament, as his Call to a privilege is
(...), his grace, in allowing such a state of favor; so his calls to a Work
are his (...), his gifts enabling for it.

The Gifts of these Apostles by which they were enabled for their Office, and
which made up their call, are set down: Those of Barnabas in the forecited 11
Act. He was a good man, full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost; and Paul's call
was a little Extraordinary. If we look into times, we shall find reason to
believe those Revelations in 2 Cor. 12. were given to Paul a little before this
consecration of him in the Text. That Epistle was writ, says Baronius, in the
second year of Nero, and this separation was in the second of Claudius, as may
be gathered also in some measure from the famine mentioned in the 28th verse of
the 11th chap. betwixt these two were fourteen years: now says Saint Paul when
he wrote that, he had his revelation somewhat above ab annis quatuordecim,
says the Arab.
14. years before; a little therefore before this solemnity. Here was a call
indeed, called up to the third heaven to receive instructions for his Office,
and for ought he did know, called out of his own body too, that he might be the
fitter for it; whether in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell, God
knows, v. 2. and that again, v. 3. They whom Gods Spirit qualifies for
Consecration to separate to these diviner Offices may be styled Angels well,
when they are called from all regards or notices of any body that belongs to
them; their gifts and graces set them above the consideration of flesh: In the
entertainment of these qualifications the Soul is swallowed up so, that it
cannot take cognizance whether it have a body of its own, and is not sensible
of that deer partner of it self, it is so only sensible of this Employment.
It Is not for an Apostle (or for his Successor) to think of things below with
much complacency: When these have all their uses, all their glories on, they
but make pomp to dress the body; which an Apostle does not design for, nor
knows whether he be concerned at all in. He becomes something without a body,
and above the Earth, who for a preparative must be taken up to Paradise, and
called from all commerce and all intelligence with his own body. Saint Paul was
called from Heaven to preach the Gospel; but he was called to Heaven to
qualify him for this higher separation, to an Apostle and Church-Governour.

And now you see your calling, Holy Fathers: And to pass by such obvious
unconcerning observations as at first sight follow, that those who are not
qualified are not called; I shall only take notice hence of the counter-part of
this call, the charge God takes upon him, when he calls to this charge; and
that is, he owns and will protect whom himself calls. 'Twas that he promised to
the Founder and God of your Order; I the Lord have called thee, and I will hold
thine hand, and I will keep thee, Isai. 42. 6. And when he said of Cyrus, I
have called him, he said also, be shall make his way prosperous, Isai. 48. 15.
And so he shall be the way what it will; for thus he said to Jacob, I have
called thee, when thou go through the Water I am with thee, and through the
rivers they shall not overflow thee, Isai. 43. 1, 2. There was Experience of
all this in one of the chief Princes of your Order; when the Apostles were
scarce safe within their Ship, they were so tossed with waves and fears, Math.
14. 28.
yet if our Lord will call him, Peter is confident he shall be safe even in the
Sea; Lord, 29.
if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the Water, says he; and the Lord did
but call him, and he went down and walked on the water safely: As if the
swelling billows did only lift themselves to meet his steps, and raise him up
from sinking. 31.
And when his own doubts, which alone could, were near drowning him, and he but
called the Lord; immediately he stretched out his hand and caught him: He
answers his call, if we answer ours; if we obey when he says come, then will he
come and save when we call to him. ibid.
And so Peter received no hurt, but a rebuke; O thou of little faith, why did
thou doubt? could thou imagine I would not sustein thee in the doing what I
bid thee do? In answering my call? But why seek we experience of so old a date?
There is a more encouraging miracle in these late calls themselves. Had God
sustein'd the Order in its Offices and dignities amidst those waves that racked
the Church of late, it had been prodigy of undeserved Compassion to our Nation:
But whenas all was sunk, to bid the Sea give up what it had swallowed and
consumed; this is more than to catch a sinking Peter, Ephesians. 1. 19. 20.
or to save a falling Church. The work of Resurrection is emphatically called
the working of God's mighty power, and does out-sound that of his ordinary
conservation. And truly 'twas almost as easy to imagination, how the scattered
Atoms of men's dust should order themselves, and reunite, and close into one
flesh; as that the parcels of our Discipline and Service that were lost in such
a wild confusion, and the Offices buried in the rubbish of the demolisht
Churches, should rise again in so much order and beauty. Stantia non poterant
tect a probare Deum. This calling of the Spirit is like that when the Spirit
moved upon the face of the abyss; and called all things out of their no-seeds
there; or like the call of the last Trump. Thus by the miraculous mercies of
these calls God has provided for our hopes, and warranted our faith of his
protections! yet he has also sent us more security, has given us a
Constantine, if his own be not a greater Name, and more deserving of the
Church; for which (it is well known to some) he did contrive and order, when he
could neither plot nor hope for his own Kingdom; and did with passion labor a
succession in your Order, when he did not know how to lay designs for the
Succession of himself or any of his Fathers house to his own Crown and Dignity.
Nor is the secular arm all your security: God himself has set yet more guards
about his consecrated ones, he has severe things for the violaters of them:
Moses, Number. 12. 3, 20, 10.
the meekest man upon the Earth, that in his life was never angry, but once at
the rebellious; seems very passionate in calling Vengeance on those that stir
against these holy Offices. Smite through the loins of all that rise against
them, and of them that hate them, Deuteronomy. 33. 11.
that they rise not again: The loins (we know) are the nest of posterity; so
that, strike through the loins, is, stab the succession, destroy at once all
the posterity of them that would cut off this Tribe, and hinder its Succession.
Nor was this Legal Spirit; Gospel is as severe. Those in Saint Jude that
despise these Governors, Number. 16. 3.
that do as Corah and his Accomplices did, (who gathered themselves against Moses
and Aaron, and said, You take too much upon you, ye Sons of Levi, since all the
Congregation is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them, wherefore
then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? words these
that we are well acquainted with, and which it seems St. Jude looks on as sins
under the Gospel:) these perish in the gainsaying of Core; Jude 11.
whom God would not prepare for punishment by death, but he and his accomplices
went quick into it: He would not let them stay to dye, but the Lord made a new
thing, Number. 16. 30.
to show his detestation of this sin, and the Earth swallowed it in the
Commission, and all that were allied and appertained to them that had an hand
in it. ver. 32, 33.
And truly they may well expect strange recompenses, who do attempt so strange
a Sacrilege, as to pull stars out of Christ's own right hand: From whence, we
have his word, that no man shall be able to pluck any; but if they shine
thence, John 10. 21.
on their Orbs below, and convert many to righteousness, their light shall
blaze out into glory, Heb. 13. 20.
and they shall ever dwell at his right hand: To which right hand He that
brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd and Bishop of
the Sheep, and set him there: He also bring you our Pastors, and us your flock
with you; and set us with his sheep on his right hand. Matthew. 25. 33.
To whom with the same Jesus and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all blessing,
honor, glory, and power, from henceforth for ever. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED AT HAMPTON COURT ON The Twenty Ninth of May 1662. Being the
Anniversary of His Sacred Majesty's Most happy Return.

BY RICHARD ALLESTRY D. D. and Chaplain to His MAJESTY.

LONDON: Printed by John Playford, in the Year 1683.

TO THE Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of CLARENDEN, Lord high Chancellor of
England, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
My LORD,
TO vouch your Lordships commands for the publishing this Discourse, I might
reasonably think, would be to libel your judgment; and the prefixing your Name
to it, and this mean address, would look rather like revenge than homage or
obedience: If I did not know that low performances are due to the transcendency
of such a subject as I then discoursed upon, and such a Patron as I now
Dedicate to: So I lie prostrate under my great Arguments, here insufficiency is
Art and Rhetoric. And the truth is, My Lord, it was not this which made me so
sollicitous to avoid your injunctions, but apprehensions of the unusefulness of
the Discourse it self.

When God's most signal methods of all sorts do not seem to have wrought much
conviction; when neither our own dismal guilts, nor miseries, nor most express
miracles of deliverance have made us sensible, but after the equally stupendous
Thirtieth of January and Twenty Ninth of May, and the black time that
intervened; we are still the same perverse untractable people; when luxury is
the retribution made for plenty, license for liberty, and Atheism for Religion,
whilst miracles of mercy are acknowledged only by prodigies of ungrateful
disobedience: And on the other side, when factious humors swell against all
Laws, as they would either overflow those mounds, or make them yield and give
way to them; when Declarations and Decrees, which infallible when they came
only from a party of a part of a Parliament, are neither of force nor esteem
when they have all solemnity and obligation that just and full authority can
give; alas, what hopes of doing any thing can a weak Harangue entertain? But,
My Lord, since you are pleased to Command, I give up both it and my
understanding to Your Lordship, and the weaker the Discourse is, so much the
more pregnant testimony is it of the obsequiousness of.

My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted and most humble Servant, RICH. ALLESTRY.

SERMON XVII. AT HAMPTON COURT May 29. 1662.
HOSEA III. 5. Afterward shall the Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness.
HE has said in the words before, that the Children of Israel shall abide many
days without a King and without a Prince, without a Sacrifice and without an
Image or Altar, and without an Ephod and without Teraphim. Now when they shall
have been for many years in such a state of helpless desolation, shall have no
King under whose shadow they, their Laws and Rights, might hope for shelter; no
Prince to guard them from the sad calamities of wild confusion or usurping
violence; shall have no exercises of Religion to allay and soften those
calamities, and give them comfort in the bearing of them; no Altar to lay hold
on for security against them, or to stretch out their hands toward, for
deprecation of them; no nor a God to put an end to this sad state; nor any
means of direction what to do under it, no Ephod to ask Counsel at; nor yet the
pageantry, the fallacy of these, no Teraphim for Ephods, nor Image for a God;
the same destruction having seized these and their worshippers, the people and
their Idols going into Captivity together, and the only true God having
forsaken them: Now when the Prophet had denounced this state of Woe, which was
to dwell with them so long as that their very expectations of deliverance
should be dying, having continued threescore years and ten, a longer and more
wearisome age of patience then life, he then proceeds to sweeten all by telling
them of a return, and what things they shall do in it; and they are three.

First, Seek the Lord their God, apply themselves to his Worship and Obedience,
and cleave to him; for so the word is rendered (...), Lev. 19. 23. and Jeremy
repeating this c. 30. 9. words it, shall serve the Lord their God, and David
their King.

Which is the second thing they were to do. As the Ecclesiastical state was to
be settled, so the secular too upon its just foundations, Religion and Loyalty
both running in their ancient current.

Thirdly, They shall fear the Lord and his goodness* Not only tremble before
him, who is the Lord, that did exert his power in their destruction; but shall
much more revere his goodness, that did flow out in such plentiful miraculous
expresses of deliverance.

Now these being not only prophecy what in that juncture they would do, nor
only duties what they were to do, but also counsels and directions immediately
from God what they were best to do, the only prudent and safe course according
to the policies of heaven; the direct view of these particulars in reference to
that state of theirs is not an unconcerning prospect at this season, which is
the Anniversary of an equal return; and therefore I shall lay them so before
you, and the reflection on them in our practice shall make the application.

1. They shall seek the Lord their God is my first part, and the Lord's prime
direction for the repairing of a broken Nation. Neither indeed can any other
course be taken; for 'till we have found him, while he does hide his face,
nothing but darkness dwells upon the land; or if any light do break out, it is
but the kindlings of his anger: So he expresses, Deuteronomy. 31. 17. Th^^ people will
forsake me and break my Covenant, then my anger shall be kindled against them,
and I will forsake them, and hide my face from them, and they shall be
devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them, so that they will say
in that day, Are not these evils come upon us because our God is not amongst
us? This absence is only another word for desclation: Be thou instructed, O
Jerusalem, says God by Jeremy, c. 6. 8. lest my soul depart from thee, and I
make thee desolate, a land not inhabited: As if without him there were nothing
else but solitude in Cities and in Courts, and all were desert where he does
not dwell. Yea there is something beyond desolation, Hos. 9. 11, 12. As for
Ephraim, their glory shall flee away like a bird from the birth and from the
womb, and from the Conception: though they bring up their Children, yet I will
bereve them that there shall not be a man, (...) yea woe also to them when I
depart from them. And it must needs be so; for let our state be never so
calamitous, if God be not departed, there is comfort in it, Psalm. 44. 19.
and a deliverer at hand: If we are in the place of Dragons, his presence will
make heaven there; and although we be covered with the shadow of death, if the
light of his Countenance break in, we are in glory; and the brightness of that
will soon damp and shine out the fiery Trial. But if the Lord depart, then
there is no redemption possible; God has forsaken him, persecute him and take
him, for there is none to deliver him, Psalm. 71. 11. But if there were
deliverance some other way, yet the want of God's presence is an evil, such as
nothing in the whole world can make good: The presence of an Angel in his stead
does not. When the Lord said to Israel, I will not go up in the midst of thee,
but I will send an Angel with thee, and drive out the Amorite, the Hittite,
etc. yet when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourn^d, and man did
put on his Ornaments, Exodus 33. 4. Nay more, I shall not speak a contradiction
if I shall say, that the most intimate presence of the Godhead does not supply
God's absence; and such a small withdrawing of himself as may consist with
being united hypostatically, was too much for him to bear, who was Immanuel
when he complained God was not with him: I mean our Savior on the Cross. He,
who although he did beseech against his cup with fervencies that did breath out
in heats of bloody sweat, Luke 22. 44.
with agonies of prayer, yet when he fell down under it, did cheerfully submit
to it, saying, Not my will, Ver. 42. Mat. 27. 46.
but thy will be done; yet when God hides himself, he does expostulate with
him, crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? His God could no
more forsake him, than himself could be not himself: And yet the apprehension
of that which could not be was even insufferable to him, to whom nothing could
be insufferable.

He seems to feel a very contradiction while he but seems to feel the want of
the Lord's presence.

Such is the sad importance of God's not being with us; and this same instant
tells us what drives him away. 'Twas sin that he withdrew from them: Christ did
but take on him our guilt, and upon that the Lord forsook him: God could no
more endure to behold wickedness in him, than the Sun could to see God suffer;
Iniquity eclipsed them both, and sin did separate betwixt him and himself, and
made that person who was God cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Mat. 27. 45.
And it will do the same betwixt God and a people. Isay. 59. 1, 2. Behold, the
Lord's hand is not shortened that it cannot save; nor his ear heavy that it
cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and
your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. His face is
clothed with light, we know; but when Wickedness over-spreads a people, those
deeds of darkness put out the light of his Countenance. His hand although it be
not shortened, yet it contracts and shuts it self, not only to grasp and
withhold his mercies from them, but to smite: Iniquity builds such a wall of
separation as does shut out omnipresence, and makes him who is every where, not
be with such a people; not be in hearing of their needs; for when their sins do
cry, no prayers can be hearkened to; he will not hear you, says the Prophet.
And that gives us the very (...) of the Lord's departure from a people, and the
manner of it.

He is taking away his peace and mercies from a Nation when he will hear no
prayers for it; and he declares that he will hear no prayers when he withdraws
once from his house of prayer, and makes his Offices to cease. The place
appointed for these Offices, the Sanctuary, he calls, we know the Tabernacle of
(...)
meeting, that is, where he would Exodus 29. 42, 43.
meet his votaries, and hear and bless them; calls it his Psalm. 42. 4.
house; his Psalm. 74. 7.
dwelling place, his Court, Psalm. 31. 20.
presence, and his Jer. 17. 12. and 14. 21.
throne: And if so, when he is not to be found in these, when he no longer
dwells nor meets in them, we may be sure that he has left the land. The
Psalmist, Psalm. 74.
when he does complain men had done evil in the Sanctuary, Ver. 3.
the adversaries roared in the midst of the Congregations, and set up their
banners there for trophies; Psalm. 4. 6.
they broke down all the carved work thereof with axes and hammers, Ver. 7.
and had defiled the dwelling places of God's name even to the ground, Ver. 1.
2.
and burnt up all the houses of God in the land; he does suppose that God was
then departed when they had left him no abiding place: And therefore cries out,
O God wherefore art thou absent from us so long? Remember Sion where thou have
dwelt. But it is not only upon these Analogies I build; this method of departure
we shall find exactly in Ezekiel's Vision of that case to which my Text
referrs: It begins chapter 9. 3. And the glory of the God of Israel, (i. e. the
shining cloud, the token of his presence in the Sanctuary,) went up from the
Cherub whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house, as going out; and then
verse. 8. he does refuse to be entreated for the land: After that chapter 10. 18.
the glory went from off the threshold to the midst of the City; and chapter 11. 23.
it went from thence to the mountain without the City, and so away: And then
nothing but desolation dwelt upon the land, until the Counsel of my Text was
followed, and they did seek the Lord their God: For then the glory did return
into the Sanctuary just as it went away, as you may find it chap. 43.

And having seen when and how God forsakes a people, and for what, that does
direct us how to seek him, and it is thus, When men forsake those paths in
which they did not only err and go astray, but did walk contrary to God, so
that they did forsake each other; and do return, walk in his ways, the ways of
Commandments, and return also to his Church, and seek him in his house, fall
low before his footstool, beg of him to meet in his tabernacle, renew his
worship, and all invitations of him to return into his dewlling place. For sure
as it is in vain to seek him but in his own ways, nor can we hope to meet him
but in his Tabernacle of meeting; so also Scripture calls both these to seek
the Lord, and promises to both the finding him. To the first, Deuteronomy. 4. 29, 30.
If from thy tribulation thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him,
if thou seek him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, if thou turn to the
Lord thy God, and shall be obedient to his voice. And the second, Jer. 29. 12.
speaking of this sad state to which my Text relates, then shall ye call upon
me, and ye shall go and pray unto me; and I will hearken unto you, and I will
be found of you, says the Lord, and I will turn away your Captivity. I could
produce you instances of Asa making all his people swear to seek the Lord: But
because my Text speaks of David, he shall be the great explication, as he was
the practice of this duty in both senses. In the former, 119. Psalm. I have
sought thy Commandments above Gold or precious stone; more than that which does
make and does adorn my Crown, than that which furnishes all the necessities and
all the pomps of Royalty. And for the other, Psalm. 63. 1, 2. O God, thou art my
God, early will I seek thee: My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for
thee in a dry and thirsty land where no water is: To see thy power and thy
glory, as I have seen the in the Sanctuary. His very words do seem to labor
too, and he does seek expressions to tell us how he seeks. The hot fits of a
thirsty palate that call so often and so impetuously are in his soul; it has a
pious fever, which cannot be allayed but by pouring out of his soul to God in
the Temple, by breathing out its heats in his devotion Offices. Nay, more, he
longs, has that I know not whether appetite, or passion, which is not to be
understood, but only suffered; to which all the unreasonable violences which
passion can be heated into, all the defaillances nature can be oppressed into,
are natural; it is the bodies Ecstasy. Now this he had toward the worship of
the Sanctuary; his very flesh found rapture in those exercises, and when he was
in a barren and dry land, was driven from the plenties of a Court, and from the
glories of a throne into a desert solitude, he found no other wants but of
God's house; did mind, pant, and long after nothing else, did neither thirst
for his necessities, nor long for his own Crown, but for the Tabernacle only.
And besides the Religion of this, he had reason of State too to be thus
affected; this was the best means to engage his Subjects to him and secure his
Throne. He knew, if by establishing God's worship, Psalm. 42. 4.
and by going with the multitude, as he did use, to the exercises of it; if by
Royal Example and encouragements of virtue, and by discountenancing and
chastising impiety, by doing as he did profess to do, Psalm. 101. (that
Directory for a Court) he could people his land with holy living, and his
Temple with holy Worship; he knew he should then have good Subjects, Loyal to
him and at peace with themselves. I they will seek their God, then they will
seek their King. The Lord saw this dependence, and therefore counseled this
course should be taken. The Master of our Politics discerned it too, Arist.
Pol. 1 7.
and therefore does advise that the first and chiefest public cares should be
about things of Religion, that and the same profession of it being (...), the
cement of Communities, and the very foundation of all legislative, and indeed
all power in the Magistrate: And in the people (...), it is a most efficacious
philtre, Joseph. 1. con. Appio.
a charm, a Gordian knot of kindness. And as a Jew observed of their own
Nation, (...), To have one and the same opinions of God, and not to differ in
their rites from one another, breeds the best harmony in men's affections. When
on the other side no obligations, though the most signal and divine, will hold
them in obedience and peace, if their ambitions or interests look another way:
And if at any time present advantage, or an expectation, or some passion do
incline them to seek David their King; yet the appearance of a change of
Interest, that expectation defeated, or a cross animosity will burst those
bonds, unless Religion and Communion in Worship help to twist them. David had
had experience of this.

Abner knew of God's Oath to David that after Saul he should be King over all
Israel; but he was otherwise concerned, and therefore he made Ishbosheth King,
maintained a long and sore War even against what he knew God was engaged to
bring about, (...)
and made himself strong for the house of Saul, 2 Samuel 2, 3, chapter But when a
quarrel happened betwixt Ishbosheth and him, then, So do God to Abner and more
also, except as the Lord has sworn to David, even so I do to him, to set up
the throne of David over Israel and over Judah. And he sent Messengers to him
saying, Whose is the land? Make but thy league with me, c. 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. Do
but look forward, and you find when Abner was cut off, and Ishbosheth was
slain, and Israel had no leader, then they came to David, saying, behold we are
thy bone and thy flesh, and the Lord said to thee, Thou shall feed my people
Israel, c. 5. 1, 2. They knew all that before, yet would not let him do it,
'till they had no other leader. Nay, when they had done that, by Absalom's
insinuations (who in a way of treacherous pity did instill dislikes against
the Government, and did remonstrate in good wishes, as some men do in prayers,
c. 15. 3, 4.) they were all drawn into Rebellion against this David, and made
him fly out of the land, and became Subjects to that Absalom. When he was dead
indeed they speak of bringing back the King, c. 19. 10. and when his own Judah
had done it, quarreled, ver. 43. because that their advice was not first had:
And though Judah had nothing but their service, for, have we eaten at all of
the Kings cost, or has he given us any gift? say they, v. 42. yet Israel in
angry, because he came not back upon their score, for they forsooth have ten
parts in him, v. 43. and yet the next day every man of Israel went after him
that said, we have no part in David, Sheba a man of Belial, chapter 20. 1. Thus no
allegiance, no tie however sacred and divine will hold them who follow not upon
God's score. Nay at the last, because that Re^oboam would not ease the Taxes,
all Israel cry out, What portion have we in David? see to thine own house, 1
Kings 12. 16
David. And to make this secession perpetual (which all the former did not
prove) Jeroboam did use no other policy, but to change the Worship and the
Priests: He knew he should divide their hearts and Nations for ever, when he
had altered once the Service and the Officers; and if he could but keep them
from seeking God at Jerusalem, he was secure they would not seek David their
King. And so it proved. Now the Lord to prevent divisions had provided so far
for Uniformity in his Worship, that he required a single Unity; and that it
might be but in one manner, he let it be but in one place.

And truly, when men once depart from Uniformity, what measures can they set
themselves of changing? What shall confine or put shores to them? what
Principle can they proceed upon which shall engage them to stay any where? And
why may not divisions be as infinite as men's fancies? And though, when those
are but in circumstantial things, those who are strong, and know them to be
such, are no otherwise concerned to contend for them than on Authorities
behalf, (to which every change is a Convulsion fit.) and on the account of
decency, and of compliance with the universal Church: yet when others do
dogmatize, and put conscience in the not doing them, and stand at such a
distance from them as to choose Schism, Disobedience, and Sedition rather, and
therefore must needs look upon damnation in them; these differences make as
great a gulf and chasm as that which does divide Dives from Abraham's bosom.
Luke 16. 26.
It is one God, one Faith, one Worship makes hearts one. Hands lifted up
together in the Temple they will join and clasp: And so Religion does fulfill
its name a religando, binds Prince and Subjects all together; and they who thus
do seek the Lord their God, will also seek David their King, God's next
direction, and my second part.

2. And here three things offer themselves, a King, their King, and David their
King.

I am not here to read a Lecture of State Policy upon a vie of Governments; why
seek a King, not any other sort of Government; and why their King, one that
already was so by the right of Succession, not whom addresses or election
should make so. And though I think, 'twere easy to demonstrate only Monarchy
had ever a divine or natural original, and that elective Monarchy is most
unsafe and burdensome, full of dangerous and uneasy consequences; and this so
much to sight, that choice for the most part bounds it self, proves but a
ceremony of Succession: yet this I need not do, for I am dealing with the Jews,
who had God's judgment in the case, and his appointment too; and to me that is
argument enough. And when God has declared, for the transgressions of a land
many are the Princes thereof; Prove. 28. 2.
many at once, as in a commonwealth, or many several families successively,
(for so God reckons also one or many; it is still, we see, David their King,
while it is in David's line, and so the King does truly never die, while his
race lives.) If either of these many be Gods punishment, for the sins of a
land; I will not say that they who love the many Princes love the
transgressions which God plagues so; but I will say, they who do choose that
which God call his plague, that quarrel for his vengeance, and with great
strife and hazard take his indignation by force, I can but pity them in their
own opinions and enjoyments: But, O my soul, enter not thou into their counsels.

As for seeking their King, I shall content my self with that which Calvin says
upon the words; Nam aliter vere and ex animo Deum quaerere non potuit, quin se
etiam subjiceret legitimo imperio cui subjectus erat: For they could not
otherwise truly and with all their heart seek God, except they did subject
themselves to his Government to whom they did of right belong as Subjects. And
I shall add that they who do forsake their King, will soon forsake their God.
E. Simeo the Son of Jochai said, (...) and R Simeon the Son of Menasiah said,
(...)
The Rabbines say it more severely of Israel that they at once rejected three
things, the Kingdom of the house of David, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Sanctuary. And truly, if we do consult that State from the beginning, we shall
find that when they were without their King, they always were without their God.

Moses was the first King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
and he was only gone into the Mount for forty days, Exodus 32. 1, 5.
and they set up a Golden Calf; they make themselves a God if they want him
whom the Lord makes so, as he does the Magistrate: If they have not a Prince,
that (...) (...), living Image of God, then they must have an Idol. When Moses
his next successor was dead, we read that the man Micah had an house of Gods,
and consecrated one of his Sons to be his Priest: And truly he might make his
Priest who made his Deities. And the account of this is given, in those days
there was no King in Israel, Jud. 17. 5, 6. The very same is said, chapter 18. 1.
to preface the Idolatry of the Tribe of Dan* There was no heir of restraint, as
it is worded ver. 7. It seems, to curb impiety is the Princes Inheritance,
which 'till it be suppressed, he has not what he is heir to. But Vice will know
no Boundaries if there be no King, whose Sword is the only mound and fence
against it: for if we read on there, 19, 20, 21. chapter we shall find those dismal
Tragedies of Lust and War, the one of which did sin to death the Levites wife;
the other, besides 40000. slain of them who had a righteous cause, and whom God
did bid fight, destroyed also a Tribe in Israel: These all sprang from the same
occasion, for so the story closes it, In those days there was no king in
Israel, chapter 21. 25.

Just upon this; when God in their necessities did raise them Judges, that is,
Kings, read all their story, you will find to almost every several Judge there
did succeed a several Idolatry: God still complaining, the Children of Israel
did evil again after the death of such an one, Judge. 3. 7. and ver. 12.
'till he raised them another. Those 450. years being divided all betwixt their
Princes and their Idols. Chapter 4. 1.
After them Jeroboam, he that made the great secession of that people from
their Prince, Chapter 6. 1.
has got no other Character from God but this, Chapter 10. 6.
the 1 Kings 16. 26. Chapter 21. 22. and 22. 52. etc.
Man that did make Israel to sin, Chapter 13. 1.
at once against God and against their King. Yea upon this account they are
reckoned by God to sin after both their Idolatry and State were ended, when
their calves and their Kingdom were destroyed. Ezekiel. 4. 4, 5. the Lord does bid
the Prophet lie on his left side 390 days, to bear the iniquity of Israel
according to the number of the years of their iniquity. But this was more then
the years of their State, which were only 255, 390 years indeed there were
betwixt the falling off of the Ten Tribes, and the destruction of Jerusalem by
the King of Babel; but those ten Tribes were gone, their Kingdom perfectly
destroyed above 130 years before: But their iniquity was not, it seems, that
does outlive their State, so long as that God's Temple, that King's house did
stand from which they did divide. As if Seditious men and schismatics sin
longer then they are, even while those are whom they do sin against in
separating from.

It Is true, there was an Ahaz and Manasseh in the house of David, but Hezekiah
and Josiah did succeed. Mischief did not appear entailed on Monarchy, as it is
upon rebellion and having no King. It does appear their Kings were guards also
to God and his Religion, the great defenders of his faith and worship. God and
the Prince for the most part stood and fell together: Therefore St. Paul did
afterward advise to pray for Kings, Tim. 2. 2.
that we might live in godliness and honesty; and still they were the same who
sought the Lord their God, and David their King.

But why David their King? For could his Kingdom disappear and be to seek; of
whom the Lord had said, I have sworn once by my Holiness, I will not fail
David? Psalm. 89. And his Throne therefore was as sure as God is holy. ver. 35.
But yet the Lord had said to the people of Israel, 1 Samuel 12. 15.
If ye do wickedly, ye shall be destroyed both you and your King. There are
other sins besides Rebellion and Treason that murder Kings and Governments.
Those that support their Ills by their dependencies, and use great shadows for
a shelter to rapacity, oppression, or licenses, or any crying wickedness; those
prove Traitors to Majesty and themselves, strike at the root of that under
which they took covert, fell that and crush themselves. National vices have all
Treason in them, and every combination in such sins is a Conspiracy. If
universal practice palliate them, we do not see their stain in may be, think
them slight; but their complexion is purple: Common blood is not deep enough to
color them, they die themselves in that that is sacred. Nay these do seem to
spread contagion to God, as if they would not let the Lord be holy, nor suffer
that to be which he swore by his holiness should be: Psalm. 89. 49.
For the Psalmist cries out, Where are thy old loving kindnesses which thou
swarest unto David? But sure some of God's Oaths will stand; if not those of
his kindness, those will by which he swears the ruin of such sinners, and God
that is holy will be sanctified in judgment upon them. Isa. 5. 16.
Yea, upon more then the offenders, for the guilty themselves are not a
sacrifice equal to such piacular ofences. Innocent Majesty must bleed for them
too; If you do wickedly, you shall be destroyed both you and your King. Thus
when God would remove Judah out of his sight, good Josiah must fall; and the
same makes them be to seek David their King.

But how David their King, when 'twas Zorobabel? For with Theodoret and others
I conclude he must be meant the first literal importance of the words.

It was the custom of most Nations from some great eminent prince to name all
the Succession, so at once to suggest his Excellencies to his followers, and to
make his glory live. Now without doubt David was Hero enough for this, and his
valor alone sufficient to ground the like practice upon. And though we do not
find that done, yet we do find his piety and his uprightness made the standard
by which that of his Successors is meted. Of one it is said, he walked in the
ways of David his Father, 2 Chro. 34. 2.
of another, he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, 2 King. 14.
3.
but not like unto David his Father. And because David went aside, and was
upright with an Exceptation, once therefore it is said, The Lord was with
Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his Father David. But
besides this, his very name is given to two, 2 Chronicles. 17. 3.
Zorobabel, and the Messiah; both which were to be the restorers of their
people: The one from Sin and Hell, to reestablish the Kingdom of heaven it
self; the other to deliver his people from Babel, and to repair a broken Nation
and demolished Temple. And for this work God bids them seek David their King.

The ways from Babel to Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. 3, 5.
from the Confusion of a people to a City that is at unity in it self, the City
of God where he appears in perfect beauty, and where the throne of the house of
David is, must be the first ways of David: In those he walked to Sion, and did
invest his people in God's promises, the whole land of Canaan. In those
Zorobabel brought them back to that land and Sion. And in these our Messiah
leads us to Mount Sion that is above, to the celestial Jerusalem; does build an
universal Church and Heaven it self. And all that have the like to do must walk
in those first ways, fulfill that part of David, and must Copy Christ. Such the
repairers of great breaches must be: These are the ways to settle Thrones, the
only ways in which we may find the goodness of the Lord; which to fear is the
third direction, and my last part.

They shall fear the Lord and his goodness. 3. That Israel who came but now out
of the furnace should fear the Lord whose wrath did kindle it, whose justice
they had found such a consuming fire as to make the Temple it self a Sacrifice,
and the whole Nation a burnt-offering, is reasonable to expect: But when his
goodness had repaired all this, to require them to fear that, does seem hard.
That that goodness which when it is once apprehended does commit a rape upon
our faculties, and being tasted melts the heart, and causes dissolution of soul
through swoons of complacency, Psalm. 130. 4.
that this should be received with dread and trembling, is most strange. Indeed
the Psalmist says, There is mercy with God that he may be feared; for where
there not, we should grow desperate* But how to fear those mercies is not
easy. It Is true, when God made his goodness pass fore Moses, showed him the
glory of it, as he says, in those mo^^ comfortable Attributes, the sight of
which is beatifick Vision, Exodus 34. 6, etc. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful
and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin; if that which follows
there be part of it, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third or fourth Generation;
if this be one ray of the glory of goodness, if it dart out such beams, alas,
it is as devouring as the lake of fire, his very goodness stabs whole
successions at once, and the guilty may tremble at it for themselves and their
posterity. But if those words do mean as we translate those very words, Jer.
46. 28. I will not leave thee altogether unpunished, (...)
yet will not utterly cut off, not make a full end of the guilty, when I visit
Iniquities upon the Children, but will leave them a remnant still; then there
is nothing dreadful in it, but those very visitations have kindness in them,
and his rod comforts, and this issue of his goodness also is not terrible but
lovely. To fear God's goodness therefore is to revere it, to entertain it with
a pious astonishment, acknowledging themselves unworthy of the crumbs of it,
especially not daring to provoke it by surfeiting, or by presuming on it, or by
abusing it to serve ill ends, or any other than God sent it for, those of piety
and obedience: Not to comply with which, is to defeat God's kindness, and the
designs of it. If when they sought the Lord, he was found of them, and came to
his dwelling place only to be forced thence again by their abominations; if
when his goodness had restored all to them, they had David their King but to
conspire against, an Altar only to pollute, and a Temple to separate from, as
Manasses the Priest, Sanballat's son in-law, with his accomplices did do; this
were both to affront and to renounce that goodness, which above all things they
must dread the doing: For if this be offended too, ruin is irreversible; there
is no other attribute in God a sinner can fly to with any hope. His Holiness
cannot behold iniquity, his Justice speaks nothing but condemnation to guilt,
his Power without kindness is but omnipotent destruction; but if we have his
Goodness on our side, we have an Advocate in his own bosom that will bear up
against the rest, for his mercy is over all his Attributes as well as Works:
But if this also be exasperated, and kindness grow severe, there is no refuge
in the Lord, no shadow of him to take Sanctuary under; for there is nothing to
allay the anger of his Comp^ssion and Bounty. This sure is the extremest
terror, we are to dread his kindness more than his severity and wrath; we have
an antidote, a buckler against those, but none against the other if it be
provoked; and if the heats of love take fire and rise into indignation, it is
unquenchable flame and everlasting burning. Therefore when God has done all
things that he can do or they can wish, then most of all they must fear the
Lord and his goodness.

My Text and I have spoke all this while to the Jews: Nor do I know whether I
need to address any other way, all this did so directly point at us. The
glories of this day need not the foil of those calamities from which this day
redeemed, to set them off; or you may read them in my Prophet here, and our own
guilts will make too sad a Comment on his Text, who were more barbarous
Assyrians to our selves. We also were without a Prince and without Sacrifice,
had neither King, nor Church, nor Offices, because we our selves had destroyed
them, and that we might not have them had engaged or covenanted against them;
tied to our miseries so, that without perjury we could neither be without them,
nor yet have them. As we had broke through all our sacred Oaths to invade and
usurp calamity and guilt, so neither could we repent without breach of Vows, if
this were not enough to make us be without a God too, then to drive him away we
had defiled his dwelling places to the ground, and by his ancient gifts of
remove he was certainly gone. There was indeed exceeding much Religion among
us, yet, God knows, almost none at all, while Christianity was crumbled into so
many, so minute professions, that 'twas divided into little nothings, and even
loft in a crowd of it self; while each man was a Church, every single professor
was a whole multitude of Sects. And in this tumult, this riot of faiths, if the
Son of man should have come, could he have found any Faith in the Land? Virtue
was out of countenance and practice, while prosperous and happy Villainy usurped
its name; while Loyalty, and conscience of Oaths, and Duty were most
unpardonable crimes, to which nothing but ruin was an equal punishment; and
all those guilts that make the last times perilous, Blasphemy, Disobedience,
Truce-breakings and Treasons, Schisms and Rebellions, with all their dismal
consequences and appendages, (for these are not single, personal crimes, these
have a politic capacity) all these did not only walk in the dress of piety,
and under holy Masks, but were themselves the very form of Godliness, by which
'twas constituted and distinguished, the Signature of a party of Saints, the
Constellation of their graces: And on the other side, the detestation of such
hypocrisy made others Libertines and Atheists; while seeing men such holy
counterfeits, so violent in acting, and equally engaged for every false
Religion, made them conclude there was none true, or in earnest. And all this
was because we were without our King; for 'twas the only interest of all those
usurpations that were, to contrive and preserve it thus. And when we had rolled
thus through every form of Government, addressed to each, moved every stone, and
raised each stone to the top of the Mount, but every one still tumbled down
again, and ours like Sisyphus's labor was like to have no end, only restless
and various Calamity; necessity then counseled us, and we applied to God's
directions in the Text, I know not whether in his method, but it is plain we
did seek David our King. And my heart is toward the Governors of Isral, Judge.
5. 9.
that offered themselves willingly among the people: Bless ye the Lord: Yea,
Thou O Lord, bless them. May all the blessings which this was the birthday of,
all that my Text encloses, all the goodness of the Lord, be the sure portion of
them and their Families; may they see the King in his beauty, and peace upon
Israel, and may their Names be blessed in their Posterities for evermore. We
sought him with the violent impatiencies of necessitous and furious desires,
and our eyes, that had even failed with looking for him, did even fail with
looking on him, as impotent and as unsatisfied in our fruitions as
expectations; and he was entertained with as many tears as prayed for; as one
whom not our Interests alone, but out guilts had endeared to us, and our tears:
He was as necessary to us as repentance, as without whom it was impossible for
us to repent and return from those impieties to him, of usurping his rights, of
exiling, of murdering him by wants, because we could not do it by the Axe or
Sword; without him 'twas impossible for us to give over the committing these;
and the tears that did welcome him were one of our best lavers to wash off that
blood that we had pulled upon our selves. One endeared also to us by God's most
miraculous preservations of him for us: We cannot look upon his life but as the
issue of prodigious bounty, snatched by immediate Providence out of the gaping
jaws of tyrannous, usurping, murtherous malice, merely to keep him for our
needs, and for this day: One whom God had trained up and managed for us, 2 Samuel
5. 4.
just as he did prepare David their King, at thirty years of age to take
possession of that Crown which God had given him by Samuel about twelve years
before; Inter 7 and 9. Sauli qui regnavit an. 20. Vid. Sim. Chron.
and in those years to prepare him for Canaan by a Wilderness, to harden him
with discipline, that so the luxuries and the effeminacies of a Court might not
emasculate and melt him; by constant Watches, cares and business to make him
equal for, habituated to, careful of and affected with the business of a
Kingdom; and by constraining him to dwell in Mesech, with Aliens to his
Religion, to teach him to be constant to his own, Psalm. 120. 5.
and to love Sion. And has he not prepared our David so for us? And we hope
has prepared for him too the first days of David, having no Sheba in the
Field, not Achitophel in the Council, nor an Abiathar in the Temple, not in
that Temple which himself has raised, God having made him instrument of that
which he would not let David do, building his house, and furnishing it with all
its Offices, and making it fit for God to meet us in; when we do seek him also,
which was the other perquisite of our Condition.

There never was so much pretense of seeking God as in those late days of his
absence from us; and it should seem indeed we knew not where to find him, we
took such several ways to seek him. But if God did not look down from heaven
then as he did Psalm. 14. to see if any did understand and seek after God,
should he not then have found it here as there? Psalm. 14. Romans 3.
They are altogether gone out of the way; their throat is an open sepulcher,
with their tongues have they deceived, the poison of asps is under their lips,
their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed
blood: destruction and unhappiness is in their ways, and the way of peace have
they not known; there is no fear of God before their eyes: They eat up my
people as it were bread; and, which is worse in these then them, they even then
call upon God; as if they craved a blessing from the Lord upon that meal that
did devour his people, and when they did seek God, they meant to find a prey.
Yet where were any others that did seek him? Or that do cleave to him now? The
Schismatic does not seek God, who shuns the place where he appears, and meets,
and dwells; nor does he cleave to God who tears himself off from the Lord's
body. Romans 16. 17.
Mark such as cause divisions, says S. Paul, and avoid them: and if all
Christians must avoid them, then I am sure God is not with them. The other
Schismatics that divide from the World by cutting off the World from them; do
they seek God that are diverted by so many Saints and Angels? that terminte
divinest Worship in a creature? Or do they cleave to God, when their devotion
embraces stocks and stones? Or did they seek God for the purpose of my Text,
who did not seek David their King, but did apply themselves to several foreign
Princes, and to others which they hoped would set up their Golden Calf?
Incendiaries, that make fires and raise commotions, 1 Kings 19. 11, 12.
these are far from God; for the Lord was not in the fire, or in the
Earthquake, but in the still small voice, in the soft whispers of peace and
love. The Atheist, he that says in his heart there is no God, will not seek
God, you may be sure; nor does he care to seek David his King, who is equally
well under all Governments that will allow his Licenses, and who has no
Religion to tie him to any. If he at all disliked the former, it was upon
reasons of Burden, or of Pride, or Libertinism: So much Religion, though
counterfeit, was a reproach to him, and the face of such strictness was uneasy
to him. These are so far from seeking God, that God says these did drive him
out of Israel, Ezekiel. 9. 9. And then when that has so long been the Wit, that
it is now the Complexion of the Age, and they who thought fit to show their not
being Hypocrites by License, and (to give it an easy word) by droll^ry in
sacred things, have now made nothing to be sacred to them; how shall the Lord
dwell among such? They are enough to exercise God out of a Nation. The
Hypocrite also, for all his Fasts and Prayers never did seek God, Matthew. 2^. 27.
for he is but a whited Sepulcher, our Savior says. Now who would seek the
Living God among the dead? the Lord of Life sure is not to be found in Graves.
Golgotha was a place to crucify him in, not Worship him: He takes not in the
Air of Funeral Vaults for Incense; it was a Demoniack that used to be among the
Tombs. The subtle, false, and faithless men that walk in Mazes, never shall
meet God: These are the windings and the tracts of the Old Serpent, and they
lead only to his habitation. They that do climb as if they meant to find God on
his own Throne, that follow Christ up to a pinnacle of the Temple, or to the
top of that exceeding high Mount, whence they can overlook the glories of the
World, and pick and choose, these do not go to seek Christ there: Matthew. 4.
It is the Devil that does carry up thither, upon his own designs. Nor is it
possible to seek the Lord in the ways that lead to the strange Woman's house,
Prove. 9. 27.
for her house is the way to hell, Solomon says, (and he did know; Prove. 5. 5.
) nay more, her steps take hold on hell, seize on those everlasting burnings
which her foul heats kindle and begin. In a word, Phil. 2. 21.
they that seek their own, that turn all merely to their advantage, they cannot
seek God too, he will not be joint God with Mammon. And then where are the men
that sought him? That did retrive him to us? Or with whom does he dwell? If he
be not among us, we do in vain flatter our selves in our prosperity and peace,
gawd it in all our bright appearances. Have we not seen the Sun rise with a
glory of day about him, and mounting in his strength chase away all the little
receptacles and recesses of the night, not leave a cloud to shelter the least
relics of her darkness, or any spot to chequer or to fleck the countenance of
day? When strait a small handful of vapor raised by that Sun it self, did creep
upon his face, and by little and little getting strengh be-dasht his shine, and
poured out as full streams of storm as he had done of light; 'till it even put
out the day, and shed a night upon the Earth in spite of him? So may
prosperity it self, if the Lord and his blessing be not in it, raise that which
will soon overcast and benight the most glorious condition of a Nation. That
Wine which now makes your hearts glad, may prove like that which did commit the
Centa^res, and the Lapithae, first kindle Lusts, then Wars, and at last only
fill a Cup of trembling and astonishment; and that Oil that does make you
cheerful countenances, may make your paths slippery, and nourish flames that
will devour and ruin all.

But God, Isai. 65. 1.
who is found of them that seek him not, nay who himself sought the lost sheep
and carried him, Luke 15. 4, 5.
when with his straying he was wearied into impossibility of a return, as also
sought, and found, and brought together us and our great Shepherd: For this is
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. These ways of his also are
so past finding out, that we may well conclude they are the mere footsteps of
his incomprehensible goodness, and we have only now to fear that goodness.

But give me leave to say, Those that despise his goodness, do not fear it; and
they whom it does not lead to repentance, do despise it. S. Paul says, Romans 2.
4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-sufferance, not knowing that the goodness of the Lord leads thee to
repentance?

And now, O Lord, what sort of men among us has thy goodness wrought upon, and
made repent? Those whom it was directed to convince, and came on purpose to, to
prove by their own only argument they had of providential Miracles, they were
not in the right, but that destruction and misery were in their ways; yet these
choose rather to deny their own conclusions, and resist Gods goodness, then to
be convinced and repent: For we have seen them as bold Martyrs to their Sin as
ever any to Religion, signalize their resolved impenitence with cheerful
suffering, as if the fire they were condemned to were that Triumphal Chariot, 2
King. 2. 11.
in which the Prophet mounted up to Heaven. Others that did not go so far in
condemnation nor guilt as they, and therefore think they have no reason to
repent of that, do they repent of what they did contribute to it? Of those that
lifted up their hands to swear and fight, how many are there that have made
them fall, and smite their own thigh, saying, Jer. 31. 19.
What have I done? Do not all rather justify as far as they themselves
proceeded? And if all that were well, why do not we repent of our Allegiance
and Loyalty? If all that were well, what has thy goodness done, O Lord, that
has reverst it all? And for the rest, those that do not partake the plenties
of thy goodness, murmur and repine at it; are discontent at having what they
prayed for, what they would have died for. Those that have been partakers of
it, have turned it into wantonness, have made it furnish them for base unworthy
practices; such as have not the generosity of Vice, have not a noble, manly
wickedness, are poltron sins; have made it raise a cry on the Faithfullest
party, the best Cause, and the purest Church in the World. While we have
debauched Gods own best Attribute, made his goodness procure for our most
wicked or self ends; and the face of things is so vicious in every order and
degree and sex, that -- But the Confession is only fit for Litanies, and we
have need to make the burden of ours be, Lord, give us some afflictions again,
send out thy Indignation, for we do fear thy goodness, it has almost undone
us; and truly, where it does not better, it is the most fearful of Gods
Attributes or Plagues, for it does harden there. Romans 2. ^.
St. Paul says so in the forecited place; and Origin does prove this very thing
did harden Pharaohs heart, indulgence was his induration. Now induration is the
being put into Hell upon the Earth: There is the same impenitence in both, and
judgment is pronounced already on the hardened, and the life they lead is, but
the interval betwixt the Sentence and the Execution, and all their sunshine of
Prosperity, is but kindled Brimstone, only without the stench. And then to
make the treasures of Gods bounty be treasures of wrath to us! to make his
kindness, 2 Pet. 3. 15.
his long-suffering; that is St. Peter says, salvation, condemn us, his very
goodness be Hell to us! But sure so great a goodness as this we have tasted,
cannot have such deadly issues; and it was great indeed, so perfectly
miraculous in such strange and continued successes, resisting our contrivances
and our sins too, overcoming all opposition of our vices, and our own policies,
that do not comport with it, and in despite of all still doing us good; it was
fatality of goodness. Now sure that which is so victorious will not be worsted
by us. But Oh! have we not reason so much more to fear the goodness? The
greater and more undeserved it is, the more suspicious it is: As if it were the
last blaze of the Candle of the Lord, when its light gasps; its flash of shine
before it do go out, the dying struggles and extreme efforts of goodness, to
see if at the last any thing can be wrought by it. And if we did consider how
some men manage the present goodness, make use of this time of it, and take,
and catch, we would believe they did fear the departure of it: But yet it is in
our power to fix it here. If we repent, Gods gifts then are without repentance,
but one of us must change: Bring Piety and Virtue into countenance and fashion,
and God will dwell among us. Romans 11. 22.
Nay St. Paul says, Goodness to thee if thou continue in his goodness: If we
our selves do not forsake it, and renounce it, not fear it so as to fly from
it, but with the fears of sinking men, that catch and grasp, lay fast dead hold
upon it, if, as God promises, Jer. 32. 40.
he so put his fear in our hearts, that we never depart from it, fear that has
love in it, and is as unitive as that, then it shall never depart from us; but
we shall see the goodness of the Lord, in the Land of the Living, and shall be
taken thence to the eternal fullness of it. This day shall be the Birthday of
Immortal Life, the entering on a Kingdom that cannot be moved. A Crown thus
beautified, is a Crown of Glory here, and shall add weight and splendour to the
Crown hereafter: A Church thus furnished, is a Church Triumphant in this World,
and such a Government is the Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth; Apoc* 1. 5, 6.
and then we shall all reign with him who is the King of Kings, and who washed
us in his Blood, to make us Kings and Priests to God and his Father. To whom be
glory and dominion for ever. Amen.

SERMON XVIII. AT CHRIST'S-CHURCH IN OXFORD ON St STEVEN's Day.
MATH. V. 44. But I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and
persecute you.
I Need no Artifice to tie this Subject and this Day together. The Saint whose
memory we celebrate was the Martyr of this Text: And it is impossible to keep
the Feast but by a resolution of obeying these Commands, you being called
together on this day to beseech God to grant that you by the Example of this
first Martyr St. Stephen, who prayed for his Murderers, may learn to love your
Enemies, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you.

A strange command in an Age, in which we scarcely can find men that love their
Friends, nor any thing but that which serves their interests or pleasures, that
indeed love nothing but themselves; nor is it only injury that works their
hate and enmity, but difference in opinion divides hearts, and men are never to
be reconciled that have not the same mind in every thing; as if one Heaven
should not hold them that have not one judgment in all things, we see that one
Church cannot hold them, and they that have but one same God, one Redeemer and
Savior, one Holy Spirit of Suplication, cannot agree yet in one Prayer to him,
though they have but one same thing to pray for to him: will not meet in their
Worship because they do not in some Sentiments; and it is no wonder all Christ's
reasonings and upbraidings, all the Advantages he does propose to them that
love, the shames he casts on them that do not, by putting them out of his Train
into the condemnation of Publicans; it is no wonder all this does not work with
them whom their own sufferings and black Calamities will not convince. There is
not one of us but knows that thus our miseries began but few years since, and
yet we that have suffered for and by our Divisions, whose quarrels wounded the
whole Nation and our selves, who have wept so much blood at once to vent and to
bewail our differences, are still as full of the same animosities as ever, and
want nothing but opportunity to confound all again, Religion and our selves:
And in the name of God what did Christ mean when he prescribed this Precept?
when he disputed? pressed it thus? or what do Christians mean when they do break
and tear this Precept and themselves? Though I be far from any hopes to
reconcile our Parties, (as by Gods help I shall ever be from making any,) yet I
will offer an Expedient to make them not so noxious; namely, if they will keep
the differences of their judgments from breaking out into their affections and
actions. And though while meekness and obedience to Governors, and the whole
constellation of Gospel-graces, do not seem to shine so fair as man's own
reputation, or humor, or possibly some strict opinion which they have owned,
and the show of holiness that glitters in it, while it is thus, I say, we cannot
look any party will yield, all do or will believe themselves to be in the
right; yet I will give them leave to think so, and my prescription shall
concern them equally although they be; and by addressing my Discourse to them
that are so really, I shall conclude more forcibly them that are not, who ere
they be; for sure I am none can be more in the right than those whom Christ
lays this injunction upon, than his Disciples and Apostles, as relating to
those that would be their Enemies as such: Yet it is to them he speaks here; I
say unto you, love your Enemies, etc.

The words contain a Duty prescribed, and the Authority prescribing it: The
Prescription and the Authority in these words, I say unto you, the Duty in the
rest: where it is set down 1. in general: Love your Enemies, and that to be
considered under a double prospect: 1. As it is placed in opposition to
something that was before indulged the Jews, or presumed so to be by them;
signified here by the particle But; and then as it stands by it self, in its
own positive importance: Love your Enemies. And Secondly, this Duty is
particularized in several exercises of the Act commanded, Love, in relation to
several sorts of the Objects of that Act, Enemies: As 1. Those that curse you,
you must bless: 2. Those that hate you, you must do good to: 3. Those that use
you despitefully and persecute you, you must pray for.

These I shall treat of in their given order, beginning with the general Duty,
and viewing that at once in both the lights that it does stand in, that one may
clear and fortify the other. But I say unto you, love your Enemies.

Of all the Points of Christian Religion those which did most stagger the faith
of some, and check their acceptance of it, or adherence to it, (says
Marcellinus writing to St. Austin) were these 3; The incarnation of our Lord:
The meanest of his Miracles, which they thought the works of Apollonius
equaled; and thirdly, the prescriptions in the Text, It seems they looked upon
these Duties as the mysteries of Practice; that spoke as loud a contradiction
to their active principles and inclinations, as the other appeared to do so,
those of Speculation and Discourse, a God made flesh, and flesh and blood made
so lame and passive, sweetened so, being alike impossible to their belief: As if
no flesh could certainly be so, except that of which God was made, and the Word
incarnate only could fulfill, these words here in my Text: They looked upon
this as a much-more mighty work than any of his Miracles; as if 'twere easier
to snatch one out of the arms of Fate from the embraces of the Grave, than to
receive an enemy into ones own: As if Christ had done more when he prayed for
his Crucifiers then when he prayed Lazarus out of his grave: For their
Magicians, they say, vied Miracles with him, but none of their Religions or
Gods did ever aim at this Prescription, ut quae sit propria bonitas nostra;
says Tertullian; this being a sort of Piety peculiar to the Christians. Nor
did they only think it unpracticable, but unreasonable; as carrying opposition
to all Government, to the Prosperity and Peace of every Polity; for he that
does require that I shall have no return of injuries, but for a wrong, makes me
in debt a kindness, not only supersedes judiciary proceedings, but does secure
Rapine by Law, and encourage it by reward; and truly if it were impossible for
him that does affect a person to dislike his evil actions, and to desire he may
have condign punishment, such as by Gospel-measures may be satisfaction equal
to his fault, and warning to himself and others, these men had reason: But if a
Father can at once love and correct his Child; if when I am with indignation
displeased at my offenses against God, and by severities revenge them on my
self, I do then love my self most passionately; and if I can pray with all the
vigor of my soul for that false Traytor-bosom-enemy, my flesh, while it lies
goading me to sin, and with temptation persecuting me to everlasting death,
then no reason of State, or of my own requires I should not do all these acts
of kindness to my Adversary. In that thou have an exact pattern for thy enmity
to them that wrong thee, and thou shall hate thine enemy as thy self, is a most
perfect Gospel-Rule: that being most cons^^^nt with and directive of this Duty,
love your enemies. But yet there is so great a difference indeed betwixt this
Act here and its object (Enemy being constituted such by enmity, that is
aversion and hate) that love, and that seem strangely coupled, things that can
be put together only for a contest, just as heat and cold, to weaken one
another, that both the love and enmity, may be refracted into a luke-warmhess.
Therefore I shall divide them, handling Love first by it self, viewing the
import of that as it is sincere, lest the enemy appearing with it, make it
shrink into a very slender Duty: and having done that, secondly, see whether an
others enmity; and thirdly, whether enmity with that appropriation here, your
enemies, can take off from the Obligation of that Duty, Love.

Now Love shows fairest to our purposes in those dresses which S. Paul presents
her in, 1 Cor. 1. 13. and 1. (...) v. 4. and (...); v. 5. it suffers long, if
not the damage, yet the malice of repeated injuries, as knowing it is bound to
forgive 'till Mat. 18. 22.
70 times 7 times: And it is not easily provoked, not apt for sudden violent
heats, instantly all one fire, quick as lightning. Such heats are from another
passion; which though sometimes they do but flash and die, yet often they have
their Thunderbolt, and most what do fore-run a storm: whereas the heats of
Charity are calm as sunshine, such as do not consume, but cherish: For (...),
in the same verse, Love is kind and gracious, full of humanity: This Virtue is
a kind of universal friendship, has nothing of reserved, morose or sour an
humor, that makes solitude in the midst of Society, and makes men only their
own company, their Rule, and scope; and such a person Aristotle says must be
either a God, who can enjoy nothing beside himself, is his own blessed and
immortal entertainment, or a wild beast whose nature is unsociable because it is
savage, whereas Love is a pious complaisance to all, it is condescension too;
for (...) in the 5. v. does not think any thing unseemly, how contemptible
soever, nor unworthy of him; so he may do his Neighbor good; he will debase
himself to meanest Offices to work a real kindness. John 13. 3, 4, 5.
Thus Christ, because he loved his own, knowing the Father had given all things
into his hand, he took a Towel, and girded himself, and put water in a Basin
and washed his Disciples feast, making the lowest act of servitude be his
Expression, and our Example: That is but slender Charity that will keep state,
Heaven could not unite Majesty and Love: But to exercise this, God did descend
from Glory into the extremity of Meanness. It Is Bowels that express compassion,
and tender kindness; Now those we know of all parts of the Body are employed in
the most low ignoble Offices; and to such Love condescends, where it is true.
Again, (...), it cover all; the naked with a garment, and the deformed, the
leprous Sinner with a covering too; for 1 Pet. 4 8*
Charity covers a multitude of sins, hides his own wrong from his own eyes;
this Love too like that in the Poets, cannot see, yea covers all that is no fit
for light, suffers only the graces to be naked near him, and not to name all,
which you may find there, (...), ver. 7 believes all things, however
incompatible to love, and to be wise have been accounted, yet this Love is S.
James his Wisdom that came down from Heaven, Cap. 3. 17. (...), (...) interpret
any thing to the most favorable sense, and (...), easy to ^^persuaded, still
believes the best, and where it cannot, yet (...) hopes the best: Affection
while it lives cannot despair, for then it must deposite its desires, which are
only the warmth of Love, and 'till it die cool not, but if all do not answer
hopes, yet (...), he does wait for it, is not discouraged with relapses and the
repetitions of injuries, but still expects, and suffers all the contradictions
of spite and wrong.

Now if all these acts and the many other there are essential to Love and all
be under Obligation; and S. Paul says there, they are so much Duty that without
these performances all Faith and all Graces profit nothing: the Preaching
Rhetoric of Men and Angels would be nothing else but tinkling, and working
Miracles, but showing tricks. It follows then these Acts must necessarily have
a certain object, there must be some body that we are bound to love thus: And
if that Object be or Neighbor (as that is most sure) it is clear my Neighbors
injury, or hate or enmity to me, cannot take off nor yet diminish in the least
that Obligation I have to all those Acts, but I must love him though he be mine
enemy in every of those instances. For it is plain, his having wronged me does
not make him cease to be my Neighbor; nay more, that enmity does formally
dispose and qualify my Neighbor for the Object of my love: And many of its
Acts cannot relate but to a man that injures me; it must be in respect to
provocations that love is said to cool into such a temper as is not easily
provokt; For men are not provokt with kindnesses. I cannot suffer any thing but
wrong, nor suffer long except there be continuation and frequency of wrongs.
Nor is it possible I should forgive unless it be offenses done against me. And
so for diverse of the rest: Now it were strange the enemy should supersede the
obligation of the Duty, which cannot be a Duty but in order to an Enemy; that
injury should give me a release, from doing that which I can neverr have cause
or occasion to do but in the case of injury; that I should have leave not to
obey the Command for that mere reason which alone maks it possible to obey it,
and which alone makes the Command: Whereas indeed because I must needs love in
these expresses, therefore he must needs be my enemy whom I must love.

But if he be without all provocation very unjustly so, if his hate be his sin,
so that he has offended God too in it, may I not then espouse Gods quarrel
thus far, not to love his Enemy if I must mine own, not to love the injurious,
the sinner? Vice certainly is the most hateful thing that is, and therefore it
must needs render the subject not to be beloved; accordingly it is said, that
the ungodly and his ungodliness are both alike hateful unto God, Wis. 14. 9.
and David does comply with God in this, Verse. 21. 22.
Psalm 139. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? yea I hate them with
perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. And when I reflect on mine under
this Notion, or if mine be such as set themselves against Religion and the
peace and quietness of the Church, am I bound to love them? If so, then I may
be allowed to do it with a little regret sure. But yet if we consider how these
in the Text are designated by that Appropriation, your enemies, which means
those that hate you, my Disciples, those that in the last words of my Text,
will persecute you even for your being mine; and yet those they are bid to
love, we may conclude in the next place we may not hate our enemies as Sinners:
Nor yet does enmity with God, his Church, or his Religion qualify a person for
our aversation or mischiefs. I except here Apostasy and utter obduration in it;
a state that incapacitates for mercy, and by consequence for love and kindness.
1 John v. 16.
There is a sin which S. John would not say that we should pray for, and the
Church thought that there was such a sinner, I^dian, but as to less degrees,
they that are supposed to persecute Disciples, and in doing so persecute Christ
himself, may well be granted sinners, enemies to God and Christianity; but yet
says he, I say unto you, love these your enemies. Tertullian understood this
so, and writing to the Governor of Carthage, who threatened all the Christians
of that Province with Excision, that he might persuade him from his purpose,
thus began his Proposals: We do not write as fearing for our selves, or
dreading any thing that we are like to suffer, for we did enter our Religion on
the condition of suffering, we covenanted to endure, and staked our lives when
we began our profession; but it is for you we fear, for you our enemies, whom
our Religion does command us to love and to do good to. And though we must hate
Vice, and do our best to root out Infidelity and Atheism, destroy Profaneness,
Irreligion and Heresy and Schism: These are fit objects for the zeals of Hate,
and for the fevers of our Passion, and if our enemies be such we may meetly
endeavor they may have appropriate restraints, yet not to exercise the Acts of
Charity and kindness to them we have no allowance: No sins can make it lawful
for us to ruin, or not to do good to the Sinners. In fine the only persons
that the Jews pretended to have ground to hate were Enemies, and Enemies,
indeed to their Religion, the Idolatrous Gentile-world, therefore that being
now forbid to us, there is not sort of men, nor any man whom it is lawful for a
Christian not to love; and all the reasons urged here by our Savior, do prove,
that all mankind whether good or bad is the object of a Christians love:
Because God does good to all, his methods of Mercies are universal; he makes
his Clouds drop fatness even upon them that consume the increase on their
Lusts, and sacrifice it to their Riots, making their belly be their God: He
gives abundance of his good things unto those that love them only as they
advantage Vanity and Sin, and that turn Gods-store into provision for Vice and
for Destruction. He gives gold to them that make gold their Idol, and bestows
large portions of Earth on them that are Children of Hell, and them who for the
pleasures of that Earth despise his Heaven. Yea, the whole order of things does
teach us this, the Creatures do service to the whole kind, they acknowledge the
man, and not the Countryman and Friend; but alike the rich and poor, (...)
the good and grateful, the wicked and ungrateful too. The Sun does not Collect
his Rays and shed more day to gild the gaudy and gay person whose Clothes and
Jewels will reflect his light, return him as much almost as he sends, and vie
brightness with him, than he does to the poor dark, sordid rags that even damp
his beams: He sheds the same unpall'd day even on those men that draw such
streams of blood as with their mists endeavor to put out or stain his shine:
The Air gives breath to them that putrify it, as well as those that send it
out a Perfume. Yea the Cretures of sense and, perception do not yet
discriminate their Lords, Psalm. 1. 3.
but with that same indifference serve all: The Ox knows his Owner, and the
Ass his Master, not his Religion, not his Virtues; and then as there is
something in man, as man which God is kind to; something in man, as man for
which the Creatures serve; so there is something in man, (...)
as he is man which we must love, and consequently we must love every man. And
'till thou have found one so much a Monster that no creature will fear or obey,
and such a one as God will show no kindness to at all, will not let his Sun
shine, or his Rain rain upon, but while as others are in Goshen, sets him in
the storm and dark of Egypt, 'till then, I say, thou have not found a person
whom thou may not love, no though he be thine enemy in mind, and thought,
indeed, for if he Curse thee, thou must bless, and must do good to him which
hates thee, which are the particular expresses to the love in the Text, the
first of which is,

Bless them that Curse you.
BLess being here opposed to Curse, must signify wish well to them that wish
you evil: Though (...), also do import speak well of, as that is opposed to
railing, 1. Pet. 3. 9. not rendering railing for railing, (...), but
contrariwise Blessing. And both are the duty of this place, which does intend
that all sorts of loving words should be the Christians returns to the offenses
of the tongue, whether by Curse or contumely. And truly when I do consider how
the other way, the rendering like for like, and giving him that does wish or
speak evil as good language as he brings, is so far from all shadow of
compensation, that there is really a loss of honor in those dismal imprecating
words, the anger that does belch them out, does swell and stretch and rack the
passion, blushes at it self, the malice drinks those spirits up which it lurks
in, and the envy that Snake, sucks all the blood away, leaves nothing but its
own pale venom in the stead: In a word, the very Essence of impatience is
vexation and fret; and then that men should call that recompense for suffering
which is it self a present agony, and has no prospect of any after good, that
they should satisfy themselves in that does make that bold assertion of the
Romanist, White.
who says that those in Hell do will and love their being there not strange at
all, for indeed there is one and the same reason of both, that in the paroxysm
of a passion, whenever a man is seized by an affection with violence (as they
in Hell are always, and those that speak evil are for the present,) He does for
that time love, cherish and pursue the affection: and in good earnest, if so be
that men can please themselves in the extreme impatience of a fruitless choler,
it looks like demonstration, that the damned may please themselves in their
damnation; as to that part of it, that which tears the Soul, the rage of its
own passions when they are loose and unmuzzel'd, and the more because we have
good reason to believe theirs are the very passions we are now upon, Envy, and
Hate, and Shame; and they do vent themselves in the same manner too, in
Blasphemy and Curses; and differ nothing, but that their's are endless, and
then let such men please themselves in the returns of calumny and imprecations,
we will allow them the delights of Hell in doing so, and they do taste those
very only satisfactions that the fiends do in their torments, and much good
may they do them. Psalm. 109. 17. 18.
It Is true then what the Psalmist says, that he who thus delights in Cursing,
it shall enter into his bowels like water, and like Oil into his bones; like
pleasure and refreshment, like water to allay his passionate heats, and Oil to
make him cheerful after his vexation: For so indeed the venting of his Curses
seems to do; but alas if to power them out do make them enter into him, into
his bowels and his bones, his most substantial parts, and his most necessary
inwards; if it leave nothing there but Curse, poison instead of marrow in the
bones, and in the bowels fiery indignation for water, if this be the effect,
then if you do resolve not to obey the Text and will not love your enemy, yet
for your own sakes, out of self-love do not execute your Enemies ill wishes on
your selves, and in mere spite to him make all his maledictions come to pass
upon you, but that blessing may not be far from you, Bless them that Curse you,
do good to them that hate you, the next part.

Do good. If to do good, mean only those Acts of Charity that are under
general precept, relieve necessities, help in needs, and the like; then it is
plain another hate to me takes not away my obligation, unless it take away his
wants, and the wrongs he has done me do not render me not bound to succor
him, unless it put him in a state that needs no succor. For if thine Enemy
hunger, thou must feed him, if he thirst, give him drink, Romans 12. 20. Yea,
though his hatred be to thy Religion: Gal. 6. 10. Tertul.
Do good to all, the Scripture says, and the Father porrigat manum Jupiter and
accipiet: If the heathen Idols that have mouths indeed, but as they cannot
speak, so neither can they eat, if they, I say, could hunger, and did ask, I
would feed them, and I would give their God, that is the Devil if he wanted.
But if (...) signify do kindness and favors, be good, as that means bountiful
and full of courtesies and grace, be more than merciful by rule and general
command. which the Gospel calls righteous, (and truly (...) in 1 Timothy 3. 1.
does mean a work of excellency, in a state of virtue without precept) and if it
be here so too, enmity seems to have advantage above friendship in the Gospel,
and brings kindness under an obligation; graces and favors that in their
notation and essence employ the being free, yet are not so to hatred, which
has by Christ's Law just pretenses to them. I will not be too positive in my
affirmings, yet from the words will offer this, that if a kindness lie before
me, and I have no reason to deny it a man, but this because he hates me, I must
not, deny it him, and if Christ's reasonings do enforce the other it will
cunclude this too. For if we must relieve the wants of them that hate us, that
we may be Children of our Father, who does so, upon the same account we must be
good and kind too to them, for he is, and he will scarce prove a true lawful
issue of this Father, who is in this unlike to him that tries and owns his
progeny by these resemblances. So that whatever strength of argument there is
in one, the other has it. And truly we have reason to believe that there is
more then motive in it, when first Christ has set this principle both to
himself and us, with what measure you meet, it shall be measured to you again,
Matt. 7. 2. As if the Lord had brought himself into that law of Justice with us
men, whatsoever ye would that others should do to you, do you also to them: And
it be also, whatsoever ye would that God should do unto you, do ye also to
others; and Secondly, when he practices just as the rates we do, for with the
froward God learns frowardness, and (...) and is kind to the kind, so Ps. 18.
25. recals a grace from him that would not do one, Matt. 18. from 23. nay
thirdly, when he gives us leave to beg his kindnesses, but just in the
proportion we do ours, forgive as we forgives, we ask no more, and praying so,
we undertake to have endeavored thus; assure God that we practice so, and upon
that score beg. Now he that will forgive to the bounds of necessity, but never
into favor, there he will stay his hand, will so much serve his turn from God?
And can he be content with such a portion? Take heed, O severe man, what thou
do ask, when thou do put up this petition. As thou should say, I knew
that notwithstanding we offend God constantly, yet besides all the mercies of
his Covenant, (and that is a Covenant of Grace) his kindness too is over all his
works; he does not only furnish our necessities, but serves our pleasures and
our fancies, prevents us with the blessings of his goodness, and watches over
us, and waits to be kind to us in the rescues of his providence, and beyond
these gives us means of Salvation more than barely sufficient, the plenties of
his grace, the five and ten Talents, the expresses of his temporal spiritual
and eternal favors toward them that provoke him, are as immense and as
innumerable as their guilts, but all these I shall rather part with, then be
good and do favors to him that is mine Enenmy; I will nevr have any kindness
for that man that hates me, nor do beg any of Thee, O Lord. And would thou
say all this to God, if it were put in words at length in thy petition? Or do
thou think thou do not say as much in praying so? And thou that make so ill
requests for thy own self, how will thou pray for them that despitefully use
thee and persecute thee? Which is the last particular command. Pray for them
that despitefully use you and persecute you.

As in this Character of Enemies, Christ has not left out any thing that does
express hostility, hating in heart, cursing in word, and persecution in deed,
and which to some is more provoking than a persecution, despiteful usage; (For
persecution may make them serious, and look at their demerits, the other only
stirs their spleen and gall) all which, all that an enemy can speak, or wish,
or do, must be no bar to our affection: So to express the unfeignedness of
that, he has not left out any exercise of Love, we must speak well of them,
but that a crafty passion may do, and blessing may be but more plausible and
cunning hatred: We must therefore also do good to them, but this a generous
pride may do, as knowing it more glorious to raise up a distressed adversary,
then to trample on him whem he is down, and to make him my creature rather then
my footstool: All this I may do therefore yet love nothing but my vanity or my
designs: But when I take my Enemy into my Closet and into my heart, give him a
share in the petitions of my soul, divide the aims and interests of my devotion
to him, and make my prayers concerned in the forgiveness of his sins as of my
own, there is nothing but obedience to my Savior, and the Love of my Enemy can
make a man do this. And truly it is a piece of kindness that is as necessary for
our selves, as those that injure us. For them it is very necessary for
persecution, or despightful usage, offending God, as by a disobedience to his
precept; so also by the sufferings it does inflict on man, to forgive or
require which that man has right: God does not use to put the injured person
by this right, or by its paramont Authority assume to pardon the man's part of
the wrong, but does retain the sin till that either in deed or desire do
satisfied for, or remitted, there being 'till then an obstruction to Gods
forgiveness, for 'till then the man has not repented; but when the fufferer
does pray for him, in doing so he pleads that that obstruction is removed, that
his part is remitted, and so leaves no bar in the way to that pardon which he
begs for him of God, and which that bar being gone, the Lord is used to grant
with all advantage, the prayers of our Martyr, in the seventh of the Acts, are
a demonstration, to which the Fathers say the Church did owe not only her
deliverance from all the violent intentions of Saul, but all that Christianity
which St. Paul planted; the dying voice of that petition. Act. 7. 60.
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, was answered by that Act. 9 4.
voice from Heaven, which converted Saul in his career of fury: One prayer for
a persecutor, puts an end to persecution, and si Stephanus non or asset and
Ecclesia non habuiesset Paulum. Jobs miserable comforters, whose visits proved
afflictions to him, could not a tone themselves to God by their burnt
offerings, but Job must pray for them 42. Chr. 8. seven Bullocks and seven Rams
cannot expiate, but one petition from the sufferer will do it; for him I will
accept, says God, and he accepted him, not for them only, but for himself, for
the Lord turned the Captivity of Job, when he prayed for them. verse. 10. These
intercessions speed sooner then direct supplications, and such a petition is
heard to our selves, when it is made for others. And reason good, for such
requests lay the condition of our pardon before God, making evidence of our
performance, and they cry, for we forgive, and so call for pardon. And to
encourage this procedure, our Savior before he did commend his own spirit into
the hand of his Father, he commended his Executioners to the mercies of his
Father; Our Martyr did not so indeed, but first prayed for himself, Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit, Luke 23. 34. 46.
Acts. 7. 59. But though Heaven opening he saw that Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, as ready to receive it, yet his spirit would not leave his body
so, yet made him live yet to endure more stoning from his persecutors, for whom
he had not prayed yet, but when he once fell on his knees, not beaten down by
their storm, but his Charity, and prayed, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge, when he had said so he fell asleep, v. 60. his Spirit taken hence as it
were osculo pacis, though by the most violent death, and he lies down in a
perpetual rest and peace, that thus lies down in Love. These are requests to
breath out a soul into heaven in, and heaven it self did open to receive that
soul that came so wafred.

And now we are at the top of Christ's Mount, the highest and the steepest
point of christianity, Mat. 5. 48.
which view with that ^o which our Martyrs Spirit did ascend: For it makes
perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect; it sets our heads within those
higher and untroubled Regions, wherein there are no Meteor-fires, the flame of
Passion cannot wing it thither, for he that is above the power of injury,
discontent, cannot look up to him, it is with him as in the upper Orbs, where
there is only harmony and shine, all is peace and love, the state of heaven it
self. Now as it does happen to them that look down from great heights, every
Object below is dwarf'd: And if the distance of the prospect be as great as
that from Heaven to Earth, they tell us this whole Globe would be but like a
spot, all being swallowed in it self; so if from this great height of duty, we
should look down upon the World of Christianity, would it not almost wholly
disappear and vanish? Something like a dark spot of it you may perchance
behold, stained and discolored with the Blood of Christians, which their
constant quarrels shed: Some it may be dye that Blood in colors of Religion,
their Animosity is christened Zeal, they kill only for Sacrifice, thus they
interpret and fulfill Christ's precepts, this they call holy love, as if Christ
when he bid his Disciples take no Staves with them, meant they should carry
Swords; as if the love he had commanded we should have for them that are in
error (if our enemies be so indeed) were but to murder them forsooth out of
their errors. Next for the kindnesses that Christians do to those that hate
them, or have disobliged them, they are God knows so little, that no
perspective can show them from this height we are upon: And yet it is not for
want of light we cannot see them, it is very rare men do those things in the
dark; for if they do not blazon them themselves, the enemy whom they oblige,
must do it. The distance also is too great to hear the prayers that are made
for those that treat men with despiteful usage; perhaps it is because they are
put up in secret; bur then what means the yelling of those curses? That ill
Language that is banded to and fro? While none will be behind in the returns of
these; how far soever we are off, like Thunder these are heard: And thence you
may behold them also tearing Christ's wounds wider to mouth their swelling
passion; We may see their anger redden with his Blood, and themselves spitting
out that Blood by imprecations at the face of him that did provoke them; we may
see them raking Hell to word these prayers, sending themselves thither in
wishes, that they may express them with more horror. The Hatreds and Revenges
which men act on them that have offended them (hates that seldom ever dye 'till
themselves do, which the Frost of the Grave only cools, yea, many times they
are raked up, and keep their heat in the ashes, live in the grave, and are as
long lived as the families, which for the most part is more careful and
tenacious of them than of their Inheritance.) The executions of these are often
writ in Characters legible at utmost distance; in this Mount of the Lord they
may be seen, but where now are the Christians of my Text and of this day?
There Is no appearance of them in the face of the whole Globe of our Profession;
nay worse, it is scarce possible they should appear, the Duties of loving
enemies, of returning affronts with kindnesses, these are banished thence; other
virtues are practiced down, but these are scorned and quarreled down. It Is
become a base thing and not to be endured to be a Christian in these instances:
See pride and passions swollen up to an height, which Christ's Mount cannot
reach, and which he must not level by his precepts: For since he was not
pleased to consider how inconsistent in this last age of the World his rules
would be with those of honor, and in making his Laws, took no care of the
reputation of a Gentleman, it is fit his Laws should give way to the
constitutions' of some Hectors, and he must bear the violation of them: And all
this must be reasonable too. Good God! what prodigy of age is this, when Christ
the Lord cannot be competent to judge either of right, of honor, or of realon?
When to be like God, and to be perfect as our Father in Heaven is perfect, is
to be most fordid and unworthy of a Gentleman? and in the name of God these men
that are too great for virtue, that brave out Religion, and will needs give
rules to God, what rank do they intend up stand in at Gods Judgment seat on the
last day? Lord God! grant us to stand among the week, on that hand with the
sheep, and those that are too poor in spirit to defy their enemies and thy
commands: for however the ^eek makes himself a prey, and is so far from
enjoying the promise of inheriting the Earth, that the virtue is sacrce allowed
to sojourn in the Earth, as if it had breathed it is last in this our Martyrs
prayer, took it is flight with his spirit, and those stones that flew him were
the Monument of loving enemies, of praying for those that persecute and murder;
and such Charity were not to be found among us any more, yet sure I am these
Charitable persons shall enjoy the friendship and the glories of that Lover,
that did Bless, do good to, Pray, and Dye for Enemies; and these meek men shall
reign with the Lord, Per. 5. 12.
who was stain, and is worthy to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing, all which be ascribed to him,
and to the Father of all mercies, the God of Consolation, and to the Spirit of
Love, now and for evermore.

FINIS.

