ECCLESIA ANGLICANA.

Read. Pray.

The WHOLE DUTY of MAN Plainly laid down for the use of the meanest Reader,
with PRAYERS (...)

Take heed and beware of false Prophets.

Matt. 7.

The Practice of Christian Graces. OR The WHOLE Duty OF Man LAID DOWN In a
Plain and Familiar WAY for the Use of All, but especially the MEANEST READER.
Divided into XVII. CHAPTERS. ONE whereof being read every LORDS DAY the Whole
may be read over THRICE in the YEAR. WITH PRIVATE DEVOTIONS For Several
OCCASIONS; Viz. For MORNING EVENING. SACRAMENT. The SICK, etc. Times of PUB.
CALAMITIES.


London, Printed by ^. Maxwell for T. Garthwait at the little North door of S.
Paul's. 1658.

Mr. GARTHVVAIT.
YOu needed not any Intercession to recommend this task to me, which brought
its Invitations and Reward with it. I very willingly Read over all the sheets,
both of the Discourse, and the Devotions annexed, and find great cause to bless
God for both, not discerning what is wanting in any part of either, to render
it with Gods blessing, most sufficient, and proper to the great End designed,
the Spiritual supplies and advantages of all those that shall be exercised
therein. The subject matter of it, is indeed, what the Title undertakes, The
whole Duty of Man, Set down in all the Branches, with those advantages of
brevity and Partitions, to invite, and support, and engage the Reader, That
Condescension to the meanest capacities, but with all, That weight of Spiritual
Arguments, wherein the best proficients will be glad to be assisted, that it
seems to me equally fitted for both sorts of Readers, which shall bring with
them a sincere desire of their own, either present or future advantages. The
Devotion part in the conclusion is no way inferior, being a most seasonable aid
to every man's infirmities, and has extended it self very particularly to all
our principal concernments; The Introduction has supplied the place of a
Preface, which you seem to desire from me, and leaves me no more to add, but my
Prayers to God, That the Author which has taken care to conveigh so liberal an
Alms to the Corban so secretly, may not miss to be rewarded openly, in the
visible power and benefit of this work, on the hearts of the whole Nation,
which was never in more need of such supplies, as are here afforded. That His
Allsufficient Grace will bless the seed sown, and give an abundant increase, is
the humblest request of

March 7. 1657. Your assured Friend. H. HAMMOND.

A TABLE Of the CONTENTS of the several CHAPTERS or PARTITIO^S in this Book.
Which according to this Division, by Reading one of these Chapters every Lords
Day, the whole may be Read over Thrice in the year.
PARTITION 1. OF the Duty of Man, by the light of Nature, by the light of
Scripture: Of Faith, the Promises, of Hope, of Love, etc. page 1. PARTITION 2.
Of Humility, of Submission to Gods Will, in respect of Obedience, of Patience,
in all sorts of Sufferings; and of Honor due to God in several ways, in his
House, Possessions, His Day, Word, Sacraments, etc. page 34. PARTITION 3. Of
the Lords Supper, Of Preparation before Receiving, of Duties to be done at the
Receiving, and afterward, etc. page 67. PARTITION 4. Honor due to Gods Name;
Of Sinning against it; Blasphemy, Swearing, Assertory Oaths, Promissory Oaths,
Unlawful Oaths Of Perjury, Of Vain Oaths, and the Sin of them, etc. page 98.
PARTITION 5. Of Worship due to Gods Name. Of Prayer and its several parts. Of
Public Prayers i^ the Church, in the Family: Of Private Pray^er. Of
Repentance, etc. Of F^sting, page 109* PARTITION 6. Of Duties to our Selves. Of
Sobriety Humility; The great Sin of Pride, the Danger, the Folly of this Sin.
Of Vainglory the Danger, Folly, Means to prevent it. O^ Meekness, the Means to
obtain it, etc. page 136* PARTITION 7. Of Contentedness, and the Contraries t^
it, Murmuring, Ambition, Coveto^sness Envy; Helps to Contentedness. Of Duty
which concern our Bodies. Of Chastity, Help^ to it. Temperance, Rules of
Temperance i^ Eating, etc. page 158. PARTITION 8. Of Temperance in Drinking,
False Ends o^ Drinking, viz. Good fellowship. Putting away Cares, etc. page
177. PARTITION 9. Temperance in Sleep; The Rule of it, etc. Of Recreation, of
Apparel. page 197* PARTITION 10. Of Duties to our Neighbors. Of Justice,
Negative, and Positive. Of the Sin of Mur^her. Of the Hainousness of it, The
Punishments of it, And the Strange Discoveries thereof; Of Maiming, Wounds and
stripes, page 206. PARTITION 11. Of Justice, about the Possessions of our
Neighbor; Against Injuring him as Concerning his Wife, His Goods. Of Malice,
Covetousness, Oppression, Theft: Of Paying Debts, etc. page 226. PARTITION 12.
Of Theft; Stealing the Goods of our Neighbor. Of Deceit in Trust; in Traffic.
Of Restitution, etc. page 238. PARTITION 13. Of False Reports, False Witness,
Slanders, Whisperings. Of Despising and Scoffing for Infirmities, Calamities,
Sins, etc. Of Positive Justice, Speaking the Truth. Of Lying. Of Humility and
Pride. Of Envy, Detraction. Of Gratitude. etc. page 251. PARTITION 14. Of Duty
to Parents. Magistrates, Pastors, etc. Of the Duty of Parents to Children, etc.
page 278. PARTITION 15. Of Duty to our Brethren and Relations; Husband, Wife,
Friends, Masters, Servants. page 305. PARTITION 16. Other Branches of our Duty
to our Neighbor. Of Charity to Men's Souls, Bodies^ Goods, etc. page 329.
PARTITION: 17. Of Charity, Almsgiving, etc. Of Charity in respect of our
Neighbors Credit, Of Peacemaking. Of going to Law: Of Charity to our Enemies,
etc. Christian Duties both Possible and pleasant. page 358.
A TABLE of the PRAYERS.
Prayers for Morning 562 Prayers for Night 570 Collects for several Graces 577
A Paraphrase on the Lords Prayer 591 Pious Ejaculations out of the Book of
Psalms 594 Brief heads of Examination before the Sacrament 598 Prayers before
the Sacrament 613 Ejaculations at the Lords Table, etc 619 Prayers after the
Sacrament 621 Prayers for the Sick 631 Ejaculations for the Sick 63^ Prayers
for Public Calamities 644
A PREFACE To the ensuing TREATISE, Showing the Necessity of Caring for the
Soul.
1. THE only intent of this ensuing Treatise, is to be a short and plain
direction to the very meanest Readers, to behave themselves so in this world,
that they may be happy for ever in the next. But because it is in vain to tell
men their duties, till they be persuaded of the necessity of performing it; I
shall, before I proceed to the particulars required of every Christian,
endeavor to win them to the practice of one general duty preparatory to all
the rest, and that is the consideration and care of their own Souls, without
which they will never think themselves much concerned in the other.

2. Man, We know is made up of two parts, a body and a soul: The body only the
husk or shell of the soul, a lump of flesh, subject to many diseases and pains
while it lives, and at last to death it self, and then it is so far from being
valued, that it is not to be endured above ground, but laid to rott in the
Earth. Yet to this viler part of us we perform a great deal of care, all the
labor and toil we are at, is to maintain that. But the more precious part, the
Soul is little thought of, no care taken, how it fares, but as if it were a
thing that nothing concerned us, is left quite neglected, never considered by
us.

3. This carelessness of the Soul is the root of all the sin we commit, and
therefore whosoever intends to set upon a Christian course, must in the first
place amend that. To the doing whereof, there needs no deep learning, or
extraordinary parts, the simplest man living (that is not a natural fool) has
understanding enough for it, if he will but act in this by the same rules of
common reason, whereby he proceeds in his worldly business. I will therefore
now briefly set down some of those motives, which use to stir up our care of
any outward thing, and then apply them to the Soul.

4. There be four things especially, which use to awake our care, the first is
the worth of the thing, the second the usefulness of it to us, when we cannot
part with it without great damage and mischief, the third the great danger of
it, and the fourth the likelihood that our care will not be in vain but that it
will preserve the thing cared for.

5. For the first, The worth of the S^ul.
we know our care of any worldly thing is answerable to the worth of it; What
is of greatest price, we are most watchful to preserve, and most fearful to
lose; no man locks up dung in his chest, but his money* or what he counts
precious, he does. Now in this respect the Soul deserves more care, then all
the things in the world besides, for it is infinitely more worth. First in that
is made after the image of God; it was God that breathed into man this breath
of life; Gen 27. Now God being of the greatest excellency, and worth, the more
any thing is like him, the more it is to be valued. But it is sure that no
creature upon the earth is at all like God, but the Soul of man, and therefore
nothing ought to have so much of our care. Secondly, the Soul never dies. We
use to prize things according to their durablenesse: what is most lasting, is
most worth. Now the Soul is a thing that will last for ever, when Wealth,
Beauty* Strength, nay our very bodies themselves fade away, the Soul still
continues. Therefore in that respect also, the Soul is of the greatest worth;
and then what strange madness is it for us to neglect them as we do? We can
spend Days, and Weeks, and Months and Years, nay our whole lives in hunting
after a little wealth of this world, which is of no durance or continuance, and
in the mean time ^et this great durable treasure, our Souls, be sto^^ from us
by the Devil.

6. A second motive to our care of any thing is the usefulness of it to us,
The misery of losing the Soul.
or ^he great mischief we shall have by the ^osse of it. Common reason teaches
us ^his in all things of this life: If our ^aires fall, we do not much regard
(...), because we can be well enough without them: But if we are in danger to
lose our eyes or limbs, we think all the care we can take little enough to
prevent it, because we know it will be a great misery. But certainly there is
no misery to be compared to that misery, that follows the loss of the Soul.
It Is true we cannot lose our Souls, in one sense, that is so lose them, that
they shall cease to be; but we may so lose them in another, that we shall wish
to lose them even in that. That is we may lose that happy estate, to which they
were created, and plunge them into the extremest misery. In a word we may lose
them in Hell, whence there is no fetching them back, and so they are lost for
ever. Nay in this consideration our very bodies are concerned, those darlings
of ours, for which all our care is laid out: for they must certainly after
death be raised again, and be joined again to the soul, and take part with it
in whatever state; if then our care for the body take up all our time and
thoughts, and leave us none to bestow on the poor Soul, it is sure the Soul
will for want of that care, be made for ever miserable. But it is as sure, that
that very body must be so too. And therefore if you have any true kindness to
your body, show it by taking care of your Souls. Think with your selves, how
you will be able to endure everlasting burnings, if a small spark of fire,
lighting on the least part of the body, be so intolerable, what will it be to
have the whole cast into the hottest flames? and that not for some few hours
or days, but for ever; so that when you have spent many thousand of years in
that unspeakable torment, you shall be no nearer com^ng out of it, then you
were the first day you went in: think of this, I say, and think this withal,
that this will certainly be the end of neglecting the Soul, and therefore
afford it some care, if it be but in pity to the body, that must bear a part in
its miseries.

7. The third Motive to the care of any thing, The danger the soul is in.
is its being in danger; now a thing may be in danger two ways, first by
enemies from without: This is the case of the sheep, which is still in danger
of being devoured by wolves, and we know that makes the Shepherd so much the
more watchful over it. Thus is it with the soul, which is in a great deal of
danger, in respect of its enemies: Those we know are the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, which are all such noted enemies to it, that the very first* act we
do in behalf of our Souls, is to vow a continual war against them. This we all
do in our Baptism; and whoever makes any truce with any of them, is false not
only to his Soul, but to his vow also, becomes a forsworn creature: A
consideration well worthy our laying to heart, But that we may the better
understand, what danger the Soul is in, let us a little consider the quality of
these enemies.

8. In a war you know there are diverse things that make an enemy terrible. The
first is subtilty, and cunning, by which alone many victories have been won,
and in this respect the Devil is a dangerous adversary, he long since gave
sufficient proof of his subtlety, in beguiling our first parents, who yet were
much wiser then we are, and therefore no wonder if he deceive and cheat us.
Secondly, the watchfulness and diligence of an enemy, makes him the more to be
feared, and here the Devil exceeds, it is his trade, business to destroy us,
and he is no loiterer at it, he goes up and down seeking whom he may devour, 1
Pet 5. 8. He watches all opportunities of advantage against us, with such
diligence, that he will be sure never to let any slip him. Thirdly, an enemy
near us is more to be feared then one at a distance; for if he be far off, we
may have time to arm, and prepare our selves against him, but if he be near he
may steal on us unawars. And of this sort is the flesh, it is an enemy, at our
doors, shall I say? nay in our bosoms, it is always near us, to take occasion
of doing us mischiefs. Fourthly, the baser and falser an enemy is, the more
dangerous; he that hides his malice under the show of friendship will be able
to do a great deal the more hurt. And this again is the flesh, which like Job
to Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 27: Pretends to speak peaceably, to us, but wounds us to
death; it is forward to purvey for pleasures and delights for us, and so see^^s
very kind, but it has a hook under that bait, and if we (...) at it, we are
lost. Fifthly, the number of enemies make them more terrible; and the world is
a vast army against us: There is no state or condition in it, nay scarce a
creature which does not at sometime or other fight against the Soul: The
honors of the world seek to wound us by pride, the wealth by covetousness; the
prosperity of it tempt us to forget God, the adversities to murmr at him. Our
very Table becomes a snare to us, our meat draws us to Gluttony, our drink to
Drunkeness, our company, nay our nearest friends often bear a part in this war
against us, whilst either by their example, or persuasions they entice us to
sin

9. Consider all this, and then tell me, whether a Soul thus beset has leisure
to sleep; even Dalilah could tell Samson, it was time to awake when the
Philistims were upon him. And Christ tells us, if the good man of the house had
known in what hour the thief would come, he would have watched and not have
suffered his house to be broken up, Mat. 24 43. But we live in the midst of
thieves, and therefore must look for them every hour, and yet who is there
among us, that has that common providence for this precious part of him, his
Soul, which he has for his house, or indeed the meanest thing that belongs to
him? I fear our Souls may say to us, as Christ to his disciples. Mat 26. 40.
What could ye not watch with me one hour? for I doubt it would pose many of us
to tell when we bestowed one hour on them, thoug^ we know them to be
continually beset with most dangerous enemies. And then alas! what is like to
be the case of these poor Souls, when their adversaries bestow so much care,
and diligence to destroy them, and we will afford none to preserve them, surely
the same as of a besieged town, where no watch or guard is kept, which is
ce^tain to fall a prey to the enemy. Consider this ye that forget God, nay, ye
that forget your selves, lest he pluck you away and there be none to deliver
you, Psalm. 50. 22.

10. But I told you, there was a second way, whereby a thing may be in danger,
and that is from some disorder, or distemper within it self. This is often the
case of our bodies, they are not only liable to outward violence, but they are
within themselves sick and diseased. And then we can be sensible enough that
they are in danger, and need not to be taught to seek out for means to recover
them. But this is also the case of the Soul; we reckon those parts of the body
diseased, that do not rightly perform their office, we account it a sick palate
that tastes not aright, a sick stomach that digests not. And thus it is with
the Soul, its parts do not rightly perform their offices.

11. The parts of the Soul are especially these three: The Understanding, the
Will, and the Affections. And that these are disordered, there needs little
proof; Let any man look seriously into his own heart, and consider, how little
it is he knows of spiritual things, and then tell me whether his understanding
be not dark: How much apter is he to will evil then good, and then ^ell me
whether his will be not Crooked: And how strong desires he has after the
pleasures of sin, and what cold and faint ones toward God, and goodness, and
then tell me whether his affections be not disordered, and rebellious even
against the vice of his own reason within him. Now as in bodily diseases, the
first step to the cure is to know the cause of the sickness, so likewise here
it is very necessary for us to know how the Soul first fell into this diseased
condition, and that I shall now briefly tell you.

12. God created the first man Adam without sin, The first Covenant.
and endued his Soul with the full knowledge of his duty, and with such a
strength, that he might if he would perform all that was required of him.
Having thus created him, he maks a covenant or agreement with him, to this
purpose, that if he continued in obedience to God, without committing sin; then
first that strength of Soul, which he then had should still be continued to
him; and first, that he should never dye, but be taken up into heaven, there to
be happy for ever. But on the other side, if he committed sin, and disobeyed
God, then both he and all his children after him, should lose that knowledge and
that perfect strength, which enabled him to do all that God required of him;
and secondly, should be subject to death, and not only so, but to eternal
damnation in Hell.

13. This was the agreement made with Adam and all mankind in him (which we
usually call the first covenant) upon which God gave Adam a particular
commandment, which was no more but this, that he should not (...) of one only
tree of that garden wherein he had placed him. But he by the persuasion of the
Devil (...) of that tree, disobeys God, and so brings that cu^se upon himself,
and all his posterity. And so by that one sin of his ^e lost both the full
knowledge of his duty, and the power of performing it. And we being born after
his image, did so likewise and so are become both ignorant in discerning what
we ought to do, and weak and unable to the doing of it, having a backwardness
to all good, and an aptness, and readiness to all evil, like a sick stomach,
which loathes all wholesome food, and longs after such trash, as may nourish the
disease.

14. And now you see where we got this sickness of soul, and likewise that it
is like to prove a deadly one, and therefore I presume I need say no more, to
assure you our souls are in danger. It is more likely you will from this
description think them hoplesse. But that you may not from that conceit, excuse
your neglect of them, I shall hasten to show you the contrary, by proceeding to
the fourth motive of care,

15. That fourth motive is the liklyhood* that our care will not be in vain,
That our care will not be in vain.
but that it will be a means to preserve the thing cared for; where this is
wanting, it disheartens our care. A Physician leaves his patient when he sees
him past hope, as knowing it is then in vain to give him any thing, but on the
contrary when he sees hopes of recovery, he plies him with medicines. N^^ in
this very respect we have a great deal of reason to take care of our souls, for
they are not so far gone, but they may be recovered, nay it is certain they
will if we do our parts toward it.

16. For though by that sin of Adam al^ mankind were under the sentence of
eternal condemnation, The second Covenant.
yet it (...) God so far to pity o^r misery, as to give us his son, and in him
to make a new Covenant with us after we had broken the first.

17. This SECOND COVENANT was made with Adam, and us in him, presently after
his fall, and is briefly contained in those words, Genesis 3. 15. Where God
declares that the SEED OF THE WOMAN SHALL BREAK THE SERPENTS HEAD; and this was
made up, as the first was, of some mercies to be afforded by God and some
duties to be performed by us.

18. God therein promises to send his only Son, who is God equal with himself,
to earth, to become man, like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, and he
to do for us these several things.

19. First to make known to us the whole will of his Father, in the performance
whereof we shall be sure to be accepted and rewarded by him. And this was one
great part of his business, which he performed in those many Sermons and
precepts, we find set down in the Gospel. And herein he is our prophet, it
being the work of a prophet of old not only to foretell, but to teach. Our duty
in this particular is to hearken diligently to him, to be most ready, and
desirous to learn that will of God, which he came from heaven to reveal to us.
This 2d. thing he was to do for us, was to satisfy God for our sins, not only
that one of Adam; but all the sins of all mankind, that truly repent and amend,
and by this means to obtain for us forgiveness of sins, the favor of God, and
so to redeem us from hell, and eternal damnation which was the punishment due
to our sin. All this he did for us by his death, he offered up himself a
sacrifice for the sins of all those who heartily bewail, and forsake them. And
in this he is our Priest, it being the Priests office to offer sacrifice for
the sins of the people. Our duty in this particular is first truly, and
heartily to repent us of, and forsake our sins, without which they will never
be forgiven us, though Christ have died. Secondly, Steadfastly to believe, that
if we do that, we shall have the benefits of that sacrifice of his, all our
sins, how many and great soever, shall be forgiven us, and we saved from those
eternal punishments, which were due unto us for them: Another part of the
Priests office was blessing and praying for the people, and this also Christ
performs to us. It was his especial commission from his Father to bless us, as
St. Peter tells us Acts 3. 26. God sent his Son Jesus to bless you, and the
following words show wherein that blessing consists, in turning away every one
of you from his iniquity, those means which he has used for the turning us from
our sins, are to be reckoned of all other the greatest blessings, and for the
other part, shat of praying, that he not only performed on earth, but continues
still to do it in Heaven, He sits on the right hand of God and makes Request
for us, Romans 8, 34. Our duty herein is not to resist this unspeakable blessing
of his, but to be willing to be thus blessed in the being turned from our sins,
and not to make void, and fruitless all his prayers, and intercessions for us,
which will never prevail for us, whilst we continue in them.

21. The third thing, that Christ was to do for us, was to enable us, or give
us strength to do what God requires of us. This he does first by taking off
from the hardness of the Law, given to Adam, which was never to commit the
least sin, upon pain of damnation, and requiring of us only an honest and
hearty endeavor to do what we are able, and where we fail, accepting of
sincere repentance. Secondly, By sending his Holy Spirit into our hearts, to
govern, and rule us, to give us strength to overcome temptations to sin and to
do all that he now under the Gospel requires of us. And in this he is our King,
it being the office of a King to govern, and rule, and to subdue enemies. Our
duty in this particular is to give up our selves obedient subjects of his, to
be governed, and ruled by him, to obey all his Laws, not to take part with any
Rebel, that is, not to cherish any one sin. But diligently to pray for his
grace to enable us to subdue all, and then carefully to make use of it to that
purpose.

22. Lastly, He has purchased for all that faithfully obey him an eternal
glorious inheritance, the Kingdom of Heaven, whether he is gone before, to take
possession for us. Our duty herein is to be exceeding careful, that we forfeit
not our parts in it, which we shall certainly do, if we continue impenitent in
any sin; Secondly, Not to fasten our affections on this world, but to raise
them up, according to the precept of the Apostle, Col. 2. 2. Set your
affections on things above and not on things on the earth, continually longing
to come to the possession of that blessed inheritance of ours, in comparison
whereof all things here below should seem vile and mean to us.

23. This is the sum of that second Covenant we are now under, wherein you
see what Christ has done, how he executes those three great offices of King,
Priest and Prophet, as also what is required of us, without our Faithful
performance whereof, all that he has done, shall never stand us in any stead;
For he will never be a Priest to save any, who take him not as well for their
Prophet, to teach, and their King to rule them; nay, if we neglect our part of
this Covenant, our condition will be yet worse, then if it had never been made;
for we shall then be to answer not for the breach of Law only, as in the
first, but for the abuse of mercy, which is of all sins the most provoking. On
the other side, if (...) faithfully perform it; That is, set our selves
heartily to the obeying of every precept of Christ, not going on wilfully in
any one sin, but bewailing and forsaking whatever we have formerly been guilty
of, it is then most certain, that all the aforementioned benefits of Christ
belongs to us.

24. And now you see how little reason you have to cast off the care of your
Souls, upon a conceit they are past cure, for that it is plain they are not;
Nay, certainly they are in that very condition, which of all others make them
fittest for our care. If they had not been thus REDEEMED by CHRIST, they had
been then so hopeless, that care would have been in vain; On the other side, if
his Redemption had been such, that all men should be saved by it, though they
live as they list, we should have thought it needless to take care for them,
because they were safe without it. But it has pleased God so to order it, that
our care must be the means, by which they must receive the good even of all
that Christ has done for them.

25. And now, if after all that God has done to save these souls of ours, we
will not bestow a little care on them our selves, we very well deserve to
perish. If a Physician should undertake a patient that were in some desperate
disease, and by his skill bring him so far out of it, that he were sure to
recover, if he would but take care of himself, and observe those rules the
Physician set him, would you not think that man weary of his life, that would
refuse to do that? So certainly that man is weary of his soul, wilfully casts
it away, that will not consent to those easy conditions, by which he may save
it.

26. You see how great kindness God has to these souls of ours, the whole
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have all done their parts for them. The
Father gave his only Son, The Son gave himself, left his glory, and endured the
bitter death of the cross, merely to keep our souls from perishing. The
Holy Ghost is become as it were our attendant, waits upon us with continual
offers of his grace, to enable us to do that which may preserve them; Nay he is
so desirous we should accept th^se offers of his, that he is said to be
grieved, when we refuse them, Ephesians. 4. 30. Now what g^eater disgrace; and
affront can we put upon God then to despise what he thus values, that those
souls of ours, which Christ thought worth every drop of his blood, we should
not think worth any part of our care? We use in things of the world, to ^ate
them according to the opinion of those who are best skilled in them, now
certainly God, who made our souls, ^ist knows the worth of them, and since he
prizes them (...) high, let us (if it be but in reverence to him) be a^^amed to
neglect them. Especially now, that they are (...) so hopeful a condition, that
nothing but our own ^arelesnesse can possibly destroy them.

27. I have now bri^fly gone over those four motives of care I at first
proposed, which are each of them such, as ^^^ver misses to stir it up toward
the things of this world and I have also showed you, how much more reasonable
nay necessary it is, they should do the like for the Soul* And now what can I
say more, but conclude in the words of Isaiah 46. 8. Remember this and show
your selves men* That is, deal with your Soul as your reason teaches you to do
with all other things that concern you. And sure this common Justice binds you
to, for the Soul is that which furnishes you with that reason, which you
exercise in all your worldly business, and shall the Soul it self receive n^
benefit from that reason, which it affords you? This is a^ if the Master of a
family, who provides food for his servants, should by them be kept from eating
any himself and so remain the only starved creature in his house.

28. And as Justice ties you to this, so Mercy does likewise, you know the poor
Soul will fall into endless and unspeakable miseries, if you continue to
neglect it, and the^ it will be too l^te to consider it. The last refuge you
ca^ hope for is Gods mercy, but that you have despised, and abused. And with
what face can you in your greatest nee^ beg for his mercy to your Souls, when
you would not as ford them your own? No not that common Charity (...)
considering them, of bestowing a few of those idle hours you know not (scarce)
how to pass away, upon them.

29. Lay this to your hearts, and as ever you hope so Gods pity, when you most
want it, be sure in time to pity your selves, by taking that due care of your
preciou^ Souls, which belongs to them.

30. If what has been said, have persuaded you to (...) so necessary a duty,
my next work will be to tell you (...) this care must be employed, and that in
a word, is in the doing of all th^se things, which tend to the making (...)
Soul happy, which is the end of our care, and what th^^ are I come now to show
you.

PARTITION I.
Of the DUTY of MAN by the Light of Nature, by the Light of Scripture; of
FAITH, the Promises, of Hope, of Love, etc.

THe benefits purchased for us by Christ, are such as will undoubtedly make the
soul happy, for eternal happiness it self is one of them; but because these
benefits belong not to us, till we perform the Condition required of us,
whoever desires the happiness of his soul, must set himself to the performing
of that condition; what that is, I have already mentioned in General, That it
is the hearty honest endeavor of obeying the whole Will of God. But then that
Will of God containing under it many particulars, It is necessary we should
also know, what those are; That is what are the several things, that God now
requires of us, our performance whereof will bring us to everlasting happiness;
and the neglect to endless misery.

2. Of these things there are some, Of the light of N^tu^e.
which God has so stamp't upon our souls, that we N^turally knew them; that
is, we should have known them to be our duty, though we had never bin told so
by the Scripture. That this is so, we may see by those heathens, who having
never heard of either Old or New Testam^nt, do yet acknowledge themselves bound
to some General duties, as to worship God; to be just, to honor their Parents,
and the like. And as S. Paul says, Rom 2. 15. Their consciences do in those
tbings accuse or excuse them, That is, tell them, whether they have done what
they should, in those particulars, or no.

3. Now though Christ have brought greater light into the world, yet he never
meant by it to put out any of that Natural light, which God had set up in our
souls: Therefore let me here by the way, advise you not to walk contrary even
to this lesser light, I mean not to venture on any of those Acts, which mere
natural conscience will tell you are sins.

4. It is just matter of sadness to any Christian heart, to see some in these
days, who profess much of Religion, and yet live in such sins, as a mere
heathen would abhor; men that pretending to higher degrees of light, and
holiness, then their brethren do, yet practice contrary to all Rules of common
honesty, and make it part of their Christan liberty so to do, of whose
seducement, it concerns all that love their souls to beware; and for that
purpose let this be laid as a foundation, That that Religion, or opinion cannot
be of God, which allows men in any wickedness.

5. But though we must not put out this light, which God has thus put into our
souls, yet this is not the only way, whereby God has revealed his will, and
therefore we are not to rest here, but proceed to the knowledge of those other
things, which God has by other means revealed.

6. The way for us to come to know them, The light of Scriptures.
is by the Scriptures, wherein are set down those several commands of God,
which he has given to be the Rule of our duty.

7. Of those some were given, before Christ came into the world, such are those
precepts we find scattered throughout the Old Testament, but especially
contained in the Ten Commandments, and that excellent book of Deuteronomy;
others were given by Christ, who added much both to the Law implanted in us by
Nature, and that of the Old Testament, and those you shall find in the New
Testament, ^n the several precepts given by him and his Apostles: But
especially in that divine Sermon ^n the Mount, set down in the fifth, sixth,
^eventh Chapters of S. Matthews Gos^el.

8. All these should be severally spoke to, but because that would make the
discourse very long, and so less fit for the meaner sort of men, for whose use
alone it is intended, I choose to proceed in another manner: By summing all
these together, and so as plainly as I can, to lay down, what is now the duty
of every Ch^istan

9. This I find briefly contained in the words of the Apostle, The Three great
branches of man, duty.
Tit. 2. 12. That we should live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this
present world; where the word soberly contains our duty to our selves,
righteously, our duty to our neighbor, and Godly, our d^ty to God. These
therefore shall be the heads of my discourse, our duty to God, our selves, and
our neighbor. I begin with that to God, that being the best groundwork
whereon to build b^th the other.

10. There are many parts of our duty to God, Duty to God.
The two chief are these: First to acknowledge him to be God, Secondly, to have
no other; under these are contained all those particulars, which make up our
whole duty to God, which shall be showed in their order.

11. To a^knowledg him to be God, Acknowledging him to be God.
is ^o believe him to be an infinite glorious Spirit, that was from
everlasting, without beginning and shall be to everlasting, without end. That
he is our Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier, Fat^er, Son, and Holy Ghost, one God,
blessed for eve. That he is suject to no alterations, but is unchangeable; that
he is no bodil^ substance, such as our eyes may behold, but Spiritual, and
invisible, whom no man has seen, nor can see, as the Apostle tell us, 1 Timothy
6. 16. That he is infinitely great, and excellent, beyond all that our wit or
conceit can imagine, that he has received his being from none, and gives being
to all things.

12. All this we are to believe of him, in regard of his essence, and being;
But besides this, he is set forth to us in the Scripture, by several
excellencies, as that he is of infinite goodness, and Mercy, Truth, Justice,
Wisdom, Power, All Sufficiency, Majesty: That he disposes, and governs all
things by his providence; that he knows all things, and is present in all
places; these are by Divines called the Attributes of God, and all these we
must undoubtingly acknowledge, that is, we must firmly believe all these Divine
excellencies to be in God, and that in the greatest degree, and so that they
can never cease to be in him, he can never be other, then infinitely Good,
Merciful, True, etc.

13. But the acknowledging him for our God, signifies yet more then this, it
means that we should perform to him all those several parts of duty, which
belong from a Creature to his God; what those are, I am now to tell you.

14. The first is Faith, Faith.
or belief, not only that forementioned of his essence, and Attributes, but of
his word, the believing most firmly, that all that he says, is perfectly true.
This necessarily arises from that Attribute, his truth, it being natural for us
to believe whatsoever is said by one of whose truth we are confident. Now the
holy Scriptures being the word of God, we are therefore to conclu^e, that all
that is contained in them, is most true.

15. The things contained in them are of these four sorts: Of his Affirmations.
First, affirmations, such are all the stories of the Bible, when it is said,
such and such things came so and so to pass; Christ was born of a virgin, was
laid in a manger, etc. And such also are many points of Doctrine, as that there
are three Persons in the Godhead, that Christ is the Son of God, and the like.
All things of this sort thus delivered in Scripture, we are to believe most
true. And not only so, but because they are all written for our instruction; we
are to consider them for that purpose, that is, by them to lay that foundation
of Christian-knowledg, on which we may build a Christian life.

16, Commands
The Second sort of things contained in the Scripture are the Commands, that
is, the several things enjoined us by God to perform; these we are to believe
to come from him, and to be most just, and fit for him to Command. But then
this belief must bring forth obedience, that what we believe thus fit to be
done* be indeed done by us; otherwise our belief that they come from him,
serves but to make us more inexcusable.

17. Thirdly, the Scripture contains threatenings; Threatenings
many texts there are which th^eaten to them that go on in their sins, the
wrath of God; and under that are contained all the punishments, and miseries of
this life, both spiritual and temporal, and everlasting destruction in the life
to come. Now we are most steadfastly to believe, that these are Gods threats,
and that they will certainly be performed to every impenitent sinner But then
the use we are to make of this belief is to keep from those sins, to which this
destruction is threatened, otherwise our belief adds to our guilt; that will
wilfully go on in spite of those threatenings.

18. Fourthly, Promises.
the Scripture contains Promises, and those both to our bodies, and our souls;
for our bodies there are many promises, that God will provide for them what he
sees necessary; I will name only one, Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of
God and his righteousness, and all these things, that is, all outward
necessaries shall be added unto you: But here it is to be observed, that we must
first seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, that is, make it our first
and greatest care, to serve and obey him, before this promise even of temporal
good things belongs to us. To the soul there are many and high promises, as
first, that of present ease, and refreshment which we find, Mat. 11. 29. Take
my yoke upon you, and learn of me, and ye shall find rest to your souls: But
here it is apparent, that before this rest belongs to us, we must have taken on
us Christ's yoke, become his servants, and disciples. Finally there are promises
to the soul, even of all the benefits of Christ; but yet those only to such, as
perform the condition required; that is, pardon of sins to those that repent of
them, increase of grace to those that diligently make use of, what they have
already, and humbly pray for more, and eternal salvation to those that continue
to their lives end, in hearty obedience to his Commands.

19. This belief of the promises must therefore stir us up to perform the
condition, and till it do so, we can in no reason expect any good by them; and
for us to look for the benefit of them on other terms, is the same mad
presumption, that it would be in a Servant to challenge his Master, to give him
a reward for having done nothing of his work, to which alone the reward was
promised; you can easily resolve, what answer were to be given to such a
servant, and the same are we to expect from God in this case; nay further, it
is sure God has given these promises to no other end, but to invite us to
holiness of life, yea he gave his Son in whom all his promise^ are as it were
sum'd up for this end. We usually look so much at Christ's coming to satisfy
for us, that we forget this other part of his errand. But there is nothing
surer, than that the main purpose of his coming into the world, was to plant
good life among men.

20. This is so often repeated in Scripture, that no man that considers, and
believes what he reads, can doubt of it. Christ himself tells us, Mat 9. 13. He
came to call sinners to repentance; and S. Peter, Acts. 3. 26. Tell us, that
God sent his Son Jesus to bless us, in turning every one of us from his
iniquities; for it seems the ^^rning us from our iniquities* was the greatest
special blessing, which God intended us in Christ.

21. Nay we are taught by S. Paul, that this was the end of his very death
also, Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works;
and again, Gal. 1. 4. Who gave himself for us, that he might deliver us from
this present evil world, that is from the sins, and ill customs of the world.
Diverse other texts there are to this purpose, but these I suppose sufficient to
assure any man of this one great truth, that all that Christ has done for us,
was directed to this end, the bringing us to live Christianly; or in the words
of S. Paul, to teach us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present world.

22. Now we know Christ is the foundation of all the promises, in him all the
promises of God are yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And therefore if God gave
Christ to this end, certainly the promises are to the same also. And then how
great an abuse of them is it, to make them serve for purposes quite contrary to
what they were intended, viz. to the encouraging us in sins, which they will
certainly do, if we persuade our selves, they belong to us, how wickedly soever
we live. The Apostle teaches us another use of them, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having
therefore these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. When we do thus, we
may justly apply the promises to our selves, and with comfort expect our parts
in them. But till then, though these promises be of certain truth, yet we can
reap no benefit from them, because we are not the persons, to whom they are
made, that is, we perform not the condition required, to give us right to them.

23. This is the Faith, or belief required of us toward the things God has
revealed to us in the Scripture; to wit, such as may answer the end, for which
they were so revealed, that is, the bringing us to good lives; the bare
believing, the truth of them, without this, is no more then the Devils do, as
S. James tells us, Chap. 2. 19. Only they are not so unreasonable, as some of
us are, for they will tremble, as knowing well this Faith will never do them
any good But many of us go on confidently, and doubt not the sufficiency of our
Faith, though we have not the least fruit of obedience to approve it by; let
such hear S. James judgment in the point, Chap. 2. 26. As the body without the
spirit is dead, so Faith, if it have not works, is dead also.

24. A Second duty to God is Hope, that is, Hope.
a comfortable expectation of these good things he has promised. But this, I
told you before of Faith, must be such, as agrees to the nature of the
promises, which being such as requires a condition on our part, we can hope no
further, then we make that good; or if we do, we are so far from performing by
it this duty of hope, that we commit the great sin of presumption, which is
nothing else, Presumption.
but hoping where God has given us no ground to hope. This every man does,
that hopes for pardon of sins, and eternal life, without that repentance and
obedience, to which alone they are promised, the true hope is that which
purifies us; S. John says, 1. Ep. 3 5. Every man that has this hope,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure, that is, it makes him leave his sins,
and earnestly endeavor to be holy, as Christ is, and that which does not so,
how confident soever it be, may well be concluded to be but that hope of the
Hypocrite, which Job assures us shall perish.

25. But there is another way of transgressing, D^sp^ir.
this duty, besides that of presu^p^^^^ and that is by Desperation, by which
(...) not that, which is ordinarily so calle^ (...) the despairing of mercy, so
long as (...) in our sins* for that is but just for (...): But I mean such a
desperation, as makes us ^e over endeavor, that is, when a man that sees he is
not at the present such a one, as the promises belong to, concludes, he can
never become such, and therefore neglects all duty, and goes on in his sins.
This is indeed the sinful desperation, and that which if it be continued in,
must end in destruction.

26. Now the work of hope is to prevent this, by setting before us the
g^nerality of the promises, that they belong to all that will but perform the
condition. And therefore though a man have not hitherto performed it, and so
has yet no right to them, yet hope will tell him, that that right may yet be
gained, if he will now set heartily about it. It is therefore strange folly for
any man, be he never so sinful, to give up himself for lost, when if he will
but change his course, he shall be as certain to partake of the promises of
merey as if he had never gone on in those former sins.

27. This Christ shows us in the parable of the Prodigal, Luke 15. where we see
that Son, which had run away from his father, and had consumed the portion
gigiven him, in riotous living, was yet upon his return and repentance used
with as much kindness by the Father, as he that had never offended, nay with
higher and more passionate expressions of love. The intent of which parable was
only to show us how graciously our heavenly Father will receive us, how great
soever our former sins have bin, if we shall return to him with true sorrow for
what is past, and sincere obedience for the time to come; nay so acceptable a
thing is it to God, to have any sinner return from the error of his ways, that
there is a kind of triumph in heaven for it, there i^ joy in the presence of
the Angels of God, over one sinner that repents: Lu. 15. 10. And now who
would not rather choose by a timely repentance, to bring joy to heaven, to God,
and his holy Angels; then by a sullen desperation to please Satan and his
accursed Spirits; especially when by the former we shall gain endless happiness
to our selves, and by the latter as endless torments.

28. A third duty to God is love; There are two common Motives of love amongst
men, Love its Motives.
the one the goodness and excellency of the person; the other his particular
kindness, and love to us, and both these are in the highest degree in God.

29. First he is of infinite goodness, and excellency in himself; Gods
excellency.
This you were before taught to believe of him, and no man can doubt it, that
considers but this one thing, that there is nothing good in the world, but what
has received all its goodness from God: His goodness is as the Sea, or Ocean;
and the goodness of all creatu^es, but as some small streams, flowing from
that Sea; now you would certainly think him a mad man, that should say the S^a
were not greater then some little brook, and certainly it is no less folly to
suppose, that the goodness of God does not as much (nay infinitely more) exceed
that of all creatures. Besides the goodness of the creature is imperfect and
mixed with much evil; but his is sure, and entire, without any such mixture. He
is perfectly holy, and cannot be tainted with the least impurity, neither can
he be the Author of any to us, for though he be the cause of all the goodness
in us, he is the cause of none of our sins. This S. James expressly tells us,
Chap. 1. 13. Let no man say when he is tempted, ^e is tempted of God; for God
cannot be tempted with evil; neither tempts he any man.

30 But secondly, His kindness to us*
God is not only thus good in himself, but he is also wonderful good; that is,
kind, and merciful to us, we are made up of two parts, a soul and a body, and
to each of these God has expressed infinite mercy, and tenderness. Do but
consider what was before told you of the second Covenant, and the mercies
therein offered, even Christ himself, and all his benefits, and also that he
offers them so sincerely and heartily, that no man can miss of enjoying them,
but by his own default. For he does most really and affectionately desire we
should embrace them, and live: As appears by that solemn oath of his, Eze. 33
11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turn from his way and live; whereto he adds this passionate
expression; turn ye, turn ye from our evil ways, for why will ye die: To the
same purpose, you may read, Ezekiel. 18. Consider this, I say, and then surely you
cannot but say, he has great kindness to our souls. Nay let every man but
remember with himself, the many calls he had to repentance and amendment,
sometimes outward by the word, sometimes inward by the secret whispers of Gods
Spirit in his heart, which were only to woo and entreat him to avoid eternal
misery, and to accept of eternal happiness; let him, I say, remember these,
together with those many other means, God has used toward him for the same
end, and he will have reason to confess Gods kindness, not only to men's souls
in general; but to his own in particular.

31. Neither has he bin wanting to our bodies, all the good things they enjoy,
as Health, Strength, Food, Raiment, and whatever else concerns them, are merely
his gifts; so that indeed it is impossible, we should be ignorant of his
mercies to them, all those outward comforts and refreshmets we daily enjoy,
being continual effects, and witnesses of it, and though some enjoy more of
these, then others, yet there is no person, but injoyes so much in one kind or
other, as abundantly shows Gods mercy, and kindness to him, in respect of his
body.

32. And now surely you will think it but reasonable we should love him, who is
in all respects thus lovely: Inde^d this is a duty so generally acknowledged,
that if you should ask any man the question, whether he loved God or no, he
would think you did him great wrong to doubt of it; yet for all this, it is too
plain, that there are very few, that do indeed love him, and this will soon be
proved to you by examining a little, what are the common effects of love, which
we bear to men* like our selves, and then trying, whether we can show any such
fruits of our love to God.

33. Of that sort there are diverse, but for shortness I will name but two.
Fruit of Love. Desire of pleasing.
The first is a desire of pleasing, the second a desire of enjoying. These are
constantly the fruits of love. For the first it is known by all, that he that
loves any person, is very desirous to approve himself to him* to do whatsoever
he thinks will be pleasing to him; and according to the degree of love, so is
this desire more* or less; where we love earnestly, we are very earnest, and
careful to please. Now if we have indeed that love to God we pretend to, it
will bring forth this fruit, we shall be careful to please him in all things.
Therefore as you judge of the tree by its fruits, so may you judge of your love
of God, by this fruit of it, nay indeed this is the way of trial, which Christ
himself has give^ us, Jo. 14. 15. If ye love me keep my comandments; and S.
John tell us, 1 Ep. 5. 3. That this is the love of God, that we walk after his
commandments, and where this one proof is wanting, it will be impossible to
testifie^ our love to God.

34. But it must yet be farther considered that this love of God must not be in
a low or weak degree, for besides that the Motives to it, his excellency, and
his kindness are in the highest; the same Commandment which bids us love God,
bids us love him with all our heart, and with all our strength; that is, as
much as is possible for us, and above any t^ing else* And therefore to the
fulfilling of this Commandment, it is necessary, we love him in that degree;
and if we do so, then certainly we shall have not only some slight, and faint
endeavors of pleasing, but such as are most diligent, and earnest, such as
will put us upon the most painful and costly duties, make us willing to forsake
our own ease, goods, friends, yea life it self, when we cannot keep them
without disobeying God.

35. Now examine thy self by this: have thou this fruit of love to show? do
thou make it thy constant and greatest care to keep Gods Commandments? to obey
him in all things? earnestly laboring to please him to the utmost of thy
power, even to the forsaking of what is dearest to thee in this world? if thou
do, thou may then truly say thou love God. But on the contrary, if thou
wilfully continuest in the breach of many, nay but of any one Command of his,
never deceive thy self, for the love of God abides not in thee. This will be
made plain to you, if you consider what the Scripture says of such, as, that
they are enemies to God by their wicked works, Col. 1. 21. That the carnal
mind (and such is every one that continues wilfully in sin) is enmity to God,
Romans 8. 7. That he that sins wilfully, tramples under foot the Son of God, and
does despite unto the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10 29. and many the like. And
therefore unless you can think enmity, and trampling, and despite to be fruits
of love, you must not believe you love God, whilst you go on in any wilful
disobedience to him.

36. A Second fruit of love, I told you, was desire of enjoying. Desire of
enjoying.
This is constantly to be seen in our love to another. If you have a friend,
whom you entirely love, you desire his conversation, wish to be always in his
company; and thus will it also be in our love to God, if that was as great, and
hearty, as this.

37. There is a twofold enjoying of God, the one imperfect in this life, the
other more perfect, and complete, in the life to come; that in this life is
that conversation, as I may call it, which we have with God in his ordinances,
in praying, and meditating, in hearing his word, in receiving the Sacrament,
which are all intended for this purpose, to bring us into an intimacy, and
familiarity with God, by speaking to him, and hearing him speak to us.

38. Now if we do indeed love God, we shall certainly hugely value, and desire
these ways of conversing with him, it being all that we can have in this life;
it will make us with David, esteem one day in Gods courts better then a
thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. We shall be glad to have these opportunities of
approaching to him, as often as is possible, and be careful to use them
diligently; to that end of uniting us still more to him, yea we shall come to
these spiritual exercises with the same cheerfulness, we would go to our
dearest friend. And if indeed we do thus, it is a good proof of our love.

39. But I fear there are not many have this to show for it, as appears by the
common backwardness; and unwillingness of men to come to these; and their
negligence, and heartlesness, when they are at them; and can we think that God
will ever own us for lovers of him, whilst we have such dislikes to his
company, that we will never come into it, but when we are dragged by fear, or
shame of men or some such worldly Motive; It is sure you would not think that
man loved you, whom you perceived to shun your company, and to be loath to come
in your sight. And therefore be not so unreasonable as to say you love God,
when yet you desire to keep as far from him as you can.

40. But besides this, there is another enjoyment of God, which is more
perfect, and complete, and that is our perpetual enjoying of him in heaven,
where we shall be for ever united to him; and enjoy him not now and then only,
for short spaces of time, as we do here, but continually without interruption,
or breaking off. And certainly if we have that degree of love to God we ought,
this cannot but ^e most earnestly desired by us so much, that we shall think no
labor too great to compass it. The seven years that Jacob served for Rachel,
Genesis 29. 20. Seemed to him but a few days for the love that he had to her: and
surely if we have love to God, we shall not think the service of our whole
lives too dear a price for this full enjoyment of him, nor esteem all the
enjoyments of the world, worth the looking on, in comparison thereof.

41. If we can truly tell our selves we do thus long for this enjoyment of God
we may believe we love him. But I fear again, there are but few that can thus
approve their love. For if we look into men's lives, we shall see they are not
generally so fond of this enjoyment, as to be at any pains to purchase it. And
not only so, but it is to be doubted, there are many, who if it were put to
their choice, whether they would live here always, to enjoy the profit and
pleasure of the world, or go to heaven to enjoy God, would, like the Children
of G^d and Reuben, set up their rest on this side Jordan, Number. 32. and never
desire that heavenly Canaan, so close do their affections cleave to things
below, which shows clearly they have not made God their treasure, for then
according to our Saviors Rule, Mat. 6. 21. Their heart would be with him. Nay,
further yet; it is too plain, that many of us set so little value on this
enjoying of God, that we prefer the vilest and basest sins before him, and
choose to enjoy them, though by it we utterly lose our parts in him, which is
the case of every man that continues wilfully in those sins.

42. And now I fear, according to these rules of trial, many that profess to
love God will be found not to do so. I conclude al with the words of S. John, 1
Ep. 3. 18. Which though spoken of the love of our brethren, is very fitly
appliable to this love of God, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but
in deed and in truth.

43. A Fourth duty to God is Fear; Fear.
this arises from the consideration both of his Justice and his Power; his
Justice is such that he will not clear the wicked, and his Power, such that he
is able to inflict the sorest punishments upon them; and that this is a
reasonable cause of fear, Christ himself tells us, Mat. 10. 18. Fear him which
is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. Many other places of Scripture
there are, which commend to us this duty, as Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with
fear: Psalm. 34. 9. Fear the Lord yea that be his Saints: Pro. 9. 10. The fear
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and diverse the like; and indeed all the
threatenings of wrath against sinners, which we meet with in the Scripture, are
only to this end, to work this fear in our hearts.

44. Now this fear is nothing else, but such an awful regard of God, as may
keep us from offending him. This the wise man tells us, Prove. 16. 17. The fear
of the Lord is to depart from evil: so that none can be said truly to fear God,
that is not thereby withheld from sin; and this is but answerable to that
common fear we have toward man, whoever we know may hurt us, we will beware of
provoking, and therefore if we be not as wary of displeasing God, it is plain
we fear men, more then we do him.

45. How great a madness this is, The Fol^y of fearing M^^ more then God.
thus to fear men above God, will soon appear, if we compare what man can do to
us, with that which God can. And first, it is sure, it is not in the power of
man (I might say Devils, too) to do us any hurt, unless God permit and suffer
them to do it: so that if we do but keep him our friend, we may say with the
Psalmist, The Lord is on my side, I fear not what man can do unto me. For let
their malice be never so great, he can restrain, and keep them from hurting us,
nay, he can change their minds toward us, according to that of the wise man,
Pro. 16. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be
at peace with him. A notable example of this we have in Jacob, Genesis 32. who
whem his brother Esau was coming against him as an enemy, God wonderfully
turned his heart, so that he met him with all the expressions, of brotherly
kindness, as you may read in the next Chapter.

46. But Secondly, suppose men were left at liberty to do thee what mischief
they could; Alas, their power goes but a little way, they may perhaps rob thee
of thy goods, it may be they may take away thy liberty, or thy credit, or
perchance thy life too; but that thou know is the utmost they can do. But
now God can do all this when he pleases, and that which is infinitely more, his
vengeance reaches even beyond death it self, to this eternal Misery both of
body and soul in hell; in comparison of which death is so considerable, that we
are notto look upon it with any dread. Fear not them that kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do, says Christ, Luke 12. 4. And then
immediately adds, But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear, fear him which
after he has killed, has power to cast into hell, yea, I say unto you fear
him. In which words the comparison is set between that greatest ill we can
suffer from man, the loss of life, and those sadder evils God can inflicton us;
and the latter are found to be the only dreadful things, and therefore God only
to be feared.

47. But there is yet one thing farther considerable in this matter, which is
this, it is possible we may transgress against men, and they not know it, I may
perhaps steal my neighbors goods, or defile his wife, and keep it so close
that he shall not suspect me, and so never bring me to punishment for it; but
this we cannot do with God, he knows all things even the most secret thoughts
of our hearts, and therefore though we commit a sin never so closely, he is
sure to fit us, and will as surely if we do not timely repent, punish us
eternally for it.

48. And now surely it cannot but be confessed, that it is much safer displeasing
men, then God; yet alas our practice is as if we believed the direct contrary,
there being nothing more ordinary with us, then for the avoiding of some
present danger we fear from men, to rush our selves upon the indignation of
God. And thus it is with us, when either to save our estates, or credits, or
our very lives, we commit any sin, for that is plainly the choosing to provoke
God, rather then man.

49. But God knows this case of the fear of men is not the only one wherein we
venture to displease him, for we commit many sins, to which we have none of
this temptation, nor indeed any other; as for instance, that of common
swearing, to which there is nothing either of pleasure, or profit to invite us.
Nay, many times, we, who so fear the mischiefs that other men may do to us,
that we are ready to buy them off with the greatest sins, do our selves bring
all those very mischiefs upon us, by sins of our own choosing. Thus the careless
prodigal robs himself of his estate, the deceitful and dishonest man, or any
that lives in open notorious sin, deprives himself of his credit, and the
drunkard, and glutton brings diseases on himself, to the shortning his life:
And can we think we do at al fear God when that fear has so little power over
us, that though it be backed with the many present mischiefs, that attend one
sin, it is not able to keep us from them? surely such men are so far from
fearing God, that they rather seem to defy him, resolve to provoke him,
whatsoever it cost them, either in this world or the next. Yet so unreasonably
partial are we to our selves that even such as these will pretend to this fear:
you may examine multitudes of the most gross scandalous sinners, before you
shall meet with one that will acknowledge he fears not God. It is stran^e it
should be possible for men thus to cheat themselves, but however it is certain,
we cannot deceive God, he will not be mock^; and therefore if we will not now
so fear as to avoid sin, we shall one day fear, when it will be too late to
avoid punishment.

50. A Fifth duty to God is, that of trusting in him, Trust.
that is, depending and resting on him: and that is first in all dangers,
Secondly in all wants. We are to rest on him in all our dangers both spiritual
and temporal. Of the first sort are all those temptations, by which we are in
danger to be drawn to sin. In all spiritual dangers.
And in this respect he has promised that if we resist the Devil he shall fly
from us, Iam. 47. Therefore our duty is first to pray earnestly for Gods grace
to enable us to overcome the temptation, and Secondly, to set our selves
manfully to combat^ with it, not yielding or giving consent to it in the least
degree; and whilst we do thus, we are confidently to rest upon God, that his
grace will be sufficient for us, that he will either remove the temptation, or
strengthen us to withstand it.

51. Secondly, In all temporal.
in all outward and temporal dangers, we are to rest upon him, as knowing that
he is able to deliver us, and that he will do so, if he see it best for us, and
if we be such to whom he has promised his protection, that is, such as truly
fear him. To this purpose we have many promises in Scripture, Ps. 34. 7. The
Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him, and delivers them;
and Ps. 34. 20. The Lord delivers the souls of his Saints, and all that put
their trust in him shall not be destitute; and diverse the like. And also we
have many examples, as that of the three children in the furnace, Dan. 3. That
of Daniel in the Lions Den, Dan. 6. And many others, all which serve to teach
us this one lesson, that if we go on conscionably in performing our duty, we
need not be dismayed for any thing that can befall us, for the God whom we
serve, is able to deliver us.

52. Therefore in all dangers, we are first humbly to pray for his aid, and
then to rest our selves cheerfully on him; Not seek to deliver our selves by
any Sin.
assuring our selves that he will give such an issue as shall be most for our
good. But above all things, we must be sure to fix our dependence wholly on
him, and not to rely on the creatures for help, much less must we seek to
deliver our selves by any unlawful means; that is by the committing of any sin,
for that is like Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 7. To go to the witch, that is, to the Devil
for help; such courses do commonly deceive our hopes at the present, and in
stead of delivering us out of our streights, plunge us in greater, and those
much mroe uncomfortable ones, because then we want that which is the only
support, Gods favor and aid which we certainly forfeit when we thus seek to
rescue our selves by any sinful means. But supposing we could by such a way
certainly free our selves from the present danger, yet alas we are far from
having gain^d safety by it, we have only removed the danger from that which was
less considerable, and brought it upon the most precious part of us, our
souls; like an unskilful Physician, that to remove a pain from the finger,
strikes it to the heart; we are therefore grossly mistaken, when we think we
have played the good husbands, in saving our Liberties, or Estates, or Lives
themselves by a sin; we have not saved them but madly overbought them, laid
out our very souls on them; And Christ tells us how little we shall gain by
such bargains, Mat. 17. 26. What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul. Let us therefore resolve never to value any thing
we can possess in this world at so high a rate, as to keep it at the price of
the least sin, but when ever things are driven to such an issue, that we must
either part with some, perhaps all our worldly possessions, nay life it self or
else commit a sin, let us then remember that this is the season for us to
perform that great and excellent duty, of taking up the Cross which we can
never so properly do, as in this case; for our bearing of that which we have no
possible way of avoiding, can at most be said to be but the carrying of the
Cross, but then only can we be said to take it up, when having a means of
escaping it by a sin, we rather choose to endure the Cross then commit the Sin,
for then it is not laid on us by any unavoidable necessity, but we willingly
choose it; and this is highly acceptable with God, yet withal so strictly
required by him, that if we fail of performing it* when we are put to the
trial, we are not to be accounted followers of Christ, for so himself has
expressly told us, Mat. 16. 24. If any man come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his Cross and follow me; and so again, Mar. 8. 34. It were
therefore a good point of Spiritual Wisdom for us* sometimes by some lower
degrees of self-denial, to fit our selves for this greater, when we shall be
called to it; we know he that expects to run a race will beforehand be often
breathing himself, that he may not be foiled when he comes to run for the
prize; in like manner 'twil be fit for us, sometimes to abridg our selves
somewhat of our lawful pleasure, or ease, or profit, sothat we may get such a
mastery over our selves, as to be able to renounce al, when our ^bedience to
God requires it.

53. And as we are thus to trust on God for d^liverance from danger, In all
wants spiritual.
so are we likewise for supply of our wants; and those again are either
spiritual or temporal: our spiritual want is that of his grace to enable us to
serve him without which we can do nothing; and for this we are to depend on
him, provided, we neglect not the means, which are prayer, and a careful using
of what he has already bestowed on us: For then we have his promise for it, he
will give the holy spirit to them that ask it, Luke 11. 15. And unto him that
has shall be given, Mat. 25, 29. that is, To him that has made a good use of
that grace he has already, God will give more. We are not therefore to
affright our selves with the difficulty of those things God requires of us, but
remember he commands nothing, which he will not enable us to perform, if we be
not wanting to our selves. And therefore let us sincerely do our parts, and
confidently assure our selves, God will not fail of his.

54. But we have likewise temporal and bodily wants, Temporal wants.
and for the supply of them we are likewise to rely on him. And for this also
we want not promises, supposing us to be of the number of them to whom they are
made, that is, Gods faithful Servants. They that fear the Lord lack nothing,
Psalm. 34. 9, and v. 10. They that seek the Lord shall want no manner of thing
that is good: Again, Psa. 33. 18, 19. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them
that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy, to deliver their souls from
death, and to feed them in time of famine. Examples also we have of this, as we
may see in the case of Eliah, and the poor widow, 1 Kings 17. And many others.

55. We are therefore to look up to him for the provision of all things
necessary for us, according to that of the Psalmist, The eyes of all wait upon
thee, O Lord, and thou give them meat in due season. And our Savior has
taught us to pray for our daily-bread; thereby teaching us, that we are to live
in continual dependence upon God for it. Yet I mean not by this, that we should
so expect it from God, as to give up our selves to idleness and expect to ^e
fed by miracle. No, our honest industry, and labor is the means by which God
ordinarily gives us the necessaries of this life, and therefore we must by no
means neglect that. He that will not labor, let him not eat, says the
Apostle, 2 These. 3. 10. And we may believe God will pronounce the same
sentence, and suffer the slothful person to want even necessary food. But when
we have faithfully used our own endeavor, then we must also look up to God for
his blessing on it, without which it can never prosper to us. And having done
thus, we may comfortably rest our selves on his providence for such a measure
of these outward things, as he sees fittest for us.

56. But if our condition be such, that we are not able to labor, and have no
other means of bringing in the necessaries of life to our selves, yet even then
we are cherfully to rest upon God, believing that he who feeds the Ravens, will
by some means or other, though we know not what, provide for us, so long as he
pleases we shall continue in this world, and never in any case torment our
selves with Carking, and distrustful thoughts, but as the Ap^stle, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
Cast all our care on him who cares for us.

57. This is earnestly pressed by our Savior, Mat. 6. Where he abundantly shows
the folly of this sin of distrust. The place is a most excellent one, and
therefore I shall set it down at large, Ver 25 Therefore I say unto you, take
no thought for your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink; neither
for your body, what you shall put on, is not the life more then meat, and the
body then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not neither do
they reap nor gather into barnes, yet our heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye
not, much better then they? which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to
his stature? and why take ye thought for raiment? consider the lilies, of the
field how they grow, they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet I say unto
you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little
Faith? Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or where with all shall we be clothed. (for after all these things do
the Gentiles seck) for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all
these things? But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and
then all these things shall be added unto you: Take therefore no thought for
the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self,
sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof: I might add many other texts to
this purpose but this is so full, and convincing, that I suppose it needless.

58. The benefits of trusting on God.
All therefore that I shall say more concerning this duty is to put you in mind
of the great benefits of it; as first, that by this trusting upon God, you
engage and hind him to provide for you. Men, you know, think themselves highly
concerned not to fail those that depend and trust upon them: and certainly God
does so much more. But then Secondly, there is a great deal of ease, and quiet
in the practice of this duty; it delivers us from all those carkings, and
immoderate cares which disquiet our minds, break our sleep, and grieves even
our very heart. I doubt not but those that have felt them, need not be told
they are uneasy. But then methinks that uneasiness should make us forward to
embrace the means for the removing of them, and so we see it too often does, in
unlawful ones; men will cheat, and steal, and lie and do any thing to deliver
themselves from the fear of want. But alas, they commonly prove but deceitful
remedies: They bring Gods curse on us, and so are more likely to betray us to
want, then to keep us from it. But if you desire a certain and unfailing cure
for cares, take this of relying upon God.

59. For what should cause that man to fear want, that knows he has one that
cares for him, who is all-sufficient, and will not suffer him to want what is
fit for him. If a poor man had but a faithful promise from a wealthy person,
that he would never suffer him to want, it is sure he would be highly cheered
with it, and would not then think fit to be as carking as he was before, and
yet a man's promise may fail us, he may either grow poor, and not be able, or he
may prove false, and not be willing to make good his word. But we know God is
subject neither to impoverishing nor deceit. And therefore how vile an injury
do we offer to him, if we dare not trust as much upon his promise, as we would
on that of a man, yea and how great a mischief do we do our selves by loading
our minds with a multitude of vexatious, and tormenting cares, when we may so
securely cast our burden upon God. I conclude this in the words of the Apostle,
Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer, and
supplication, with thanksgiving; let your requests be made known unto God.

PARTITION II.
Of HUMILITY Of Submission to Gods Will, in respect of Obe^ience of Patience in
all sorts of sufferings; and of HONOR ^ue to God in several ways in his
House, Possessions, His Day, Word, Sacraments, etc.

1. A Sixth duty to God is humility, that is, such a sense of our own meanness,
Humility.
and his excellency, as may work in us a lowly and unfeigned submission to him;
This submission is twofold, First to his will, Secondly to his Wisdom.

2. The submission to his will is also of two sorts, Submission to Gods will in
respect of obedience.
the submission either of obedience, or patience. That of obedience, is our
ready yielding our selves up to do his will, so that when God has by his
command made known to (...) what his pleasure is, cheerfully, and readily to
set about it. To enable us to this, humility is exceeding necessary, for a
proud person is of all others the unaptest to obey, and we see men never pay an
obedience but where they acknowledge the person commanding to be some way above
them. And so it is here, if we be not thoroughly persuaded, that God is
infinitely above us, that we are vileness, and nothing in comparison of him, we
shall never pay our due obedience.

3. The great distance between God and us.
Therefore if ever you mean to obey entirely (as you must if ever you mean to
be saved) get your hearts possessed with the sense of that great unspeakable
distance that is between God and you. Consider him as he is a God of infinite
Majestly, and glory, and we poor worms of the earth; he infinite in power, able
to do all things; and we able to do nothing, not so much as to make one hair
white or black, as our Savior speaks, Mat. 5. 36. He of infinite purity and
holiness, and we polluted and defiled, wallowing in all kind of sins, and
uncleanness; he unchangeable and constant, and we subject to change and
alteration every minutes of our lives. He eternal and immortal, and we frail
mortals, that when ever he takes away our breath we die; and are turned again
to our dust, Psalm. 104. 29. Consider all this, I say, and you cannot but
acknowledge a wide difference betwixt God and man, and therefore may well cry
out with Job, after he had approach't so near to God, as to discern somewhat of
his excellency, Job 42. 56. Now mine eyes sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self
and repent in dust and ashes.

4. And even when this humility has brought us to obedience, The unworthiness
of our best work.
it is not then to be cast off, as if we had no farther use of it; for there is
still great use, nay necessity of it, to keep us from any high conceits of our
performances, which if we once entertain, it will blast the best of them, and
make them utterly unacceptable to God; like the strictness of the Pharisee,
which when once he came to boast of, the Publican was preferred before him,
Luke 18. The best of our works are so full of infirmity and pollution; that if
we compare them with that perfection, and purity, which is in God, we may truly
say with the Prophet, All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isaiah 64. 6.
And therefore to pride our selves in them, is the same madness, that it would
be in a beggar, to brag of his apparel when it is nothing but vile rags, and
tatters. Our Saviors precept in this matter must always be remembered, Lnke
17. 10. When you have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we
are unprofitable servants; if when we have done all, we must give our selves no
better a title, what are we then to esteem our selves, that are so far from
doing any considerable part, of what we are commanded? Surely that worser name
of slothful and wicked servant, Mat. 25. 26. We have no reason to think too bad
for us.

5. A Second sort of submission to his will, Submission in respect of Patience.
is that of patience, this stands in suffering his will, as that of obedience
did in acting it, and is nothing else, but a willing and quiet yielding to
whatever afflictions it pleases God to lay upon us. This the formentioned
humility will make easy to us; for when our hearts are thoroughly possessed with
that reverence and esteem of God, it will be impossible for us to grudg or
murmr at what ever he does. We see an instance of it in Old Elie. 1 Samuel 3.
Who after he had heard the sad threatenings of God against him, of the
destruction of his family, the loss of the Priesthood, the cutting off both his
sons in one day, which were all of them afflictions of the heaviest kind, yet
this one consideration, that it was the Lord enabled him calmly and quietly to
yield to them; saying, Let him do what seems him good, ver. 18. The same
effect it had on David, in his sufferings, Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened
not my mouth, because thou did it: God doing it silenced all murmurings and
grumblings in him. And so must it do in us, in all our afflictions, if we will
indeed approve our humility to God.

6. For surely you will not think that child has due humility to his parent or
that servant to his Master, that when they are corrected, shall fly in the
Father or Masters face. But thus do we when ever we grudg and repine at that
which God lays upon us. But besides the want of humility in our so doing,
there is also a great want of justice in it; for God has as we are his
creatures, a right to do with us what he will, and therefore for us to resist
that right of his, is the highest injustice, that can be; nay farther, it is
also the greatest folly in the world, for it is only our good that God aims at
in afflicting us; that heavenly Father is not like our earthly ones, who
sometime correct their children, only to satisfy their own angry humor, not
to do them good. But this is subject to no such frailties, he does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men, Lam. 3. 33. They are our sins, which
do not only give him just cause, but even force, and necessitate him to punish
us. He carries to us the bowels and affections of the tenderest Father; now
when a Father sees, his child stubborn, and rebellious, and running on in a
course that will certainly undo him, what greater act of Fatherly kindness can
he do then chasten and correct him, to see if by that means he may amend him;
nay indeed he could not be said to have true kindness to him, if he should not.
And thus it is with God when he sees us run on in sin, either be must leave off
to love us, and so leave us to our selves, to take our own course; and that is
the heaviest curse that can befall any man; or else if he continue to love us,
he must correct and punish us, to bring us to amendment. Therefore when ever he
strikes, we are in all reason, not only patiently to lie under his rod, but (as
I may say) kiss it also; that is, be very thankful to him, Thankfulness for
Gods Corrections.
that he is pleased, not to give us over to our own hearts lusts, Psalm. 81. 12.
But still continue his care of us, sends afflictions, as so many messengers to
call us home to himself. You see then how gross a folly it is to murmr at
those stripes, which are meant so graciously; it is like that of a froward
patient, which reproaches and reviles the Physician that comes to cure him, and
if such a one be left to die of his disease, every one knows whom he is to
thank for it.

7. But it is not only quietness, Fruitfulness under them.
no nor thankfulness neither under afflictions, that is the full of our duty in
this matter; we must have fruitfulness also, or all the rest will stand us in
no stead. By fruitfulness I mean the bringing forth that, which the afflictions
were sent to work in us, viz. the amendment of our lives. To which purpose in
time of affliction it is very necessary for us to call our selves to an
account, to examine our hearts and lives, and search diligently, what sins lie
upon us, which have provoked God thus to smite us, and whatsoever we find our
selves guilty of, humbly to confess to God, and immediately to forsake for the
rest of our time.

8. All I shall add concerning this duty of patience, In all sorts of
sufferings.
is, that we are as much bound to it in one sort of sufferings, as another,
whether our suffering be so immediately from Gods hand, that no creature has
any thing to do in it, as sickness, or the like; or whether it be such, wherein
men are the instruments of afflicting us. For it is most sure, when any man
does us hurt, he could not do it, without Gods permission, and sufferance, and
God, may as well make them the instruments of punishing us, as do it more
directly by himself; and it is but a counterfeit patience, that pretends to
submit to God, and yet can bear nothing from men; we see holy Job, who is set
forth to us as a pattern of true patience, made no such difference in his
afflictions, he took the loss of his Cattle, which the Chaldeans and Sabeans
robbed him of, with the very same meekness, with which he did that, which was
consumed by fire from heaven. When therefore we suffer any thing from men, be
it never so unjustly in respect of them, we are yet to confess it most just in
respect of God, and therefore in stead of looking upon them with rage, and
revenge, as the common custom of the world is, we are to look up to God,
acknowledge his justice in the affliction, begging his pardon most earnestly for
those sins, which have provoked him to send it, and patiently and thankfully
bear it, till he shall see fit to remove it; still saying with Job, Blessed be
the name of the Lord

9. But I told you, Submission to Gods Wisdom.
humility contained in it a submission not only to his Will, but also to his
Wisdom; That is, to acknowledge him infinitely wise, and therefore that whatever
he does, is best and fittest to be done. And this we are to confess both in his
commands, and in his disposing, and ordering of things: First, In his Commands.
whatsoever he commands us, either to believe or do, we are to submit to his
wisdom in both, to believe whatever he bids us believe, how impossible soever
it seem to our shallow understandings, and to do whatever he commands us to do,
how contrary soever it be to our fleshly reason, or humor; and in both to
conclude that his commands are most fit and reasonable however they appear to
us.

10. Secondly, In his disposals.
We are to submit to his wisdom in respect of his disposal and ordering of
things, to acknowledge he disposes all things most wisely, and that not only in
what concerns the world in general, but also in what concerns every one of us
in particular, so that what condition soever he puts us in, we are to assure
our selves, it is that, which is best for us, since he chooses it for us, who
cannot err. And therefore never to have impatient desires of any thing in this
world; but to leave it to God to fit us with such an estate and condition, as
he sees best for us, and there let us quietly and contentedly rest, yea though
it be such, as of all others we should least have wished for our selves. And
this surely cannot but appear very reasonable to any, that has humility; for
that having taught him, that God is infinitely wise, and he very f^olish, he
can never doubt, but that it is much more for his good that God should choose
for him, then he for himself, even as it is much more for the child's good, to
have the parent choose for it, then to be left to those silly choices it would
make for its self. For how many times would it cut and burn, and mischief it
self, if it might have every thing it desires? And such children are we, we
many times eagerly desire those things, which would undo us, if we had them.
Thus many times we wish for wealth and honor and beauty, and the like, when if
we had them, they would only prove snares to us, we should be drawn into sin by
them. And this God who knows all things sees, though we do not, and therefore
often denies us those things, which he sees will tend to our mischief, and it
is his abundant mercy, that he does so. Let us therefore when ever we be
disappointed of any of our aims and wishes, not only patiently but joyfully
submit to it, as knowing that it is certainly best for us, it being chosen by
the unerring wisdom of our heavenly Father.

11. A Seventh duty to God is Honor; Honor.
that is, the paying him such a reverence and respect as belong to so great a
Majesty. And this is either inward or outward. The inward is the exalting him
in our hearts, having always the highest and most excellent esteem of him. The
outward is the manifesting and showing forth that inward, and that is the first
general in the whole course of our lives, the living like men that do indeed
carry that high esteem of God. Now you know if we bear any special reverence
but to a man, we will be careful not to do any foul or base thing in his
presence, and so if we do indeed honor God, we shall abhor to do any unworthy
thing in his sight. But God sees all things, and therefore there is no way to
shun the doing it in his sight, if we do it at all; therefore if we do thus
reverence him, we must never at any time do any sinful thing.

12. But besides this general way of honoring God, Several ways of Honoring
God.
there are many parti^ular acts, by which we may honor him, and those acts are
diverse according to the several particulars, about which they are exercised.
For we are to pay this honor not only immediately to himself, but also by a
due estimation, and account of all those things, that nearly relate or belong
to him. Those are especially Six, First his House. Secondly his Revenue or
incom, (as I may say) Thirdly his Day, Fourthly his Word, Fifthly his
Sacraments, and Sixthly his Name; and every one of these is to have some degree
of our reverence and esteem.

13. First his House, In his house
that is, the Church, which being the place set apart for his public worship,
we are to look on it, though not as holy in respect of its self, yet in respect
of its use, and therefore must not profane it by employing it to uses of our
own. This Christ has taught us by that act of his, Mat. 21. 12. In driving the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, saying, my house shall be called the
house of prayer: And again, Jo. 2. 16. Make not my Fathers house of a house
merchandice: by which it is clear, Churches are to be used only for the
services of God, and we are to make that the only end of our coming thither,
and not to come to Church, as to a market, to make bargains, or dispatch
businesses with our neighbors, as is too common among many. But when ever thou
enterest the Church, remember that it is the house of God, a place where he is
in an especial manner present, and therefore take the counsel of the wise man,
Eccles. 5. 1. And keep thy foot when thou go into the house of God; that is,
behave thy self with that godly awe and reverence, which belongs to that great
Majesty, thou art before. Remember that thy business there is to converse with
God, and therefore shut out all thoughts of the world, even of thy most lawful
business, which though they be allowable, at another time, are here sinful. How
fearful a guilt is it then to entertain any such thoughts, as are in themselves
wicked? It is like the treason of Judas, who pretended indeed to come to kiss
his Master, bu^ brought with him a band of soldiers to apprehend him. Mat. 26.
We make show in our coming to Church, of serving and worshipping God, but we
bring with us a train of his enemies, to provoke and despite him. This is a
wickedness that may out^ie the profaneness of these days, in turn^ng Churches
into stables; for sinful and ^olluted thoughts are much the worst sort of
^beasts.

14. The Second thing to which respect belongs, His Posessions.
is his revenue or income; that is, whatsoever is his peculiar possessions, set
apart for the maintenance of those that attend his service; those were the
Priests in time of the Law, and Ministers of the Gospel now with us. And what
ever is thus set apart we must look on with such respect as not to dare to turn
it to any other use. Of this sort some are the freewill-offerings of men, who
have sometimes of their own accord given some of their goods or lands to this
holy use; and whatsoever is so given, can neither by the person that gave it,
nor any other be taken away without great that sin of sacriledg.

15. But besides these, there was among the Jews, and has always been in all
Christian Nations, something allotted by the Law of the Nation, for the support
and maintenance of those that attend the service of God. And it is but just and
necessary it should be so, that those who by undertaking that Calling are taken
off from the ways of gaining a livelihood in the world, should be provided for
by them, whose souls they watch over. And therefore it is most reasonable,
which the Apostle urges in this matter, 1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? That
is, the most unreasonable for men to grudg the bestowing a few carnal things,
the outward necessaries of this temporal life on them, from whom they receive
spiritual things, even instruction and assistance toward the obtaining an
eternal life.

16. Now whatsoever is thus appointed for this use, The great sin of Sacriledg.
may by no means be employed to any other. And therefore those tithes which are
here by Law allotted for the maintenance of the Ministry, must by no means be
kept back, nor any tricks or shifts used to avoid the payment either in whole
or in part. For first it is certain, that it is as truly theft as any other
robbery can be, Ministers having right to their tithes by the same Law, which
gives any other man right to his estate. But then Secondly, it is another
manner of robbery, then we think of, it is a robbing of God, whose service they
were given to maintain, and that you may not doubt the truth of this, it is no
more then God himself has said of it, Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob God? yet ye
have robbed me; yet ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? in tithes and
offerings Here it is most plain, that in Gods account the withholding tithes is
a robbing of him. And if you please, you may in the next verse see, what the
gains of this robbery amounts to, Yea are cursed with a curse. A curse is all
is gotten by it, and common experience shows us, that Gods vengeance does in a
remarkable manner pursue this sin of Sacriledg, The punishment.
whether it be that of withholding tithes, or the other of seizing on those
possessions, which have been voluntarily consecrated to God. Men think to
enrich themselves by it; but it usually proves directly contrary; this unlawful
gain becomes such a Canker in the estate, as often eats out even that we had a
just title too. And therefore if you love (I will not say your souls, but) your
estates, preserve them from that danger by a strict care never to meddle with
anything set a part for God.

17. A Third thing, The times for his service.
wherein we are to express our reverence to God, is the hallowing of the times,
set apart for his service. He who has given all our time, requires some part
of it to be paid back again, as a rent or tribute of the whole. Thus the Jews
kept holy the seventh day: Lords Day
and we Christians the Sunday, or Lords day, the Jews were in their Sabbath
especially to remember the Creation of the world, and we in ours, the
resurrection of Christ by which a way is made for us into that better world we
expect hereafter. Now this day thus set a part, is to be employed in the
worship and service of God, and that first more solemnly and publicly in the
Congregation, from which no man must then absent himself without a just cause:
and Secondly, privately at home; in praying with, and instructing our families,
or else in the yet more private duties of the closet, a man's own private
prayers, reading meditating, and the like.

And that we may be at leisure for these a rest from all our worldly business
is commanded; therefore let no man think that a bare rest from labor is all
that is required of him on the Lords day, but the time which he saves from the
works of his calling, he is to lay out on those spiritual duties. For the Lords
Day was never ordained to give us a pretense for idleness, but only to change
our employment from worldly, to heavenly; much less was it meant, that by our
rest from our callings, we should have more time free to bestow upon our sins,
as too many do, who are more constant on that day at the Alehouse, then the
Church. But this rest was commanded, first to shadow out to us that rest from
sin which we are bound to all the days of our lives. And secondly to take us
off from our worldly business, and to give us time to attend the service of
God, and the need of our souls.

18. And surely if we rightly consider it, it is a very great benefit to us
that there is such a set time, thus weekly returning for that purpose. We are
very intent, and busy upon the world, and if there were not some such time
appointed to our hands, it is to be doubted, we should hardly allot any our
selves: And then what a starved condition must these poor souls of ours be in,
that shall never be afforded a meal, whereas now there is a constant diet
provided for them, every Sunday, if we will conscionably employ it, may be a
festival day to them; may bring them in such spiritual food, as may nourish
them to eternal life. We are not to look on this day with grudging, like those
in Amos 8. 5. Who ask, When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may set forth
wheat? As if that time were utterly lost, which were taken from our worldly
business. But we are to consider it, as the gainfullest, as the joyfullest day
of the week, a day of harvest, wherein we are to lay up in store for the whole
week, nay for our whole lives.

19. But besides this of the weekly Lords day, The Feasts of the Church.
there are other times, which the Church has set apart for the remembrance of
some special mercies of God, such as the Birth, and Resurrectoon of Christ, the
Descent of the Holy Ghost, and the like; and these days we are to keep in that
manner which the Church has ordered, to wit in the solemn worship of God, and
in particular thanksgiving for that special blessing we then remember. And
surely whoever is truly thankful for those rich mercies, cannot think it too
much to set apart some few days in a year for that purpose.

But then we are to look that our Feasts be truly spiritual, by employing the
day thus holily, and not make it an occasion of intemperance and discords as
too many do, who consider nothing in Christmas and other good times, but the
good cheers and jollity of them. For that is doing despite, in stead of honor
to Christ, who came to bring all purity and soberness in the world, and
therefore must not have that coming of his remembered in any other manner.

20. Other days there are also set a part in memory of the Apostles, and other
Saints, wherein we are to give hearty thanks to God, for his graces in them,
particularly that they were made instruments of revealing to us Christ Jesus,
and the way of salvation, as you know the Apostles were by their Preaching
throughout the world. And then farther, we are to meditate on those Examples of
holy life, they have given us, and stir up our selves to the imitation thereof.
And whoever does uprightly set himself to make these uses of these several holy
days, will have cause, by the benefit he shall find from them, to thank and
not to blame the Church for ordering them.

21. Another sort of days there are, The Feasts.
which we are likewise to observe, and those are days of fasting and
humiliation; and whatever of this kind the Church injoynes, whether constantly
at set times of the year, or upon any special and more sudden occasion, we are
to observe in such a manner as she directs; that is, not only in a bare
abstaining from meat, which is only the bodies punishment, but in afflicting
our souls, humbling them deeply before God, in a hearty confessing, and
bewailing of our own, and the nations sins, in earnest Prayers for Gods pardon,
and forgiveness, and for the turning away of those judgments, which those sins
have called for, But above all, in turning our selves from our sins, loosing
the bands of wickedness; as Isaiah speaks, Chap. 58. 6. And exercising our
selves in works of mercy, dealing our bread to the hungry, and the like, as it
there follows.

22. Fourthly, Gods word
we are to express our reverence to God, by honoring his Word; and this we
must certainly do, if we do indeed honor him; there being no surer sign of our
dispising any person, then the setting light, by what he says to us; as on the
contrary, if we value one every word he speaks will be of weight with us. Now
this word of God is expressly contained in the holy Scriptures, the Old and New
Testament, where he speaks to us, The holy Scripture.
to show us his Will, and our duty. And therefore to this Word of his we are to
bear a wonderful respect, to look upon it, as the rules, by which we must
frame all the actions of our life; and to that end to study it much, to read in
it as often as we can, if it may be never to let a day pass us, without
reading, or hearing some part of it read.

23. But then that is not all: We must not only read, but we must mark what we
read, we must diligently observe, what duties there are which God commands us
to perform, what faults they are, which God there charges us not to commit,
together with the rewards promised to the one, and the punishments threatened to
the other. When we have thus marked, we must lay them up in our memory, not so
loosely, and carelessly, that they shall presently drop out again; but we must
so fasten them there by often thinking, and meditating on them, that we may
have them ready for our use. Now that use is the directing of our lives; and
therefore whenever we are tempted to the committing of any evil, we are then to
call to mind, this is the thing, which in such a Scripture is forbidden by God,
and all his vengeances threatened against it; and so in like manner when any
opportunity is offered us of doing good to remember, this is the duty, which I
was exhorted to in such a Scripture, and such glorious rewards promised to the
doing of it: and by these considerations strengthen our selves for resisting of
the evil and performance of the good.

24. But besides this of the written Word, it has pleased God to provide yet
further for our instruction, by his Ministers, whose office it is to teach us
Gods Will, not by saying any thing contrary to the written word; (for
whatsoever is so, can never be Gods Will) but by explaining it, and making it
easier to our understandings, and then applying it to our particular occasions,
and exhorting, and stirring us up to the practice of it; all which is the end,
at which first their Catechizing and then their preaching aims. And to this
we are to bear also a due respect, by giving diligent heed thereto, not only
being present at Catechizings and Sermons, and either sleep out the time, or
think of somewhat else, but carefully marking what is said to us. And surely if
we did but rightly consider, how much it concern us, we should conclude it very
reasonable for us to do so.

25. For First as to that of Catechizing, Catechizing.
it is the laying the foundation upon which all Christian Practice must be
built, for that is the teaching us our duty, without which it is impossible for
us to perform it. And though it is true, that the Sriptures are the Fountains,
from whence this knowledge of duty must be fetched, yet there are many who are
not able to draw it from this fountain themselves, and therefore it is
absolutely necessary it should be thus brought to them by others.

26 This Catechizing is generally looked on as a thing belonging only to the
youth, and so indeed it ought, not because the oldest are not to learn, if they
be ignorant, but because all children should be so instructed, that it should
be impossible for them, to be ignorant when they come to years. And it nearly
concerns every Parent, as they will free themselve; from the guilt of their
childrens eternal undoing, that they be careful to see them instructed in all
necessary things; to which purpose it will be fit early to teach then some
short Catechism, of which sort none so fit as the Church-Catechism; yet are
they not to rest on these endeavors of their own; but also to call in the
Ministers help, that he may build them up farther in Christian Knowledge.

27. But alas! it is too sure, that parents, have very much neglected this
duty, and by that means it is that such multitudes of men and women, that are
called Christians, know no more of Christ, or any thing, that concerns their
own souls, then the mearest heathen.

28. But although it were their Parents fault, that they were not instructed,
when they were young, yet it is now their own if they remain still ignorant;
and it is sure, it will be their own ruin and misery, if they wilfully
continue so. Therefore whoever it be, of what age or condition soever, that is
in this ignorant estate, or in any such degree of it, that he wants any part of
necessary saving knowledge; let him as he loves his soul, as ever he would
escape eternal damnation, seek out for instruction, and let no fear of shame
keep any from it; for first it is certain the shame belongs only to the wilful
continuing in ignorance, to which the desire of learning is directly contrary,
and is so far from a shameful, that it is a most commendable thing, and will be
sure to be so accounted by all wise and good men. But Secondly, suppose some
profane, senseless people should deride it, yet sure that shame were in all
reason to be undergon joyfully, rather then venture on that confusion of face,
which will at the day of judgment befall those, who to avoidalittle false shame
amongst men, have gone on in a wilful ignorance of their duty, which ignorance
will be so far from excusing any sins they shall commit, that it adds one great
and heavy sin to all the rest, even the dispising that knowledge, which is
offered to them. How heinous a sin that is, you may learn in the First Chapter
of the Proverbs, where hating knowledge, ver. 29. is said to be the thing that
draws down those sad vengeances forementioned, even Gods forsaking men,
laughing at their calamity, in stead of helping them: Which is of all other
conditions in the world, the most miserable, and surely they are madly
desperate, that will run themselves into it.

29. As for those who have already this foundation laid, by the knowledge of the
grounds of Christian Religon, there is yet for them a farther help provided, by
Preaching. Preaching.
And it is no more then needs, for God knows, those that understand their duty
well enough, are too apt to forget it; nay, sometimes by the violence of their
own lusts to transgress it, even when they do remember it, and therefore it is
very useful, we should often be put in mind of it, to prevent our forgetting,
and also often exhorted and assisted, to withstand those lusts which draw us to
those transgressions. And to these purposes preaching is intended; First, to
warn us, to be upon our guard against our spiritual enemy, and then to furnish
us with weapons for the fight; that is, such means and helps, as may best
enable us to beat off temptations, and get the victory over them.

30. Since therefore this is the end of preaching, we must not think we have
done our duty, when we have heard a Sermon, though never so attentively, but we
must lay up in our hearts those instructions, and advices we there meet with
and use them faithfully to that end of overcoming our sins. Therefore when ever
thou come to the Physician of thy soul, do as thou would with the Physician
of thy body; thou come to him not only to hear him talk, and tell thee what
will cure thee, but also to do according to his directions; and if thou do
not so here, thou art as vain, as he that expects a bare receipt from his
Doctor shall cure him, though he never make use of it. Nay, thou art much more
vain and ridiculous, for that though it do him no good, will do him no harm^ he
shall be never the worse for having bin taught a medicine, though he use it
not: but in these spiritual receipts, it is otherwise, if we use them not to
our good, they will do us a great deal of harm, they will rise up in judgment
against us, and make our condemnation so much the heavier. Beware therefore not
to bring that danger upon thy self, but when thou have heard a Sermon, consider
with thy self what directions there were in it, for enabling thee to eschew
evil, or to do good. And if there were any thing especially concerned thine own
bo^ome sin, lay that close to thy heart, and all the week after make it matter
of medit^tion, think of it even whilst thou art at thy work, if thou want
other time; and not only think of it, but ^et to the practice of it, do what
thou were advised to, for the subduing sins and quickening grace in thee.
Finally look carefully to practice the counsel of the Apostle, Ia. 1. 22. Be ye
doers of the word not hearers only deceiving your own souls: to hope for good
from the word, without doing of it, is, it seems, nothing but a deceiving our
selves; Let us never therefore measure our godliness by the number of Sermons
which we hear, as if the hearing many were a certain mark of a good Christian,
but by the store of fruit we bring forth by them, without which all our hearing
will serve but to bring us in that heavier portion of stripes, which belongs to
him that knows his Masters will and does it not, Lu. 12. 47. But this reverence
which is due to preaching we must not pay to all that is now a days called so,
for God knows there are many false Prophets gone out into the world, as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Jo. 4 1. And now, if ever, is that advice of his necessary,
to try the Spirits whether they be of God: But what I have said, I mean only
of the preaching of those, who first have a lawful calling to the Office, and
secondly frame their doctrine according to the right rule, the written word of
God. But if any man say he is not able to judge whether the doctrine be
according to the Word or no, let him at least try it by the common known rules
of duty, which he does understand, and if he find it a doctrine, giving men
liberty to commit those things, which are by all acknowledged sins; such as
rebellion, injustice, unmercifulness, uncleanness, or the like he may conclude
it is utterly contrary to God, and his Word, and then abhorence, and not
reverence belongs to it.

31. Fifthly, The Sacraments.
we are to express our honoring of God, by receiving his Sacraments, those are
two, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. And this we are to do; First, by our
high esteem of them; Secondly, by our reverent usage of them; we are first to
prize them at a high rate, looking on them, as the instruments of bringing to
us the greatest blessings we can receive. The first of them, Baptism that
enters us into covenant with God, makes us members of Christ, and so gives us
right to all those precious benefits, that flow from him, to wit pardon of
sins, sanctifying grace, and heaven it self, on condition we perform our parts
of the covenant. And as for the Lords Supper, that is not only a sign and
remembrance of Christ, and his death; but it is actually the giving Christ, and
all the fruits of his death to every worthy receiver, and therefore there is a
most highest estimation, and value due to each of them.

32. And not only so; Of Baptism.
but in the second place we must show our r^^erence in our usage of them, and
that First before, Secondly at, and Thirdly after the time of receiving them.
It is true that the Sacrament of Baptism being now administered to us, when we
are infants, it is not to be expected of us, that we should in our own persons
do any thing, either before or at the time of receiving it, those performances
were strictly required of all persons, who were baptized, when they were of
years. But for us, it suffices to give us right to Baptism, that we are born
within the pale of the Church, that is, of Christian parents; and all that is
required at that time, is, what we can only perform by others, they in our
stead promising that when we come to years, we will perform our parts of the
Covenant. But by how much the less we are then able to do, so much the greater
bond lies on us, to perform those after-duties required of us, by which we are
to supply the want of the former.

33. Now if you would know what those duties are, look over those promises
which your The vow of Baptism.
Godfathers and Godmothers then made in your name, and you may then learn them.
I cannot give you them in a better form, then that of our Churches Catechism
which tells: That our Godfathers and Godmothers did promise, and vow three
things in our names; First, that we should forsake the Devil and all his works,
the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the
flesh: where by the Devil is meant. First, the worshipping of all false gods,
which is indeed but worshipping the Devil: A sin which at the time of Christ's
coming into the world, was very common; most part of mankind then living in
that vile Idolatry. And therefore when Baptism was first ordained, it was but
needful to make the forsaking of those false gods, a principal part of the vow.
And though those false worships are now much rarer, yet there was one special
part of them, which may be feared to be yet too common among us, and that is
all sorts of un^leanness, which though we do not make ceremonies of our
religion as the heathens did of theirs, yet the committing thereof is a most
high provocation in Gods eyes, such as drew him to destroy whole Cities with
fire and brimstone, as you may read, Genesis 19. Nay, the whole world with water,
Genesis 6. and will not fail to bring down judgments, and strange ones on any that
continue therein; and therefore the forsaking them well deserves to be looked
on, as an especial part of this promise. Besides this all dealing with the
Devil is here vowed against, whether it be by practicing witcheraft our selves,
or consulting with those that do upon any occasion whatever, as the recovery of
our health, our goods or what ever else. For this is a degree of the former
sin, it is the forsaking of the Lord, and setting up the Devil for our God,
whilst we go to him in our needs for help

34. But we also renounce all the works of the Devil, and those are either in
general all those which the Devil tempts us to, or else those particular kinds
of sin, which have most of his image on them; that is, those which he himself
most practices, such are pride (which brought him from being an Angel of light
to the accursed condition he is now in) and lying; he is, as our Savior says,
Jo 8. 44. A liar, and the Father of it; and such also are malice and envy,
especially killing, and destroying of others, for he was a murderer from the
beginning. Io 8. 44. But above all, there is nothing wherein we become so like
him, as in tempting and drawing others to sin; which is his whole trade, and
business, and if we make it any part of ours, we become like that roaring Lion,
that goes about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

35. The second thing we vow to forsake, is the pomps and vanities of this
wicked world. By the pomps and vanities there are several things meant, some of
them, such as were used by the heathens, in some unlawful sports of theirs,
wherein we are not now so much concerned, there being none of them remaining
among us but besides that, there is meant all excess either in diet or sports,
or apparel, when we keep not those due measures, which either by the general
rules of sobriety, or the particular circumstances of our qualities and
callings we are bound to. Next, by the wicked world we may understand, first
the wealth and greatness of the world, which though we do not so totally
renounce, that it is unlawful for a Christian to be either rich, or great, yet
we thus far promise to forsake them, that we will not set our hearts upon them,
nor ever either get, or keep them by the least unlawful means. Secondly by the
wicked world, we may understand the companies and customs of the world; which
so far as they are wicked, we here renounce; that is, we promise never to be
drawn by company to the commission of a sin, but rather to forsake the most
delightful company, then be ensnared by it; nor yet by custom, but rather
venture the shame of being thought singular, ridiculous persons, walk as it
were in a path by our selves, then put our selves into that broad way, that
leads to destruction, by giving our selves over to any sinful custom, how
common soever it be grown. If this part of our vow were but thoroughly
considered, it would arm us against most of the temptations the world offers
us, company and custom being the two special instruments by which it works on
us.

36. A third thing we renounce is all the sinful lusts of the flesh: where the
flesh is to be understood in that sense, wherein the Scripture often uses it,
for the fountain of all disordered affections. For though those unclean
desires, which we ordinarily call the lusts of the flesh, are meant here, yet
they are not the only things here contained, there being diverse other things,
which the Scripture calls the works of the flesh; I cannot better inform you of
them, then by setting down that list S. Paul gives of them, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultry, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witcheraft, hatred, variance,
emulations, wra^h, strife, seditions, heresies, Envyings, murders, drunkenness,
revilings, and such like. This with those other discription^, you w^ll find
scattered in several places of Scripture will show you, there are many things
contained under this part of your vow, the forsaking all the sinful lusts of
the flesh.

37. The secend thing our Godfathers and Godmothers promised for us, was that
we should belive all the Articles of the Christian faith. These we have summed
up together, in that which we call the Apostles Creed, which since we promise
to believe, we are supposed also to promise to learn them, and that not only
the words, but likewise the plain sense of them, for who can believe what he
either never heard of, or knows not any thing of the means of it? Now by this
believing is meant not only the consenting to the truth of them, but also the
living like them that do believe; As for Example, our believing that God
created us, should make us live in that subjection and obedience to him, which
becomes creatures to their Creator; the believing that Christ redeemed us,
should make us yield up our selves to him as his purchase, to be disposed wholly
by him, and employed only in his service. The believing a judgment to come,
should give us care so to walk, that we may not be condemned in it. And our
believing the life everlasting should make us diligent so to employ our short
moment of time here, that our everlasting life may be a life of joy, not of
misery to us. In this manner from all the Articles of the Creed, we are to draw
Motives to confirm us in all Christian Practice; to which end it is that our
learning, and believing of them tends and therefore without it we are very far
from making good this part of our vow, the believing all the Articles of the
Christian faith.

38. The last part of our vow is, that we should keep Gods holy will and
commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our lives. Where by of Gods
holy will and commandments, is meant our doing of all those things, which he
has made known to us to be his will we should perform; wherein he has given
us his holy Word to instruct us, and teach us, what it is that he requires of
us, and now he expects that we should faithfully do it without favoring our
selves in the breach of any one of his commands. And then in this entire
obedience, we must walk all the days of our lives: That is, we must go on in a
constant course of obeying God, not only fetch some few steps in his ways, but
walk in them, and that not for some part of our time but all the days of our
lives, never turn out of them, but go on constantly in them, as long as we live
in this world.

39. Having now thus briefly explained to you this vow made at your Baptism,
The strict obligation of this vow of Baptism.
all I shall add concerning it, is not only to remember you how nearly you are
concerned in the keeping it: and that first in respect of justice, secondly, in
respect of advantage and benefit. That you are in justice bound to it, I need
say no more, but that it is a promise, and you know justice requires of every
man the keeping of his promise. But then this is of all other promises the most
solemn and binding, for it is a vow; that is, a promise made to God; and
therefore we are not only unjust, but forsworn, when ever we break any part of
it.

40. But secondly we are also highly concerned to keep it, in respect of our
own benefit. I told you before, that Baptism entered us into Covenant with
God, now a Covenant is made up of two parts; that is, something promise by the
one party, and something by the other of the parties that make the Covenant.
And if one of them break his part of the Covenant; that is, perform not what he
has agreed to, he can in no reason look that the other should make good his.
And so it is here, God does indeed promise those benefits before mentioned, and
that is his part of the Covenant. But then we also undertake to perform the
several things contained in this vow of Baptism, and that is our part of it,
and unless we do indeed perform them, God is not tied to make good his, and so
we forfeit all those precious benefits and advantages, we are left in that
natural and miserable estate of ours, Children of wrath, enemies of God, and
heirs of eternal damnation. And now what can be the pleasure, that any or all
sins can offord us, that can make us the least degree of recompense for such a
loss, the loss of Gods favor and grace here, and the loss of our own souls
hereafter: for as our Savior says, Mar. 8. 36. What shall it profit a man; if
he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul: yet this mad bargain we
make, whenever we break any part of this our vow of Baptism. It therefore most
nearly concerns us to consider sadly of it; to remember, that every sin we
commit, is a direct breach of this vow, and therefore when thou art tempted to
any sin, seem it never so light, say not of it, as Lot did of Zoar, Genesis 6. 20.
Is it not a little one? but consider, that whatever it is, thou have in thy
Baptism vowed against it, and then be it never so little, it draws a great one
at the heels of it, no less then that of being forsworn, which whoever
commits, God has in the third Commandment pronounced, he will not hold him
guiltless. And that we may the better keep this vow, it will be very useful
often to repeat to our selves the several breaches of it, that so we may still
have it ready in our minds, to set against all temptations; and surely it is so
excellent a weapon, that if we do not either cast it aside, or use it very
negligently, it will enable us by Gods help to put to flight our spiritual
adversary. And this is that reverence we are to pay to this first Sacrament,
that of Baptism.

PARTITION III.
Of the LORDS SUPPER, of Preparation before, of Duties to be done at the
Receiving, and afterward, etc.

1. NOw follows the reverence due to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; The
Lords Supper.
and in this I must follow my first division, and set down first what is to be
done before, secondly, at, and thirdly, after the time of receiving, for in
this Sacrament we cannot be excused from any one of these, though in the former
we are.

2. And first for that which is to be done before, Things to be done before
receiving.
S. Paul tells us it is examination, 1 Cor. 11 28. But let a man examine
himself and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup. But before I
proceed to the particulars of this examination, Examination.
I must in the general tell you that the special business we have to do in this
Sacrament, is to repeat, and renew that covenant we made with God in our
Baptism, which we having many ways grievously broken, it pleases God in this
great mercy to suffer us to come to the renewing of it in this Sacrament, which
if we do in sincerity of heart, he has promised to accept as, and to give us
all those benefits in this, which he was ready to bestow in the other
Sacrament, if we had not by our own fault forfeited them. Since then the
renewing of our Covenant is our business of this time, it follows that these
three things are necessary toward it; First, that we understand what that
covenant is; Secondly, that we consider, what our breaches of it have bin; and
Thirdly, that we resolve upon a strict observance of it, for the rest of our
life. And the trying our selves in every one of these particulars, is that
examination which is required of us, before we come to this Sacrament.

3. And first we are to examine, Of our knowledge.
whether we understand what this Covenant is; this is, exceeding necessary, as
being the foundation of both the other, for it is neither possible to discover
our past sins, nor to settle purpose against them for the future without it.
Let this therefore be your first business. Try whether you rightly understand
what that Covenant is, which you entered into at your Baptism, what be the
mercies promised on Gods part, and the duties on yours. And because the
Covenant made with each of us in Baptism, is only the applying to our
particulars; the Covenant made by God, in Christ, with all mankind in general,
you are to consider, whether you understand that; if you do not, you must
immediately seek for instruction in it. And till you have means of gaining
better, look over what is briefly said in the entrance to this treatise,
concerning the second Covenant, which is the foundation of that Covenant, which
God makes with us in our Baptism. And because you will there find, that
obedience to all Gods Commands is the condition required of us; and is also
that, which we expressly vow in our Baptism, it is necessary you should
likewise know, what those Commands of God are. Therefore if you find you are
ignorant of them, never be at rest, till you have got your self instructed in
them, and have gained such a measure of knowledge, as may direct you to do that
Whole Duty of Man, which God requires. And the giving thee this instruction is
the only aim of this Book; which the more ignorant thou art, the more earnestly
I shall entreat thee, diligently to read. And if thou have heretofore approacht
to this holy Sacrament in utter ignorance of these necessary things, bewail thy
sin in so doing, but presume not to come again, till thou have by gaining this
necessary knowledge fitted thy self for it, which thou must hasten to do. For
though no man must come to the Sacrament in such ignorance, yet if he wilfully
continue in it, that will be no excuse to him for keeping from this holy Table.

4. The second part of our examination is concerning our breaches of this
Covenant, Sins.
and here thou will find the use of that knowledge I spoke of. For there is no
way of discovering what our sins have bin, but by trying our actions by that
which should be the rule of them, Several sorts.
the Law of God. When therefore thou set to this part of examination,
remember what are the several branches of thy duty, and then ask thy own heart
in every particular, how thou have performed it. And content not thy self with
knowing in general, that thou have broken Gods Law, but do thy utmost to
discover in what particulars thou have done so. Recall as well as thou can,
all the passages of thy life, and in each of them consider, what part of that
duty has bin transgrest by it. And that not only in the grosser act, but in
word also, nay even in thy most secret thoughts. For though man's Law reaches
not to them, yet Gods does; so that whatever he forbids in the act, he forbids
likewise in the thoughts and desires, and sees them as clearly as our most
public acts. This particular search is exceed^ng necessary; For there is no
promise of forgiveness of any sin, but only to him that confesses and
forsakes it. Now to both these it is necessary, that we have a distinct and
particular knowledge of our sins. For how can he either confess his sin, that
knows not his guilt of it? or how can he resolve to forsake it, that discerns
not himself to have formerly cleaved to it? Therefore we may surely conclude,
that this examination is not only useful, but necessary toward a full, and
complete repentance; for he that does not take this particular view of his
sins; will be likely to repent but by halves, which will never avail him
toward his pardon; nothing but an entire forsaking of every evil way, being
sufficient for that. But surely of all other times it concerns us, that when we
come to the Sacrament, our repentance be full and complete, and therefore this
strict search of our own hearts is then especially necessary. For although it
be true, that it is not possible by all our diligence to discover, or remember
every sin of our whole lives: And though it be also true, that what is so
unavoidably hid from us, may be forgiven without any more particular
confession, then that of David's, Psalm 19. 12. Cleanse thou me from my secret
faults, yet this will be no plea for us, if they come to be secret, only
because we are negl^gent in searching. Therefore take heed of deceiving thy
self in this weighty business, but search thy soul to the bottom, without which
it is impossible that the wounds thereof should ever be thoroughly cured.

5. And as you are to inquire thus narrowly concerning the several sorts of
sins, Degrees.
so also must you concerning the degrees of them; for there are diverse
circumstances, which increase, and heighten the sin. Of this sort there are
many. As first, when we sin against knowledge, that is, when we certainly know
such a thing to be a sin, yet for the present pleasure or profit (or whatever
other motive) adventure of it. This is by Christ himself adjudged to be a great
heightning of the sin. He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall
be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 47. Secondly, when we sin with
deliberation; that is, when we do not fall into it of a sudden, ere we are
aware, but have time to consider of it, this is another degree of the sin. But
thirdly a yet higher is, when we do it against the resistances and checks of
our own conscience, when that at the time tells us, this thing thou ought
not to do; Nay, lays before us the danger, as well as the sin of it, yet in
spite of these admonitions of conscience, we go on and commit the sin; this is
a huge increase of it, such as will raise the lest sin into a most high
provocation. For it is plain, a sin thus committed must be a wilful one, and
then be the matter of it never so light, it is most heinous in Gods eyes. Nay,
this is a circumstance of such force, that it may make an indifferent action,
that is in it self no sin, become one. For though my conscience should err in
telling me such a thing were unlawful, yet so long as I were so persuaded, it
were sin for me to do that thing; for in that case my will consents to the
doing a thing, which I believe to be displeasing to God, and God (who judges us
by our will, not our understandings,) imputes it to me as a sin, as well as if
the thing were in it self unlawful, and therefore surely we may conclude that
any thing which is in it self sinful, is made much more so by being committed
against the checks of conscience. A fourth aggravation of a sin is, when it
has bin often repeated, for then there is not only the guilt of so many more
Acts, but every Act grows also so much worse, and more inexcusable. We always
judge thus in faults committed against our selves, we can forgive a single
injury, more easily then the same, when it has bin repeated, and the oftener it
has bin so repeated, the more heinous we account it. And so surely it is in
faults against God also. Fifthly, the sins which have bin committed after vows,
and resolutions of amendment are yet more grievous: for that contains also the
breaking of those promises. Somewhat of this, there is in every wilful sin,
because every such is a breach of that vow we make at Baptism; But besides
that, we have since bound our selves by new vows, if at no other time, yet
surely at our coming to the Lords Supper, that being (as was formerly said)
purposely to repeat our vow of Baptism. And the more of these vows we have
made, so much the greater is our guilt; if we fall back to any sin, we then
renounced. This is a thing very well worth weighing, and therefore examine thy
self particularly, at thy approach to the Sacrament, concerning thy breaches of
former vows made at the holy Table. And if upon any other occasion, as
sickness, trouble of mind, or the like, thou have at any time made any other,
call thy self to a strict account how thou have performed them also, and
remember that every sin committed against such vows is besides its own natural
guilt, a perjury likewise. Sixthly, a yet higher step is, when a sin has bin
so often committed, that we are come to a custom and habit of it: and that is
indeed a high degree.

6. Yet even of habits some are worse then others; as first, if it be so
confirmed, that we are come to a hardness of heart, have no sense at all of the
sin; or secondly, if we go on in it against any extraordinary means used by God
to reform us, such as sickness, or any other affliction, which seems to be
sent on purpose for our reclaiming. Or thirdly, if all reproofs and
exhortations either of Ministers or private friends work not on us, but either
make us angry at our reprovers, or set us on defending the sin. Or Lastly, if
this sinful habit be so strong in us, as to give us a love to the sin, not only
in our selves, but in others; if as the Apostle says, Romans 1. 31. We do not
only do the things, but take pleasure in them that do them, and therefore
entice and draw as man^ as we can into the same sins with us: Then it is risen
to the highest step of wickedness, and is to be looked on as the utmost d^gree
both of sin and danger. Thus you see how you are to examine your selves
concerning your sins, in each of which you are to consider how many of these
heightning circumstances there have bin, that so you may aright measure the
hainousness of them.

7. Now the end of this examination is to bring you to such a sight of your
sins, Humiliation.
as may truly humble you, make you sensible of your own danger, that have
provoked so great a Majesty, who is able so sadly to revenge himself upon you.
And that will surely even to the most carnal heart appear a reasonable ground
of sorrow. But that is not all, it must likewise bring you to a sense and
abhorrence of your baseness, and ingratitude, that have thus offended so good
and gracious a God, that have made such unworthy and unkind returns to those
tender and rich mercies of his. And this consideration especially must melt
your hearts into a deep sorrow and contrition, the degree whereof must be in
some measure answerable to the degree of your sins. And the greater it is,
provided it be not such as shuts up the hope of Gods Mercy, the more acceptable
it is to God, who has promised not to despise a broken and contrite heart,
Psalm. 51. 17. And the more likely it will be also to bring us to amendment: For
if we have once felt what the smart of a wounded Spirit is, we shall have the
less mind to venture upon sin again.

8. For when we are tempted with any of the short pleasures of sin, we may then
out of our own experience set against them the sharp pains and terrors of an
accusing conscience, which will to any that has felt them; be able infinitely
to outweigh them. Endeavor therefore to bring your soul to this melting
temper, to this deep unfeigned sorrow, and that not only for the danger you
have brought upon your self, for though that be a consideration that may and
ought to work sadness in us, yet where that alone is the motive of our sorrow,
it is not that sorrow which will avail us for pardon; and the reason of it is
clear, for that sorrow proceeds only from the love of our selves, we are sorry,
because we are like to smart. But the sorrow of a true penitent must be
enjoined also with the love of God, Contrition.
and that will make us grieve for having offended him, though there were no
punishment to fall upon our selves. The way then to stir up this sorrow in us,
is first to stir up our love of God, by repeating to our selves the many
gracious Acts of his mercy toward us, particularly that of his sparing us, and
not cutting us off in our sins. Consider with thy self how many and how great
provocations thou have offered him, perhaps in a continued course of many years
wilful disobedience, for which thou might with perfect justice have bin ere
this sent quick into Hell; Nay, possibly thou have before thee many examples of
less sinners, then thou art, who have bin suddenly snatched away in the midst of
their sins. And what cause can thou give, why thou have thus long escaped,
but only because his eye has spared thee. And what cause of that sparing, but
his tender compassions toward thee, his unwillingness that thou should
perish? This consideration if it be pressed home upon thy soul, cannot choose (if
thy heart be not as hard as the nether Millstone) but awake somewhat of love in
thee toward this gracious, this long-suffering God, and that love will
certainly make it appear to thee, that it is an evil thing, and a bitter, that
thou have forsaken the Lord, Ier. 2. 19. That thou have made such wretched
requitals of so great mercy; it will make thee both ashamed and angry at thy
self, that thou have bin such an unthankful creature. But if the consideration
of this one sort of mercy, Gods forbearance only, be such an engagement, and
help to this Godly sorrow, what will then be the multitude of those other
mercies, which every man is able to reckon up to himself? and therefore let
every man be as particular in it as he can call to mind as many of them as he
is able that so he may attain to the greater degree of true contrition.

9. And to all these endeavors most be added earnest prayers to God, that he
by his holy spirit would show you your sins, and soften your hearts, that you
may thoroughly bewail, and lament them.

10. To this must be joined an humble confession of sins to God, Confession.
and that not only in general, but also in particular, as far as your memory of
them will reach, and that with all those heightning circumstances of them,
which you have by the forementioned examination discovered. Yea even secret,
and forgotten sins must in general be acknowledged; for it is certain there are
multitudes of such, so that it is necessary for every one of us to say with
David, Psalm. 19. 12. Who can understand his errors, cleanse thou me from my
secret faults. When you have thus confessed your sins, with this hearty sorrow,
and sincere hatred of them, you may then (and not before) be concluded to feel
so much of your disease, that it will be seasonable to apply the remedy.

11. In the next place therefore you are to look on him, whom God has set
forth to be the propitiation of our sins, Romans 3. 25. Even Jesus Christ that
Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world Io. 1. 29. And earnestly beg
of God, that by his most precious blood, your sins may be washed away, and that
God would for his sake be reconciled to you. And this you are to believe will
surely be done, if you do for the rest of your time forsake your sins, and give
your selves up sincerely to obey God in all his commands. But without that, it
is vain to hope any benefit from Christ, or his sufferings. And therefore the
next part of your preparation must be the setting those resoluti^ns of
obedience which I told you was the third thing you were to examine your selves
of before your approach to the holy Sacrament.

12. Concerning the particulars of this resolution, Resolutions of obedience.
I need say no more, but that it must answer every part, and branch of our
duty; that is, we must not only in general resolve, that we will observe Gods
Commandments, but we must resolve it for every Commandment by it self; and
especially where we have found our selves most to have failed heretofore, there
especially to renew our resolutions. And herein it nearly concerns us to look,
that these resolutions be sincere, and unfeigned, and not only such slight ones
as people use out of custom to put on at their coming to the Sacrament, which
they never think of keeping afterward. For this is a certain truth, that
whosoever comes to this holy Table without an entire hatred of every sin, comes
unworthily; and it is as sure, that he that does entirely hate all sin, will
resolve to forsake it; for you know forsaking naturally follows hatred, no man
willingly abides with a thing, or person he hates. And therefore he that does
not so resolve, as that God the searcher of hearts may approve it as sincere,
cannot be supposed to hate sin, and so cannot be a worthy receiver of that holy
Sacrament. Therefore try your resolutions thoroughly, that you deceive not your
selves in them, it is your own great danger, if you do, for it is certain you
cannot deceive God, nor gain acceptance from him by any thing, which is not
perfectly hearty and unfeigned.

13. Now as you are to resolve on this new obedience, Of the means.
so you are likewise to resolve on the means, which may assist you in the
performance of it. And therefore consider in every duty, what are the means
that may help you in it, and resolve to make use of them, how uneasy soever
they be to your flesh; so on the other side consider what things they are, that
are likely to lead you to sin, and resolve to shun and avoid them: this you are
to do in respect of all sins whatever, but especially in those, whereof you
have formerly bin guilty. For there it will not be hard for you to find, by
what steps and degrees you were drawn into it, what company, what occasion it
was that ensnared you, as also to what sort of temptations you are aptest to
yield. And therefore you must particularly fence you self against the sin, by
avoiding those occasions of it.

14. But it is not enough that you resolve you will do all this hereafter, but
you must instantly set to it, and begin the course by doing at the present
whatsoever you have opportunity of doing: And there are several things, which
you may; nay, must do at the present, before you come to the Sacrament.

15. As first you must cast off every sin, Present renouncing of sin.
not bring any one unmortified lust with you to that Table; for it is not
enough to purpose to cast them off afterward, but you must then actually do it
by withdrawing all degrees of love and affection from them; you must then give
a bill of divorce to all your old beloved sins, or else you are no way fit to
be married to Christ. The reason of this is clear; For this Sacrament is our
spiritual nourishment; now before we can receive spiritual nourishment we must
have spiritual life (for no man gives food to a dead person) But whosoever
continues not only in the act, but in the love of any one known sin has no
spiritual life, but is in Gods account no better then a dead carcass, and
therefore cannot receive that spiritual food. It is true, he may eat the bread,
and drink the wine, but he receives not Christ, but in stead of him, that which
is most dreadful; the Apostle will tell you what, 1 Cor. 11. 29. He eats and
drinks his own damnation. Therefore you see how great a necessity lies on you
thus actually to put off every sin, before you come to this Table.

16. And the same necessity lies on you for a second thing to be done at this
time, Embracing virtue.
and that is the putting your soul into a heavenly and Christian temper; by
possessing it with all those graces which may render it acceptable in the eyes
of God. For when you have turned out Satan and his accursed train, you must not
let your soul lie empty; if you do, Christ tells you, Luke 11. 26. He will
quickly return again, and your last estate shall be worse then your first. But
you must by earnest Prayer invite into it the holy Spirit, with his graces, or
if they be in some degree there already, you must pray that he will yet more
fully possess it, and you must quicken and stir them up.

17. As for example, Quickening of graces.
you must quicken your humility, by considering your many and great sins; your
Faith, by mediating on Gods promises to all penitent sinners; your love to God,
by considering his mercies, especially those remembered in this Sacrament, his
giving Christ to die for us: and your love to your neighbor, nay to your
enemies, by considering that great example of his suffering for us, that were
enemies to him. And it is most particularly required of us when we come to this
Table, that we copy out this pattern of his in a perfect forgiveness of all
that have offended us, and not only forgiveness, but such a kindness also, as
will express it self in all offices of love and friendship to them.

18. And if you have formerly so quite forgot that blessed example of his,
Charity.
as to do the direct contrary, if you have done any unkindness or injury to any
person, then you are to seek forgiveness from him; and to that end first
acknowledge your fault, and secondly restore to him to the utmost of your power,
whatsoever you have deprived him of, either in goods or credit. This
reconciliation with our brethren is absolutely necessary toward the making any
of our services aceptable with God, as appears by that precept of Christ, Mat.
5. 23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar; and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come, and offer thy gift.
Where you see, that though the gift be already at the Altar, it must rather be
left there unoffered, then be offered by a man that is not at perfect peace
with his neighbor. And if this charity be so necessary in all our services,
much more in this, where by a joint partaking in the same holy mysteries, we
signify our being united and knit, not only to Christ our head, but also to
each other, as fellow members. And therefore if we come with any malice in our
hearts we commit an act of the highest Hypocrisy, by making a solemn
profession in the Sacrament of that charity and brotherly love, whereof our
hearts are quite void.

19. Another most necessary grace at this time is that of devotion, Devotion.
for the raising whereof we must allow our selves some time to withdraw from
our worldly affairs, and wholly to set our selves to this business of
preparation, one very especial part of which preparation lies in raising up our
souls to a devout and heavenly temper. And to that it is most necessary, that
we cast off all thoughts of the world, for they will be sure as so many clogs,
to hinder our souls in their mounting toward heaven. A special exercise of
this devotion is prayer, wherein we must be very frequent, and earnest at our
coming to the Sacrament, this being one great instrument, whereby we must
obtain all those other graces required in our preparation. Therefore be sure
this be not omitted, for if you use never so much endeavor besides, and leave
out this, it is the going to work in your own strength, without looking to God
for his help, and then it is impossible you should prosper in it; For we are
not able of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Therefore be instant with him so to assist
you with his grace, that you may come so fitted to this Holy Table, that you
may be partakers of the benefits there reached out to all worthy receivers.

20. Necessity of these graces.
These and all other spiritual graces our Souls must be clothed with when we
come to this Feast, for this is that wedding garment, without which whosoever
comes, is like to have the entertainment, mentioned in the parable, of him who
came to the marriage without a wedding garment, Mat. 22. 13. who was cast into
utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth; for though it is
possible he may sit it out at the present, and not be snatched from the Table,
yet St. Paul assures him, he drinks damnation to himself, and howsoever it may
fall on him, is uncertain; But it is sure, it will, if repentance prevent it
not, and as sure that when ever it does come, it will be intolerable, for who
among us can dwell with everlasting burnings, Isa. 33. 14.

21. I shall add but one thing more concerning the things which are to be done
before the Sacrament, The usefulness of a spiritual guide.
and that is an advice. That if any person upon a serions view of himself
cannot satisfy his own Soul of his sincerity, and so doubts, whether he may
come to the Sacrament, He do not rest wholly on his own Judgment in the case;
For if he be a truly humbl^d Soul, it is likely he may judge too hardly of
himself, if he be not, it is odds, but if he be left to the satisfying of his
own doubts, he will quickly bring himself to pass too favorable a sentence. Or
whether he be the one or the other, if he come to the Sacrament in that doubt,
he certainly plunges himself into further doubts and scruples, if not into sin;
On the other side, if he forbear, because of it, if that fear be a causeless
one, then he groundlesly absents himself from that Holy Ordinance, and so
deprives his Soul of the benefits of it. Threfore in the midst of so many
dangers, which attend the mistake of himself, I would, as I said before, exhort
him not to trust to his own judgment, but to make known his case to some
discreet and Godly Minister, and rather be guid^^ by his, who will probably (if
the case be duly and without any disguise discovered to him) be better able to
judge of him, then he of himself. This is the council the Church gives in the
exhortation before the Communion, where it is advised, that if any by other
means therefore mentioned, cannot quiet his own conscience, but require farther
counsel, and comfort, than let him go to some discre^t and learned Minister of
Gods Word, and open his grief, that he may receive such Ghostly counsel,
advice, and comfort that his conscience may be relieved, etc. This is surely
such advice, as should not be neglected neither at the time of coming to the
Sacrament, nor any other, when we are under any fear or reasons of doubt
concerning the state of our Souls. And for want of this, many have run into
very great mischief, having let the doubt fester so long, that it has either
plunged them into deep distresses of conscience; or which is worse, they have
to still that disquiet within them, betaken themselves to all sinful pleasures,
and so quite cast off all care of their Souls.

22. But to all this it will perhaps be said, Not to be ashamed to discover our
selves to one.
that this cannot be done without discovering the nakedness, and blemishes of
the Soul, and there is shame in that, and therefore men are unwilling to do it.
But to that I answer, that it is very unreasonable, that should be a
hinderance. For first, I suppose you are to choose only such a person as will
faithfully keep any secret, you shall commit to him, and so it can be no
public shame you can fear. And if it be in respect of that single person, you
need not fear that neither; for, supposing him a godly man, he will not think
the worse of you, but the better, that you are so desirous to set all right
between God, and your Soul. But if indeed there were shame in it, yet as long
as it may be a means to cure both your trouble and your sin too (as certainly
Godly and faithful counsel may tend much to both) that shame ought to be
despised, and it is sure it would, if we loved our Souls, as well as our body,
for in bodily diseases, be they never so foul or shameful, we count him a fool,
who will rather miss the cure, then discover it, and then it must here be so
much a greater folly, by how much the Soul is more precious then the body.

23. But God knows, As necessary to the confident as to the doubtful.
it is not only doubting persons, to whom this advice might be useful, there
are others of another sort, whose confidence is their disease, who presume very
groundlesless of the goodness of their estates; And for those it were most
happy, if they could be brought to hear some more equal judgments, then their
own in this so weighty a business. The truth is, we are generally so apt to
savor our selves, that it might be very useful for the most, especially the
more ignorant sort, sometimes to advise with a spiritual guide, to enable them
to pass right judgments on themselves, and not only so, but to receive
directions, how to subdue and mortify those sins they are most inclined to,
which is a matter of so much difficulty, that we have no reason to despise any
means that may help us in it.

24. I have now gone through those several parts of duty we are to perform
before our receiving. At the time of receiving.
In the next place, I am to tell you, what is to be done at the time of
receiving. Meditation of thy unworthiness.
When thou art at the Holy Table, first humble thy self in an unfeigned
acknowledgement of thy great unworthiness to be admitted there; The sufferings
of Christ.
and to that purpose remember again between God and thine own Soul, some of thy
greatest, and foulest sins, thy breaches of former vows made at that Table,
especially since thy last receiving. Then meditate on those bitter sufferings
of Christ, which are set out to us in the Sacrament, when thou see the bread
broken, remember how his blessed body was torn with nails upon the Cross, when
thou see the wine poured out, remember how his precious blood was spilt
there. And then consider, it was thy sins that caused both. And here think, how
unworthy a wretch thou art to have done that, which occasioned such torments to
him? How much worse then his very crucifiers? They crucified him once, but thou
have, as much as in thee lay, crucified him daily. They crucified him, because
they knew him not, but thou have known both what he is in himself, The Lord of
Glory, and what he is to thee a most tender and merciful Savior, and yet thou
have still continued thus to crucify him afresh. Consider this, and let it work
in thee, first a great sorrow for thy sins past, and then a great hatred, and a
firm resolution against them for the time to come.

25. When thou have a while thus thought on these sufferings of Christ for the
increasing The atonement wrought by them.
thy humility and contrition; Then in the second place think of them again, to
stir up thy Faith; look on him as the sacrifice offered up for thy sins, for
the appeasing of Gods wrath, and procuring his favor, and mercies toward thee.
And therefore beleevingly, yet humbly, beg of God to accept of that
satisfaction made by his innocent and beloved Son, and for the merits thereof
to pardon thee; whatever is past, and to be fully reconciled to thee.

26. In the third place consider them again to raise thy thankfulness. The
thankfulness owing for them.
Think how much both of shame and pain he there endured, but especially those
great agonies of his Soul, which drew from him that bitter cry, My God, my God
why have thou forsaken me. Mat. 27. 45. Now all this he suffered only to keep
thee from perishing. And therefore consider what unexpressable thanks thou
owe him, and endeavor to raise thy Soul to the most zealous and hearty
thanksgiving; For this is a principal part of duty at this time, the praising,
and magnifying that mercy, which has redeemed us by so dear a p^ice. Therefore
it will here well become thee to say with David, I will take the Cup of
Salvation and will call upon the Name of the Lord.

27. Fourthly, The great love of Christ in them.
look on these sufferings of Christ, to stir up this love, and surely there
cannot be a more effect^al means of doing it, for here the love of Christ to
thee is most manifest, according to that of the Apostle, 1 Jo. 3. 16. Hereby
perceive we the love of God toward us, because he laid down his life for us.
And that even the highest degree of love, for as himself tells us, Jo 15. 13.
Greater love then this has no m^n, then that a man lay down his life for his
friend. Yet even greater love then this had he, for he not only died, but died
the most painful and most reproachful death, and that not for his friends, but
his utter enemies. And therefore if after all this love on his part, there be
no return of love on ours, we are worst then the vilest sort of men, for even
the Publicans, Matthew. 5. 46. Love those that love them. Here therefore chide,
and reproach thy self, that thy love to him is so faint and cool, when his to
thee was so zealous and affectionate. And endeavor to enkindle this holy flame
in thy Soul, to love him in such a degree, that thou may be ready to copy
out his example, to part with all things yea even life it self, whenever he
calls for it, that is whenever thy obedience to any command of his shall lay
thee open to those sufferings. But in the mean time, to resolve never again to
make any league with his enemies, to entertain, or harbor any sin in thy
breast. But if there have any such hitherto remained with thee, make this the
season to kill, and crucify it, offer it up at this instant a sacrifice to him,
who was sacrificed for thee, and particularly for that very end, that he might
redeem thee from all iniquity. Therefore here make thy solemn resolutions to
forsake every sin, particularly those, into which thou have most frequently
fallen. And that thou may indeed perform those resolutions, earnestly beg of
this crucified Savior, that he will by the power of his death mortify and kill
all thy corruptions.

28. When thou art about to receive the consecrated bread and wine, The
benefits of the New Covenant sealed in the Sacrament.
remember that God now offers to seal to thee that New Covenant made with
mankind in his Son. For since he gives that his Son in the Sacrament, he gives
with him all the benefits of that Covenant, to wit, pardon of sins, fanctifying
grace and a title to an eternal inheritance. And here be astonished at the
infinite goodness of God who reaches out to thee so precious a treasure. But
then remember, that this is all but on condition, that thou perform thy part of
the Covenant. And therefore settle in thy Soul the most serious purpose of
obedience, and then with all possible devotion join with the Minister in that
short, but excellent prayer used at the instant of giving the Sacrament, The
body of our Lord, etc.

29. So soon as thou have received, Upon receiving give thanks.
^ffer up thy devoutest praises for that great mercy, together with thy most
earnest prayers for such assistance of Gods Spirit, Pray.
as may enable thee to perform the vow thou have now made. Then remembering that
Christ is a propitiati^n not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the
whole world, let thy charity reach as far as his has done, and pray for all
mankind, that every one may receive the benefit of that sacrifice of his;
commend also to God the estate of the Church, that particularly, whereof thou
art a member. And forget not to pray for all to whom thou owe obedience, both
in Church and State, and so go on to pray for such particular persons as either
thy relations, or their wants shall present to thee If there be any collection
for the poor (as there always ought to be at this time) give freely according
to thy ability; or if by the d^fault of others there be no such collection, yet
do thou privately design something toward the relief of thy poor brethren, and
be sure to give it the next fitting opportunity that offers it self. All this
thou must contrive to do in the time that others are receiving, that so when
the public prayers, after the administration begin, thou may be ready to
join in them, which thou must likewise take care to do with all divotion: thus
much for thy behavior at the time of receiving.

30. Now follows the third and last thing; After the Sacrament.
That is* what thou art to do after thy receiving. That which is immediately to
be done, is as soon as thou art retired from the Congregation, to offer up
again to God thy Sacrifice of praise for all those precious mercies conveyed to
thee, Private Prayer and Thanksgiving.
in that holy Sacrament, as also humbly to entreat the continued assistance of
his grace to enable thee to make good all those purposes of obedience thou have
now made. And in whatsoever thou know thy self most in danger, either in
respect of any former habit, or natural inclination, there especially desire
and earnestly beg his aid.

31. When thou have done thus, Not presently to f^l (...) worldly affairs
do not presently let thy self lose to thy worldly car^s and business. But
spend all that day, either in medi^ating, praying, reading, good conferences,
or the like; so as may best keep up that holy flame that is enkindled in thy
heart. Afterward, when thy calling requires thee to fall to thy usual
affaire^, do it, but yet still remember that thou have a greater business then
that upon thy hands; that is, the performing of all those promises, thou so
lately made to God, and therefore whatever thy outward employments are, let
thy heart be set on that, To keep thy re^o^utions still in memory.
keep all the particulars of thy resolution in memory, and whenever thou art
tempted to any of thy old sins, then consider, this is the thing thou so
solemnly vowedst against, and withal remember what a horrible guilt it will be,
The danger of breaking them.
if thou should now wilfully do any thing contrary to that vow; Yea, and what
a horrible mischief also it will be to thy self. For at thy receiving, God and
thou enteredst into Covenant, into a league of friendship and kindness. And as
long as thou keep in that friendship with God, thou art false, all the
malice of men or devils can do thee no harm: For as the Apostle says, Romans 8.
31. If God be for us who can be against us. But if thou breakest this league
(as thou certainly do, Making God thy enemy.
if thou yield to any wilful sin) then God and thou are enemies, and if all the
world then were for thee, it could not avail thee.

32. Nay thou will get an enemy within thine own bosom, Thy own conscience.
thy conscience accusing and upbraiding thee, and when God and thine own
conscience are thus against thee, thou can not but be extremely miserable,
even in this life, besides that fearful expectation of wrath, which awaites
thee in the next. Remember all this, when thou art set upon by any temptation,
and then sure thou can not but look upon that temptation, as a cheat, that
co^es to rob thee of thy peace, thy God, thy very soul. And then surely it will
appear as unfit to entertain it, as thou would think it to harbor one in thy
house, who thou know came to rob thee of what is dearest to thee.

33. And let not any experience of Gods mercy in pardonning thee heretofore
encourage thee again to provoke him; Gods former pardons no encouragement to
sin.
for besides, that it is thy highest degree of wickedness and unthankfulness to
make that goodness of his, which should lead thee to repentance an
encouragement in thy sin; besides this, I say, the oftener thou have bin
pardoned, the less reason thou have to expect it again, because thy sin is so
much the greater, for having bin committed after so much mercy. If a King have
several times pardoned an offender, yet if he still return to the commission of
the same fault, the King will at last be forced, if he have any love to
Justice, to give him up to it. Now so it is here, God is as well just as
merciful, and his justice will at last surely and heavily avenge the abuse of
his mercy; and there cannot be a greater abuse of his mercy, then to sin in
hope of it, so that it will prove a miserable deceiving of thy self then to
presume upon it.

34. Now this care of making good thy vow must not abide with thee some few
days only, The obligation of this vow perpetual.
and then be cast aside, but it must continue with thee all thy days. For if
thou break thy vow, it matters not, whether sooner or latter. Nay perhaps the
guilt may in some respects be more, if it be late, for if thou have for a good
while gone on in the observance of it, that shows the thing is possible to
thee; and so thy after breaches are not of infirmity, because thou can not
avoid them, but of perverseness, because thou will not: Besides the use of
Christian-walking must needs make it more easy to thee. For indeed all the
difficulty of it, is but from the custom of the contrary. And therefore if
after some acquaintance with it, when thou have overcome somewhat of the
hardness, thou shall then give it over, it will be most inexcusable. Therefore
be careful all the days of thy life, to keep such a watch over thy life, and
so to avoid all occasions of temptations, as may preserve thee from all wilful
breaches of this vow.

35. But though the obligation of every such single vow reach to the utmost day
of our lives, Yet often to berenewed.
yet are we often to renew it; that is, we are often to receive the holy
Sacrament, for that being the means of conveying to us so great and unvaluable
benefits; and it being also a Command of Christ, that we should do this in
remembrance of him, we are in respect both of reason and duty to omit no fit
opportunity of partaking of that holy Table. I have now showed you what that
reverence is, which we are to pay to God in his Sacrament.

PARTITION. IV.
HONOR due to Gods name; Of Sinning against it; Blasphemy; Swearing; Assertory
Oaths; Promissery Oaths; Unlawful Oaths; Of Perjury; Of vain Oaths, and the Sin
of them, etc.

. 1. THe last thing wherein we are to express our reverence to him, Honor due
to Gods name.
is the honoring his name. Now what this honoring of his name is, we shall
best understand by considering what are the things by which it is ^^shonoured,
the avoiding of which will be our way of honoring it.

The first is all blasphemies, Sins against it.
or speaking any evil thing of God, the highest degree whereof is cursing him,
or if we do not speak it with our mouths, Blasphemy.
yet if we do it in our hearts, by thinking any unworthy thing of them, it is
looked on by God, who sees the heart, as the vilest dishonor. But there is also
a blasphemy of the actions, that is, when men who profess to be the servants of
God, live so wickedly, that they bring up an evil report on him, whom they own
as their Master and Lord. This blasphemy the Apostle takes notice of, R^m. 2.
24. Where he tells those who protest to be observers of the Law, That by their
wicked actions the name of God was blasphemed among the Gentiles. Those
Gentiles were moved to think ill of God, as the favor of sin, when they saw
those, who called themselves his servants, commit it.

A second way of dishonouring Gods name, Swearing.
is by swearing, and that is of two sorts, either by false oaths or else by
rash, and light ones. A false oath may also be of two kinds, as first that by
which I affirm somewhat, or secondly that by which I promise. The first is when
I say such or such a thing was done so or so; and comfirm this saying of mine
with an oath, Assertory oaths.
if then I know there be not perfect truth in what I say, this is a flat
perjury, a down right being forsworn; Nay if I swear to the truth of that,
whereof I am only doubtful, though the thing should happen to be true, yet it
brings upon me the guilt of perjury. For I swear at a venture, and the thing
might for ought I knew be as well false as true, whereas I ought never to swear
to any thing, the truth of which I do not certainly know.

2. But besides this sort of oaths, Promissory*
by which I affirm any thing, there is the other sort, that by which I promise
somewhat. And that promise may be either to God or Man, when it is to God, we
call it a vow, of which I have already spoken, under the head of the
Sacraments, I shall now only speak of that to man; and this may become a false
oath, either at, or after the time of taking it. At the time of taking, it is
false if either I have then no real purpose of making it good or else take it
in a sense different from that which I know, he to whom I make the promise
understands it; for the use of oaths, being to assure the persons, to whom they
are made they must be taken in their sense. But if I were never so sincere at
the taking the oath, if afterward I do not perform it, I am certainly perju^ed.

3. The nature of an oath being then thus binding, Unlawful oaths.
it nearly concerns us to look that the matter of our oaths be lawful, for else
we run our selves into a woeful snare. For Example, suppose I swear to kill a
man, if I perform my oath, I am guilty of murder, if I break it, of perjury.
And so I am under a necessity of sinning one way or other. But there is nothing
puts us under a greater degree of this unhappy necessity, then when we swear
two oaths, whereof the one is directly cross and contradictory to the other.
For if I swear to give a man my whole estate, and afterward swear to give all
or part of that estate to another, it is certain I must break my oath to one of
them, because it is impossible to perform it to both, and so I must be under a
necessity of being forsworn. And into this unhappy straight every man brings
himself that takes any oath which crosses some other, which he has formerly
taken; which should make all that love either God, or their own souls, resolve
never thus miserably to ^ntangle themselves, by taking one oath cross and
thwarting to another. But it may perhaps here be asked, what a person that has
already brought himself into such a condition shall do? I answer, he must first
heartily repent the great sin of taking the unlawful oath, and then stick only
to the lawful, which is all that is in his power toward the repairing his
fault, and qualifying him for Gods pardon for it.

4. Having said this concerning the kinds of this sin of perjury, God greatly
dishonored by perjury.
I shall only add a few words to show you, how greatly Gods name is dishonored
by it. In all oaths you know, God is solemnly called to witness the truth of
which is spoken; now if the thing be false, it is the basest affront, and
dishonor that can possibly be done to God. For it is in reason to signify one
of these two things, either that we believe he knows not whether we say true or
no. (And that is to make him no G^d, to suppose him to be as deceiveable, and
easy to be deluded as one of our ignorant neighbors) or else that he is
willing to countenance our lies; the former robs him of that great attribute of
his, his knowing all things, and is surely a great dishonouring of him, it
being even amongst men accounted, one of the greatest disgraces to account a
man fit to have cheats put upon him; yet even so we deal with God, if we
venture to forswear, upon a hope that God discerns it not, But the other is yet
worse, for the supposing him willing to countenance our lies, is the making him
a party in them; and is not only the making him no God (it being impossible
that God should either lie himself or approve it in another) but it is the
making him like the very Devil. For he it is that is a liar, and the Father of
it, Jo. 8 44. And sure I need not say more to prove that this is the highest
degree of dishonouring Gods name.

5. But if any yet doubt the hainousness of this sin; The punishments of it.
let him but consider what God himself says of it in the Third Commandment,
where he solemnly professes, he will not hold him guiltless that takes his
name in vain, and sure the adding that to this commandment, and none of the
rest, is the marking this out for a most heinous guilt: and if you look into
Zac. 5. You will there find the punishment is answerable, even the utter
destruction, not only of the man; but his house also. Therefore it concerns all
men as they love either their temporal or eternal welfare, to keep them most
strictly from this sin.

But besides this of forswaring, I told you there was another sort of oaths,
Vain oaths.
by which Gods name is dishonored, those are the vain and light oaths, such as
are so usual in our common discourse; and are expressly forbidden by Christ,
Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto you swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is
Gods throne, nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; where you see we are
not allowed to swear even by mere creatures, because of the relation they have
to God. How great a wickedness is it then to profane his holy name by rash and
vain oaths, this is a sin that is (by I know not what charm of Satan's) grown
into fashion among us, and now its being so, draws d^ily more men into it. But
it is to be remembered that when we shall appear before Gods Judgment seat, to
answer for those prophanations of his name; it will be no excuse to say, it was
the fashion to do so, it will rather be an increase of our guilt, that we have
by our own practice, helped to confirm that wicked custom, which we ought to
have beat down, and discountenanced.

6. And sure what ever this profane age thinks of it, The sin of them.
this is a sin of a very high nature. For besides that it is a direct breach of
the precept of Christ's, it shows first a very mean, and low esteem of God;
Every oath we swear is the appealing to God, to judge the truth of what we
speak, and therefore being of such greatness, and majesty, it requires that the
matter concerning which we thus appeal to him, should be of great weight, and
moment, somewhat wherein either his own glory, or some considerable good of man
is concerned. But when we swear in common discourse, it is far otherwise, any
the tristingest, or lightest thing serves for the matter of an oath, nay often
men swear to such vain and foolish things, as a considering person would be
ashamed barely to speak. And is it not a great despising of God, to call him
solemly to judge in such childish, such wretched matters, God is the great King
of the world, now though a King be to be resorted unto in weighty cases, yet
sure he would think himself much despised, if he should be called to judge
between boys at their childish games: And God knows many things whereto we
frequently swear, are not of greater weight, and therefore are a sign, that we
do not rightly esteem of God.

7. Secondly, They lead to perjury.
This common swearing is a sin which leads directly to the former of
forswearing; for he that by the use of swearing has made oaths so familiar to
him, will be likely to take the dreadfullest oath without much consideration?
For how shall he that swears hourly, look upon an oath with any reverence and
he that does not? it is his chance, not his care, that is to be thanked, if he
keep from perjury. Nay further, he that swears commonly, is not only prepared
to forswear, when a solemn oath is tendered him, but in all probability does
actually forswear himself often in these suddener oaths: for supposing them to
come from a man, ere he is aware (which is the best can be said of them) what
assurance can any man have, who swears, ere he is aware, that he shall not lie
so too? And if he does both together, he must necessarily be forsworn. But he
that observes your comm^n swearers, will be put past doubt, that they are often
forsworn. For they usually swear indifferently to things true or false,
doubtful or certain. And I doubt not, but if men who are guilty of this sin,
would but impartially examine their own practice, their hearts would second me
in this observation.

8. Thirdly, This is a sin, No temptation to them.
to which there is no temptation, there is nothing either of pleasure, or
prefit, got by it. Most other sins offer us somewhat either of the ^re, or the
other, but this is utterly empty of both. So that in this sin the Devil does
not play the M^rchant for our Souls, as in others he does, he does not so much
as cheapen them, but we give them freely into his hands without any thing in
exchange. There seems to be but one thing possible for men to hope to gain by
it, and that is to be believed in what they say when they thus bind it by an
oath. But this also they constantly fail of, for there are none so little
believed, as the common swearers. And good reason, For he that makes no
conscience thus to profane Gods name; Why shall any man believe, he makes any
of lying? Nay, their forwardness to confirm every the slightest thing by an
oath, rather gives jealousy, that they have some inward guilt of falseness, for
which that oath must be the clo^k. And thus you see in how little stead it
stands them, even to this only purpose, for which they can pretend it useful;
and to any other advantage it makes not the lest claim, and therefore is a sin
without temptation, and consequently without excuse: for it shows the greatest
contempt, nay unkindness to God, when we will provoke him thus, without any
thing to tempt us to it. And therefore though the commonness of this sin have
made it pass but for a small one, yet it is very far from being so, either in
it self, or in Gods account.

9. Let all therefore, Necessity of abstaining from them.
who are not yet fallen into the custom of this sin, be most careful never to
yield to the least beginnings of it, and for those who are so miserable, as to
be already ^^s^ared in it, let them immediately, as they tender their Souls,
get out of it. And let no man plead the hardness of leaving an old custom, as
an excuse for his continuing in it, but rather the longer he has been in it,
so much the more haste let him make out of it, as thinking it too too much,
that he has so long gone on in so great a sin. And if the length of the
cust^me have increased the difficulty of leaving it, that is in all reason to
make him set immediately to the casting it off, left that difficulty at last
grow to an impossibility, and the harder he finds it at the present, so much
the more diligent and watchful he must be in the use of all those means, Means
for it.
which may tend to the overcoming that sinful habit, some few of those means it
will not be amiss here to mention.

10. First let him possess his mind fully of the hainousness of the sin, Sense
of the guilt and danger
and not to measure it only according to the common rate of the world. And
when he is fully persuaded of the guilt, then let him add to that, the
consideration of the danger, as that it puts him out of Gods favor at the
present, and will, if he continue in it, cast him into Hell for ever. And sure
if this were but thoroughly laid to heart, it would restrain this sin; For I
would ask a man, that pretends impossibility of leaving the custom, whether if
he were sure he should be hanged the next oath he swore, the fear of it would
not keep him from swearing? I can scarce believe any man in his wits so little
Master of himself, but it would. And then surely damning is so much worse then
hanging, that in all reason the fear of that ought to be a much greater
restraint. The doubt is, men do either not heartily believe that this sin will
damn them, or if they do, they look on it, as a thing a great way off and so
are not much moved with it; but both these are very unreasonable. For the
first, it is certain, that every one that continues wilfully in any sin, is so
long in a state of damnation, and therefore this being so continued in, must
certainly put a man in that condition. For the second, It is very possible, he
may be deceived in thinking it so far off, for how knows any man that he shall
not be struck dead with an oath in his mouth, or if he were sure not to be so,
yet eternal damnation is surely to be dreaded above all things, be it at what
distance soever.

11. A second means is to be exactly true in all thou speak, Truth in
speaking.
that all men may believe thee on thy bare word, and then thou will never have
occasion to confirm it by an oath, to make it more credible, which is the only
color, or reason can at any time be pretended for swearing.

12. Thirdly, Forsaking the occasions.
Observe what it is that most betrays thee to this sin, whether drink, or
anger, or the company and example of others, or what ever else, and then if
ever thou mean to forsake the sin, forsake those occasions of it.

13. Fourthly, Endeavor to possess thy heart with a continual remembrance of
God, Reverence of God.
and if that once grow into a custom with thee, it will quickly turn out that
contrary one of profaning. Use and accustom thy self therefore to this
reverence of God; and particularly to such a respect to his name, as if it be
possible, never to mention It without some lifting up of thy heart to him; Even
in thy ordinary discourse, when ever thou take his Name in to thy mouth, let
it be an occasion of raising up thy thoughts to him. But by no means permit thy
self to use it in idle bywords, or the like. If thou do accustom thy self
to pay this reverence to the bare mention of his name, it will be an excellent
fence against the profaning it in oaths.

14. A fifth means is a diligent and constant watch over thy self, Watchfulness.
that thou thus offend not with thy tongue, without which all the former will
come to nothing. And the last means is prayer, Prayer.
which must be added to all thy endeavors, therefore pray earnestly, that God
will enable thee, to overcome this wicked custom; say with the Psalmist, Set a
watch O Lord over my mouth and keep the door of my lips; and if thou do
sincerely set thy self to the use of means for it, thou may be assured, God
will not be wanting in his assistance. I have been the longer on this, because
it is so reigning a sin: God in his mercy give all that are guilty of it a true
sight of the hainousness of it.

15. By these several ways of dishonouring Gods Name you may understand, What
it is to honor Gods Name.
what is the duty of honoring it, viz. A strict abstaining from every one of
these, and that abstinence founded on an awful respect, and reverence to that
sacred Name, which is Great, Wonderful, and Holy, Psalm. 99. 3. I have now past
through the several branches of that great duty of honoring of God.

PARTITION V.
Of WORSHIP due to Gods Name. Of Prayer and its several parts. Of Public
prayers in the CHURCH, in the FAMILY; Of PRIVATE PRAYER: Of REPENTANCE, etc. Of
FASTING.

. 1. THE eight duty we owe to God is worship; Worship.
This is that great duty by which especially we acknowledge his Godhead, worship
being proper only to God, and therefore it is to be looked on as a most weighty
duty. This is to be performed first by our Souls, Prayer its parts.
secondly by our bodies: The Souls part is praying. Now prayer is a speaking to
God, and there are diverse parts of it, according to the different things about
which we speak.

2. As first, There is Confession, that is, Confession.
the acknowledging our sins to God. And this may be either general, or
particular; The general is, when we only confess in gross, that we are sinful,
the particular, when we mention the several sorts, and acts of our sins. The
former is necessary to be always a part of our solemn prayers, whether
public, or private. The latter is proper for private prayer, and there the
oftener it is used, the better, yea, even in our daily private prayer it will be
fit constantly to remember some of our greatest and foulest sins, though never
so long since past. For such we should never think sufficiently confessed, and
bewailed. And this bewailing, must always go along with confession, we must be
heartily sorry for the sins we confess, and from our Souls acknowledge our own
great unworthiness, in having committed them, for our confession is not
intended to instruct God, who knows our sins much better then our selves do,
but it is to humble our selves, and therefore we must not think w^ have confessed
aright, till that be done.

3. The second part of prayer, is petition. Petitions.
That is the begging of God whatsoever we want either for our Souls, or bodies.
For our Souls we must first beg pardon of sins, For our Souls.
and that for the sake of Jesus Christ, who shed his blood to obtain it. Then
we must also beg the grace and assistance of Gods Spirit, to enable us to
forsake our sins, and to walk in obedience to him. And herein it will be
needful particularly to beg all the several virtues, as faith, love, zeal,
purity, repentance, and the like, but especially those which thou most want;
And therefore observe what thy wants are, and if thou be proud; be most
instant in praying for humility, if lustful, for chastity, and so for all other
graces, according as thou find thy needs. And in all these things that
concern thy Soul, be very earnest and importunate, take no denial from God, nor
give over, though thou do not presently obtain what thou suest for. But if thou
have never so long prayed for a grace, and yet find it not, do not grow
weary of praying, but rather search what the cause may be, which makes thy
prayer so ineffectual; see if thou do not thy self hinder them, perhaps thou
prayest to God, to enable thee to conquer some sin, and yet never go about
to fight against it, never make any resistance, but ye^ldest to it, as often as
it comes, nay put thy self in its way, in the road of all temptations. If
it be thus, no wonder though thy prayers avail not, for thou will not let them.
Therefore amend this, and set to the doing of thy part sincerely, and then thou
need not fear, but God will do his.

4. Secondly, Bodi^^
We are to petition also for our bodies; That is, we are to ask of God such
necessaries of life, as are needful to us, while we live here. But these only
in such a degree, and measure, as his wisdom sees best for us, we must not
presume to be our own c^rvers, and pray for all that wealth, or greatness,
which our own vain hearts may perhaps desire, but only ^or such a condition,
in respect of outward things, as he sees may most tend to those great ends of
our living here, the glorifying him, and the saving of our own Souls.

5. A third part of prayer is Deprecation, Depr^cation.
that is when we pray to God to turn away some evil from us. Now this evil may
be either the evil of sin, or the evil of punishment. The evil of sin is that
we are especially to pray against, Of sin.
most earnestly begging of God, that he will by the power of his grace preserve
us from falling into sin. And whatever sins they are, to which thou know thy
self most inclined, there be particularly earnest with God, to preserve thee
from them. This is to be done daily, but then more especially, when we are
under any present temptation, and in danger of falling into any sin; In which
case we have reason to cry out, as St. Peter did, when he found himself
sinking, save Lord, or I perish; humbly beseeching him either to withdraw the
temptation, or strengthen us to withstand it, neither of which we can do for
our selves.

6. Secondly, Of punishm^^t.
We are likewise to pray against the evil of punishment, but principally
against spiritual punishments, as the anger of God, the withdrawing of his
grace, and eternal damnation. Against these we can never pray with too much
earnestness; but we may also pray against temporal punishments, that is any
outward affliction, but this with submission to Gods will, according to the
example of Christ, Mat. 26. 39. Not as I will, but as thou will.

7. A fourth part of prayer is intercession; that is, Intercession
praying for others: This in general we are to do for all mankind, as well
strangers, as acquaintance, but more particularly those, to whom we have any
especial relation, either public, as our Governors, both in Church and State,
or private, as Parents, Husband, Wife, Children, Friends, etc. We are also to
pray for all that are in affliction, and such particular persons, as we discern
especially to be so; Yea we are to pray for those that have done injury, those
that despightfully use us and persecute us, for it is expressly the command of
Christ, Mat. 5. 44. and that whereof he has likewise given us the highest
example, in praying even for his very crucifiers, Luc. 23. 34. Father forgive
them. For all these sorts of persons we are to pray, and that for the very same
good things we beg of God for our selves, that God would give them in their
several places and callings, all spiritual and temporal blessings, which he
sees wanting to them, and turn away from them all evil whether of sin, or
punishment.

8. The fifth part of prayer is thanksgiving; Thank^^^ving
That is, the praising, and blessing God for all his mercies, whether to our
own persons, and those that immediately relate to us, or to the Church and
Nation whereof we are members, or yet more general to all mankind. And this for
all his mercies both spiritual and temporal: In the spiritual, first for those
wherein we are all in common concerned, as the giving of his Son, the sending
of his Spirit, and all those means he has used to bring sinful men unto
himself. Then secondly for those mercies we have in our own particulars
received, such are the having been born within the pale of the Church, and so
brought up in Christian Religion, by which we have been partakers of those
precious advantages of the word, and Sacraments, and so have had, without any
care, or pains of ours, the means of eternal life put into our hands. But
besides these, there is none of us but have received other spiritual means from
God.

9. As first Gods patience, Spiritual Mercies.
and long-suffering, waiting for our repentance, and not cutting us off in our
sins. Secondly, his calls and invitations of us to that repentance, not only
outward in the ministry of the word, but also inward, by the motions of his
Spirit. But then if thou be one that has by the help of Gods grace been
wrought upon by these calls, and brought from a profane, or worldly, to a
Christian course of life, thou art surely in the highest degree tied to
magnify and praise his goodness, as having received from him the greatest of
mercies.

10. We are likewise to give thanks for temporal blessings, Temporal.
whether such as concern the public, as the prosperity of the Church or
Nation, and all remarkable deliverances offered to either; or else such as
concern our particulars, such are all the good things of this life which we
enjoy, as health, friends, food, raiment, and the like; also for those minuitly
preservations, whereby we are by Gods gracious providence kept from danger, and
the especial deliverances which God has given us in time of greatest perils.
It will be impossible to set down the several mercies which everyman receives
from God, because they differ in kind and degree between one man and another.
But it is sure that he which receives least, has yet enough to employ his
whole life in praises to God. And it will be very fit for every man to consider
the several passages of this life, and the mercies he has in each received,
and so to gather a kind of list, or Catalogue of them, at least the principal
of them, which he may always have in his memory, and after with a thankful
heart repeat before God.

11. These are the several parts of prayer and all of them to be used both
publicly and privately. Public Prayer in the Church.
The public use of them is, first that in the Church where all meet to join in
those prayers, wherein they are in common concerned. And this (where the
prayers are such as they ought to be) we should be very constant at, there
being an especial blessing promised to the joint requests of the faithful, and
he that without a necessary cause absents himself from such public prayers,
cuts himself off from the Church, which has always been thought so unhappy a
thing, that it is the greatest punishment, the Governors of the Church can lay
upon the worst offender; and therefore it is a strange madness for men to
inflict it upon themselves.

12. A second sort of public prayer, In the family.
is that in a family, where all that are members of it, join in their common
supplications, and this also ought to be very careful attended to; first by the
Master of the Family, who is to look that there be such prayers, it being as
much his part thus to provide for the souls of his children and servants, as to
provide food for their bodies. Therefore there is none, even the meanest
householder, but ought to take this care: If either himself, or any of his
Family can read, he may use some prayers out of some good book, if it be the
service book of the Church, he makes a good choice; if they cannot read, it
will then be necessary they should be taught without book some form of prayer,
which they may use in the Family, for which purpose again some of the prayers
of the Church will be very fit, as being most easy for their memories by
reason of their shortness, and yet containing a great deal of matter. But what
choice soever they make of Prayers, let them be sure to have some, and let no
man that professes himself a Christian, keep so heathenish a Family, as not to
see God be daily worshipped in it. But when the Master of a Family has done
his duty in this providing, it is the duty of every member of it to make use of
that provision, by being constant, and diligent at those Family-Prayers.

13. Private or secret Prayer is that which is used by a man alone, Private
Prayer.
a part from all others, wherein we are to be more particular, according to our
peculiar needs, then in public it is fit to be. And this of private prayer, is
a duty, which will not be excused by the performance of the other of public.
They are both required, and one must not be taken in exchange for the other.
And whoever is diligent in public prayers, and yet negligent in private, it is
much to be feared, he rather seeks to approve himself to men, then to God,
contrary to the command of our Savior, Mat. 6. Who enjoins this private
prayer, this praying to our Father in secret, from whom alone we are to expect
our reward, and not from the vain praises of men.

14. Now this duty of Prayer is to be often performed, Frequency in Prayer.
by none seldomer then evening and morning, it being most necessary that we
should thus begin, and end all our works with God, and that not only in respect
of the duty we owe him, but also in respect of our selves, who can never be
either prosperous, or safe, but by committing our selves to him; and therefore
should tremble to venture on the perils either of day or night, without his
safeguard. How much oftener this duty is to be performed, must be judged
according to the business, or leisure men have, where by business, I mean not
such business as men unprofitably make to themselves, but the necessary
business of a man's calling, which with some will not afford them much time for
set, and solemn Prayer. But even these men may often in a day lift up their
hearts to God in some short Prayers, even whilst they are at their work. As for
those that have more leisure, they are in all reason to bestow more time upon
this duty. And let no man that can find time to bestow upon his vanities, nay
perhaps his sins, say be wants leisure for prayer, but let him now endeavor to
redeem, what he has so misspent, by employing more of that leisure in this duty
for the future. And surely if we did but rightly weigh, how much it is our own
advantage, to perform this duty, The advantages of Prayer.
we should think it wisdom to be as frequent as we are ordinarily solemn in it.

15. For first it is a great honor for us poor wo^mes of the earth to be
allowed to speak so freely to the great Majesty of heaven; Honor.
if a King should but vouchsafe to let one of his meanest subjects talk
familiarly, and freely with him, it would be looked on as a huge honor, that
man how despiseable soever he were before, would then be the envy of all his
neighbors; and there is little question, he would be willing to take all
opportunities of receiving so great a grace. But alas! this is nothing to the
honor is offered us, who are allowed nay, invited to speak to, and converse
with the King of Kings, and therefore how forward should we in all reason be to
it.

16. Secondly, it is a great benefit, Benefit.
even the greatest that can be imagined, for prayer is the instrument of
fetching down all good things to us, whether spiritual, or temporal, no prayer,
that is qualified as it ought to be, but is sure to bring down a blessing
according to that of the wise man, Eccl. 35. 17. The Prayer of the humble
pierces the clouds, and will not turn away, till the highest regard it. You
would think him a happy man, that had one certain means of helping him to what
ever he wanted, though it were to cost him much pains, and labor, now this
happy man thou may be if thou will. Prayer is the never-failing means of
bringing thee, if not all that thou think thou want, yet all that indeed
thou do, that is, all that God sees fit for thee. And therefore be there
never so much weariness to thy flesh in the duty, yet considering in what
continual want thou stand for something or other from God, it is madness to
let that uneasiness dishearten thee, and keep thee from this so sure means of
supplying thy wants.

17. But in the third place this duty is in it self so far from being uneasy,
Pleasantness.
that it is very pleasant. God is the fountain of happiness, and at his right
hand there are pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16. 11. And therefore the nearer
we draw to him* the happier we must needs be, the very joys of heaven arising
from our neerness to God. Now in this life we have no way of drawing so near to
him, as by this of Prayer, and therefore surely it is that, which in it self is
apt to afford abundance of delight and pleasure, if it seem otherwise to us, it
is from some distemper of our own hearts, which like a sick palate cannot
relish the most pleasant meat. Prayer is a pleasant duty, but it is withal a
spiritual one; and therefore if thy heart be carnal, Carnallity one reason of
its seeming otherwise.
if that be set either on the contrary pleasures of the flesh, or dross of the
world, no marvail then, if thou taste no pleasantness in it; if like the
Israelites thou despise Manna, whilst thou longest after the flesh pots of
Egypt. Therefore if thou find a weariness in this duty, suspect thy self,
purge, and refine thy heart from the love of all sin, and endeavor to put it
into a heavenly and spiritual trance, and then thou will find this no
unpleasant exercise, but full of delight and satisfaction. In the mean time
complain not of the hardness of the duty, but of the untowardness of thy own
heart.

18. But there may also be another reason of its seeming unpleasant to us, Want
of one another.
and that i^ want of use. You know there are many things, which seem uneasy at
the first trial, which yet after we are accustomed to them, seem very
delightful, and if this by thy case, then thou know a ready cure, viz: to
use it oftener, and so this consideration naturally inforces the exhortation of
being frequent in this duty.

19. But we are not only to consider how often, but how well we perform it. To
ask nothing unlawful.
Now to do it well, we are to respect, first the matter of our Prayers, to look
that we ask nothing that is unlawful, as revenge upon our enemies, or the like;
secondly the manner; and that must be first in faith, we must believe, that if
we ask as we ought, To ask in Faith.
God will either give us the thing we ask for, or else something which he sees
better for us. In humility.
And then secondly in humility we must acknowledge our selves utterly unworthy
of any of those good things we beg for, and therefore sue for them only for
Christ's sake; thirdly with attention, we must mind what we are about, With
attention.
and not suffer our selves to be carried away to the thought of other things. I
told you at the first, that Prayer was the business of the soul, but if our
minds be wandering, it is the work only of the tongue and lips, which makes it
in Gods account no better then vain babbling, and so will never bring a
blessing on us. Nay, as Jacob said to his mother, Genesis 27. 12. It will be more
likely to bring a curse on us then a blessing, for it is a profaning one of the
most solemn parts of Gods service, it is a piece of Hypocrisy, the drawing
near to him with our lip, when our hearts are far from him, and a great
slighting and despising that dreadful Majesty we come before: And as to our
selves it is a most ridiculous folly, that we who come to God upon such weighty
errands, as are all the concernments of our souls and bodies, should in the
midst forget our business, and pursue every the lightest thing that either our
own vain fancies, or the Devil, whose business it is here to hinder us, can
offer to us. It is just as if a malefactor, that comes to sue for his life to
the King, should in the midst of his supplication happen to epsy a butterfly,
and then should leave his suit, and run a chase after that butterfly: Would
you not think it pity, a pardon should be cast away upon so wretchless a
creature. And sure it will be as unreasonable to expect that God should attend
and grant those suits of ours, which we do not at all consider our selves.

20. This wandering in Prayer is a thing we are much concerned to arm our selves
against, Helps against wandering.
it being that to which we are naturally wonderful prone. To that end it will
be necessary first to possess our hearts at our coming to Prayers with the
greatness of that Majesty we are to approach, (...)
that so we may dread to be vain and trifling in his presence. Secondly, We are
to consider the great concernment of the things we are to ask, (...)
some whereof are such, that if we should not be heard, we were of all
creatures the most miserable, and yet this wandering is the way to keep us from
being heard. Thirdly, We are to beg Gods aid in this particular: And therefore
when thou set to Prayer, Prayer for Gods aid.
let thy first petition be for this grace of attention.

21. Lastly, Watchfulness.
Be as watchful as is possible over thy heart, in time of prayer, to keep out
all wandering thoughts, or if any have gotten in, let them not find
entertainment, but as soon as ever thou discernest them, suffer them not to
abide one moment, but cast them out with indignation, and beg Gods pardon for
them. And if thou do thus sincerely, and diligently strive against them,
either God will enable thee in some measure to overcome them, or he will in his
mercy pardon thee what thou can not prevent. But if it be through thy own
negligence, thou art to expect neither, so long as that negligence continues.

22. In the fourth place we must look our Prayers be with zeal and earnestness,
With Zeal.
it is not enough that we so far attend them, as barely to know what it is we
say, but we must put forth all the affection and devotion of our souls, and
that according to the several parts of Prayer before mentioned. It is not the
cold faint request, that will ever obtain from God. We see it will not from our
selves; for if a beggar should ask relief from us, and do it in such a scornful
manner, that he seemed indifferent; whether he had it or no, we should think he
had either little want or great pride, and so have no heart to give him. Now
surely the things we ask from God, are so much above the rule of an ordinary
alms, that we can never expect they should be given to slight and heartless
petitions. No more in like manner will our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving
ever be accepted by him, if it be not offered from a heart truly affected with
the sense of his mercies; it is but a kind of formal complementing, which will
never be approved by him who requires the heart, and not the lips only. And the
like may be said of all the other parts of Prayer. Therefore be careful when
thou drawest nigh to God in Prayer, to raise up thy soul to the highest pitch
of zeal and earnestness thou art able. And because of thy self alone thou art
not able to do any thing, beseech God that he will inflame thy heart with this
heavenly fire of devoti^n, and when thou have obtained it, beware that thou
neither quench it by any wilful sin, nor let it go out again for want of
stirring it up, and employing it.

23. Fifthly, we must Pray with purity, With purity.
I mean we must purge our hearts from all affections to sin. This is surely the
meaning of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 8. When he commands men to lift up holy hands
in Prayer, and he there instances in one special sort of sin, wrath and
doubting, whereby doubting is meant those unkind disputes, and contentions
which are so common amongst men. And surely he that cherishes that, or any
other sin in hi^ heart, can never lift up those holy hands, which are required
in this duty. And then sure his prayers, be they never so many, or earnest,
will little avail him. The Psalmist will tell him, he shall not be heard, Psalm.
66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Nay
Solomon will tell him yet worse, that his prayers are not only vain, but
abominable, Pro. 15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the
Lord. And thus to have our prayers turned into sin, is one of the heaviest
things can befall any man; we see it is set down in that sad Catalogue of
curses, Psalm. 109. 7. Therefore let us not be so cruel to our selves, as to
pull it upon our own heads, which we certainly do, if we offer up prayers from
an impure heart.

24. In the last place we must direct our prayers to right ends, To right ends.
And that either in the respect of the prayer it self, or the things we pray
for; First, we must pray, not to gain the praise of devotion amongst men like
those hypocrites Mat. 6. 5. Nor yet only for company, or fashion sake, to do
as other do; But we must do it first as an act of worship to God; Secondly, as
an acknowledgment, that he is that great spring, from whence alone we expect
all good things; And thirdly, to gain a supply of our own, or others needs.
Then in respect of the things prayed for, we must be sure to have no ill aims
upon them, we must not ask, that we may consume it upon our lusts, Ia. 4. 3. as
those do, who pray for wealth, that they may live in riot, and excess; and for
power, that they may be able to mischief their enemies, and the like But our
end in all must be Gods glory first, and next that our own, and others
Salvation, and all other things must be taken in, only as they tend to those,
which they can never do, if we abuse them to sin. I have now done with that
first part of worship, that of the Soul.

25. The other is that of the body, Bodily worship.
and that is nothing else, but such humble, and reverent gestures in our
approaches to God, as may both express the inward reverence of our Souls, and
may also pay him some tribute from our very bodies, with which the Apostle
commands us to glorify God, as well as with our Souls; and good reason, since
he has created, and redeemed the one, as well as the other, whenever
therefore thou offerest thy prayers unto God, let it be with all lowliness as
well of body, as of mind, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 95. 6. O
come let us worship, let us fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker.

26. The ninth duty to God, Repentance
is REPENTANCE. That this is a duty to God we are taught by the Apostle, Acts
20. 21. where speaking of repentance, he styles it repentance toward God. And
there is good reason this should be a duty to him, since there is no sin we
commit, but is either mediatly, or immediately, against him. For though there be
sins both against our selves, and our neighbors, yet they being forbidden by
God, they are also breaches of his Commandments, and so sins against him.

This repentance is, A turning from sin to God.
in short, nothing but a turning from sin to God, the casting off all our
former evils, and in stead thereof, constantly practicing all those Christian
duties, which God requires of us. And this is so necessary a duty, that
without it we certainly perish, we have Christ's word for it, Luke 13. 5. Except
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

27. The directions for performing the several parts of this duty have been
already given in the preparation to the Lords Supper, Times for this Duty.
and thither I refer the reader. Only I shall here mind him, that it is to be
looked upon as a duty to be practiced only at the time of receiving the
Sacrament. For this being the only remedy against the poison of sin, we must
renew it as often as we repeat our sins, that is daily. Daily.
I mean we must every day repent of the sins of that day, for what Christ says
of other evils, is true also of this, sufficient to the day is the evil
thereof; we have sins enough of each day to exercise a daily repentance, and
therefore every man must thus daily call himself to account.

28. But as it is in accounts, At set times.
they who constantly set down their daily expenses, have yet some set time of
casting up the whole sum; as at the end of the week or month; so should it
also be here, we should set aside some time to humble our selves solemnly
before God for the sins, not of that day only, but of our whole lives. And the
frequenter these times are, the better. For the oftener we thus cast up our
accounts with God, and see vast debts we are run in to him, the more humbly
shall we think of our selves, and the more shall thirst after his mercy, which
two are the special things that must qualify us for his pardon. He therefore
that can assign himself one day in the week for this purpose, will take a
thriving course for his Soul. Or if any man's state of life be so busy, as not
to afford him to do it so often, let him yet come as near to that frequency, as
is possible for him, remembering always, that none of his worldly employments
can bring him in near so gainful a return as this spiritual one will do, and
therefore it is very ill husbandry to pursue them, to the neglect of this.

29. Besides these constant times, In the time of affliction
there are likewise occasion all times for the performance of this duty, such
especially are the times of calamity, and affliction, for when any such befalls
us, we are to look on it as a message sent from Heaven, to call us to this
duty, and therefore must never neglect it, when we are thus summoned to it,
lest we be of the number of them, who despise the chastisements of the Lord,
Heb. 12. 5.

30. There is yet another time of repentance, At Death.
which in the practice of men has gotten away the custom from all those, and
that is the time of death, which, it is true, is a time very fit to renew our
repentance, but sure not proper to begin it, and it is a most desperate madness
for men to defer it till then. For to say the midst of it, it is the
venturing our Souls upon such miserable uncertainties, as no wise man would
trust with any thing of the least value.

For first, I would ask any man, The danger of deferring it till then.
that means to repent at his death, how he knows he shall have an hours time
for it? do we not daily see men snatched away in a moment? and who can tell
that it shall not be his own case? But secondly, suppose he have a more
leisurely death, that some disease give him warning of its approach, yet
perhaps he will not understand that warning, but will still flatter himself, as
very often sick people do, with hopes of life to the last: and so his death may
be sudden to him, though it come by never so slow degrees. But again thirdly,
if he do discern his danger, yet how is he sure he shall then be able to
repent? Repentance is a grace of God, not at our own command, and it is just
and usual with God, when men have a long time refused, and rejected that grace,
resisted all his calls, and invitations to conversion and amendment, to give
them over at last to the hardness of their own hearts, and not to afford them
any more of that grace they have so despised. Yet suppose in the fourth place,
That God in his infinite patience should still continue the offer of that grace
to thee, yet thou that have resisted, it may be thirty, or forty or fifty years
together, how know thou, The disadvantages of a deathbed repentance.
that thou shall put off that habit of resistance upon a sudden, and make use
of the grace afforded? It is sure, thou have many more advantages toward the
doing it now then thou will have then.

31. For the first, The custom of sin.
The longer sin has kept possession of the heart, the harder it will be to
drive it out. It is trne, if repentance were nothing, but a present ceasing
from the acts of sin, the deathbed were fittest for it, for then we are
disabled from committing most sins, but I have formerly showed you, repentance
contains much more then so, there must be in it a sincere hatred of sin and
love of God. Now how unlikely is it, that he which has all his life loved sin,
cherisht it in his bosom, and on the contrary abhorred God and goodness,
should in an instant quite change his affections, hate that sin he loved, and
love God, and goodness, which before he utterly hated?

32. And secondly, Bodily pains.
The bodily pains, that attend a deathbed, will distract thee, and make thee
unable to attend the work of repentance, which is a business of such weight,
and difficulty, as will employ all our powers, even when they are at the
freshest.

33. Consider those disadvantages thou must then struggle with, Danger of
unsincerity.
and then tell me what hope there is, thou shall then do that, which now upon
much easier terms thou will not. But in the fifth place, there is a danger
behind, beyond all these, and that is, that the repentance which death drives a
man to, will not be a true repentance, for in such a case it is plain, it is
only the fear of hell puts him on it, which though it may be a good beginning,
where there is time after to per^ect it, yet where it goes alone, it can never
avail for Salvation. Now that deathbed repentances are often only of this
sort, is too likely, when it is observed, that many men who have seemed to
repent, when they have thought death approaching, have yet, after it has
pleased God to restore them to health, been as wicked (perhaps worse) as ever
they were before; Which shows plainly, that there was no real change in them,
and then surely had such a man died, in that seeming repentance, God, who tries
the heart, would not have accepted it, which he saw was unsincere. When all
these dangers are laid together, it will surely appear a most disperate
adventure for any man to trust to a deathbed repentance. Nor is it ever the
less for that example of the penitent thief, Luc. 23. 43. which is by many so
much depended on. For it is sure, his case and ours differ widely, he had never
heard of Christ before, and so more could not be expected of him then to
embrace him as soon as he was tendered to him; But we have had him offered, nay
pressed upon us from our cradles and yet have rejected. But if there were not
this difference, it is but a faint hope can be raised only from a single
example, and another we find not in the whole Bible. The Israelites we read
were fed with Manna from Heaven, but would you not think him stark mad, that
should out of expectation of the like, neglect to provide himself any food; Yet
it is full as reasonable to depend upon this example as the other. I conclude
all in the words of the wiseman, Eccl. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the days
of thy youth before the evil days come, etc.

34. To this duty of repentance, Fasting.
fasting is very proper to be annexed. The Scripture usually joins them
together, among the Jews the great day of atonement was to be kept with
fasting, as you may see by comparing Levit. 16. 31. with Isa. 58. 5. and this
by Gods especial appointment. And in the Prophets, when the people are called
on to repent, and humble themselves, they are also called on to fast. Thus it
is Joel 2. 12. Therefore now thus says the Lord, turn ye unto me with all your
hearts, with fasting, and with weeping, etc. Yea, so proper has fasting been
accounted to humiliation, that we see even wicked Ahab would not omit it in
his, 2 Kings 21. 27. Nor the Heathen Ninevites in theirs, Jonah 3. 5. Nor is it
less fit, or less acceptable since Christ, then it was before him. For we see
he supposes it as a duty sometimes to be performed, when he gives directions to
avoid vainglory in it. Mat. 6. 6. and also assures us, that if it be
performed, as it ought, not to please men, but God, it will surely be rewarded
by him. And accordingly ^e find it practiced by the Saints: Anna Luke 2. 37.
Served God with fastings and prayers; where it is observable, that it is
reckoned as a service of God, fit to be joined with prayers. And the Christians
of the first times were generally very frequent in the practice of it. Now
though fasting be especially proper to a time of humiliation, yet is it not so
restrained to it, but it may be seasonable, whenever we have any
extraordinary thing to request from God. Thus when Esther was to endeavor the
deliverance of her people from destruction, she and all the Jews kept a solemn
fast, Esther 4. 16. and thus when Paul and Barnabas were to be ordained
Apostles, there was fasting joined to prayer, Acts 13. 3. And so it will be
very fit for us, whenever we have need of any extraordinary directions, or
assistance from God whether concerning our temporal or spiritual concernments,
thus to quicken our prayers by fasting. But above all occasions, this of
humiliation seems most to require it, for besides the advantage of kindling our
zeal, which is never more necessary, then when we beg for pardon of sins,
fasting carries in it somewhat of revenge, Fasting a a revenge upon our selves
which is reckoned as a special part of repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 11. For by
denying our bodies the refreshment of our ordinary food, we do inflict somewhat
of punishment upon our selves, for our former excesses, or whatever other sins
we at that time accuse our selves of; which is a proper effect of that
indignation which every sinner ought to have against himself. And truly he that
is so tender of himself, that he can never find in his heart so much as to miss
a meal, by way of punishment for his faults, shows he is not much fallen out
with himself, for committing them, and so wants that indignation, which the
Apostle in the forenamed text mentions, as a part of true repentance.

35. There is no doubt, Such revenges acceptable with God.
but such Holy revenges upon our selves for sins are very acceptable to God,
yet we must not think that either those, or any thing else we can do, can make
satisfaction for our offenses, Yet no satisfaction for sins.
for that nothing but the blood of Christ can do. And therefore on that, and
not on any of our performances we must depend for pardon. Yet since that blood
shall never be applied to any but penitent sinners, we are as much concerned to
bring forth all the fruits of repentance, as if our hopes depended on them
only.

36. How often this duty of fasting is to be performed, Times of fasting.
we have no direction in Scripture. That must be allotted by men's own piety,
according as their health, or other considerations will allow. But as it is in
humiliation, the frequenter returns we have of set times for it, the better; so
is it likewise in fasting, the of^ner, the better, so it be not hurtful either
to our healths, or to some other duty required of us. Nay perhaps fasting may
help some men to more of those times for humiliation, then they would otherwise
gain. For perhaps there are some, who cannot, without a manifest hinderance to
their calling, allow a whole day to that work, yet such a one may at least
afford that time, he would otherwise spend in eating; And so fasting will be
doubly useful toward such a man's humiliation, both by helping him in the duty,
and gaining him time for it.

37. I have now gone through the first branch of our duty to God, Second bran^h
of our d^ty to God.
to wit the acknowledging him for our God. The second is the having no other.
Of which I need say little, as it is a forbidding of that grosser sort of
heathiness Idolatry, the worshipping of Idols, which though it were once common
in the world, yet is now so rare, that it is not likely any that shall read
this, will be concerned in it. Only I must say, that to pay divine worship to
any creature, be it Saint or Angel, yea or the Image of Christ himself, is a
transgression against this second branch of our duty to God, it being the
imparting that to a creature which is due only to God, and therefore is
strictly to be abstained from.

38. But there is another sort of Idolatry, Inward Idolatry.
of which we are generally guilty, and that is when we pay those affections of
love, fear, trust, and the like, to any creature in a higher degree then we do
to God. For that is the setting up that thing, whatsoever it is, for our God.
And this inward kind of Idolatry is that, which provokes God to jealousy, as
well as the outward of worshipping an Idol. I might enlarge much upon this, but
because some severals of it have been touched on in the former discourse, I
suppose it needless. And therefore shall now proceed to the second head of
duty, that to our selves.

PARTITION. VI.
Of DUTIES to our SELVES, Of Sobriety other Humility; the great Sin of PRIDE,
the Danger, the Folly of this Sin. Of VAIN GLORY, the Danger, Folly, The Means
to Prevent it. Of MEEKNES, the Means to obtain it, etc.

. 1. THis duty to our selves, Duty to our selves.
is by St. Paul in the foremetioned text, Tit. 2* 12. summed up in this one
word, soberly. Now by soberly is meant our keeping within those due bounds
which God has set us. My business will therefore be to tell you, what are the
particulars of this sobriety. And that first in respect of the soul, secondly
in respect of the body: the sobriety of the soul stands in a right governing
its passions, and affections; and to that there are many virtues required. I
shall give you the particulars of them.

2 The first of them is humility, Humility.
which may well have the prime place, not only in respect of the excellency of
the virtue, but also of it usefulness toward the obtaining of all the rest.
This being the founda^ion, on which all others must be built. And he that hopes
to gain them without this, will prove but like that foolish builder Christ
speaks of, Luke 6. 49. Who built his house on the sand. Of the humility toward
God I have alread^ spoken, and showed the necessity of it, I am now to speak of
humility, as it concerns our selves, which will be found no less necessary,
then the former.

3. This humility is of two sorts, the first is the having a mean and low
opinion of our selves, the second is the being content that others should have
so of us. The first of these is contrary to pride, the other to vain glory. And
that both these are absolutely necessary to Christians, I am now to show you^
which will, I conceive, best be done by laying before you first the sin,
secondly the danger, and thirdly the folly of the contrary vices.

4. And first for pride; The great sin of pride.
the sin of it is so great, that it cast the Angels out of heaven, and
therefore if we may judge of sin by the punishment, it was not only the first,
but the greatest sin that ever the Devil himself has bin guilty of: But we
need no better proof of the hainousness of it, then the extreme hatefulness of
it to God, which besides that instance of his punishing the Devil, we may
frequently find in the Scriptures, Prove. 16. 5. Every one that is proud in
heart, is an abomination to the Lord. And again, Chap. 6. 16. Where there is
mention of several things* the Lord hates, a proud look is set as the first of
them: So Jam. 4. 7. God resists the proud; and diverse other texts there are
to the same purpose, which show the great hatred God bears to this sin of pride
Now since it is certain, God who is all goodness hates nothing, but as it is
evil, it must needs follow, that where God hates in so great a degree, there
must be a great degree of evil.

5. But secondly, The danger.
pride is not only very sinful, but very dangerous, and that first in respect
of drawing us to our sins, Drawing into other sins.
secondly of betraying us to punishments. First, pride draws us to other sins,
wherein it shows it self indeed to be the direct contrary to humility, for as
that is the root of all virtue, so is this of all vice. For he that is proud,
sets himself up as his own God, and so can never submit himself to any other
rules or Laws, then what he makes to himself. The ungodly, says the Psalmist,
is so proud that he cares not for God, Psalm. 10. 4. Where you see it is his
pride, that makes him despise God. And when a man is once come to that, he is
prepared for the commission of all sins. I might instance in a multitude of
particular sins, that naturally flow from this of pride, as first anger, which
the wise man sets, as the effect of pride, Pro. 21. 24. calling it proud wrath;
secondly, strife and contention, which he again notes to be the offspring of
pride, Pro. 13. 10. Only by pride comes contention. And both these are indeed
most n^tural effects of pride. For he that thinks very highly of himself,
expects much submission, and observance from others, and therefore cannot but
rage and quarrel, whenever he thinks it not sufficiently paid. It would be
infinite to mention all the fruits of this bitter root, I shall name but one
more, and that is, that pride not only betrays us to many sins, but also makes
them incureable in us, for it hinders the working of all remedies.

6. Those remedies must either come from God or man; Frustrating of remedies.
if from God, they must be either in the way of meekness and greatness, or else
of sharpness and punishment. Now if God by his goodness essay to lead a proud
man to repentance, he quite mistakes Gods meaning, and thinks all the mercies
he receives, are but the reward of his own desert, and so long it is sure he
will never think he needs repentance. But if on the other side, Gods use him
more sharply, and lay afflictions, and punishments upon him, those in a proud
heart work nothing but murmurings and hatings of God, as if he did him injury
in those punishments. As for the remedies that can be used by man, they again
must be either by way of correcttion, or exhortation; correcttion from man will
sure never work more on a proud heart, then those from God; for he that can
think God unjust in them, will much rather believe it of man. And exhortations
will do as little. For let a proud man be admonished though never so mildly and
lovingly, he looks on it as a disgrace. And therefore in stead of confessing,
or amending the fault, he falls to reproaching his reprover, as an over-busy,
or censorious person, and for that greatest and most precious act of kindness,
looks on him as his enemy. And now one that thus stubbornly resists all means
of cure, must be included in a most dangerous estate.

7. But besides this danger of sin, Betraying to punishment.
I told you there was another, that of punishment; and of this there will need
little proof, when it it considered, that God is the proud man's professed enemy;
that he hates and resists him, as appeared in the texts forecited: And then
there can be little doubt, that he which has so mighty an adversary shall be
sure to smart for it; Yet besides this general ground of conclusion, it may not
be a miss to mention some of those t^xts, which particularly threaten this sin,
as Pro. 16. 18. Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a
fall: Again, Pro. 16. 5. Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to
the Lord, though hand join in hand, yet they shall not be unpunished. The
decree it seems is unalterable, and whatever endeavors are used to preserve
the proud man, they are but vain, for he shall not go unpunished. And this is
very remarkable in the story of Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4. Who though a King, the
greatest in the world, yet for his pride, was driven from among men, to dwell
and feed with beasts. And it is most frequently seen, that this sin meets with
very extraordinary judgments even in this life. But if it should not, let not
the proud man think that he has escaped Gods vengeance, for it is sure, there
will be a most sad reckoning in the next; for if God spared not the Angels for
this sin, but cast them into hell, let no man hope to speed better.

8. In the third place, The folly.
I am to show you the great folly of this sin, and to do that, it will be
necessary to consider the several things, whereof men use to be proud; they are
of three sorts, either those which we call the goods of nature, or the goods of
fortune, or the goods of grace.

9. By the goods of nature, In respect of the goods of Nature.
I mean beauty, strength, wit, and the like, and the being proud of any of
these is a huge folly. For first we are very apt to mistake, and think our
selves hand some or witty, when we are not, and then there cannot be a more
ridiculous folly, then to be proud of what we have not, and such every one
esteems it in another man, though he never supposes it his own case, and so
never discerns it in himself. And therefore there is nothing more despiseable
amongst all men, then a proud fool, yet no man that entertains high opinions of
his own wit, but is in danger to be thus deceived, a man's own judgment of
himself being of all others the least to be trusted. But Secondly, suppose we
be not out in judging, yet what is there in any of these natural endowments,
which is worth the being proud. There being scarce any of them, which some
creature or other has not in a greater degree then man. How much does the
whiteness of the Lilly, and the redness of the Rose exceed the white, and red
of the fairest face? what a multitude of creatures is there, that far surpass
man in strength and sweetness? And diverse others there are which as far as
concerns any useful end of theirs, act much more wisely then most of us; and
are therefore oftentimes in Scripture proposed to us by way of Example. It is
therefore surely great unreasonableness for us to think highly of our selves,
for such things as are common to us with beasts and plants. But thirdly, if
they were as excellent as we fancy them, yet they are not at all durable, they
are impaired and lost by sundry means; a phrensy will destroy the rarest wit, a
sickness decay the freshest beauty, the greatest strength, or however old age
will be sure to do all. And therefore to be proud of them is again a folly in
this respect. But lastly, whatever they are, we gave them not to our selves. No
man can think he did any thing toward the procuring his natural beauty or wit,
and so can with no reason value himself for them.

10 In the second place, The goods of fortune.
the folly is as great to be proud of the goods of fortune; by them I mean
wealth and honor, and the like; for it is sure, they add nothing of true worth
to the man, somewhat of outward pomp, and bravery they may help him to, but
that makes no change in the person. You may load an Ass with money, or deck
him with rich trappings, yet still you will not make him a whit the nobler kind
of beast by either of them. Then secondly, these are things we have no hold of,
they vanish many times, ere we are aware, he that is rich to day, may be poor
tomorrow, and then will be the less pitied by all in his poverty, the prouder
he was when he was rich. Thirdly, We have them all, but as Stewards, to lay out
for our Masters use, and therefore should rather think how to make our
accounts, then pride our selves in our receipts. Lastly, Whatever of these we
have, they, as well as the former, are not owing to our selves. But if they be
lawfully gotten, we owe them only to God, whose blessing it is, that makes
rich, Pro. 10. 22. If unlawfully, we have them upon such terms, that we have
very little reason to brag of them. And thus you see in these several respects,
the folly of this second sort of pride.

11. The third is that of the goods of grace; The goods of grace.
that is any virtue a man has. And here I cannot say, but the things are very
valuable, they being infinitely more precious, then all the world, yet
nevertheless this is of all the rest the highest folly. And that not only in
the foregoing respect, that we help not our selves to it, grace being above all
things most immediately Gods Work in us, but especially in this, that the being
proud of grace, is the sure way to loose it. God, who gives grace to the
humble, will take it from the proud. For if, as we see in the parable, Mat. 25.
28. the talent was taken from him who had only put it to no use at all, how
shall he hope to have it continued to him, that has put it to so ill, that in
stead of trading with it for God, has trafficked with it for Satan? And as he
will loose the grace for the future, so he will loose all reward of it for the
time past. For let a man have done never so many good acts, yet if he be proud
of them, that pride shall be charged on him to his destruction, but the good
shall never be remembered to his reward. And this proves it to be a most
wretched folly to be proud of grace. It is like that of children, that pull
those things in pieces, they are most fond of, but yet much worse then that of
theirs, for we not only loose the thing (and that the most precious that can
be imagined) but we must also be eternally punished for doing so, there being
nothing that shall be so sadly reckoned for in the next world, as the abuse of
grace, and certainly there can be no greater abuse of it, then to make it serve
for an end so directly contrary to that for which it was given, it being given
to make us humble, not proud, to magnify God, not our selves.

12. Having showed you thus much of this sin, Means of Humility.
I suppose it will appear very necessary to be eschewed, to which purpose it
will first be useful to consider, what has been already said concerning it,
and that so seriously, as may work in thee* not some slight dislike, but a
deep, and irreconcilable hatred of the sin; secondly to be very watchful over
thine own heart, that it cherish not any beginnings of it; never suffer it to
feed on the fancy of thy own worth, but when ever any such thought arises, beat
it down immediately with the remembrance of some of thy follies or sins, and so
make this very motion of pride an occasion of humility. Thirdly, Never to
compare thy self with those thou think more foolish or wicked then thy self,
that so thou may like the Pharisee Luke 16. 11. extol thy self, for being
better, but if thou will compare, do it with the Wise, and Godly, and then thou will find thou come so far short, as may help to pull down thy high esteem of
thy self. Lastly, To be very earnest in Prayer, that God would root out all
degrees of this sin in thee, and make thee one of those poor in Spirit, Mat. 5.
3. to whom the blessing, even of Heaven it self, is promised.

13. The second contrary to humility I told you was vain glory. Vain glory.
That is a great thirst after the praise of men. The sin.
And first, that this is a sin, I need prove no otherwise, then by the words of
our Savior, Jo. 5. 44. How can ye believe, that receive honor one of another?
Where it appears, that it is not only a sin, but such a one, as hinders the
receiving of Christ into the heart, for so believing there signifies. The danger
This then in the second place shows you likewise the great dangerousness of
this sin, for if it be that, which keeps Christ out of the heart, it is sure it
brings infinite danger, since all our safety, all our hope of escaping the
wrath to come, stands in receiving him? But besides the authority of this text,
common experience shows, that where ever this sin has possession, it endangers
men to fall into any other. For he that so considers the praise of men, that he
must at no hand part with it, when ever the greatest sins come to be in
fashion, and credit (as God knows many are now a days) he will be sure to
commit them, rather then run the disgrace of being too singular, and precise; I
doubt there are many consciences can witness the truth of this, so that I need
say no more to prove the danger of this sin.

14. The third thing I am to show, The folly.
is the folly of it, And that will appear first by considering, what it is we
thus hunt after, nothing but a little air, a blast, the breath of men, it
brings us in nothing of real advantage: for I am made never the wiser, nor the
better, for a man's saying I am wise, and good. Besides if I am commended, it
must be either before my face, or behind my back, if the former, it is very
often flattery, and so the greatest abuse that can be offered, and then I must
be very much a fool, to be pleased with it. But if it be behind my back, I have
not then so much as the pleasure of knowing it, and therefore it is a strange
folly thus to pursue, what is so utterly gainless. But secondly, It is not
only gainless, but painful, and uneasy also. He that eagerly seeks Prayer, is
not at all Master of himself, but must suit all his actions to that end, and in
stead of doing what his own reason and conscience (nay perhaps his wordly
convenience) directs him to, he must take care to do what will bring him in
commendations, and so enslaves himself to every one that has but a tongue to
commend him. Nay there is yet a further uneasiness in it, and that is, when
such a man fails of his aim, when he misses the praise, and perhaps meets with
the contrary reproach, (which is no man's lot more often then the vain glorious,
nothing making a man more despised) then what disturbances and disquiets, and
even tortures of mind is he under? A lively instance of this you have in
Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17. 23. who had so much of this upon Absoloms despising his
counsel, that he chose to rid himself of it, by hanging himself. And sure this
painfulness that thus attends this sin, is sufficient proof of the folly of it.
Yet this is not all, it is yet further very hurtful: For if this vain glory be
concerning any good, or Christian action, it destroys all the fruit of it; he
that prays or gives alms to be seen of men, Mat. 6. 2. must take that as his
reward, Verily I say unto you they have their reward, they must expect none
from God, but the portion of those hypocrites that love the the praise of men
more then the praise of God. And this is a miserable folly to make such an
exchange. It is like the dog in the fable, who seeing in the water the shadow
of that meat he held in his mouth, caught at the shadow, and so let go meat.
Such dogs, such unreasonable creatures are we, when we thus let go the eternal
rewards of Heaven, to catch at a few good words of men. And yet we do not only
loose those eternal joys, but procure to our selves the contrary eternal
mercies, which is sure the highest pitch of folly and madness. But if the vain
glory be not concerning any virtuous action, but only some indifferent thing,
yet even there also it is very hurtful; for vain glory is a sin, that
wheresoever it is placed, endangers our eternal estate, which is the greatest
of all mischiefs. And even for the present it is observable, that of all other
sins, it stands the most in its own light, hinders it self of that very thing
it pursues. For there are very few that thus hunt after praise, but they are
discerned to do so, and that is sure to eclipse whatever praise worthy thing
they do, and brings scorn upon them in stead of reputation. And then certainly
we may justly condemn this sin of folly, which is so ill a manager even of its
own dedesigns.

15. You have seen how wretched a thing this vain glory is, ^elps a^^inst vain
^^^ry.
in these several respects, the serious consideration whereof, may be one good
means to subdue it, to which it will be necessary to add; first, a great
watchfulness over thy self; Observe narrowly, whether in any Christian duty
thou at all considerest the praise of men, or even in the most indifferent
action, look whether thou have not too eager a desire of it; And if thou
find thy self inclined that way, have a very strict eye upon it, and where
ever thou find it stirring, check, and resist it; suffer it not to be the
end of thy actions; But in all matters of Religion, let the duty be thy motive;
In all indifferent things of common life, let reason direct thee; and though
thou may so far consider in those things the opinion of men, as to observe
the rules of common decency, yet never think any praise, that come in to thee
from any thing of that kind worth the contriving for; Secondly, Set up to thy
self another aim, viz that of pleasing God; let that be thy inquiry when thou
go about any thing, whether it be approved by him, and then thou will not be
at leisure to consider what praise it will bring thee from men. And surely he
that weighs of how much more moment it is to please God, who is able eternally
to reward us, then men, whose applause can never do us any good, will surely
think it reasonable, to make the former his only care. Thirdly, If at any time
thou art praised, do not be much overjoyed with it, nor think a jot the better
of thy self, but if it be virtue thou art praised for, remember it was God,
that wrought it in thee, and give him the glory, never thinking any part of it
belongs to thee; If it be some indifferent action, then remember that it
cannot* deserve praise, as having no goodness in it; But if it be a bad one (as
amongst men such are sometimes likeliest to be commended) then it ought to set
thee a trembling, in stead of rejoicing, for then that woe of our Saviors
belongs to thee, Luke 6, 26. Woe unto you when men speak well of you, for so did
their Fathers to the false Prophets, and there is not a greater sign of a
hardened heart, then when men can make their sins the matter of their glory. In
the last place let thy prayers assist in the fight with this corruption.

16. A second virtue is meekness, Meekness.
That is a calmness and quietness of spirit, contrary to the rages, and
impatiences of anger. This virtue may be exercised either in respect of God, or
our neighbor. That toward God I have already spoken of, under the head of
humility, and that toward our neighbor I shall hereafter; All I have here to
say of it, is, how it becomes a duty to our selves; that it does, in respect of
the great advantage we reap by it, Advantages of it.
which, in mere kindness to our selves, we are to look after. And to prove that
it brings us this great advantage, I need say no more, but that this meekness
is that to which Christ has pronounced a blessing, Mat. 5. 5. Blessed are the
meek, and not only in the next world, but even in this too, they shall inherit
the earth; Indeed none but the meek person has the true enjoyment of any thing
in the world, for the angry, and impatient are like such people, who we use to
say, cannot enjoy the greatest prosperities; For let things be never so fair
without, they will raise storms within their own breasts. And surely whoever
^ath either in himself, or others observed the greatest uneasiness of this
passion of anger, cannot choose but think meekness a a most pleasant thing.

17. Besides it is also a most honorable thing, for it is that whereby we
resemble Christ, learn of me, says he, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat.
11. 28. It is also that whereby we conquer our selves, overcome our own unruly
passions, which of all victories is the greatest, and most noble. Lastly, it is
that which makes us behave our selves like men, whereas anger gives us the
fierceness and wildness of savage beasts. And accordingly the one is by all
esteemed, and loved, whereas the other is hated and abhorred, every man
shunning a man in rage as they would a furious beast.

18. Farther, yet meekness is the sobriety of the mind, whereas anger is the
direct madness, it puts a man wholly out of his own power, and makes him do
such things, as himself in his sober temper abhors; how many men have done
those things in their rage, which they have repented all their lives after? and
therefore surely as much as a man is more honorable then a beast, a sober man
then a mad man, so much has this virtue of meekness the advantage of honor
above the contrary vice of anger.

19. Again, meekness makes any condition tolerable, and easy to be endured.
He that meekly bears any suffering, takes off the edg of it, that it cannot
wound him, whereas he that frets and rages at it; whets it, and makes it much
sharper then it would be; Nay in some cases makes that so, which would not else
be so at all; as particularly in the case of reproachful words, which in
themselves can do us no harm, they neither hurt our bodies nor lessen our
estate, the only mischief they can do us is to make us angry, and then our
anger may do us many more; whereas he that meekly passes them by, is never the
worse for them; nay the better, for he shall be rewarded by God for that
patience. Much more might be said to recommend this virtue to us, in respect of
our own present advantage, but I suppose this may suffice to persuade men to
esteem of it. The harder matter will be to gain them to the practice of it,
wherein men pretend I know not what difficulties of natural constitutions and
the like; Yet sure there is no man of so Choleric a temper; but if he did
heartily set about it, would find it were not impossible in some good measure
to subdue it: But then he must be diligent in using means to that end. Diverse
of these means there are I shall mention some few.

20 As first. Means of obtaining it.
The imprinting deep in our mind the loveliness, and benefits of meekness,
together with the ugliness and mischiefs of anger. Secondly, To set before us
the examples of Christ, who endured all reproaches, yea torments with perfect,
patience that was lead as a sheep to the slaughter, Isaiah 33. 7. That when he
was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, threatened not, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
And if he the Lord of glory suffered thus meekly and unjustly from his own
creatures, with what force can we ever complain of any injury done to us?
Thirdly, To be very watchful to prevent the very first beginnings of anger, and
to that purpose to mortify all in^ard peevishness, and frowardness of mind,
which is a sin in it self, though it proceed no farther, but will also be sure,
if it be cherished to break out into open effects of anger. Therefore whenever
thou find the least rising of it within thee, make as much haste to check it
as thou would to quench a fire in thy house, but be sure thou bring no fuel
to it, by entertaining any thoughts, that may increase it. And at such a time
especially, keep a most strick watch over thy tongue, that it break not out
into any angry speeches, for that breath will fan the fire; not only in thine
adversary, but thy self too; therefore though thy heart be hot within stifle
the flame, and let it not break out, and the greater the temptation is* the
more earnestly lift up thy heart to God, to assist thee to overcome it.
Fourthly, Often remember, how great punishments sins have deserved, and then
whether thy sufferings be from God or man, thou will acknowledge them to be far
short of what is due to thee, and therefore wilt be ashamed to be impatient at
them.

21. The third virtue is ^onsideration, Consideration.
and this in a most special manner we own to our souls. For without it, we
shall, as rash, unadvised people use to do; rush them into infinite perils. Now
this consideration is either of our state, or of our actions. By our state I
mean what our condition is to Godward, Of our state.
whether it be such that we may reasonably conclude our selves in his favor.
This it much concerns us to consider and examine, and that not by those easy
rules men are apt to frame to themselves, as whether they believe that Christ
died for their sins; that they are of the number of the elect; and shall
certainly be saved, if these and the like were all that were required to put us
into Gods favor, none but some very melancholy person could ever be out of
it, for we are apt enough generally to believe comfortably of our selves. But
the rules God has given us in his word, are those by which we must be tried at
the last day, and therefore are certainly the only safe ones, by which to try
our selves now. The rule by which to try our state.
And the sum of those are, that whosoever continues in any one wilful sin is
not in his favor, nor can if he so die, hope for any mercy at his hand.

22. Now it is highly necessary, we should consider what our condition is in
this respect For since our life is nothing but a puff of breath in our
nostrils, which may for ought we know be taken from us the next minuite, it
nearly concerns us, to know how we are provided for another world, that so in
case we want at present that oil in our lamps, wherewith we are to meet the
Bridegroom, Mat. 25. 8. We may timely get it, and not for want of it be ever
shut out like the foolish virgins, from his presence. The danger of
inconsideration.
The neglect of this consideration has undon many souls, some by too easy a
belief that they were in a good condition, without considering and trying
themselves by the foregoing rule, but presuming either upon some slight outward
performances, or upon such a false faith, as I even now described others by the
wretched careless going on, without so much as asking themselves, what their
condition is, but hope they shall do as well as their neighbors, and so never
inquiring farther; which wretched carelessness will as certainly undo the
spiritual, as the like would do the temporal estate; yet in that every man is
wise enough to foresee, that a man that never takes any accounts of his estate
to see whether he be worth something or nothing, will be sure to be a beggar in
the end. But in this far weightier matter we can generally be thus improvident.

23. The second thing we are to consider, Our actions.
is our actions, and those either before, or after the doing of them. In the
first place we are to consider before we act, Before we do them.
and not to do any rashly or headily. But first to advise with our consciences,
whether this be lawful to be done, for he that follows his own inclination,
and does every thing which that moves him to, shall be s^re to fall into a
multitude of sins. Therefore consider soberly and be assured of the lawfulness
of the thing, before thou venture to do it. This advisedness is in all worldly
things accounted so necessary a part of wisdom, that no man is accounted wise
without it; A rash man we look upon as the next degree to a fool: And yet it is
sure there is not so much need of looking about us in any thing, as in what
concerns our souls, and that not only in respect of the great value of them
above all things else, but also in regard of the great danger they are in, as
has been showed more at large in the beginning of the treatise.

24 Secondly, We are to consider our actions, After they are done.
when they are past also, that is, we are to examine whether they have been
such, as are allowable by the Laws of Christ, This is very necessary, whether
they be good or bad; if they be good, the recalling them helps us to the
comfort of a good conscience, and that comfort again incourageth us to go on in
the like; and besides it stirrs us up to thankfulness to God, by whose grace
alone we were enabled to do them. But if they be bad, then it is especially
necessary, that we thus examine them, for without this it is impossible we
should ever come to amendment; for unless we observe them to have been amiss,
we can never think it needful to amend: But shall still run on from one
wickedness to another, which is the greatest curse any man can lie upon.

25. The oftener therefore we use this consideration, the better; Frequency of
consideration.
for the less likely it is, that any of our sins shall escape our knowledge. It
is much to be wished, that every man should thus every night try the actions of
the day, that so if he have done any things amiss, he may soon check himself
for it, and settle his resolutions against it, and not let it grow on to a
habit and course. And that he may also early beg Gods pardon, which will the
easier be had, the sooner it is asked, every delay of that being a great
increase of the sin. And surely whoever means to take account of himself at
all, will find this the easiest course, it being much easier to do it so, a
little at a time, and while passages are fresh in his memory, th^n to take the
account of a long time together. Danger of omitting it.
Now if it be considered, that every wilful sin must have a particular
repentance before it can be pardoned, me thinks men should tremble to sleep
without that repentance, for what assurance has any man that lies down in his
bed, that he shall ever rise again; and then how dangerous is the condition of
that man, that sleeps in an unrepented sin? The weighing of these several
motives may be a means by Gods blessing, to bring us to the practice of this
duty of consideration in all the parts of it.

PARTITION. VII.
Of CONTENTEDNES and the Contraries to it; Murmuring, Ambition, Covetousness,
Envy, Helps to Contentedness, Of DUTIES which concern our BODIES Of CHASTITY,
etc. Helps to it. Of TEMPERANCE* Rule of Temperance in EATING.

. 1. THe fourth virtue is contendedness, Contentedness.
and this surely is a duty we much own to our selves, it being that without
which it is impossible to be happy. This contentedness is a well-pleasedness
with that condition, whatever it is that God has placed us, not murmuring, and
repining of our lot, but cheerfully well-c^ming whatsoever God sends. How
great, and withal how pleasant a virtue this is, may appear by the contrariety
it has to several great and painful vices, so that where this is rooted in the
heart* it subdues not only some such single sin, but ^ cluster of them together.

2. And first it is contrary to all murmuring i^ general, Contrary to murmuring.
which is a sin most hateful to God, as may appear by his sharp punishments of
it on the Israelites in the wilderness, as you may read in several places of
the book of Exodus, and Numbers. And sure it is also very painful, and uneasy
to a man's self, for if, as the Psalmist says, it be a joyful and pleasant
thing to be thankful, we may by the rule of contraries conclude, it is a sad
and unpleasant thing to be murmuring; and I doubt not every man's own experience
will confirm the truth of it.

3. Secondly, It is contrary to ambition, the ambitions man is always
disliking his present condition, To ambition.
and that makes him so greedily to seek a higher, whereas he that is content
with his own, lies quiet out of the road of his temptation. Now ambition is not
only a great sin in it self, but it puts men upon many other; There is nothing
so horrid, which a man that eagerly seeks greatness will stick at; lying,
perjury, murder, or any thing will down with him; if they seem to tend to his
advancement. And the uneasiness of it is answerable to the sin. This none can
doubt of, that considers what a multitude of fears and jealousies, cares and
distractions there are that attend ambition in its progress, besides the great
and public ruins that usually befall it in the end. And therefore sure
contentedness is in this respect as well a happiness, as a virtue.

4. Thirdly, it is contrary to covetousness; To covet^usness.
this the Apostle witnesses. Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have, where you see
contentedness is set as the direct contrary to covetousness. But of this there
needs no other proof, then common experience, for we see the covetous man never
thinks he has enough, and therefore can never be content, for no man can be
said to be so, that thirsts after any thing he has not. Now that you may see
how excellent, and necessary a virtue this is, that secures us against
covetousness, it will not be amiss a little to consider the nature of that sin.

5. That it is a very great crime, is most certain, for it is contrary to the
very foundation of all good life, I mean those three great duties to God, to
our selves, to our neighbor. First, Covetousness contrary to our duty to God.
It is so contrary to our duty to God, that Christ himself tells us Luke 16 13.
We cannot serve God and Mammon; he that sets his heart upon wealth, must
necessarily take it off from God. And this we daily see in the covetous man's
practice, he is so eager in the gaining of riches, that he has no time or care
to perform duty to God, let but a good bargain, or opportunity of gain come in
his way, prayer and all duties of Religion must be neglected to attend it. Nay,
when the committing the greatest sin against God may be likely either to get,
or save him ought, his love of wealth quickly persuades him to commit it.

6. Secondly, To our selves.
It is contrary to the duty we owe our selves, and that both in respect of our
Souls, and bodies* The covetous man despises his Soul, sels that to eternal
destruction for a little pelf; For so every man does, that by any unlawful
means seeks to enrich himself; Nay though he do it not by unlawful means, yet
if he have once set his heart upon wealth, he is that covetous person, of whom
the Apostle has pronounced, that he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6. 10. Nor does he only offend against his Soul, but against his body
too. For he often denies that those necessary refreshments it wants, and for
which his wealth (as far as it concerns himself) was given him. This is so
constantly the custom of rich Misers, that I need not prove it to you.

7. In the third place. Covetousness is contrary to the duty we owe to our
neighbors. To our neighbour^*
And that in both the parts of it, Justice and Charity: he that loves money
immoderately, will not care whom he cheats, and defrauds, so he may bring in
gain to himself, and from hence spring those many tricks of deceit and
cousenage, so common in the world. As for Charity, that is never to be hoped
for from a covetous man, who dreads the lessening of his own heaps more then
the starving of his poor Brother. You see how great a sin this is that
contains under it so many others; so that we may well say of it, as the
Apostle does 1 Timothy 6. 10. The love of money is the root of all evil. And it is
not much less uneasy, then wicked, for between the care of getting, and the
fear of loosing, the covetous man enjoyes no quiet hour. Therefore every man is
deeply concerned, as the tenders his happiness, either in this world, or the
next, to guard himself against this sin, which he can no way do* but by
possessing his heart with this virtue of contentedness.

8. In the fourth place, it is contrary to envy, Contentedness contrary to envy.
for he that is content with his own condition, has no temptation to envy
another; How unchristian a sin this of envy is, shall hereafter be showed; At
the present, I need say no more, but that it is also a very uneasy one, it
frets and knawes the very heart of him that harbors it. But the worse this sin
is, the more excellent still is this grace of contentedness, which frees us
from it. I suppose I have said enough to make you think this a very lovely, and
desirable Virtue. And sure it were not impossible to be gained by any, that
would but observe these few directions.

9. First, To consider, Helps to contentedness.
that whatever our estate and condition in any respect be, it is that which is
allotted us by God, and therefore is certainly the best for us, he being much
better able to judge for us, then we for our selves; and therefore to be
displeased at it, is in effect to say, we are wiser then he. Secondly, Consider
thoroughly the vanity of all worldly things, how very little there is in them,
while we have them, and how uncertain we are to keep them, but above all, in
how little stead they will stand us at the day of death or judgment, and then
thou can not think any of them much worth the desiring, and so wilt not be
discontented for want of them. Thirdly, Suffer not thy fancy to run on things
thou have not: many have put themselves out of love with what they have, only
by thinking what they want. He that sees his neighbor possess somewhat, which
himself has not, is apt to think how happy he should be, if he were in that
man's condition, and in the mean time never thinks of enjoying his own, which
yet perhaps in many respects may be much happier, then that of his neighbors
which he so much admires. For we look but upon the outside of other men's
conditions, and many a man that is envied by his neighbors, as a wonderful
happy person, has yet some secret trouble, which makes him think much
otherwise of himself. Therefore never compare thy condition in any thing with
those thou countest more prosperous then thy self, but rather do it with those,
thou know more unhappy, and then thou will find cause to rejoice in thine
own portion. Fourthly, Consider how far thou art from deserving any good thing
from God, and then thou can not but with Jacob Genesis 32. 10. confess, that
thou art not worthy of the least of those mercies thou enjoyest, and in stead
of murmuring that they are no more, wilt see reason to admire, and praise the
bounty of God, that they are so many. Fifthly, Be often thinking of the joys
laid up for thee in Heaven; look upon that as thy home, on this world, only as
an Inn, where thou art fain to take up in thy passage; and then as a traveller
expects not the same conveniences at an Inn, that he has at home, so thou
have reason to be content with whatever entertainment thou findst here, knowing
thou art upon thy journey to a place of infinite happiness, which will make an
abundant amends for all the uneasiness, and hardship thou can suffer in the
way. Lastly, Pray to God, from whom all good things do come, that he will to
all his other blessings, add this of a contented mind, without which thou can
have no taste or relish of any other.

10. A fifth duty is diligence: Diligence.
This is made up of two parts, watchfulness, and industry, and both these we
owe to our Souls

11. First, Watchfulness, Watchfulness against sin.
in observing all the dangers that threaten them. Now since nothing can
endanger our Souls, but sin, this watchfulness is principally to be employed
against that: And as in a besieged City, where there is any weak part, there it
is necessary to keep the strongest guard; so it is here, wherever thou find
thy inclinations such, as are most likely to betray thee to sin, there it
concerns thee to be especially watchful; Observe therefore carefully to what
sins either thy natural temper, thy company, or thy course of life do
particularly incline thee, and watch thy self very narrowly in those; Yet do
not so lay out all thy care on those, as to leave thy self^open to any other*
for that may give Satan as much advantage on the other side; but let thy watch
be general, against all sin, though in a special manner against those, which
are like oftnest to assault thee.

12. The second part of diligence, Industry in improving gifts.
is industry, or labor, and this also we owe to our Souls, for without it they
will as little prosper as that vineyard of the sluggard, which Solomon
describes, Prove. 24. 30. For there is a husbandry of the Soul, as well as of
the estate, and the end of the one, as of the other, is the creasing, and
improving of its riches. Now the riches of the Soul are either natural, or
Divine. By the natural I mean its faculties of reason, wit, memory, and the
like; by the Divine I mean the graces of God, which are not the Souls natural
portion, but are given immediately by God, and both these we are to take care to
improve, they being both talents entrusted to us for that purpose.

13. The way of improving the natural is by employing them so, Of Nature.
as may bring in most honor to God: we must not let them lie idle by us,
through sloth, neither must we overwhelme them with intemperance, and brutish
pleasures, which is the case of too many, but we must employ them, and set them
on work. But then we must be sure it be not in the Devils service, like many,
who set their wit only to the profaning of God, or cheating their neighbors,
and stuff their memories with such filthiness, as should never once enter their
thoughts; our use of them must be such, as may bring in most glory to God, most
benefit to our neighbors, and may best fit us to make our accounts, when God
shall come to reckon with us for them.

14. But the other part of the Souls riches, Of Grace.
is yet more precious, that is grace, and of this we must be especially
careful, to husband, and improve it. This is a duty expressly commanded us by
the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Grow in grace. And again, in the first chapter of
that Epistle, verse 5. Give all diligence to add to your Faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge, etc. Now the especial means of improving grace is by employing
it, that is, by doing those things for the enabling of us whereunto it was
given us; This is a sure means, not only in respect of that easiness, which a
custom of any thing brings in the doing of it, but principally, as it has the
promise of God, who has promised, Mat. 25. 29. That to him that has (that is
has made use of what he has) shall be given, and he shall have abundance. He
that diligently, and faithfully employes the first beginnings of grace, shall
yet have more, and he that in like manner husbands that more, shall yet have a
greater degree; so that what Solomon says of temporal riches, is also true of
spiritual, The hand of the diligent makes rich.

15. Therefore whenever thou find any good motion in thy heart, To improve
good motions.
remember that is a season for this spiritual husbandry, If thou have but a
check of conscience against any sin, thou live in, drive that on till it come
to a hatred, and then that hatred, till it come to resolution, then from that
resolution, proceed to some endeavors against it. Do this faithfully, and
sincerely, and thou shall certainly find the grace of God assisting thee, not
only in every of these steps, but also enableing thee to advance still higher,
till thou come to some victory over it. Yet to this industry thou must not fail
to add thy prayers also, there being a promise, that God will give the holy
Spirit to them that ask it, Mat. 7. 11. And therefore they that ask it not,
have no reason to expect it. But it must be asked with such an earnestness, as
is some way answerable to the value of the thing, which being infinitely more
precious then all the world, both in respect of his own worth, and its
usefulness to us, we must beg it with much more zeal and earnestness then all
temporal blessi^gs, or else we show our selves despisers of it.

16. Having directed you to the means of improving grace, The dang^^ of the
contrary.
I shall, to quicken you to it, mention the great danger of the contrary; And
that is not as in other things, the loosing only those further degrees, which
our industry might have helped us to, but it is the loosing even of what we
already have, For from him that has not (that is again has not made use of
what he has) shall be taken away even that which he has, Mat. 25. 29. God
will withdraw the grace, which he sees so neglected, as we see in that parable,
the talent was taken from him that had only hid it in a Napkin, and had
brought in no gain to his lord. And this is a most sad punishment, the greatest
that can befall any man, before he comes to hell, indeed it is some kind of
foretast of it, it is the delivering him up to the power of the Devil, and it
is the banishing him from the face of God, which are not the least parts of the
misery of the damned. And it is also the binding a man over to that fuller
portion of wretchedness in another world; For that is the last doom of the
unprofitable servant, Mat. 25. 30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. You see they are no
light dangers that attend this neglect of grace, and therefore if we have any
love, nay any common pity to our Souls, we must set our selves to this
industry. I have now done with those virtues, which respect our Souls. I come
now to those which concern our bodies.

17. The first of which is chastity, Chastity.
or purity, which may well be set in the front of the duties we owe to our
bodies, since the Apostle 1 Cor. 6. 18. sets the contrary as the especial sin
against them, He that commits fornication sins against his own body.

18 Now this virtue of chastity consists in a perfect abstaining from all kinds
of uncleanness, not only that of adultery, and fornication, but all other more
unnatural sorts of it, committed either upon our selves, or with any other. In
a word, all acts of that kind are utterly against chastity, save only in
lawful marriage. And even there men are not to think themselves let loose to
please their brutish appetites, but are to keep themselves within such rules of
moderation, as ag^ee to the end of marriage, which being these two, the
begetting of children, and the avoiding of fornication, nothing must be done,
which may hinder the first of these ends; and the second aiming only at the
subduing of lust, the keeping men from any sinful effects of it, it is very
contrary to that end, to make marriage an occasion of heightning, and enflaming
it.

19. But this virtue of chastity reaches not only to the restraining of the
grosser act, Uncleanness forbidden in the very lowest degrees.
but to all lower degrees; it sets a guard upon our eyes, according to that of
our Savior, Mat. 5. 28. He that looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart; and upon our hand as appears
by what Christ adds in that place, If thy hand offend thee, cut it off; so also
upon our tongues, that they speak no immodest or filthy words, Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth. Ephesians. 4. 29 Nay upon our very thoughts,
and fancies, we must not entertain any foul or filthy desires, nor so much as
the imagination of any such thing. Therefore he that forbears the grosser act,
and yet allows himself in any of these, it is to be suspected that it is
rather some outward restraint, that keeps him from it* then the conscience of
the sin. For if it were that, it would keep him from these too, these being
sins also, and very great ones in Gods sight. Besides, he that lets himself
loose to these puts himself in very great danger of the other, it being much
more easy to abstain from all, then to secure against the one, when the other
is allowed. But above all, it is to be considered, that even these lower
degrees are such, as make men very odious in Gods eyes who sees the heart, and
loves none that are not pure there.

20. The loveliness of this virtue of chastity needs no other way of
describing, The mischiefs of it.
then by considering the loathsomness, and mischiefs of the contrary sin; which
is first very brutish; those desires are but the same, that the beasts have,
and then how far are they sunk below the nature of man, that can boast of their
sins of that kind, as of their special excellency? When if that be the measure,
a goat is the more excellent creature. To the Soul.
But indeed they that eagerly pursue this part of bestiality do often leave
themselves little, besides their humane shape, to difference them from beasts;
this sin so clouds the understanding, and defaceth the reasonable Soul.
Therefore Solomon very well describes the young man, that was going to the
harlots house, Pro. 7. 22. He goes after her, as an Ox goes to the slaughter.

21 Nor secondly are the effects of it better to the body then to the mind. To
the Body.
The many foul and filt^y, besides painful diseases, which often follow this
sin, are sufficient witnesses, how mischievous it is to the body. And alas, how
many are there that have thus made themselves the Devils martyrs? Suffered such
torments in the pursuit of this sin, as would exceed the invention of the
greatest tyrant? Surely they that pay thus dear for damnation, very well
deserve to enjoy the purchase.

22. But thirdly, The Judgments of God against it.
Besides the natural fruits of this sin, it is attended with very great and
heavy Judgments from God; the most extra ordinary and miraculous Judgment that
ever befell any place, Fire and Brimstone from Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah,
was for this sin of uncleanness. And many examples likewise of Gods vengeance
may be observed on particular persons, for this sin. The incest of Amnon cost
him his life, as you may read, 2 Samuel 13. Zimrie and Cozhi were slain in the
very act, Number. 25. 8. And no person that commits the like, has any assurance
it shall not be his own case. For how secretly soever it be committed, it
cannot be hid from God, who is the sure avenger of all such wickedness. Nay,
God has very particularly threatened this sin, 1 Cor. 3. 17. If any man defile
the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. This sin of uncleanness is a kind of
sacrilege, a polluting those bodies, which God has chosen for his Temples,
and therefore no wonder, if it be thus heavily punished.

23. Lastly, It shuts out from Heaven.
This sin shuts us out from the Kingdom of Heaven, wherein no impure thing can
enter. And we never find any list of those sins, which bar men thence, but this
of uncleanness has a special place in it. Thus it is Gal. 5. 19. and so again
1 Cor. 6. 9. If we will thus pollute our selves, we are fit company only for
those black spirits, the Devil and his Angels, and therefore with them we must
expect our portion, where our flames of lust shall end in flames of fire.

24. All this laid together, Helps to chastity.
may surely recommend the virtue of chastity to us, for the preserving of
which, we must be very careful; first, to check the beginnings of the
temptation, to cast away the very first fancy of lust, with indignation, for if
you once fall to parley, and talk with it, it gains still more upon you, and
then it will be harder to resist, therefore your way in this temptation is, to
fly rather then fight with it. This is very necessary, not only that we may
avoid the danger of proceeding to act the sin, but also in respect of the
present fault of entertaining such fancies, which of it self, though it should
never proceed further is, as has been showed, a great abomination before God;
Secondly, have a special care to fly idleness, which is the proper soil for
these filthy weeds to grow in; And keep thy self always busied in some
innocent, or virtuous employment, for then these fancies will be less apt to
offer themselves. Thirdly, never suffer thy self to recall any unclean passages
of thy former life with delight, for that is to act over the sin again; and
will be so reckoned by God, nay perhaps thus deliberately to think of it, may
be a greater guilt, then a rash acting of it. For this both shows thy heart to
be set upon filthiness, and is also a preparation to more acts of it. Fourthly,
forbear the company of such light, and wanton persons, as either by the
filthiness of their discourse, or any other means, may be a snare to thee.
Fifthly, pray earnestly that God would give thee the spirit of purity,
especially at the time of any present temptation. Bring the unclean Devil to
Christ, to be cast out* as did the man in the Gospel; And if it will not be
cast out with prayer alone, add fasting to it, but be sure thou do not keep up
the flame by any high or immoderate feeding. The last remedy, when the former
prove vain, is marriage, which becomes a duty to him, that cannot live
innocently without it. But even here there must be care taken, lest this which
should be for his good, become not to him an occasion of falling, for want of
sobriety in the use of marriage. But this I have touched on already, and
therefore need add no more, but an earnest entreaty, that men would consider
seriously of the foulness, and danger of this sin of uncleanness, and not let
the commonness of it lessen their hatred of it, but rather make them abhor that
shameless impudence of the world, that can make li^ht of this sin, against
which God has pronounced such heavy curses, Whoremongers and adulterers God
will Judge, Heb. 13. 4. and so he will certainly do all sorts of unclean
persons whatsoever.

25. The second virtue, Temperance.
that concerns our bodies is temperance: And the exercises of that are diverse;
As first temperance in eating, secondly in drinking, thirdly in sleep, fourthly
in recreation, fifthly in apparel. I shall speak of them severally; and first
of temperance in eating. This temperance is observed, In Eating.
when our eating is agreeable to those ends, to which eating are by God and
nature designed; those are first the being, Ends of eating.
secondly the well being of our bodies

26. Man is of such a frame, Preserving of life.
that eating becomes necessary to him for the preserving his life, hunger being
a natural disease which will prove deadly, if not prevented, and the only
Physic for it is eating which is therefore become a necessary means of keeping
us alive. And that is the first end of eating; and as men use not to take
Physic for pleasure, but remedy, so neither should they eat.

27. But secondly, Of Health.
God has been so bountiful, as to provide not only for the being, but the
well being of our bodies, and therefore we are not tied to such strictness,
that we may eat no more then will just keep us from starving, but we may also
eat whatsoever either for kind or quantity most tends to the health, and
welfare of them; Now that eating which is agreeable to these ends, is within
the bounds of temperance, as on the contrary whatsoever is contrary to them, is
a transgression against it; He therefore that sets up to himself other ends of
eating, as either the pleasing of his taste, or (what is yet worse) the
pampering of his body, that he may the better serve his lust, he directly
thwarts and crosses these ends of Gods; for he that has those aims, does that
which is very contrary to health, yea and to life it self; as appears by the
many diseases, and untimely deaths, which surfeiting and uncleanness daily
bring on men.

28. He therefore that will practice this virtue of temperance, Ru'es of
Temperance in eating.
must neither eat so much, nor of any such sorts of meat (provided ^he can have
other) as may be hurtful to his health: what the sorts or quantities shall be,
is impossible to set down, for that differs according to the several
constitutions of men; some men may with temperance eat a great deal, because
their stomachs require it, when another may be guilty of intemperance in eating
but half so much, because it is more then is useful to him. And so also for the
sort of meat, it may be niceness and luxury for some to be curious in them,
when yet some degree of it may be necessary to the infirmities of a weak
stomach, which not out of wantonness, but disease cannot eat the courser meats
But I think it may in general be said, that to healthful bodies the plainest
meats are generally the most wholesome, but every man must in this be left to
judge for himself; and that he may do it aright, he must be careful, that he
never suffer himself to be enslaved to his palate, for that will be sure t^
satisfy its self, whatever becomes of health or life.

29. To secure him the better, Means of it.
let him consider, First, How unreasonable a thing it is, that the whole body
should be subjected to this one sense of tasting, that it must run all hazards
only to please that. But it is yet much more so* that the diviner part, the
soul should also be thus enslaved; and yet thus it is in an intemperate person,
his very soul must be sacrificed to this brutish appetite, for the sin of
intemperance, though it be acted by the body, yet the soul must share in the
eternal punishment of it, Secondly, Consider how extreme short and vanishing
this pleasure is, it is gone in a moment, but the pains that attend the excess
of it, are much more durable, and then surely it agrees not with that common
reason, wherewith as men we are endued, to set our hearts upon it. But then in
the third place it agrees yet worse with the temper of a Christian, who should
have his heart so purified, and refined with the expectation of those higher
and spiritual joys he looks for in another world, that he should very much
despise these gross and brutish pleasures, which beasts are as capable of, as
we, and to them we may well be content to leave them, it being the highest
their natures can reach to; but for us, who have so much more excellent hopes,
it is an intolerable shame, that we should account them as any part of our
happiness. Lastly, the sin of Gluttony is so great and dangerous, that Christ
thought fit to give an especial warning against it; take heed to your selves,
that your hearts be not overcharged with surfeiting, etc. Luke 21. 34. And you
know what was the end of the rich glutton, Luke 16. He that had fared
deliciously every day, at last wants a drop of water to cool his tongue. So
much for that first sort of temperance, that of eating.

PARTITION VIII.
Of Temperance in DRINKING, False Ends of Drinking, viz. Good Fellow-ship.
Putting away cares, etc.

. 1. THe second is temperance in drinking, Temperanc^ in Drink^ing.
and the ends of eating and drinking being much the same, I can give no other
direct rules in this, then what were given in the former, to wit, that we drink
neither of such sorts of liquor, nor in such quantities as may not agree with
the right ends of drinking, the preserving of our lives and healths: Only in
this there will be need of putting in one caution, for our understandings being
in more danger to be hurt by drink then meat, we must take care to keep that
safe, and rather not drink what we might safely in respect of our healths, if
it be in danger to distemper our reason. This I say because it is possible some
men's brains may be so weak, that their heads cannot bear that ordinary quantity
of drink which would do the^r bodies no harm. And whoever is of this temper
must strictly absta^n from that degree of drink or that sort of it, which he
finds has that effect, yea though it do in other respects appear not only
safe, but useful to his health. For though we are to preserve our healths, yet
we are not to do it by a sin, as drunkenness most certainly is.

2. But alas, of those multitudes of drunkards we have in the world, False ends
of drinking.
this is the case but of very few, most of them going far beyond what their
health requires, yea or can bear even to the utter destruction thereof. And
therefore it is plain men have set up to themselves some other ends of
drinking, then those allowable ones forementioned, it may not be amiss a
little to examine what they are, and withal to show the unreasonableness of
them.

3. The first, Good fellowship.
and most owned is that, which they call good fellowship: One man drinks to
keep another company at it. But I would ask such a one whether if that man were
drinking rank poison, he would pledge him for company? If he say he would not, I
must tell him* that by the very same, nay, far greater reason, he is not to do
this. For immoderate drinking is that very poison, perhaps it does not always
work death immediately (yet there want not many instances of its having done
even that, very many having died in their drunken fit) but that the custom of
it does usually bring men to their ends, is past doubt, and therefore though
the poison work slowly, yet it is still poison. But however it does at the
present work that which a wise man would more abhor then death; it works
madness, and frenzy turns the man into a beast, by drowning that reason which
should difference him from one. Certainly the effects of drink are such, that
had being drunk been first enjoined, as a punishment, we should have thought
him a more then ordinary Tyrant, that had invented it.

4. A second end of drinking is said to be the maintaining of friendship and
kindness amongst men. Preserving of kindness
But this is strangely unreasonable, that men should do that toward the
maintaining of friendship, which is really the greatest mischief that can be
done to any man. Did ever any think to befriend a man by helping to destroy his
estate, his credit, his life? Yet he that thus drinks with a man does this, and
much more, he ruins his reason, yea his soul; and yet this must be called the
way of preserving of friendship; this is so ridiculous that one would think
none could own it, but when he were actually drunk. But besides, Alas,
experience shows us, that this is fitter to beget quarrels then preserve
kindness, as the many drunken brawles we every day see, with the wounds, and
sometimes murders, that accompany them, do witness.

5. A third end is said to be the cheering of Cheering the spirits.
their spirits, making them merry and jolly. But sure if the mirth be such that
reason must be turned out of doors before it begin, it will be very little
worth; one may say with Solomon, Ecc. 2. 2. The laughter of such fools is
madness. And sure they that will be drunk to put themselves in this temper,
must by the same reason be glad of a frenzy, if they could but be sure it would
be of the merry sort. But little do these merry folks think what sadness they
are all this while heaping up to them selves, often in this world, when by some
mad pranks, they play in their jollity, they bring mischief upon themselves,
but however certainly in another, where this mirth will be most sadly reckoned
for.

6. A fourth end is said to be the putting away of cares; Putting away cares.
but I shall ask what those cares are? be they such as should be put away?
perhaps they are some checks and remorses of conscience, which must be thus
charmed. And I doubt this has proved too effectual with many to the laying
them asleep: But this is the wickedst folly in the world; for if thou think
not these checks to have something considerable in them, why do they trouble
thee But if thou do, it is impossible thou can hop^ this can long secure thee
from them. Thou may thus stop their mouths for a wh^le, but they will one day
cry the louder for it. Suppose a thief or a murderer knew he were pursued to be
brought to justice, would he think you to put away the fear of being hanged,
fall to drinking, and in the mean time take no care for his escape, or would
you not think him desperately mad if he did? Yet this is the very case here,
thy conscience tells thee of thy danger, that thou must ere long be brought
before Gods judgment seat; and is it not madness for thee, in stead of
endeavoring to get thy pardon, to drink away the thought of thy danger. But in
the second place, suppose these cares be some worldly ones, and such as are fit
to be put away; then for shame do not so disgrace thy reason, thy Christianity,
as not to let them be as forcible to that end, as a little drink. Thy reason
will tell thee it is in vain to care, where care will bring no advantage; and thy
Christianity will direct thee to one, on whom thou must safely cast all thy
cares, for he cares for thee, 1 Pet. 5. 7. And therefore unless thou meanest
to renounce being both a man and a Christian, never betake thee to this pitiful
shift, to rid thee of thy cares. But besides, this will not do the deed
neither; for though it may at present, whilst thou art in the height of the
drunken fit, keep thee from the sense of thy cares, yet when that is over, they
will return again with greater violence, and if thou have any conscience, bring
a new care with them, even that which arises from the guilt of so foul a sin.

7. A fifth end is said to be the passing away of time. Passing away time.
This though it be as unreasonable as any of the former, yet by the way it
serves to reproach idleness, which is, it seems, so burdensome a thing, that
even this vilest i^ployment is preferred before it. But this is in many a very
false plea. For they often spend time at the pot, not only when they have
nothing else to do, but even to the neglect of their most necessary business.
However it is in all a most unreasonable one, for there is no man, but he may
find somewhat, or other to employ himself in. If he have little worldly
business of his own, he may yet do somewhat to the benefit of others; but
however there is no man but has a soul, and if he will look carefully to that,
he need not complain for want of business; where there are so many corruptions
to mortify so many inclinations to watch over, so many temptations (whereof
this of drunkenness is not the least) to resist the graces of God, to improve
and stir up, and former neglects of all these to lament, sure there can never
want sufficient employment; for all these require time, and so men at their
deaths find; for then those that have all their lives made it their business to
drive away their t^me, would then give all the world to redeem it. And sure
where there is much leisure from worldly affairs, God expects to have the more
time thus employed in spiritual exercises. But it is not likely those meaner
sort of persons, to whom this book is intended, will be of the number of those
that have much leisure; and therefore I shall no farther insist on it; only I
shall say this, that what degree of leisure they at any time have, it concerns
them to employ to the benefit of their souls, and not to bestow it to the ruin
of them, as they do, who spend it in drinking.

8. A sixth end is said to be the preventing of that reproach, which is by the
world cast on those that will in this be stricter then their neighbors;
Preventing reproach.
but in answer to this, I shall first ask, what is the harm of such reproach?
sure it cannot equal the least of those mischiefs, drunkenness betrays us to.
Nay, if we will take our Saviors word, it is a happiness, Blessed, says he,
are ye when men shall revile you, and say all manner of evil against you for
my sake, Mat. 5. 11. And St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 4 14. If ye be reproached
for the name of Christ, happy are ye, and sure to be reproached for obedience
to any command of Christ's, is to be reproached for his name. Secondly, Let it
be remembered, that at our Baptism we solemnly renounced the world; and shall we
now so far consider it, as for a few scoffs of it to run our selves on all the
temporal evils before mentioned, and which is much worse, the wrath of God and
eternal destruction? But Thirdly, if you fear reproach, why do you do that,
which will bring reproach upon you from all wise and good men; whose opinion
alone is to be regarded? And it is certain, drinking is the way to bring it on
you from all such. And to comfort thy self against that, by thinking thou art
still applauded by the foolish and worst sort of men, is as if all the mad men
in the world should agree to count themselves the only sober persons, and all
others mad, which yet sure will never make them the less mad, nor others the
less sober. Lastly, consider the heavy doom Christ has pronounced on those
that are ashamed of him, and so are all those that for fear of reproach shall
shrink from their obedience to him, Mat. 8* 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of
me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the
Son of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of the father with the holy
Angels. There is none but will at that day desire to be owned by Christ: But
whoever, will not here own him; that is, cleave fast to his commands,
notwithstanding all the scorns, nay, persecutions of the world, shall then
certainly be cast off by him. And he that will adventure thus to maintain his
credit among a company of fools and madmen, deserves well to have it befall him:
But after all this is it not sure that even these will despise thee for thy
sob^iety, it is possible they may seem to do so, to fright thee out of it; but
if their hearts were searched, it would be found, they do even against their
wills, bear a secret reverence to sober persons, and none fall more often under
their scorn, and despising then those that run with them to the same excess of
riot, for even he that sticks not to be drunk himself, will yet laugh at
another that he sees so.

9 There is a seventh end, Pleasure of the drink.
which though every man think too base to own, yet it is too plain, it prevails
with many. And that is the bare pleasure of the drink; but to these I confess
it will not be fit to say much, for he that is come to this lamentable degree
of sottishness, is not like to receive benefit by any thing can be said. Yet
let me tell even this man, that he of all others has the most means of
discerning his fault, for this being such a ground of drinking as no body will
own, he is condemned of himself, yea, and all his fellow drunkards too, for
their denying it is a plain sign, they acknowledge it a most abominable thing.
And if Esau were called a profane person, Heb. 12. 6. For selling but his
birthright for a m^sse of pottage* and that too, when he had the necessity of
hunger upon him, what name of reproach can be bad enough for him, who sells his
health, his reason, his God, his soul for a cup of drink, and that when he is
so far from needing it, that perhaps he has already more then he can keep? I
shall say no more to this sort of persons, but let me warn all those that go
on in the sin, on any of the former grounds, that a little time will bring them
even to this, which they profess to loath, it being daily seen, that those
which first were drawn into the sin for the love of the company, at last
continue in it for love of the drink.

10 I can think but of one end more: Bargaining.
That is, that of bargaining. Men say it is necessary for them to drink, in
this one respect, of trading with their neighbors, bargains being most
conveniently to be struck up at such meetings. But this is yet a worse end,
then all the rest, for the bottom of it is an aim of cheating and defrauding
others* We think when men are in drink, we shall the better be able to
overreach them: And so this adds the sin of cousenage and defrauding to that
of drunkenness. Now that this is indeed the intent, is manifest, for if it were
only the dispatch of bargains were aimed at, we should choose to take men with
their w^^s about them, therefore the taking them, when drink has distempered
them, can be for nothing, but to make advantage of them. Yet this often proves
a great folly, as well as a sin; for he that drinks with another in hope to
overreach him, does many times prove the weaker brained, and becomes drunk
first, and then he gives the other that opportunity of cheating him, which he
designed for the cheating of the other. Now this end of drinking is so far from
becoming an excuse, that it is a huge heightning of the sin; For if we may not
drink intemperately upon any occasion, much less upon so wicked a one, as is
the cousening and defrauding of our brethren.

11. I suppose I have now showed you the unreasonableness of those motives,
Degrees of this sin.
which a^e ordinarily brought in excuse of this sin. I am yet further to tell
you, that it is not only that huge degree of drunkenness, which makes men able
neither to go nor speak, which is to be looked on as a sin, but all lower
degrees, which do at all work upon the understanding, whether by dulling it,
and making it less fit for any employment, or by making it too light and airy,
apt to apish, and ridiculous mirth, or, what is worse, by inflaming men into
rage and fury. These, or whatever else make any change in the man, are to be
reckoned into this sin of drunkenness; Nay further, the drinking beyond the
natural ends of drinking; that is, beyond moderate refreshment, is a sin,
though by the strength of a man's brain it makes not least change in him, and
therefore those that are not actually drunk, yet can spend whole days, or any
considerable part of them, in drinking, are so far from being innocent, that
that greater woe belongs to them, which is pronounced Isa. 5. 22. against those
that are mighty to drink. For though such a man may make a shift to preserve
his wits, yet that wit serves him to very little purpose, when his employment
is still but the same with him, that is the most sottishly drunk; that is, to
power down drink.

12. Nay, The great guilt of the strong drinkers.
this man is guilty of the greater waste; First, of the good creatures of God;
That drink, which is by Gods providence intended for the refreshing and
relieving of us, is abused and misspent, when it is drunk beyond that measure,
which those ends require, and sure there is not the meanest of these creatures
we enjoy, but the abuse of them shall one day be accounted for, and he that
drinks longest, has the most of that gnilt. But in the second place, this is a
waste of that which is much more precious, our time, which is allowed us by God
to work out our Salvation in, and must be strictly reckoned for, and therefore
ought every minute of it to be most thriftily husbanded to that end in actions
of good life, but when it is thus laid out, it tends to the direct contrary,
even the working out our damnation. Besides, he that thus drinks, though he
escape being drunk himself, he is yet guilty of all the drunkenness, that any
of his company fall under, for he gives them encouragemennt to drink on by his
example, especially if he be one of any authority, but if he be one whose
company the rest are fond of, his drinking is then a certain ensnaring of them,
for then they will drink too, rather then lose him. There is yet a greater
fault, that many of these stronger brained drinkers are guilty of; That is, the
setting themselves purposely to make others drunk, playing, as it were, a prize
at it, and counting it matter of triumph, and victory to see others fall before
them; This is a most horrible wickedness, it is the making our selves the
Devils factors, endeavoring all we can to draw our poor brethren into eternal
misery, by betraying them to so grievous a sin; and therefore it may well be
reckoned as the highest step of this vice of drinking, as having in it the sin
of mischieving others, added to the excess in our selves. And though it be
looked upon in the world as a matter only of jest and merriment to make others
drunk, that we may sport our selves with their ridiculons behavior, yet that
mirth will have a sad conclusion, there being a woe expressly threatened by God
to this very sin. Hab. 2 15. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, that
put thy bottle to him and make him drunk, that thou may look on their
nakedness: And sure he buys his idle pastime very dear, that takes it with
such a woe attending it. The great mischiefs of this sin.


13. I have now gone through the several motives to, and degrees of this sin of
drunkenness, wherein I have been the more particular, because it is a sin so
strangely reigning amongst us, no Condition, no Age, or scarce Sex free from
it, to the great dishonor of God, reproach of Christianity, and ruin not
only of our own Souls hereafter, but even of all our present advantages and
happiness in this life; the^^ being no sin which betrays each single committer
to more mischiefs in his understanding, his health his credit, his estate, then
this one does. And we have reason to bel^eve this sin is one of those common
crying guilts, which have long layen heavy upon this Nation, and pulled down
those many sad judgments we have groaned under. Exhortation to forsake it.


14. Therefore, Christian Reader, let me now entreat, nay conjure thee, by all
that tenderness and love thou ought to have to the honor of God, the credit
of thy Christian profession, eternal welfare of thine own Soul, the prosperity
of the Church and Nation, whereof thou art a member; Nay, by that love which
certainly thou have to thy own Soul, to think sadly of what has been spoken;
And then judge, whether there be any pleasure in this sin, which can be any
tolerable recompense for all those mischiefs, it brings with it; I am confident
no man in his w^^s can think there is and if there be not, then be ashamed to
be any longer that fool, which shall make so wretched a bargain, but begin at
this instant a firm and a faithful resolution, never once more to be guilty of
this swinish sin, how often soever thou have heretofore fallen into it, and in
the fear of God betake thee to a st^^ct temperance, which when thou have done,
thou will find, thou have made not only a gainful, but a pleasant exchange;
For there is no man that has tried both courses, but his own heart will tell
him, there is infinitely more present comfort, and pleasure in sobriety and
temperance, then ever all his drunken revelli^gs afforded him.

15. The main difficul^y is the first breaking off the custom, The
difficulties of doing so considered.
and that arises partly from our selves, partly from others. That from our
selves may be of two sorts, the first is, when by the habit of drinking, we
have brought such false thirsts upon our selves, that our bodies seems to
require it, Seeming n^^^ssity of drink.
and this wants nothing bnt a little patience to overcome. Do but refrain some
few days, and it will afterward grow easy; for the hardness arising only
from custom, the breaking of that does the business. If thou say, it is very
uneasy to do so, consider whether thou had (...) me disease, which would
cer^ainly kill thee, ^f thou did not for some little time refrain ^mmoderate
drinking, thou would not rather forbear, then dye; If thou would not, thou
art so brutish a sot, that it is in vain to persuade thee; but if thou had,
then consider how unreasonable it is for thee not to do ^it in this case also;
the habit of drinking may well pass for a mortal disease, it proves so very
often to the body, but will most certainly to the Soul, and therefore it is
madness to stick at that uneasiness in the cure of this, which thou would
submit to in a less danger. Set therefore but a resolute purpose to endure that
little trouble for a small time, and this first difficulty is conquered, for
after thou have a while refrained, it will be perfectly easy to do so still.

16 The second difficulty is that of spending the time, Want of employment
which those that have made drinking their trade and business, know scarce how
to dis^ose of. But the very naming of this difficulty directs to the cure, get
thee some business, somewhat to employ thy self in, which, as I have already
showed, will be easily found by all sorts of persons, but those meaner to whom
I now write, can sure never want it ready at hand; they being generally such as
are to be maintained by their labor, and therefore to them I need only give
this advice, to be diligent in that business they have, to follow that close as
they ought; and they will have little occasion to seek out this way of spending
their time.

17. There is another sort of difficulty, Persuasions and reproaches of men.
which I told you arises from others, and that is either from their
persuasions, or reproaches. It is very l^kely if thy old companions see thee
begin to fall off, they will set hard to thee, to bring thee back to thy old
course, they will urge to thee the unkindness of forsaking the company of thy
friends, the sadness of renouncing a^l that mirth and jollity, which good
fellows (as they call them) enjoy, and if thou can not thus be won, they will
affright thee with the reproach of the world, and so try if they can mock thee
out of thy sobriety.

18 The way to ove come this difficulty is to foresee it, The means of
resisting them
therefore when thou first enterest on thy course of temperance, thou art to
make account thou shall meet with these (perhaps many other) temptations, and
that thou may make a right judgment, whether they be worthy to prevail with
thee, take them before hand, and weigh them, consider whether that false
kindn^ss, that is maintained among men by drinking, be worthy to be compared
with that real and everlasting kindness of God, which is lost by it; Which the
advantages (...) the hurt.
Whether that foolish, vain mi^th bear any weight with the present joys of a
good conscience here, or with those greater of Heaven hereafter. Lastly,
whether the unjust reproach of wicked men* the shame of the world be so
terrible, as the just reproof of thine own conscience at the present, and that
eternal confusion of face that shall befall all those, that go on in this sin,
at the last day; Weigh all these, I say, I need not say, in the balance of the
Sanctuary, but even in the scales of common reason, and sure thou will be
forced to pronounce, that the motives to temperance infinitely outweigh those
against it; When thou have thus advisedly judged, then fix thy resolution
accordingly, and when ever any of these temptations come to stagger thee,
remember thou have formerly weighed them, know the just value of them, and
that they are a most unworthy price for those precious advantages thou must
give in exchange for them. And therefore hold fast thy resolution, and with
indignation reject all motions to the contrary.

19. But be sure thou thus reject them at their very first tender, Reject the
temptation^ at the ve^^ beginning*
and do not yield in the least degree; For if once thou give ground, thou art
lost, the sin will by little and little pervail upon thee. Thus we see many,
who have professed to be resolved upon great temperance, yet for want of this
care, have adventured into the company of good fellows, when they have been
there, they have at the first been over entreated to take a cup, after that
another, till at last they have taken their rounds as freely as any of them,
and in that flood of drink drowned all their sober resolutions* Therefore
whoever thou art, that do really desire to forsake the sin, take care to
avoid the occasions, and beginnings of it; To w^^ch end it w^ll be good openly
to declare, and own thy purpose of sobriety, that so thou may discourage men
from assaulting thee. But if either thou art ashamed to own it, or seem to
be so, they will quickly make use of that shame to bring thee to break it.

20. If thou be thus wary to keep thee from the first beginnings, The se^urity
of doing so.
thou art then sure never to be overtaken with this sin; For it is like the
keeping the outworks of a besieged City, which so long as they are stoutly
defended, there is no danger, but if they be either surprised or yielded, the
City cannot long hold out: The advice therefore of the wise man is very
agreeable to this matter, Eccles. 19. 1. He that despises small things shall
perish by little and little. But because as the Psalmist says, Psa. 127. 1.
Except the Lord keep the City the watchman waketh but in vain; therefore to
this guard of thy self add thy most earnest prayers to God, that he will also
watch over thee, and by the strength of his grace enable thee to resist all
temptations to this sin.

21. If thou do in the sincerity of thy heart use these means, The effica^y of
these means if not hindered by love of the sin.
there is no doubt, but thou will be able to overcome this vice, how long
soever thou have been accustomed to it therefore if thou do still remain under
the power of it, never excuse thy self by the impossibility of the task* but
rather accuse the falseness of thy own heart, that has still such a love to
this sin, that thou will not set roundly to the means of subduing it.

22. Perhaps the great commonness of the sin and thy particular custom of it
may have made it so much thy familiar thy bosom acquaintance, That lov^ makes
m^^ loath to be^lieve it dangerou^*
that thou art loath to enterta^n hard thoughts of it, very unwilling thou art
to t^ink that it means thee any hurt, and therefore art a^t to speak peace to
thy self, to hope that either this is no sin, or at most but a frailty, such as
will not bar thee out of Heaven; But deceive not thy self, for thou may as
well say there is no Heaven, as that drunkenness shall not keep thee thence; I
am sure the same word of God which tells us there is such a place of happiness,
tells us also that drunkards are of the number of those, that shall not inherit
it. 1 Cor. 6. 10. and again, Gal. 5. 21. Drunkenness is reckoned among those
works of the flesh, which they that do, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
And indeed had not these plain texts, yet mere reason would tell us the same;
That is, a place of infinite purity, such that flesh and blood, till it be
refined, and purified, is not capable of, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15.
53. and if as we are mere men, we are too gross, and impure for it, we must
sure be more so, when we are changed our selves into swine, the foulest of
beasts, we are then prepared for the devils to enter into, as they did into the
herd, Mark 5. 13. and that not only some one or two, but a Legion, a troop and
multitude of them. And of this we daily see examples, for where this sin of
drunkenness has taken possession, it usually comes as an harbinger to
abundance of others; each act of drunkenness prepares a man not only for
another of the same sin, but of others; lust and rage, and all brutish
appetites are then let loose, and so a man brings himself under that curse,
which was the sadest David knew how to foretell to any, Psa. 69. 28. The falling
from one wickedness to another. If all this be not enough to affright thee out
of this drunken fit, thou must still wallow in thy vomit, continue in this
sottish, senseless condition, till the flames of Hell rowse thee, and then thou will by sad experience find, what now thou will not believe, that the end of
these things, as the Apostle says, Romans 6. 21. is Death. God in his infinite
mercy timely awake the hearts of all that are in this sin, that by a timely
forsaking it, they may fly from that wrath to come. I have now done with this
second part of temperance, concerning drinking.

PARTITION. IX.
Temperance in SLEEP; The rule of it, etc. Of RECREATION; Of APPAREL.

. 1: THE third part of Temperance concerns sleep; Sleep.
And temperance in that also must be measured by the end for which sleep was
ordained by God, which was only the refreshing and supporting of our frail
bodies, which being of such a temper, that continual labor and toil tires, and
wearies them out, sleep comes as a Medicine to that weariness, as a repairer of
that decay, that so we may be enabled to such labors, as the duties of
Religion or works of our calling require of us. Sleep was intended to make us
more profitable, not more idle; as we give rest to our beasts, not that we are
pleased with their doing nothing* but that they may do us the better service.

2. By this therefore you may judge what is temperate sleeping, The rule of
temperance therein.
to wit, that which tends to the refreshing, and making us more lively, and fit
for action. And to that end a moderate degree serves best; It will be
impossible to set down just how many hours is that moderate degree, because as
in eating so in sleep, some consti^utions require more then others. Every man's
own ex^erience must in this judge for him, but then let him judge uprightly,
and not consult with his sloth in the case* for that will still with S^lomons
slu^gard, cry, a little more sleep, a little more slumber, a lit^l^ more
folding of the hand^ to sleep, Prove. 24. 33. But take only so much, as he
really finds to tend to the end forementioned.

3. He that does not thus limit himself, The many sins that f^^l^w the
transgressing of it.
falls into several sins under this general one of sl^th; As first, he wastes
his time, that precious talent which was committed to him by God to improve,
which he that sleeps away, does like him in the Gospel. M^^. 25. 18. Hides it
in the earth, when he should be trading with it; and you know what was the doom
of that unprofitable servan^, verse. 30 Cast ye him into outer darkness; he that
gives himself up to the darkness of sl^ep here, shall there have darkness
without sl^ep, but with weeping, and gnashing o^ (...). Sec^ndly, he injures
his body, immoderate sl^ep fills that full of diseases* makes it a very sink of
humors, as daily experi^nces show us. Thirdly, he inju^es^ is Soul also* and
that not only in robbing it of the service of the body, but in dulling its
proper fac^lties* m^king them useless, and unfit for those implo^ments, to
which God has designed them, of all which ill husbandry the poor Soul must one
day give account. Nay lastly, he affronts and despises God himself in it, by
crossing the very end of his creat on, which was to serve God in an active
obedience, but he that sleeps away his life, directly thwarts* and contradicts
that, and when God says, Man is born to labor, his practice says the direct
contrary that man was born to rest. Take heed therefore of giving thy self to
immoderate sleep, which is the comm^tting of so many sins in one.

4. But besides the sin of it, it is also very hurtful in other respects, Other
mischiefs of sloth.
it is the sure ba^e of thy outward estate, wherein the sluggish person shall
never thrive, according to that observation of the wise man, Proverb. 23. 21.
Drowsiness shall cover a man with rags; that is, the slothful man shall want
convenient clothing; nay, indeed it can scarce be said, that the sluggard
lives; sleep, you know, is a kind of death, and he that gives himself up to it,
what does he but dye before his time. Therefore if untimely death be to be
looked upon, as a curse, it must needs be a strange folly to choose that from
our own sloth, which we dread so much from Gods hand.

5. The fourth part of temperance concerns recreations, Temperance in Recreation
which are sometimes necessary both to the body and the mind of a man, neither
of them being able to endure a constant toil without somewhat of refreshment
between; and therefore there is a very lawful use of them, but to make it so,
it will be necessary to observe these cautions;

6. First, We must take care, that the kind of them be lawful, Cautions t^he
observe^ in them.
that they be such as have nothing of sin in them; we must not, to recreate our
selves, do any thing which is dishonorable to God, or injurious to our
neighbor, as they do, who make profane or filthy backbiting discourse their
recreation; Secondly, we must take care that we use it with moderation; And to
do so we must first be sure not to spend too much time upon it, but remember
that the end of recreation is to fit us for business, not to be it self a
business to us; Secondly, we must not be too vehement, and earnest in it, nor
set our hearts too much upon it, for that will both ensnare us to the using too
much of it, and it will divert, and take off our minds from our more necessary
employments, like school-boyes, who after a play-time know not how to set
themselves to their books again. Lastly, we must not set up to our selves any
other end of recreations, but that one lawful, of giving us moderate
refreshment.

7. As first, we are not to use sports only to pass away our time, Undue end
of sports.
which we ought to study how to redeem, not fling away; and when it is
remembered how great a work we have here to do, the making our calling and
election sure, the securing our title to Heaver hereafter, and how uncertain we
are what tim^ shall be allowed us for that purpose, it will appear our time is
that, which of all other things we ought most industriously to improve. And
therefore sure we have little need to contrive ways of driving that away,
which flies so fast of it self, and is so impossible to recover. Let them that
can spend whole days and nights at cards, and dice, and idle pastimes,
consider this, and withal, whether they ever bestowed a quarter of that t^me
toward that great business of their lives, for which all their time was given
them, and there think what a woeful reckoning they are like to make, when they
come at last to account for that precious treasure of their time. Secondly, we
must not let our covetousness have any thing to do in our recreations, if we
play at any game, let the end of our doing it be merely to recreate our selves,
not to win money; and to that purpose be sure never to play for any
considerable matter, for if thou do, thou will bring thy self into two dangers,
the one of covetousness, and a greedy desire of winning, the other of rage and
anger at thy ill fortune, if thou happen to loose; both which will be apt to
draw thee into other sins besides themselves; Covetousuess will tempt thee to
c^eat, and cosen in gaming, and anger to swearing and cursing, as common
experience shows us too often. If thou find thy self apt to fall into either of
these in thy gaming, thou must either take some course to secure thy self
against them, or thou must not permit thy self to play at all; for though
moderate play be in it self not unlawful, yet if be the occasion of sin, it is
so to thee, and therefore must not be ventured on. For if Christ commands us so
strictly to avoid temptations, that if our very eyes or hands offend us (that
is, prove snares to us) we must rather part with them, then be drawn to sin by
them: How much rather must we part with any of these unnecessary sports, then
run the hazard of offending God by them? He that so plays lays his Soul to
stake, which is too great a prize to be played away. Besides, he loses all the
recreation, and sport he pretends to aim at; and instead of that sets himself
to a greater toil, then any of those labors are he was to ease by it. For sure
the desires and fears of the covetous, the impatience and rage of the angry
man, are more real pains, then any the most laborious work can be.

8. The last part of Temperance is that of apparel, Temperance in Apparel.
which we are again to measure by the agreeableness to the ends for which
clothing should be used. Those are especially these three; First, the hiding of
nakedness. This was the first occasion of apparel, as you may read, Genesis 3 21.
and was the effect of the first sin, Apparel designed for covering of shame.
and therefore when we remember this or^ginal clothes, we have so little reason
to be proud of them, that on the contrary we have cause to be humbled and
ashamed, as having lost that innocence which was a much greater ornament, then
any the most glorious apparel can be. From this end of clothing we are likewise
e^gaged to have our apparel modest, such as may answer this end of covering our
shame; And therefore all immodest fashions of apparel, which may either argue
the wantonness of the wearer^ or provoke that of the beholder, are to be
avoided.

9 A second end of apparel, Fencing from cold.
is the fencing the body from cold, thereby to preserve the health thereof, and
this end we must likewise observe in our clothing; we must wear such kind of
habits, as may keep us in that convenient warmth, which i^ necessary to our
healths. And this is transgrest* when out of the vanity of being in every
fantastic fashion, we put our selves in such clothing, as either will not
defend us from cold, or is some other way so uneasy, that it is rather a hurt
then a benefit to our bodies to be so clod. This is a most ridiculous folly,
and yet that which people that take a pride in their clothes are usually guilty
of.

10. A third end of apparel is the distinguishing or d^fferencing of persons,
Distinction of persons.
and that first in respect of Sex; Secondly, in respect of qualities. First,
clothes are to make difference of Sex; this has been observed by all Nations,
the habits of men and women have always been diverse. And God himself expressly
provided for it among the I^ws, by commanding, that the man should not wear the
apparel of the woman, nor the woman of the man. But then secondly, there ^s
also a distinction of qualities to be observed in apparel; God has placed some
in a higher condition then others, and in proportion to their condition, it
befits their clothing to be; Gorgeous apparel, our Savior tells us, is for
Kings Co^^ts, Luke 7. 25. Now this end of apparel should also be observed. Men
and women should content themselves with that sort of clothing, which agrees to
their Sex and condition, not striving to exceed, and equal that of a higher
rank, nor yet making it matter of envy among those of their own estate, vying
who shall be finest, but let every man cloth himself in such sober atire, as
befits his place and calling, and not think himself disparaged, if another of
his neighbors have better then he.

11. And let all remember that cloths are things, which add no true worth to
any, and therefore it is an intolerable vanity to spend any considerable part
either of their thoughts, time or wealth upon them, or to value themselves ever
the more for them, or despise their poor brethren that want them. But if they
desire to adorn themselves, let it be as St. Peter advises the women of his
time, 1 Pet. 3. 4. In the hidden man of the heart, even the ornament of a meek,
and quiet spirit, Let them cloth themselves as richly as is possible with all
Christian virtues, and that is the raiment that will set them out lovely in
Gods eyes, yea, and in men's t^o, who, unless they be fools and Idiots, will
more value thee for being good, then fine, and sure one plain Coat thou put
upon a poor man's back will better become thee, then twenty rich ones thou shall
put upon thine own.

12. I have now gone through the several parts of temperance; Too much sparing
a fault as well as excess.
I shall now in conclusion, add this general caution, that though in all these
particulars I have taken notice only of the one fault of excess, yet it is
possible there may be one on the other hand; men may deny theirbodies that
which they necessarily require to their support, and well being. This is, I
believe, a fault not so common, as the other, yet we sometimes see some very
niggardly persons, that are guilty of it, that cannot find in their hearts to
borrow so much from their chests, as may feed their bellies, or cloth their
backs, and that are so intent upon the world, so moiling, and drudging in it,
that they cannot afford themselves that competent time of sleep, or recreation,
that is necessary. If any that has read the former part of this discourse be
of this temper, let him not comfort himself, that he is not guilty of those
excesses there complained of, and therefore conclude himself a good Christian,
because he is not intemperate, for whoever is this covetous creature, his
abstaining shall not be counted to him as the virtue of temperance, for it is
not the love of temperance, but wealth, that makes him refrain; And that is so
far from being praise worthy, that it is that great sin which the Apostle tells
us, 1 Timothy 6. 10. is the root of all evil; such a man's body will one day rise
in judgment against him, for defrauding it of its due portion, those moderate
refreshments* and comforts which God has allowed it. This is an Idolatry
beyond that of offering the children to Moloch, Lev. 20. 3. they offered but
their children, but this covetous wretch sacrifices himself to his god M^mmon,
whilst he often destroys his health, his life, yea, finally h^s ^oul too, to
save his purse. I have now done with the second head of duty, that to our
selves, contained by the Apostle under the word soberly.

PARTITION X.
Of D^TIES to our NEIGHBORS. Of JUSTICE, Negative, Positive. Of the sin of
MURDER, Of the H^inousness of it, the Punishments of it, and the strange
Discoveries thereof. Of Maining, wounds and strip^s.

1. I come now to the third part of duties, Duty to our Neighbor.
those to our Neighbor, which is by the Apostle summed up in gross in the word
[ righteousness,] by which is meant not only bare justice, but all kind of
charity also, for that is now by the law of Christ become a debt ^o our
neighbor, and it is a piece of unrigteousness to defraud him of it. I shall
therefore build all the particular duties we owe to our neighbor, on those two
general ones, Justice and Charity.

2. I begin with Justice, Justice.
whereof there are two parts, the one negative, the other positive, the
negative justice is to do no wrong, or injury to any. The positive justice is
to do right to all; that is, to yield them w^^at soever appertains or is due
unto them. I shall first speak of the negative justice the not injuri^g ^r
wronging any. Negative.
Now because a man is capable of receiving wrong in several respects; this
first part of justice extends its self into several branches, answerable to
those capacities of injury. A man may be injured either in his Soul, his body,
his possessions, or credit; and therefore this duty of negative justice lays a
restraint on us in every of these. That we do no wrong to any man in respect
either of his Soul, his body, his possessions, or credit.

3. First, To the Soul.
This justice ties us to do no hurt to his Soul; and here my first work must be
to examine what harm it is that the soul can receive; it is, we know an
invisible substance which we cannot reach with our eye, much less with our
swords and weapons, yet for all that it is capable of being hurt and wounded;
and that even to death.

4. Now the soul may be considered either in a natural or spiritual sense; In
the natural sense.
in the natural it signifies that which we usually call the mind of a man, and
this we all know may be wounded with grief or sadness as Solomon says Pro. 15.
13. By sorrow of heart the spirit is broken. Therefore whoever does causlesly
afflict or grieve his neighbor; he transgresses this part of justice, and
hurts, and wrong^ his soul. This sort of injury malicious and spiteful men are
very often guilty of, they will do things, by which themselves reap no good,
nay, often much harm, only that they may vex and gr^eve another; This is a
most savage, inhumane humor, thus to take pleasure in the sadness, and
afflictions of others; and whoever harbors it in his heart, may truly be said
to b^ possessed with a Devil, for it is the nature only of those accursed
spirits to delight in the miseries of men; and till that be cast out, they are
fit only to dwell as the possessed person did, Mar. 5. 2. Among graves and
tombs, where there are none capable of receiving affliction by them.

5. But the Soul may be considered also in the spiritual sense, In the
spiritual.
and so it signifies that immortal part of us, which must live eternally,
either in bliss, or woe in another world. And the Soul thus understood is
capable of two sorts of harm; first, that of sin; secondly, that of punishment,
the latter whereof is certainly the consequent of the former; and therefore
though God be the inflicter of punishment, yet since it is but the effect of
sin, we may justly reckon, that he that dr^wes a man to sin, is likewise the
betrayer of him to punishment, as he that gives a man a mortal wound, is the
cause of his death; therefore under the evil of sin both are contained, so that
I need speak only of that

6. And sure there cannot be a h^gher sort of wrong, Drawing to sin the
greatest injury.
then the bringing this great evil upon the Soul; sin is the disease and wound
of the Soul, as being the direct contrary to grace, which is the health, and
soundness of it; Now this wound we give to every Soul, whom we do by any means
whatsoever draw into sin.

7. The ways of doing that are diverse, Direct means of
I shall mention some of them, whereof though some are more direct then others,
yet all tend to the same end. Of the more direct ones there is first, the
commanding of sin; that is when a person that has power over another, shall
require him to do something which is unlawful; An example of this we have in
Nebuchadnezzars commanding the worship of the golden Image, Dan. 3 4 and his
copy is imitated by any parent or master, who shall require of his child or
servant to do any unlawful act. Secondly, there is counselling of sin, when men
advise and persuade others to any wickedness: Thus Jobs wife counseled her
husband to curse God, Job 2. 7. And Achitophel advised Absalom to go into his
Fathers concubines, 2 Samuel 16. 21. Thirdly, there is enticing and alluring to
sin, by setting before men the pleasures or profits they shall reap by it. Of
this sort of enticement Solomon gives warning, Prove. 1. 10. My son, if sinners
entice thee, consent thou not, if they say come with us, let us lay wait for
blood, let us l^rke privily for the innocent without cause, etc. and verse the
13. you may see what is the bait, by which they seek to alure them; we shall
find all precious substance, we shall fill our souls with spoil, cast in thy
lot among us, let us all have one purse. Fourthly, there is assistance in sin;
that is, when men aid and help others either in contriving or acting a sin.
Thus Jonadab helped Amnon in plotting the ravishing of his sister, 2 Samuel 13.
all these are direct means of bringing this great evil of sin upon our brethren

8. There are also others, Indirect.
which though they seem more indirect, may yet be as effectual toward that ill
end: As first, example in sin; he that sets others an ill pattern does his part
to make them imitate it, and too often it has that effect; there being
generally nothing more forcible to bring men into any sinful practice, then the
seeing it used by others, as might be instanced in many sins, to which there is
no other temptation, but their being in fashion. Secondly, there is
encouragement in sin, when either by approving, or else at least by not showing
a dislike, we give others confidence to go on in their wickedness. A third
means is by justifying and defending any sinful act of another, for by that we
do not only confirm him in his evi^, but endanger the drawing others to the
like, who may be the more inclinable to it, when they shall hear it so pleaded
for. Lastly, the bringing up any reproach upon strict and Christian living, as
those do who have the ways of God in derision; this is a means to affright men
from the practice of duty, when they see it will bring them to be scorned and
despised, this is worse then all the former, not only in respect of the man who
is guilty of it (as it is an evidence of the great profaneness of his own
heart) but also in regard of others; it having a more general ill effect then
any of the former can have, it being the betraying men not only to some single
acts of disobedience to Christ, but even to the casting off all subjection to
him: By all these means we may draw on our selves this great guilt of injuring
and wounding the souls of our brethren.

9. It would be too long for me to instance in all the several sins, Men sadly
to consider whom they have thus injured.
in which it is usual for men to ensnare others, as drunkenness, uncleanness,
rebellion, and a multitude more. But it will concern every man for his own
particular, to consider sadly what mischiefs of this kind he has done to any,
by all, or any of these means, and to weigh well the greatness of the injury:
Men are apt to boast of their innocence toward their neighbors, that they
have done wrong to no man, but God knows many that thus brag, are of all others
the most injurious persons: perhaps they have not maimed his body, nor stolen
his goods; but alas! the body is but the case and cover of the man, and the
goods some appurtenances to that, it is the soul is the man, and that they can
wound and pierce without all remorse, and yet with the adulteress, Prove. 30.
20. say, they have done no wickedness; but glory of their friendly behavior to
those whom they thus betray to eternal ruin, for whomsoever thou have drawn to
any sin, thou have done thy part to ascertain to those endless flames. And then
think with thy self how base a treachery this is, thou would call him a
treacherous villain, that should while he pretends to embrace a man, secretly
stab him; but this of thine is as far beyond that, as the soul is of more value
then the body, and hell worse then death. And remember yet farther, that
besides the cruelty of it to thy poor brother, it is also most dangerous to thy
self, it being that against which Christ has pronounced a woe, Mat. 18. 7. and
ver. 6. he tells us that whoever shall offend (that is, draw into sin) any of
those little ones, it were bettter for him that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. Thou may plunge
thy poor brother into perdition, but as it is with wrestlers, he that gives
another a fall, commonly falls with him, so thou art like to bear him company
to that place of torment.

10. Let therefore thy own and his danger beget in thee a sense of the
greatness of this (...), Heartily to bewail it.
this horrid piece of injustice to the precious soul of thy neighbor. Bethink
thy self seriously to whom thou past bin thus cruel, whom thou have enticed to
drinking, advised to rebellion, alured to lust, stirred up to rage whom thou
have assisted or encouraged in any ill course, or discouraged, and disheartened
by thy profane scoffings at piety in general, or at any conscionable strict
walking of his in particular; and then draw up a bill of indictmtnt, accuse and
condemn thy self, as a Cain, a murderer of thy brother, heartily and deeply
bewail all thy guilts of this kind, and resolve never once more to be a
stumbling block, as St. Paul calls it, Romans 14. in thy brothers way.

11. But this is not all, there must be some fruits of this repentance brought
forth; Endeavor to repair it.
now in all sins of injustice, restitution is a necessary fruit of repentance,
and so it is here thou have committed an act (perhaps many) of high injustice
to the soul of thy brother, thou have robbed it of its innocence, of its title
to heaven, thou must now endeavor to restore all this to it again, by being
more earnest and industrious to win him to repentance, then ever thou were to
draw him to sin, use now as much art to convince him of the danger, as ever
thou did to flatter him with the pleasures of his vice; in a word,
countermine thy self by using all those methods, and means to recover him, that
thou did to destroy him, and be more diligent and zealous in it, for it is
necessary thou should both in regard of him and thy self: First, in respect
of him, because there is in man's nature so much a greater promptness and
readiness to evil, then to good, that there will need much more pains and
diligence to instill the one into him, then the other: besides, the man it
supposed to be already accustomed to the contrary, which will add much to the
difficulty of the work, then in respect of thy self; if thou be a true
penitent, thou will think thy self obliged, as St. Paul did, to labor more
abundantly, and wilt be ashamed, that when thou art trading for God, bringing
back a soul to him, thou should not pursue it with more earnestness, then
while thou were an agent of Satan's; besides the remembrance, that thou were a
means of bringing this poor soul into this snare, must necessarily quicken thy
diligence to get him out of it: So much for the first part of negative justice,
in respect of the souls of our brethren.

12. The second concerns the bodies, Negative justice to the body.
and to those also this justice binds thee to do no wrong nor violence. Now of
wrongs to the body there may be several degrees, the highest of them is
killing, In respect of the life.
taking away the life, this is forbid in the very letter of the sixth
Commandment. Thou shall do no murder.

13. Murder may be committed either by open violence, Several ways of being
guilty of murder.
when a man either by sword, or any other instrument takes away another life,
immediately, and directly, or it may be done secretly and tracherously, as
David murdered Vriah, not with his own sword, but with the sword of the
Children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 11. 17. And Jezabel N^both by a false accusation, 1
Kin 21. 13. And so diverse have committed this sin of murder by poison, false
witness, or some such concealed ways. The former is commonly the effect of a
sudden rage, the latter has several originals, sometimes it proceeds from some
old malice fixed in the heart toward the person, sometimes from some covetous
or ambitious desires; such a one stands in a man's way to his profit or
preferment, and therefore he must be removed; and sometimes again it is to cover
shame, as in the case of strumpets, that murder their infants, that they may
not betray their filthiness. But besides these more direct ways of killing,
there is another, and that is, when by our persuasions and enticements, we draw
a man to do that which tends to the shortning of his life, and is apparent to
do so; he that makes his neighbor drunk, if by that drunkenness the ma^^ ^ome
by any mortal hurt, which he would have escaped if he had been sober, he that
made him drunk, is not clear of his death, or if he die not by any such sudden
accident, yet if drinking cast him into a disease, and that disease kill him, I
know not how he that drew him to that excess, can acquit himself of his murder
in the eyes of God, though humane Laws touch him not. I wish those who make it
their business, to draw in customers to that trade of debauchery, would
consider it: There is yet another way of bringing this guilt upon our selves,
and that is by inciting, and stirring up others to it, or to that degree of
anger, and revenge which produces it: As that sets two persons at variance, or
seeing them already so, blows the coals, if murder ensue, he certainly has
his share in the guilt, which is a consideration that ought to affright all
from having any thing to do in the kindling, or increasing of contention.

14. Now for the hainousness of this sin of murder, The Hainousness of the sin.
I suppose none can be ignorant, that it is of the deepest dye, a most loud
crying sin; This we may see in the first act of this kind, that ever was
committed, Abels blood cried from the earth, as God tells Cain, Genesis 4. 10. Yea,
the guilt of this sin is such, that it leaves a stain even upon the land, where
it is committed, such as is not to be washed out, but by the blood of the
murderer, as appears, Deuteronomy. 19. 12, 13. The land cannot be purged of blood, but
by the blood ^f him that shed it, and therefore though in other cases the
flying to the Altar secured a man, yet in this of wilful murder no such refuge
was allowed, but such a one was to be taken even thence, and delivered up to
justice, Exodus 21. 14. Thou shall take him from my Altar, that he may dye. And
it is yet farther observable, that the only two precepts which the Scripture
mentions, as given to Noah after the flood, were both in relation to this sin,
that of not eating blood, Genesis 9. 4. being a ceremony to beget in men a greater
horror of this sin of murder, and so intended for the preventing of it. The
other was for the punishment of it, Genesis 9. 6. He that sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed, and the reason of this strickness is added in the
next words, For in the Image of God made be man; where you see that this sin is
not only an injury to our brother, but even the highest contempt, and despite
toward God himself, for it is the defacing of his Image, which he has stamped
upon man. Nay yet further, it is the usurping of Gods proper right, and
authority. For it is God alone, that has right to dispose of the life of man;
'twas he alone that gave it, and it is he alone that has power to take it
away, but he that murders a man, does, as it were, wrest this power out of Gods
hand, which is the highest pitch of rebellious presumption.

15. And as the sin is great, The great punishments attending it.
so likewise is the punishment; we see it frequently very great, and
remarkable, even in this world, (besides those most fearful effects of it in
the next) blood not only cries, but it cries for vengeance, and the great God
of recompenses, as he styles himself, will not fail to hear it: very many
examples the Scripture gives us of this: Ahab and Jezabeel, that murdered
innocent Naboth, for greediness of his vineyard, were themselves slain, and the
dogs licked their blood in the place, where they had shed his, as you may read
in that Story; so Absalom, that slew his brother Amnon, after he had committed
that sin, fell into another, that of rebellion against his King and Father, and
in it miserably perished. Rechab, and Baanah, that slew Ishbosheth, were
themselves put to death, and that by the very person they thought to endear by
it; many more instances might be given of this out of the Sacred Story, and
many also out of Humane, there having been no age, but has yielded multitudes
of example^ of this kind, so that every man may furnish himself out of the
observations of his own time.

16. And it is worth our notice, The strange discoveries of it.
what strange and even miraculous means it has often pleased God to use for
the discovery of this sin; the very bruit creatures have often been made
instruments of it, nay, often the extreme horror of a man's own conscience has
made him betray himself, so that it is not any closeness a man uses in the
acting of this sin, that can secure him from the vengeance of it, for he can
never shut out his own consc^ence, that will in spite of him be privy to the
fact, and that very often proves the means of discovering it to the world, or
if it should not do that, yet it will sure act revenge on him, it will be such
a hell within him, as will be worse then death: this we have seen in many, who
after the commission of this sin have never been able to enjoy a minutes rest,
but have had that intolerable anguish of mind, that they have chosen to be
their own murderers, rather then live in it. These are the usual effects of
this sin even in this world, but those in another are yet more dreadful, where
surely the highest degrees of torment belong to this high pitch of wickedness,
for if as our Savior tells us, Mat. 5. 22. Hell fire be the portion of him that
shall but call his brother fool, what degree^ of those burnings can we think
proportionable, to this so much greater an injury?

17. The consideration of all this ought to possess us with the greatest
horror, We must wa^ch diligently a^gainst all approaches of this sin.
and abomination of this sin, and to make us extremely watchful of our selves,
that we never fall into it, and to that end to prevent all those occasions
which may insensibly draw us into this pit. I mentioned at first several
things, which are wont to be originals of it, and at those we must begin, if we
will surely guard our selves. If therefore thou will be sure never to kill a
man in thy rage, be sure never to be in that rage, for if thou permittest thy
self to that, thou can have no security against the other, anger being a
madness that suffers us not to consider, or know what we do, when it has once
possessed us. Therefore when thou find thy self begin to be inflamed, think
betimes, whether this may lead thee, if thou let loose to it, and
immediately put the bridle upon this headstrong passion; so again, if thou will be sure thy malice shall not draw thee to it, be sure never to harbor one
malicious thought in thy heart, for if it once settle there, it will gather
such strength, that within a while thou will be perfectly under the power of
it, so that it may lead thee even to this horrible sin at its pleasure; be
therefore careful at the very first approach of this treacherous gift, to shut
the doors against it, never to let it enter thy mind; so also if thou will be
sure thy covetousness, thy ambition, thy lust, or any other sinful desire shall
not betray thee to it, be sure thou never permit any of them to bear any sway
with thee, for if they get the dominion, as they will soon do, if they be once
entertained in the heart, they will be past thy control, and hurry thee to
this or any other sin, that may serve their ends. In like manner if thou
would not be guilty of any of the mortal effects of thy neighbors
drunkenness, be sure not to entice him to it, nor accompany him at it, and to
that purpose do not allow thy self in the same practice, for if thou do, thou will be laboring to get company at it. Lastly, if thou will not be guilty of
the murder committed by another, take heed thou never give any encouragement to
it, or contribute any thing to that hatred, or contention, that may be the
cause of it. For when thou have either kindled or blowed the fire, what know
thou whom it may consume; bring always as much water, as thou can, to
quench, but never bring one drop of oil, to increase the flame. The like may be
said of all other occasions of this sin, not here mentioned; and this careful
preserving our selves from these, is the only sure way to keep us, from this
sin; therefore as ever thou would keep thy self innocent from the great
offense, guard thee warily from all such inlets, those steps and approaches
toward it.

18. But although murder be the greatest, Maiming ^ great injury.
yet it is not the only injury that may be done to the body of our neighbor;
there are others which are also of a very high nature, the next in degree to
this is maiming him, depriving him of any member, or at least of the use of it,
and this is a very great wrong and mischief to him, as we may discern by the
Judgment of God himself, in the case of the bond-servant, who should by his
Masters means loose a member, Ex. 21. 26. the freedom of his whole life was
thought but a reasonable recompense for it, He shall let him go free, says the
text, for his eye; Nay, though it were a less considerable part, if it were but
a tooth, which of all other may be lost with the least damage, yet the same
amends was to be made him, ver. 27.

19. But we need no other way of measuring this injury, That which every man
dreads for himself.
then the judgment of every man in his own case; how much does every man dread
the loss of a limb, so that if he be by any accident or disease, in danger of
it, he thinks no pains or cost too much to preserve it. And then how great an
injustice, how contrary to that great rule of doing as we would be done to, is
it, for a man to do that to another, which he so unwillingly suffers himself.

But if the person be poor, Yet worse if the man be poor.
one that must labor for his living, the injury is yet greater, it is such as
may in effect amount to the former sin of murder, for as the wise man says,
Ecclesiasticus 24. 21. The poor man's bread is his life, and he that deprives
them thereof is a blood-shedder. And therefore he that deprives him of the
means of getting his bread by disabling him from labor, is surely no less
guilty. In the law it was permitted that to every man that had sustained such a
damage by his neighbor to require the Majestrate to inflict the like on him,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, as it is Exodus 21. 24.

20. And though unprofitable revenge be not now allowed to us Christians,
Necessity of making what satisfaction we can.
yet sure it is the part of every one, who has done this injury, to make what
satisfaction lies in his power, it is true he cannot restore a limb again
(which by the way should make men wary, how they do those mischiefs, which it
is so impossible for them to repair) but yet he may satisfy for some of the
ill effects of that loss; If that have brought the man to want and penury, he
may, nay, he must, if he have but the least ability, relieve and support him,
yea, though it be by his own extraordinary labor: for if it be a duty of us
all to be eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, as Job speaks, much more
must we be so to them, whom our selves have made blind and la^e. Therefore who
ever has done this injury to any of his poor brethren, let him know, he is
bound to do all that is possible toward the repairing of it, if he do not,
every new suffering that the poor man's wants bring upon him, becomes a new
charge and accusation against him, at the tribunal of the just Judge.

21. There are yet other degrees of injury to the body of our neighbor,
Wounds, and stripes, injuries also.
I shall mention only two more, wounds, and stripes; A man may wound another,
which though it finally cause loss neither of life nor limb, is yet an
endangering of both; and the like may be said of stripes; both of which however
are very painful at the present, nay, perhaps very long after, and pain, of all
temporal evils, is to be accounted the greatest, for it is not only an evil in
it self, but it is such a one, that permits us not, whilst we are under it, to
enjoy any other good; A man in pain having no taste of any the greatest
delights: If any man despise these, as light injuries, let him again ask
himself, how he would like it, to have his own body slasht or bruised, and put
to pass under those painful means of cure, which are many times necessary in
such cases? I presume there is no man would willingly undergo this from
another, and why then should thou offer it to him?

22. The truth is, This cruelty to others the effect of pride.
this strange cruelty to others is the effect of a great pride, and haughtiness
of heart, we look upon others with such contempt, that we think it no matter
how they are used; we think they must bear blows from us, when in the mean
time we are so tender of our selves, that we cannot hear the least word of
disparagement, but we are all on a flame. The provocations to these injuries
are commonly so slight, that did not this inward pride dispose us to such an
angriness of humor, that we take fire of every thing, it were impossible we
should be moved by them. Nay some are advanced to such a wantonness of cruelty,
that without any provocation at all in cool blood, as they say, they can thus
wrong their poor brethren, and make it part of their pastime, and recreation to
cause pain to others. Thus some tyrannous humors take such a pleasure in
tormenting those under their power, that they are glad, when they can but find
a pretense to punish them, and then do it without all moderation, and others
will set men together by the ears, only that they may have the sport of seeing
the scuffle, like the old Romans, that made it one of their public sports to
see men kill one another, and sure we have as little Christianity as they, if
we can take delight in such spectacles.

23. This savageness and cruelty of mind is so unbecoming the nature of a man,
that he is not a lowed to use it even to his beast; how intolerable is it then
toward those, that are of the same nature, and which is more, are heirs of
the same eternal hopes with us? They that shall thus transgre^s against their
neighbors in any of the foregoing particulars, or what ever else is hurtfnl to
the body, are unjust persons, want even this lowest sort of justice, the
negative, to their neighbors, in respect of their bodies.

24. Neither can any man excuse himself by saying what he has done was only in
return of some injury offered him by the other, for suppose it be so, that he
have indeed received some considerable wrong, yet cannot he be his own revenger
without injury to that man, who is not, by being thine enemy, become thy
vassal, or slave, to do with what thou list; thou have never the more right of
dominion over him, because he has done thee wrong, and therefore if thou had
no power over his body before, it is certain thou have none now, and therefore
thou art not only uncharitable (which yet were sin enough to damn thee) but
unjust in every act of violence thou do to him. Nay, this injustice ascends
higher, even to God himself, who has reserved vengeance as his own peculiar
right, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, Romans 12 19. and then he
that will act revenge for himself, what does he, but incroach upon this special
right and prerogative of God, snatch the sword, as it were out of his hand, as
if he knew better how to weild it? which is at once a robbery, and contempt of
the Divine Majesty.

PARTITION XI.
Of JUSTICE, about the Possessions of our Neighbor, against ^njuring him as
concerning his WIFE, His Goods. Of Malice, Covetousness, Oppression, Theft, Of
Paying of Debts, etc.

. 1. THe third part of negative justice concerns the possessions of our
neighbors; His possession.
what I mean by possessions, I cannot better explain, then by referring you to
the tenth Commandment, the end of which is to bridle all covetous appetites and
desires toward the possessions of our Neighbor. There we find reckoned up not
only his house, servants, and cattle, which may all pass under the one general
name of his goods or riches, but particularly his wife, as a principal part of
his possessions, and therefore when we consider this duty of negative justice,
in respect of the possessions of our Neighbor, we must apply i^ to both, his
wife, as well as his goods.

2. The especial and peculiar right, H^s wife.
that every man has in his wife, is so well known that it were vain to say any
thing in proof of it; the great impatience that every husband has to have this
right of his invaded, shows that it is sufficiently understood in the world,
and therefore none that does this injury to another, can be ignorant of the
greatness of it. The corrupting of a man's wife, enticing her to a strange bed,
is by all acknowledged to be the worst sort of theft, infinitely beyond that of
the goods.

3. Indeed there is in this one a heap of the greatest injustices together; The
enticing a man's wife, the greatest injustice.
some toward the woman, and some toward the man: Toward the woman, there are
the greatest imaginable; it is that injustice to her soul, which was before
mentioned as the highest of all others, it is the robbing her of her innocence,
To the woman.
and setting her in a course of the horredst wickedness (no less then lust and
perjury together) from which it is probable she may never return, and then it
proves the damning of her eternally. Next it is in respect of this world, the
robbing her of her credit, making her abhorred and despised, and her very name
a reproach among all men; and besides it^ is the depriving her of all that
happiness of life, which arises from the mutual kindness and affection that is
between man and wife, in stead whereof this brings in a loathing, and abhorring
of each other; from whence flow multitudes of mischiefs, too many to rehearse,
in all which man has his share also.

4. But besides those, To the man.
there are to him many, and high injustice; for it is first the robbing him of
that, which of all other things he accounts most precious, the love and
faithfulness of his wife, and that also wherein he has such an incommunicable
right, that himself cannot, if he would, make it over to any other; and
therefore sure it cannot without the utmost in justice be torn from him by any:
Nor is this all, but it is farther the ingulfing him (if ever he come to
discern it) in that most tormenting passion of jealousy, which is of all
others the most painful, and which often puts men upon the most desperate
attempts, it being as Soloman says, Prove. 6. 34. The rage of a man. It is yet
farther, the bringing upon him all that scorn, and contempt, which by the
unjust measures of the world falls on them, which are so abused, and which is
by many esteemed the most unsufferable part of the wrong; and though it be true
that it is very unjust, he should fall under reproach, only because he is
injured, yet unless the world could be new molded, it will certainly be his
lot, and therefore it adds much to the injury: Again, this may indeed be a
robbery in the usual sense of the word, for perhaps it may be the thrusting in
the child of the adulterer into his family, to share both in the maintenance
and portions of his own children; and this is an arrand theft; first, in
respect of the man, who surely intends not the providing for another man's
child; and then in respect of the children, who are by that means defrauded by
so much as that goes away with. And therefore whoever has this circumstance of
the sin to repent of, cannot do it effectually, without restoring to the
family, as much as he has by this means robbed it of.

5. All this put together will sure make this the greatest and most provoking
injury that can be done to a man, The most irrepairable.
and (which heightens it yet more) it is that, for which a man can never make
reparations; for unless it be in the circumstance before mentioned, there is no
part of this sin, wherein that can be done; to this purpose it is observable in
the Jewish Law, that the thief was appointed to restore fourfold, and that
freed him; but the adulterer having no possibility of making any restitution,
any satisfaction, he must pay his life for his offense. Lev. 20. 10. And though
now a days adulterers speed better, live many days to renew their guilt, and
perhaps to laugh at those, whom they have thus injured, yet let them be
assured, there must one day be a sad reckoning, and that whether they repent or
not: If by Gods grace they do come to repentance, they will then find this to
be no cheap sin, many anguishes of soul, terrors, and perplexities of
conscience, groans, and tears it must cost them, and indeed were a man's whole
life spent in these penitential exercises, 'twere little enough to wipe off the
guilt of any one single act of this kind; what overwhelming sorrows then are
requisite for such a trade of this sin, as too many drive? Certainly it is so
great a task, that it is highly necessary for all that are so concerned, to set
to it immediately, lest they want time to go through with it; for let no man
flatter himself, that the guilt of a course and habit of such a sin can be
washed away with a single act of repentance; no he must proportion the
repentance to the fault, and as one has been a habit and course, so must the
other also. And then how strange a madness is it for men to run into this sin
(and that with such painful pursuits, as many do) which he knows must at the
best hand, that is, supposing he do repent of it, cost him thus dear; but then,
if he do not repent, infinitely dearer; it looses him all his title to heaven,
that place of purity, and gives him his portion in the lake of fire, where the
burnings of his lust shall end in those everlasting burnings: For how closely
soever he have acted this sin, be it so that he may have said with the
adulterer in Job 25. 15. No eye sees me, yet it is sure he could not in the
greatest obscurity shelter himself from Gods sight, with whom the darkness is
no darkness, Psalm. 139. 12. And he it is, who has expressly th^eatned to judge
this sort of offender, Heb. 13 4. Adulterers God will judge. God grant that all
that live in this foul guilt may so seasonably, and so thoroughly judge
themselves, that they may prevent that severe and dreadful judgment of his.

6. The second thing, His goods.
to which this negative justice to our neighbors possessions reaches, is his
Goods, under which general word is contained all those several sorts of things,
as House, Land, Cattle, Money, and the like, in which he has a right and
proporty; these we are by the rule of this justice to suffer him to enjoy,
without seeking either to work him damage in any of them, or to get any of them
to our selves: I make a difference between these two, because there may be two
several grounds, or motives of this injustice; the one malice, the other
covetousness.

7. The malicious Malicious injustice.
man desires to work his neighbor mischief, though he get nothing by it
himself; it is frequently seen, that men will make havoc, and spoil of the
goods of one, to whom they bear a grudg, though they never design to get any
thing to themselves by it, but only the pleasure of doing a spite to the
other: This is a most hellish humor, directly answerable to that of the Devil,
who bestows all his pains and industry, not to bring in any good to himself but
only to ruin and undo others: and how contrary it is to all rules of justice,
you may see by the Precept given by God to the Jews concerning the goods of an
enemy, where they were so far from being allowed a liberty of spoil and
destruction, that they are expressly bound to prevent it, Exodus 23. 45. If thou
meet thine enemies ox, or his ass going a stray, thou shall surely bring it
back to him again: If thou see the ass of him that hates thee lying under his
burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him: Where
you see it is a debt we owe to our very enemies, to prevent that loss and
damage, which by any accident he is in danger of: and that even with some
labor, and pains to our selves. How horrible an injustice is it then,
purposely to bring that loss, and damage on him? Whoever is guilty of this let
him never excuse himself by saying, he has not inricht himself by the spoil of
his neighbor, that he has nothing of it cleave^ to his finger; for sure this
malicious injustice is no less a fault then the covetous one; nay I suppose in
respect of the principle and cause, from which it flows, it may be greater,
this hatred of another being worse then the immoderate love of our selves;
whoever has thus mischieft his neighbor, he is as much bound to repair the
injury, to make satisfaction for the loss, as if he had enriched himself by it.

8 But on the other side, Covetous injustice.
let not the covetous defrauder therefore judge his sin light because there is
another, that in some one respect outweighs it, for perhaps in others his may
cast the scales; certainly it does in this one, that he that is unjust for
greediness of gain is like to multiply more acts of this sin, then he that is
so out of malice; for it is impossible any man should have so many objects of his
malice, as he may have of his covetousness; there is no man at so general a
defiance with all mankind that he hates every body; but the covetous man has
as many objects of his vice, as there be things in the world he counts
valuable: But I shall not longer stand about this comparison, it is sure they
are both great and crying sins, and that is ground enough of abhorring each;
let us descend now to the several branches of this sort of covetous injustice;
it is true they may all bear the name of robbery, or theft for in effect they
are all so, yet for methods sake it will not be amiss to distinguish them into
these three Oppression, Oppression.
Theft, and Deceit.

9. By oppression I mean that open and barefaced robbery, of seizing upon the
possessions of others, and owning, and avowing the doing so. For the doing of
this there are several instruments: as first that of power, by which many
Nations and Princes have been turned out of their rights, and many private men
out of their estates; sometimes again. Law is made the instrument of it; he
that covets his neighbors lands or goods, pretends a claim to them, and then
by corrupting of justice by bribes and gifts, or else overruling it by
greatness and authority gets judgment on his side: This is a high oppression,
and of the worst sort, thus to make the Law, which was intended for the
protection, and defense of men's rights, to be the means of overthrowing them;
and it is a very heavy guilt, that lies both on him that procures, and on him
that pronounces such a sentence, yea and on the lawyer too, that pleads such a
cause, for by so doing he assists in the oppression; sometimes again, the very
necessities of the oppressed are the means of his oppression; thus it is in the
case of extortion, and griping usury; a man is in extreme want of money, and
this gives opportunity to the extortioner two rest unconscionably from him, to
which the poor man is forced to yield, to supply his present wants. And thus
also it is often with exacting Landlords, who when their poor tenants know not
how to provide themselves elsewhere, rack and skrew them beyond the worth of
the thing. All these and many the like are but several ways of acting this one
sin of oppression which becomes yet the more heinous, by how much the more
helpless the person is, that is thus oppressed, therefore the oppression of the
widow, and fatherless, is in Scripture mentioned, as the height of this sin.

10. It is indeed a most crying guilt, Gods vengeance against it.
and that against which God has threatened his heavy vengeance, as we read in
diverse texts of Sriptures: Thus it is, Ezekiel. 18. 12. He that has oppressed the
poor, and has spoiled by violence, he shall surely die, his blood shall be
upon him: and the same sentence is repeated against him. ver. 18. Indeed God
has so peculiarly taken upon him the protection of the poor, and oppressed,
that he is engaged as it were in honor to be their avenger, and accordingly,
Psalm 12. We see God solemnly declare his resolution of appearing for them, ver.
5. For the oppression of the poor for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him; the advice therefore
of Solomon is excellent, Prove. 22. 22. Rob not the poor, because he is poor,
neither oppress the afflicted in the g^te, for the Lord will plead their
cause, and will spoil the soul of those that spoiled them; they are like in the
end to have little joy of the booty it brings them in, when it thus engages God
against them.

11. The second sort of this injustice is theft, Theft.
and of that also there are two kinds, the one the withholding what we should
pay, and the other taking from our neighbor what is already in his possession.

12. Of the first sort is the not paying of debts, Not paying what we borrow.
whether such as we have borrowed, or such as by our own voluntary promise are
become our debts, for there are equally due to him, that can lay either of
these claims to them; and therefore the withholding of either of them is a
theft, a keeping from my neighbor that which is his; yet the former of them is
rather the more injurious, for by that I take from him that which he once
actually had (be it money, or whatsoever else) and so make him worse then I
found him: This is a very great, and very common injustice; men can now a days
with as great confidence deny him that asks a debt, as they do him, that asks
an alms, nay many times it is made matter of quarrel for a man to demand his
own, besides the many attendances the creditor is put to in pursuit of it, are
a yet farther injury to him, by wasting his time, and taking him off from other
business, and so he is made a looser that way too. This is so great injustice,
that I see not how a man can look upon any thing he possesses as his own right,
whilst he thus denies another his. It is the duty of every man in debt, rather
to strip himself of all, and cast himself again naked upon Gods providence,
then thus to feather his nest with the spoils of his neighbors. And surely it
would prove the more thriving course, not only in respect of the blessing,
which may be expected upon justice, compared with the curse, that attends the
contrary, but even in worldly prudence also; for he that defers paying of
debts, will at last be forced to it by Law, and that upon much worse terms, then
he might have done it voluntarily, with a greater charge, and with such a loss
of his credit, that afterward in his greatest necessities he will not know
where to borrow. But the sure way for a man to secure himself from the guilt of
this unjustice, is never to borrow more then he knows he has means to repay,
unless it be one, who knowing his disability, is willing to run the hazard.
Otherwise he commits this sin at the very time of borrowing for he takes that
from his neighbor upon promise of paying, which he knows he is never likely to
restore to him, which is a flat robbery.

The same justice which ties men to pay their own debts ties also every surety
to pay those debts of others, for which he stands bound, What we are b^und for.
i^ case the principal either cannot or will not: for by being bound, he has
made it his own debt, and must in all justice answer it to the creditor, who,
its presumed was drawn to lend, on confidence of his security, and therefore is
directly cheated and betrayed by him, if he see him not satisfied. If it be
thought hard, that a man should pay for that, which he never received benefit
by, I shall yield it, so far as to be just matter of wariness to every man how
he enter into such engagements, but it can never be made an excuse for the
breaking them.

As for the other sort of debt, that which is brought upon a man by his own
voluntary promise, What we have promised.
that also cannot without great injustice be withholden; for it is now the man's
right, and then it is no matter, by what means it came to be so. Therefore we
see David makes it part of the description of a just man, Psalm. 15. 4. that he
keeps his promise, yea, though they were made to his own disadvantage; and
surely he is utterly unfit to ascend to that Holy Hill, there spoken of, either
as that signifies the Church here, or Heaven hereafter, that does not
punctually observe this part of justice. To this sort of debt may be reduced
the wages of the servant, the hire of the labourer, and the withholding of
these is a great sin, and the complaints of those that are thus injured, ascend
up to God. Behold (says St. James) the hire of the laborers which have reaped
down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, c^yeth, and the cries of
them that have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbaths: and
Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. we find a strict command in this matter. Thou shall not
oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy, at his day thou shall give him
his hire, neither shall the Sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and sets
his heart upon it, lest he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be sin unto
thee. This is one of those loud clamourous sins, which will not cease crying,
till it bring down Gods vengeance, and therefore though thou have no justice to
thy poor brother, yet have at least so much mercy to thy self, as not to pull
down judgemenns on thee by thus wronging him.

PARTITION XII.
Of THEFT; Stealing the Goods of our Neighbor. Of DECEIT in Trust, in
Traffic. Of RESTITUTION, etc.

. 1. THE second part of theft is the taking from our neighbor that which is
already in his possession; Stealing the goods of our neighbor.
and this may be done either more violently, and openly, or else more closely,
and slyly; The first is the manner of those that rob on the way, or plunder
houses, where by force they take the goods of their neighbor; The other is the
way of the pilfering thief, that takes away a man's goods unknown to him; I
shall not dispute, which of these is the worst, it is enough that they are both
such acts of injustice, as make men odious to God, unfit for humane society,
and betray the actors to the greatest mischiefs even in this world, death it
self being by Law appointed the reward of it; and there are few that follow
this Trade long, but at last meet with that fruit of it. I am sure it is madness
for any to believe he shall always steal securely, for he is to contend with
the industry of all those, whom he shall thus injure, whose losses will quicken
their wits for the finding him out, and which is infinitely more, he is to
struggle with the justice of God, which does usually pursue such men to
destruction, even in this world; witness the many strange discoveries, that
have been made of the craftiest thieves. But however, if he were secure from
the vengeance here, I am sure nothing but repentance and reformation can secure
him from the vengeance of it hereafter. And now when these dangers are weighed,
'twill surely appear, that the thief makes a pitiful bargain, he steals his
neighbors money, or cattle, and in exchange for it he must pay his life, or
his Soul, perhaps both, and if the whole world be too mean a price for a Soul,
as he tells us, Mar. 18. 36. who best knew the value of them, having himself
bought them, what a strange madness is it, to barter them away for every petty
trifle* as many do, who have got such a habit of stealing, that not the meanest
worthless thing can escape their fingers? Under this head of theft may be
ranked the receivers of stolen goods, whether those that take them, as partners
in the theft, or those that buy them, when they know or believe they are stolen.
This many (that pretend much to abhor theft,) are guilty of, when they can by
it, buy the thing a little cheaper then the common rate. And here also comes in
the concealing of any goods a man finds of his neighbors, which whosoever
restores not, if he know, or can learn out the owner, is no better then a
thief, for he withholds from his neighbor that which properly belongs to him:
and sure 'twill not be uncharitable to say, that he that will do this, would
likewise commit the grosser theft, were he by that no more in danger of Law
then in this he is.

The third part of injustice is deceit, Deceit.
and in that there may be as many acts as there are occasions of intercourse
and dealing between man and man.

2. It will be impossible to name them all, but I think they will be contained
under these two general deceits in matters of Trust, and in matters of
Traffic, or bargaining; unless it be that of Gaming, which therefore here by
the way, I must tell you, is as much a fraud and deceit as any of the rest.

3. He that deceives a man in any trust, In Trust.
that is committed to him, is guilty of a great injustice, and that the most
treacherous sort of one, it is the joining of two great sins in one,
defrauding, and promise-breaking; for in all trusts there is a promise employed,
if not expressed, for the very accepting of the trust contains under it a promise
of fidelity; these trusts are broken sometimes to the living, sometimes to the
dead; to the living there are many ways of doing it, according to the several
kinds of the trust; sometimes a trust is more general, like that of Potiphar to
Joseph, Genesis 39. 4. a man commits to another all that he has, and thus
guardians of children, and sometimes stewards are entrusted; sometimes again it
is more limited, and restrained to some one special thing: A man intrusts
another to bargain, or deal for him in such a particular, or he puts some one
thing into his hands, to manage, and dispose: Thus among servants it is usual
for one to be entrusted with one part of the Masters goods, and another with
another part of them. Now in all these, and the like cases, whosoever acts not
for him that intrusts him, with the same faithfulness, that he would for
himself but shall either carelessly loose, or prodigally imbezel the things
committed to him, or else convert them to his own use, he is guilty of this
great sin of betraying a trust to the living. In like manner he that being
entrusted with the execution of a dead man's Testament, acts not according to
the known intention of the dead man, but enriches himself by what is assigned
to others, he is guilty of this sin, in respect of the dead; which is so much
the greater, by how much the dead has no means of remedy, and redress, as the
living may have. It is a kind of robbing of graves, which is a theft of which
men naturally have such a horror, that he must be a very hardened thief, that
can attempt it. But either of these frauds are made yet more heinous, when
either God, or the poor are immediately concerned in it; that is, when any
thing is committed to a man, for the uses either of piety, or charity: this
adds sacrilege to both the fraud, and the treachery, and so gives him title to
all those curses, that attend those several sins, which are so heavy, that he
that for the present gain will adventure on them, makes as ill, nay, a much
worse bargain, then Geh^zi, 1 Kings 5. 27. who by getting the raiment of Naam
in got his leprosy too.

4. The second sort of fraud is in matters of traffic and bargain, In Traffic
wherein there may be deceit both in the seller, and buyer; That of the seller
is commonly either in concealing the faults of the commodity, or else in
over-rateing it.

5. The ways of concealing its faults are ordinarily these, The sellers
concealing the faults of his ware.
either first by denying that it has any such fault, nay, perhaps commending
it for the direct contrary quality, and this is downright lying, and so adds
that sin to the other, and if that lie be confirmed by an oath, as it is too
usually, then the yet greater guilt of perjury comes in also; and then what a
heap of sins is here gathered together? abundantly enough to sink any poor Soul
to destruction, and all this only to skrew a little more money out of his
neighbors pocket, and that sometimes so very little, that it is a miracle that
any man that thinks he has a Soul, can set it at so miserable a contemptible
price. A second means of concealing is by using some Art to the thing, to make
it look fair, and to hide the faults of it, and this is acting a lie, though it
be not speaking one, which amounts to the same thing, and has surely in this
case as much of the intention of cheating, and defrauding as the most impudent
forswearing can have. A third means, is the picking out ignorant chapmen; This
is, I believe, an Art too well known among tradesmen, who will not bring out
their faulty wares to men of skill, but keep them to put off to such, whose
unskilfulness may make them passable with them; and this is still the same
deceit with the former, for it all tends to the same end, the cozening and
defrauding of the chapman, and then it is not much odds, whether I make use of
my own Art, or his weakness for the purpose. This is certain, he that will do
justly, must let his chapman know what he buys, and if his own skill enable
him not to judge (nay, if he do not actually find out the fault) thou art bound
to tell it him, otherwise thou make him pay for somewhat, which is not there,
he presum^ng there is that good quality in it, which thou know is not, and
therefore thou may as honestly take his money for some goods of another
man's, which thou know thou can never put into his possession, which I
suppose no man will deny to be an arrant cheat. To this head of concealment may
be referred, that deceit of false weights and measures, for that is the
concealing from the buyer a defect in the quantity, as the other was in the
quality of the commodity, and is again the making him pay for what he has not.
This sort of fraud is pointed at particularly by Solomon, Prove. 11. 1. with
this note upon it, that it is an abomination to the Lord.

6. The second part of fraud in the seller, lies in over-rating His over-rating
it.
the commodity; though he have not disguised, or concealed the faults of it,
and so have dealt fairly in that respect, yet if he set an unreasonable price
upon it, he defrauds the buyer: I call that an unreasonable price, which
exceeds the true worth of the thing, considered with those moderate gains,
which all tradesmen are presumed to be allowed in the Sale; Whatever is beyond
this must in all likelihood be fetched in by some of these ways: As first, by
taking advantage of the buyers ignorance in the value of the thing, which is
the same with doing it in the goodness, which has already been showed to be a
deceit: or secondly, by taking advantage of his necessity; thou find a man
has present and urgent need of such a thing, and therefore take this
opportunity to set the dice upon him, but this is that very sin of extortion,
and oppression spoken of before; for it is sure, nothing can justly raise the
price of any thing, but either its becoming dearer to thee, or its being some
way better in its self, but the necessity of thy brother causes neither of
these; his nakedness does not make the clothes thou f^llest him stand thee in
ever the more, neither does it make them any way better, and therefore to rate
them ever the higher, is to change thy way of trading, and sell even the wants
and necessities of thy neighbor, which sure is a very unlawful vocation. Or
thirdly, it may be by taking advantage of the indiscretion of the chapman; A
man perhaps earnestly fancies such a thing, and then suffers that fancy so to
overruled his reason, that he resolves to have it upon any terms; If thou
find this in him, and thereupon raisest thy rate, this is to make him buy
his folly, which is of all others the dearest purchase, it is sure his fancy
adds nothing to the real value, no more then his necessity did in the former
case, and therefore should not add to the price. He therefore that will deal
justly in the business of selling, must not catch at all advantages, which the
temper of his chapman may give, but consider soberly, what the things is worth,
and what he would afford it for to another, of whom he had no such advantage,
and accordingly rate it to him at no higher a price.

7. On the buyers part there are not ordinarily so many opportunities of fraud,
Fraud in the Buyer.
yet it is possible a man may sometimes happen to sell somewhat, the worth
whereof he is not acquainted with, and then it will be as unjust for the buyer
to make gain by his ignorance, as in the other case it was for the seller; but
that which oftener falls out, is the case of necessity, which may as probably
fall on the sellers side, as the buyers; A man's wants compel him to sell, and
permit him not to stay to make the best bargain, but forces him to take the
first offer; and here for the buyer to grate upon him, because he sees him in
that strait, is the same fault, which I before showed it to be in the seller.

8. In this whole business of traffic there are so many opportunities of
deceit that a man had Many Temptations to deceit in Traffic.
need fence himself with a very firm resolution, nay, love of justice, or he
will be in danger to fall under temptation, for as the wise man speaks Eccles.
27. 2. As a nail sticks fast between the joinings of the stones, so does sin
stick close between buying and selling; it is so interwoven with all trades, so
mixed with the very first principles, and grounds of them, that it is taught
together with them, and so becomes part of the Art, so that he is now a days
scarce thought fit to manage a Trade, that wants it, while he that has most of
this black Art of defrauding, applauds and huggs himself, nay, perhaps boasts
to others, how he has over-reacht his neighbor.

What an intolerable shame is this, The commonness of injustiee a reproach to
Christianity.
that we Christians, who are by the precepts of our Master set to those higher
duties of Charity, should in stead of practicing them, quite unlearn those
common rules of justice, which mere nature teaches? For, I think, I may say,
there are none of those several branches of injustice toward the possessions
of our neighbor, which would not be adjudged to be so by any sober Heathen, so
that, as Saint Paul tells those of the Circumcision, that the name of God was
Blasphemed among the Gentiles, by that unagreeableness that was betwixt their
practice, and their Law, Romans 2. 24. So may it now be said of us, that the Name
of Christ is Blasphemed among the Turks and Heathens, by the vile and
scandalous lives of us, who call our selves Christians, and particularly in
this sin of injustice; For shame let us at last endeavor to wipe off this
reproach from our profession, by leaving these practices, to which me thinks
this one single consideration should be enough to persuade us.

9. Yet besides this, It is not the way to enrich a man.
there want not other; Among which, one there is of such a nature, as may
prevail with the arrantest worldling, and that is, that this course does not
really tend to the enriching of him; there is a secret curse goes along with
it, which like a canker eats out all the benefit was expected from it. This no
man can doubt that believes the Scripture, where there are multitudes of Texts
to this purpose: thus Prove. 22. 16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his
riches, shall surely come to want. So Hab. 2. 6. Woe to him that increases
that which is not his, how long? And he that ladeth himself with thick clay:
shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex
thee? and thou shall be for booties to them. This is commonly the fortune of
those that spoil and deceive others, they at last meet with some that do the
like to them. But the place in Zachary is most full to this purpose, Chap. 5.
where under the sign of a flying roll is signified the curse, that goes forth
against this sin, ver. 4. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hosti, and
it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that
swears falsely by my Name, and it shall consume it with the timber thereof,
and with the stones thereof. Where you see theft, and perjury are the two sins,
against which this curse is aimed (and they too often go together in the matter
of defrauding) and the nature of this curse is, to consume the house, to make
an utter destruction of all that belongs to him that is guilty of either of
these sins. Thus whilst thou art ravening after thy neighbors goods, or
house, thou are but gathering fuel to burn thine own. And the effect of these
threatenings of God we daily see in the strange improsperousness of ill gotten
estates, which every man is apt enough to observe in other men's cases; he that
sees his neighbor decline in his estate, can presently call to mind, this was
gotten by oppression or deceit, yet so sottish are we, so bewitched with the
love of gain, that he that makes this observation, can seldom turn it to his
own use, is never the less greedy, or unjust himself for that vengeance he
discerns upon others.

10. But alas, if thou could be sure that thy unjust possession, It ruins
the Soul Eternally.
should not be torn from thee, yet when thou remembrest, how dear thou must pay
for them in another world, thou have little reason to brag of thy prize. Thou
think thou have been very cunning, when thou have over-reacht thy brother,
but God knows all the while, there is another overreaching thee, and cheating
thee of what is infinitely more precious, even thy Soul; the Devil herein deals
with thee as fishers use to do; those that will catch a great fish, will bait
the hook with a less, and so the great one coming with greediness to devour
that, is himself taken; So thou that art gaping to swallow up thy poor brother,
art thy self made a prey to that great devourer. And alas! what will it ease
thee in Hell, that thou have left wealth behind thee upon earth, when thou
shall there want that, which the meanest beggar here enjoyes, even a drop of
water to cool thy tongue. Consider this, and from henceforth resolve to employ
all that pains and diligence thou have used to deceive others, in rescuing thy
self from the frauds of the grand deceiver.

11. To this purpose it is absolutely necessary, The necessity of Restitution.
that thou make Restitution to all whom thou have wronged; For as long as thou
keep any thing of the unjust gain, it is as it were an earnest penny from the
Devil, which gives him full right to thy Soul. But perhaps it may be said, it
will not in all cases be possible to make Restitution to the wronged party,
peradventure he may be dead; in that case then make it to his heirs, to whom
his right descends. But it may further be objected, that he that has long gone
on in a course of fraud, may have injured many, that he cannot now remember,
and many that he has no means of finding out; In this case all I can advise is
this: First, to be as diligent as is possible, both in recalling to mind who
they were, and endeavoring to find them out; and when, after all thy care,
that proves impossible, let thy Restitutions be made to the poor, and that they
may not be made by halves, be as careful as thou can to reckon every the
least mite of unjust gain, but when that cannot exactly be done, as it is sure
it cannot by those who have multiplied the acts of fraud, yet even there let
them make some general measures, whereby to proportion their restitution: as
for example, a tradesman that cannot remember how much he has cheated in every
single parcel, yet may possibly guess in the gross whether he have usually
over-reacht to the value of a third, or a fourth part of the wares, and then
what proportion soever he think he has so defrauded, the same proportion let
him now give out of that estate he has raised by his Trade; but herein it
concerns every man to deal uprightly, as in the presence of God, and not to
make advantage of his own forgetfulness, to the cutting short to the
Restitution, but rather go on the other hand, and be sure rather to give too
much, then too little. If if he do happen to give somewhat over, he need not
grudge the charge of such a sin offering, and it is sure he will not, if he do
heartily desire an atonement. Many other difficulties there may be in this
business of restitution, which will not be foreseen, and so cannot now be
particularly spoke to; but the more of those there are, the greater horror
ought men to have of running into the sin of injustice, which it will be so
difficult, if not impossible for them to repair, and the more careful ought
they to be to mortify that, which is the root of all injustice, to wit
Covetousness.

PARTITION. XIII.
Of FALSE REPORTS, False Witness. Slanders Whisperings. Of Despising and
Scoffing for infirmities; Calamities; Si^s. etc. Of POSITIVE JUSTICE, Speaking
the TRUTH, Of LYING. Of Humility and Pride. Of Envy and Detraction. Of
Gratitude, etc.

1: THe Fourth Branch of Negative Justice concerns the credit o^ our
neighbors, His credit.
which we are not to lessen, or impair by any means, particularly not by false
reports: Of false reports there may be two sorts, the one is when a man says
something of his neighbor, which he directly knows to be false, the other when
possibly he has some slight surmize, or jealousy of the thing; but that upon
such weak grounds, that it is as likely to be false as true. In either of these
cases, there is a great guilt lies upon the reporter; that there does so in the
first of them, no body will doubt, every one acknowledging that it is the
greatest baseness to invent a lie of another; but there is as little reason to
question the other, for he that reports a thing as a truth, which is but
uncertain, is a liar also, or if he do not report it as a certainty, but only
as a probability, yet then though he be not guilty of the lie, yet he is of the
injustice, of robbing his neighbor of his credit; for there is such an aptness
in men to believe ill of others, that any the lightest jealousy will, if once
it be spread abroad, serve for that purpose; and sure it is a most horrible
injustice upon every slight surmize, and fancy, to hazard the bringing so great
an evil upon another; especially when it is considered, that those surmizes
commonly spring rather from some censoriousness, peevishness, or malice in the
surmizer, then from any real fault in the person so suspected.

2. The manner of spreading these false r^ports of both kinds, False witness.
is not always the same; sometimes it is more open and avowed, sometimes more
close and private: the open is many times by false witness before the Court of
Justice; and this not only hurts a man in his credit, but in other respects
also; it is the delivering him up to the punishment of the Law, and according to
the nature of the crime pretended, does him more or less mischief; but if it be
of the highest kind, it may concern his life, as we see it did in Naboths case,
1 Kin. 21. How great and crying a sin it is in this respect, as also in that of
the perjury, you may learn from what has been said of both those sins. I am
now to consider it only, as it touches the credit; and to that it is a most
grievous wound, thus to have a crime publicly witnessed against one, and such
as is scarce curable by any thing that can afterward be done to clear him, and
therefore whoever is guilty of this, does a most outrageous injustice to his
neighbor; this is that which is expressly forbidden in the ninth Commandment,
and was by God appointed to be punished by the inflicting of the very same
suffering upon him, which his false testimony aimed to bring upon the other.
Deuteronomy. 19. 16.

3. The second open way of spreading these reports, Public slanders.
is by a public and common declaring of them; though not before the
Magistrate, as in the other case, yet in all companies, and before such as are
likely to carry it farther, and this is usually done with bitter railings, and
reproaches, it being an ordinary act of slanderers, to revile those whom they
slander, that so by the sharpness of the accusation they may have the greater
impression in the minds of the hearers; this both in respect of the slander,
and the railing, is a high injury, and both of them such, as debar the
committers from heaven; thus Psalm. 15. where the upright man is discribed, that
shall have his part there, this is one special thing, verse. 3. That he
slendereth not his neighbor; And for railing, the Apostle in several places
reckons it amongst those works of the flesh, which are to shut men out both
from the Church here by excommunication, as you may see 1 Cor. 5. 11. and from
the Kingdom of God hereafter, as it is, 1 Cor. 6. 10.

4. The other more close and private way of spreading such reports, is that of
the Whisperer, Whispering.
he that goes about from one to an other, and privately vents his slanders, not
out of an intent by that means to make them less public, but rather more; this
trick of delivering them by way of secret, being the way to make them both more
believed, and more spoken of too; for he that receives such a tale* as a secret
from one, thinks to please some body else, by delivering it as a secret to him
also; and so it passes from one hand to another, till at last it spread over a
whole Town: This sort of slanderer is of all other; the most dangerous, for he
works in the dark, ties all he speaks to, not to own him as the author, so that
whereas in the more public accusations, the party may have some means of
clearing himself, and detecting his accuser, here he shall have no possibil^ty
of that, the slander, like a secret poison, works incureable effects, before
ever the man discern it. This sin of whispering is by St. Paul mentioned among
those great crimes, which are the effects of a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 29. It
is indeed one of the most injurable wounds of this sword of the tongue; the
very bane and pest of humane society; and that which not only robs single
persons of their good names, but oftentimes whole families, nay, public
societies of men of their peace, what ruins, what confusions has this one sin
wrought in the world? It Is Solomon's observation, Prove. 18 28. That a whisperer
seperateth chief friends, and sure one may truly say of tongues thus employed,
that they are set on fire of Hell, as St. James says, Chap. 3. 6.

5. This is such a guilt that we are to beware of all degrees of approach to
it, Several steps toward this sin.
of which there are several steps; the first is the giving ear to, and
ch^rishing of those that come with slanders, for they that entertain and
receive them, encourage them in the practice; for as our common proverb says,
if there were no receivers, there would be no thief; so if there were none,
that would give an ear to tales, there would be no tale bearers. A second step
is, the giving too easy credit to them, for this helps them to attain part of
their end, they desire to beget a general ill opinion of such a man, but the
way of doing it must be by causing it, first, in particular m^n: and if thou
suffer them to do it in thee, they have so far prospered in their aim. And
for thy own part thou do a great injustice to thy neighbor, to believe ill
of him without a just ground, which the accusation of such a person certainly
is not. A third step, is the reporting to others, what is thus told thee; by
which thou make thy self directly a party in the slander, and after thou have
unjustly withdrawn from thy neighbor, thy own good opinion, endeavourest to
rob him also of that of others. This is very little below the guilt of the
first whisperer, and tends as much to the ruin of our neighbors credit. And
these several degrees have so close a dependence one upon another, that it will
be very hard for him that allows himself the first, to escape the other; and
indeed he that can take delight to hear his neighbor defamed, may well be
presumed of so malicious a humor, that it is not likely he should stick at
spreading the slander. He therefore that will preserve his innocence in this
matter, must never in the least degree cheris or countenance any that brings
these false reports. And it is not less necessary to his peace, then to his
innocence; for he that once entertains them, must never expect quiet, but shall
be continually incited and stirred up even against his nearest, and dearest
relations; so that this whisperer, and slanderer is to be looked on by all, as
a common enemy, he being so as well to those to whom, as of whom he speaks.

6. But be^ides this grosser way of slandering, there is another, whereby we
may impair, Despising and scoffing.
and lessen the credit of our neighbor, and that is by contempt, and
despising; one common effect whereof is scoffing, and deriding him. This is
very injurous to a man's reputation, for the generallity of men do rather take
up opinions upon trust, then judgment; and therefore if they see a man
despised, and scorned, they will be apt to do the like. But besides this effect
of it, there is a present injustice in the very act of despising, and scorning
others. There are ordinarily but three things, which are made the occasions of
it (unless it be with such, with whom virtue and godliness are made the most
reproachful things, and such despising is not only an injury to our neighbor,
but even to God himself, for whose sake it is, that he is so despised) those
three are first the infirmities, secondly the calamities, thirdly the sins of a
man, and each of these are very far from being ground of our triumphing over
him.

7. First, for infirmities, For infirmities.
be they either of body or mind, the deformity and unhandsomeness of the one,
or the weakness, and folly of the other, they are things out of his power to
help, they are not his faults, but the wise dispensations of the great Creator,
who bestows the excellencies of body and mind, as he pleases, and therefore to
scorn a man because he has them not, is in effect to reproach God who gave
them not to him.

8. So also for the calamities, For calamities.
and miseries, that befall a man, be it want, or sickness, or what ever else,
these also come by the providence of God, who raises up, and pulls down, as
seems good to him, and it belongs not to us to judge, what are the motives to
him to do so, as many do, who upon any affliction that befalls another, are
presently concluding, that sure it is some extraordinary guilt, which pulls
this upon him, though they have no particular to lay to his charge. This rash
judgment our Savior reproves in the Jews, Lu. 13. where on occasion of the
extraordinary sufferings of the Galileans, he asks them, ver. 2. suppose ye
that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they
suffered such things? I tell you nay, but except you repent, ye shall all
likewise perish: when we see Gods hand heavy upon others, it is no part of our
business to judge them, but our selves, and by repentance to prevent, what our
own sins have deserved. But to reproach, and revile any, that are in
affliction, is that barbarous cruelty, taken notice of by the Psalmist, as the
height of wickedness, Psalm. 69. 26. They persecute him whom thou have smitten,
and they talk to the grief of them whom thou have wounded: In all the miseries
of others, compassion becomes a debt to them; how unjust are they then, that in
stead of paying them that debt, afflict them with scorn and reproach?

9. Nay the very sins of men, Forsi ^.
though as they have more of their wills in them, they may seem more to deserve
reproach, yet certainly they also oblige us to the former duty of compassion,
and that in the highest degree, as being the things, which of all others make a
man the most miserable; in all these cases, if we consider how subject we are
to the like our selves; and that is not only Gods mercy to us, by which we are
preserved from the worst that any man else is under, it will surely better
become us to look up to him with thankfulness, then down on them with contempt,
and despising. Thus you see the direct injustice of scorning and contemning our
brethren, to which when that other is added, which naturally follows, as a
consequent of this, to wit, the begetting the like contempt in others, there
can sure be no doubt of its being a great, and horrible injustice to our
neighbor, in respect of his credit.

10. Now how great the injury of destroying a man's credit is, Destroying the
credit; a great injury.
may be measured by these two things, first the value of the thing he is robbed
of, and secondly the difficulty of making reparations. For the first, it is
commonly known, that a man's good name is a thing he holds most precious,
oftentimes dearer then his life, as we see by the hazards men sometimes run to
preserve even a mistaken reputation; but it is sure it is that, which has even
by sober men been esteemed one of the greatest happiness of life: And to some
sorts of men, such especially as subsist by dealings in the world, it is so
necessary, that it may well be reckoned as the means of their livelihood, and
then sure it is no slight matter to rob a man of what is thus valuable to him.

11. Secondly, And irrepairable.
the difficulty of making reparations increases the injury, and that is such
in this case of defamation, that I may rather call it an impossibility, then a
difficulty: For when men are possessed with an ill opinion of a person, it is no
easy matter to work it out; so that the slanderer is herein like a young
Conjurer, that raises a Devil he knows not how to lay again. Nay suppose men
were generally as willing to lay down ill conceits of their neighbors, as they
are to take them up, yet how is it possible for him that makes even the most
public recantation of his slander, to be sure that every man that has come to
the hearing of the one, shall do so of the other also? And if there be but one
person, that does not (as probably there will be many) then is the reparation
still short of the injury.

12. This consideration is very fit to make men afraid of doing this wrong to
their neighbor; Yet every guilty person must do all he can to repair the
injury.
but let it not be made use of to excuse those, that have already done the
wrong, from endeavoring to make the best reparations they can; for though it is
odd, it will not equal the injury, yet let them however do what they are able
toward it: And this is so necessary toward the obtaining pardon of the sin
that none must expect the one, that do not perform the other. Whosoever
therefore sets himself to repent of his faults of this kind, must by all
prudent means endeavor to restore his neighbor to that degree of credit he
has deprived him of; and if that be not to be done without bringing the shame
upon himself, of confessing publicly the slander, he must rather submit to
that, then be wanting to this necessary part of justice, which he owes to the
wronged party.

13. Thus have I gone through these four branches of Negative Justice to our
neighbor, Justice in the thoughts.
wherein we must yet farther observe, that this justice binds us not only in
respect of our words, and actions, but of our very thoughts, and affections
also; we are not only forbid to hurt, but to hate, not only restrained from
bringing any of these evils forementioned upon him, but we must not so much as
wish them before, nor delight in them after they are befallen him: We must take
no pleasure either in the sin of his Soul, or hurt of his body; we must not
envy him any good thing he injoys, nor so much as wish to possess our selves of
it: Neither will it suffice us, that we so bridle our tongue, that we neither
slander, or revile, if we have that malice in our hearts, which makes us wish
his d^scredit or rejoice, when we find it procured, though we have no hand in
the procuring it. This is the peculiar property of Gods Laws, that they reach
to the heart, whereas men's can extend only to the words, and actions; and the
reason is clear, because he is the only Lawgiver, that can see what is in the
heart, therefore if there were the perfectest innocence in our tongue, and
hands, yet if there be not this purity of heart, it will never serve to acquit
us before him. The counsel therefore of Solomon is excellent, Prove. 4. 23. Keep
thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life. Let us
strictly guard that, so that no malicious unjust thought enter there, and that
not only, as it may be the means of betraying us to the grosser act, but also
as it is in it self such a pollution in Gods sight, as will unfit us for the
blessed vision of God, whom none but the pure in heart have promise of seeing,
Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

14. I come now to speak of the Positive part of Justice, Positive Justice.
which is the yielding to every man that which by any kind of right he may
challenge from us. Of these dues there are some, that are general to all
mankind, others that are restrained within some certain conditions, and
qualities of men, and become due only by virtue of those qualifications.

15. Of the first sort, Speaking Truth a due to all men.
that is those, that are due to all men, we may reckon first the speaking
truth, which is a common debt we owe to all mankind; speech is given us as the
instrument of intercourse and society, one with another, the means of
discovering the mind, which otherwise lies hid, and concealed, so that were it
not for this, our conversations would be but the same as of beasts; Now this
being intended for the good and advantage of mankind, it is a due to it, that it
be used to that purpose. But he that lies, is so far from paying that debt,
that on the contrary he makes his speech the means of injury and deceiving him
he speaks to.

16. There might much be said to show the several sorts of Obligations we lie
under, Lying expressly forbiden in Scripture.
to speak truth to all men; but supposing I write to Christians, I need not
insist on any other, then the Commands we have of it in Scripture, thus Ephesians. 4.
25. the Apostle commands, that putting away lying, they speak every man truth
with his neighbor: and again, Col. 3. 9. Lie not one to another: and Pro. 6
17. a lying tongue is mentioned as one of those things that are abominations to
the Lord. Yea, so much does he hate a lie, that it is not the most pious and
Religious end, that can reconcile him to it, the man that lies, though in a
zeal to Gods glory, shall yet be judged as a sinner, Romans 3. 7. what shall then
become of those multitudes of men that lie on quite other ends? some out of
malice, to mischief others, out of covetousness to defraud their neighbors,
some out of pride, to set themselves out, and some out of fear, to avoid a
danger, or hide a fault. But of a yet stranger sort, then all these, are those,
that do it without any discernable temptation, that will tell lies by way of
story, take pleasure in telling incredible things, from which themselves reap
nothing, but the reputation of impertinent liars.

17. Among these diverse kinds of falsehoods, The great commonness and folly of
this sin.
Truth is become such a rarity among us, that it is a most difficult matter, to
find such a man as David describes Psalm. 15. 2. That speaks the truth from
his heart. Men have so glibbed their tongues to lying, that they do it
familiarly upon any or no occasion, never thinking that they are observed
either by God or man. But they are extremely deceived in both, for there is
scarce any sin (that is at all endeavored to be hid) which is more discernable
even to men: they that have a custom of lying, seldom fail (be their memory
never so good) at some time or other to betray themselves; and when they do,
there is no sort of sin, meets with greater sco^n, and reproach; a liar being
by all accounted a title of the greatest infamy, and shame. But as for God,
it is madness to hope that all their Arts can disguise them from him, who needs
none of those casual ways of discovery, which men do, but sees the heart, and
so knows at the very instant of speaking, the falsehood of what is said; and
then by his title of the God of Truth, is tied not only to hate, but punish
it, and accordingly you see Rev. 20. that the liars are in the number of those
that are shut out of the New Jerusalem, and not only so, but also have their
part in the lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. If therefore thou be not
of the humor of that unjust Judge Christ speaks of, Luke 18 2 Who neither
feared God, nor regarded man, thou must resolve on this part of Justice the
putting away lying, which is abhorred by both.

18. A second thing we owe to all is humanity and courtesy of behavior,
Courteous behavior a due to all men.
contrary to that ^ullen churlishness we find spoken of in Nabal, who was of
such a temper, that a man could not speak to him. 1 Samuel 25. 17. There is sure
so much of respect due to the very nature of mankind, that no accidental
advantage of wealth or honor, which one man has above another, can acquit him
from that debt to it, even in the person of the meanest; and therefore that
crabbed and harsh behavior to any that bears but the form of a man, is an
injustice to that nature he partakes of. And when we consider how much that
nature is dignified by the Son of God his taking it upon him, the obligation to
reverence it is yet greater, and consequently the sin of thus contemning it.

19 This is the common guilt of all proud and haughty persons, Not paid by the
proud man.
who are so busy in admiring themselves, that they over look all that is
valuable in others, and so think they owe not so much as common civility to
other men, whilst they set up themselves as Nebuchadnezzar did his Image to be
worshipped of all. This is sure very contrary to what the Apostle exhorts, Romans
12. 10. In honor prefer one another: and again Phil 2. 4. Lo^k, not every man
on his own things, but every man also on the things of others; and let such
remember the sentence of our blessed Savior. Luke 14. 11. He that exalts
himself shall be abased, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted, which
we often find made good to us, in the strange down-fals of proud men. And it is
no wonder, for this sin makes both God and men our enemies, God, as the
Scripture every where testifies, abhorres it, and all that are guilty of it,
and men are by means of it used so contemptuously and unkindly by us, that they
are by nothing more provoked against us, and then whom God and man thus resist,
who shall secure and uphold?

20. A third thing we owe to all is Meekness; that is, Meekness a due to all
men.
such a patience, and gentleness toward all, as may bridle that mad passion of
anger, which is not only very uneasy to our selves, as has already been
showed, but also very mischievous to our neighbors, as the many outrages, that
are often committed in it, do abundantly testify. That this duty of meekness is
to be extended to all men, there is no doubt, for the Apostle in express words
commands it, 1 These. 5. 14. Be patient toward all men, and that it should seem
in spite of all provocation to the contrary, for the very next words are, See
that none render evil for evil, or railing for railing; and Timothy is
commanded to exercise this meekness even toward them who oppose themselves
against the Doctrine of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 2. 25. which was a case, wherein
some heat would probably have been allowed, if it might have been in any.

21. This virtue of meekness is so necessary to the preserving the peace of the
world, Brauling very in^ufferable.
that it is no wonder, that Christ, who came to plant peace among men, should
injoin meekness to all. I am sure the contrary effects of rage and anger are
every where discernable, it breeds disquiets in Kingdoms, in Neighbourhoods,
in Families, and even between the nearest relations; it is such a humor, that
Solomon warnes us never to enter a friendship with a man that is of it, Prove.
22. 24. Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall
not go. It makes a man unfit to be either friend or companion, and indeed makes
one insufferable to all that have to do with one, as we are again taught by
Solomon, Prove. 21. 19. where he preferres the dwelling in a wilderness, rather
then with a contentious and angry woman, and yet a woman ha^ ordinarily only
that one weapon of the tongue to offend with. Indeed to any that have not the
same unquietness of humor, there can scarce be a greater uneasiness, then to
converse with those, that have it, though it never proceed farther, then words.
How great this sin is, we may judge by what our Savior says of it, Mat. 5.
where there are several degrees of punishment allotted to several degrees of
it; but alas! we daily out go that, which he there sets as the highest step of
this sin; the calling thou fool, is a modest sort of reviling, compared with
those multitudes of bitter reproaches we use in our rages.

22. Nay, It leads to that great sin of cursing.
we often go yet higher; reproaches serve not our turn, but we must curse too;
How common is it to hear men use the horridst execrations, and cursings upon
every the slightest cause of displeasure? nay, perhaps without any cause at
all; so utterly have we forgot the rule of the Apostle, Romans 12. 14. Bless and
curse not; Yea, the precept of our blessed Savior himself, Mat. 5. 44. Pray
for those that despitefully use you. Christ bids us pray for those, who do us
all injury, and we are often cursing those, who do us none. This is a kind of
saying our prayers backward indeed, which is said to be part of the ceremony
the Devil uses, at the making of a witch, and we have in this case also reason
to look on it, as a means of bringing us into acquaintance, and league with
that accursed spirit here, and to a perpetual abideing with him hereafter. It Is
the language of Hell* which can never ^it us to be Citizens of the New
Jerusalem, but marks us out for inhabitants of that land of darkness. I
conclude this with the advice of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4 31. Let all bitterness,
and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you with
all malice.

23. Having spoken thus far of those common dues, Particular dues.
wherein all men are concerned, and have a right, I am now to proceed to those
other sorts of dues, which belong to particular persons, by virtue of some
especial qualification. These qualifications may be of three kinds, that of
excellency, that of want, and that of relation.

24. By that of excellency I mean any extraordinary gifts, A respect due to men
of extraordinary gifts.
or endowments of a person; such as wisdom, learning, and the like, but
especially grace: these being the singular gifts of God, have a great value and
respect due to them, wheresoever they are to be found; and this we must readily
pay by a willing, and glad acknowledgment of those his gifts in any he has
bestowed them on, and bearing them a reverence, and respect, answerable
thereunto, and not out of an overweening of our own excellencies, despise and
undervalue those of others, as they do, who will yield nothing to be reason,
but what themselves speak, nor any thing piety, but what agrees with their own
practice.

25. Also we must not envy, We are not to envy them.
or grudg that they have those gifts, for that is not only an injustice to
them, but injurious also to God, who gave them, as it is as large set forth in
the parable of the laborers, Mat. 20. where he asks them, who grumbled at the
Masters bounty to others, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my
own, is thine eye evil because mine is good? This envying at Gods goodness to
others, is in effect a murmuring against God, who thus disposes it, neither can
there be a greater, and more direct opposition against him, then for me to hate
and wish ill to a man, for no other reason, but because God has loved and done
well to him and then in respect of the man, it is the most unreasonable thing in
the world, to love him the less, merely because he has those good qualities,
for which I ought to love him more.

26. Neither must we detract from the excellencies of others, Nor detract from
them.
we must not see to eclipse or darken them by denying either the kinds, or
degrees of them; by that means to take off that esteem, which is due to them.
This sin of detraction is generally the effect of the former of envy, he that
envies a man's worth, will be apt to do all he can to lessen it in the opinions
of others, and to that purpose will either speak slightly of his excellencies;
or if they be so apparent, that he knows not how to cloud them, he will try if
he can by reporting some either real, or feigned infirmity of his, take off
from the value of the other, and so by casting in some dead flies, as the wise
man speaks, Eccles. 10. 1. Strive to corrupt the savor of the ointment; this
is a great injustice, and directly contrary to that duty we owe, of
acknowledging, and reverencing the gifts of God in our brethren.

27. And both these sins of envy, and detraction do usually prove as great
follies, The folly of both those sins.
as wickedness; the envy constantly brings pain, and torment to a man's self,
whereas if he could but cheerfully, and gladly look on those good things of
another, he could never fail to be the better for them himself; the very
pleasure of seeing them would be some advantage to him; but besides that, those
gifts of his brother may be many ways helpful to him, his wisdom and learning
may give him instruction; his piety, and virtue, example, etc. but all this the
envious man loses, and has nothing in exchange for it, but a continual
fretting, and gnawing of heart.

28. And then for detraction, that can hardly be so managed, but it will be
found out; he that is still putting in Caveats against men's good thoughts of
others, will quickly discover himself to do it out of envy, and then that will
be sure to lessen their esteem of himself, but not of those he envies, it being
a sort of bearing testimony to those excellencies, that he thinks them worth
the envying.

29 What has been said of the value, A respect due to men in regard of their
r^nks and qualities.
and respect due to those excellencies of the mind, may in a lower degree be
applied to the outward advantages of honor, greatness, and the like. These
though they are not of equal value with the former (and such for which no man
is to prize himself) yet in regard, that these degrees, and distinctions of men
are by Gods wise providence disposed, for the better ordering of the world,
there is such a civil respect due to those, to whom God has dispensed them, as
may best preserve that order, for which they were intended. Therefore all
inferiors are to behave themselves to their superious with modesty, and
respect, and not by a rude boldness confound that order, which it has pleased
God to set in the world, but according as our Church-Catechism teaches, order
themselves lowly and reverently to all their betters. And here the former
caution against envy comes in most seasonably; these outward advantages being
things, of which generally men have more taste, then of the other, and
therefore will be more apt to envy, and repine to see others exceed them
therein, to this therefore all the former considerations against envy will be
very proper, and the more necessary to be made use of, by how much the
tempt^tion is in this case to most minds the greater.

30. The second qualication is that of want; Dues to those that are in any sort
^f want
whoever is in distress for any thing, wherewith I can supply him, that
distress of his makes it a duty in me so to supply him, and this in all kinds
of wants. Now the ground of its being a duty is, that God has given men
abilities not only for their own use, but for the advantage and benefit of
others, and therefore what is thus given for their use becomes a debt to them,
whenever their need requires it. Thus he that is ignorant and wants knowledge is
to be instructed by him, that has it, and this is one special end, why that
knowledge is given him: The tongue of the learned is given to speak a word in
season, Esaias. 50. 4. He that is in sadness* and affliction, is to be comforted
by him that is himself in cheerfulness. This we see St. Paul makes it the end
of Gods comforting him, that he might be able to comfort them that are in any
trouble, 2 Cor. 1. 4. He that is in any course of sin, and wants reprehension
and counsel, must have that want supplied to him by those, who have such
abilities, and opportunities, as may make it likely to do good. That this is a
justice we owe to our neighbor, appears plainly by that text, Levit. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise reprove
him, and not suffer sin upon him; where we are under the same obligation to
reprove him, that we are not to hate him. He that lies under any slander, or
unjust defamation, is to be defended, and cleared by him, that knows his
innocence, or else he makes himself guilty of the slander, because he neglects
to do that which may remove it; and how great an injustice, that of slandering
our neighbor is, I have already showed.

31. Lastly, he that is in poverty and need, To the poor
must be relieved by him that is in plently; and he is bound to it, not only in
charity, but even in justice. Solomon calls it a due, Pro. 3. 27. Withhold not
good from him to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do
it: and what that good is, he explains in the very next verse: Say not to thy
neighbor, go and come again, and tomorrow I will give, when thou have it by
thee: It seems, it is the withholding a due, so much as to defer giving to our
poor neighbor. And we find God did among the Jews separate a certain portion
of every man's increase for the use of the poor, a tenth every third year (which
is all one with a thirtieth part ever year, Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. And this was to
be paid not as a charity, or liberality, but as a debt, they were unjust, if
they withheld it. And surely we have no reason to think, that Christian justice
is sunk so much below the Jewish, that either nothing at all, or a less
proportion is now required of us. I wish our practice were but at all
answerable to our obligation in this point, and then surely we should not see
so many Lazaruses lie unrelieved at our doors, they having a better right to
our superfluities, then we our selves have, and then what is it, but arrant
robbery to bestow that upon our vanities, nay our sins, which should be their
portion?

32. In all the foregoing cases, God withdraws those abilities which are not
thus employed.
he that has ability is to look upon himself, as Gods steward, who has put it
into his hands to distribute to them, that want, and therefore not to do it, is
the same injustice and fraud, that it would be in any steward to purse up that
money for his private benefit, which was entrusted to him, for the maintenance
of the family, and he that shall do thus, has just reason to expect the doom
of the unjust steward, Luke 16. to be put out of the stewardship, to have those
ability, taken from him, which he has so unfaithfully employed. And as for
all the rest, so particularly for that of wealth, it is very commonly to be
observed, that it is withdrawn from those that thus defraud the poor of their
parts, the griping miser coming often by strange undiscernable ways to
poverty; and no wonder, he having no title to Gods blessing on his heap, who
does not consecrate a part to him in his poor members. And therefore we see the
Israelites before they could make that challenge of Gods promise to bless them,
Deuteronomy. 26. 15. Look down from thy holy habitation and bless thy people Israel,
etc. they were first to pay the poor man's tithes, ver. 12. without which they
could lay no claim to it. This withholding more then is meet, as Solomon says,
Pro. 11. 24. tends to poverty; and therefore as thou would play the good
husband for thy self, be careful to perform this justice according to thy
ability to all that are in want.

33. The third qualification is that of relation, Dues in respect of relations.
and of that there may be diverse sorts, arising from diverse grounds, and
duties, answerable to each of them. There is first a relation of a debtor to a
creditor, and he that stands in that relation to any whether by virtue of
bargain, loan, or promise, it is his duty to pay justly what he owes, if he be
able (as on the other side if he be not, it is the creditors, to deal charitably
and Christianly with him, and not to exact of him beyond his ability.) But I
need not insist on this, having already by showing you the sin of with holding
debts, informed you of this duty.

34. There is also a relation of an obliged person to his benefactor, Gratitude
to Benefactors.
that is one that has done him good, of what kind soever, whether spiritual,
or corporal; and the duty of that person is, first thankfulness,, that is a
ready and hearty acknowledgment of the courtesy received: secondly, prayer for
Gods blessings and rewards upon him; and thirdly an endeavor, as opportunity
and ability serves, to make returns of kindness, by doing good turns back
again. This duty of gratitude to benefactors is so generally acknowledged by
all, even the most barbarous, and savagest of men, that he must have put off
much of his humane nature, that refuses to perform it. The very Publicans and
sinners, as our Savior says, do good to those that do good to them.

35. Yet how many of us fail even in this, The contrary too common.
how frequent is it to see men, not only neglect to repay courtesies, but
return injuries in stead of them? It is too observable in many particulars, but
in none more, then in the case of advice, and admonition, which is of all
others, the most precious part of kindness, the reallest good turn that can be
done from one man to another. And therefore those that do this to us, should be
looked on, as our prime and greatest benefactors. But alas! how few are there
that can find gratitude, shall I say? nay patience for such a courtesy? Go
about to admonish a man of a fault, or tell him of an error, he presently looks
on you, as his enemy, you are, as St. Paul tells the Galatians, Chap. 4. 16.
become his enemy because you tell him the truth; such a pride there is in men's
hearts, that they must not be told of any thing amiss, though it be with no
other intent, but that they may amend it. A strange madness this is, the same
that it would be in a sick man, to fly in the face of him that comes to cure
him, on a fancy that he disparaged him in supposing him sick; so that we may
well say with the wise man, Pro. 12. 1. He that hates reproof is brutish.
There cannot be in the world a more happy temper, for it fortifies a man in his
sins, raises such mounts, and bulwarks about them, that no man can come to
assault them, and if we may believe Solomon, destruction will not fail to
attend it, Pro. 29. 1. He that being of ten reproved hardneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. But then again in respect of
the admonisher, it is the greatest injustice, I may say, cruelty that can be, he
comes in tenderness, and compassion to rescue thee from a danger, and to that
purpose puts himself upon a very uneasy task; for such the general impatience
men have to admonition, has now made it; and what a defeat, what a grief is it
to him, to find that in stead of reforming the first fault, thou art run into a
second, to wit that of causeless displeasure against him? This is one of the
worst, and yet I doubt, the commonest sort of unthankfulness to benefactors,
and so a great failing in that duty we owe to that sort of relation. But
perhaps these will be looked on as remote relations (yet it is sure they are
such as challenge all that duty I have assigned to them) I shall in the next
place proceed to those relations, which are by all acknowledged to be of the
greatest neerness.

PARTITION XIV.
Of DUTY to PARENTS. Magistrates, Pastors, etc. Of the DUTY of PARENTS to
Children, etc.

. 1. THE first of those nearer sorts of relations, is that of a Parent; Duty to
Parents.
And here it will be necessary to consider the several sorts of Parents,
according to which the duty to them is to be measured. Those are these three,
the Civil, the Spiritual, the Natural.

2. The Civil Parent is he, Dues to the Supreme Magistrate
whom God has established the Supreme Magistrate, who by a just right possesses
the throne in a Nation. This is the common Father of all those that are under
his authority. The duty we owe to this Parent is, Honor.
first, Honor and Reverence, looking on him, as upon one, on whom God has
stamped much of his own power and authority, and therefore paying him all
honor and esteem, never daring, upon any pretense whatsoever, to speak evil of
the ruler of our people, Acts 23. 5.

3. Secondly, Tribute.
Paying Tribute; This is expressly commanded by the Apostle, Romans 13. 6. Pay ye
tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers attending continually upon this very
thing. God has set them apart as Ministers for the common good of the people,
and therefore it is all justice, they should be maintained, and supported by
them. And indeed when it is considered, what are the cares, and troubles of
that high calling, how many thorns are plated in every Crown, we have very
little reason to envy them these dues, and it may truly be said, there is none
of their poor laboring subjects, that earns their living so hardly.

4. Thirdly, We are to pray for them: Prayers for them.
this is also expressly commanded by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 2. to be done for
Kings, and for all that are in authority. The businesses of that calling are so
weighty, the dangers and hazards of it so great, that they of all others need
prayers for Gods direction, assistance, and blessing, and the prayers that are
thus poured out for them, will return into our own bosoms, for the blessings
they receive from God tend to the good of the people, to their living a quiet
and peaceable life, as it is in the close of the verse forementioned.

5. Fourthly, Obedience.
We are to pay them Obedience. This is likewise strictly charged by the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as those
that are sent by him; We owe such an obedience to the Supreme power, that
whoever is authorized by him, we are to submit to, and St. Paul likewise is
most full to this purpose, Romans 13. 1. Let every Soul be subject to the higher
powers; and again, ver. 2. Whosoever resists the pouers, resists the
Ordinance of God. And it is observable that these precepts were given at a time,
when those powers were Heathens, and cruel persecutors of Christianity, to show
us, that no pretense of the wickedness of our rulers can free us of this duty.
An obedience we must pay either active, or passive: the active in the case of
all lawful commands; That is, whenever the Magistrate commands something, which
is not contrary to some Command of God, we are then bound to act according to
that command of the Magistrate, to do the thing he requires. But when he
injoins any thing contrary to what God has Commanded, we are not then to pay
him this active obedience, we may, nay we must refuse thus to act, (yet here we
must be very well assured that the thing is so contrary, and not pretend
conscience for a cloak of stubborness) we are in that case to obey God rather
then man. But even this is a season for the passive obedience, we must
patiently suffer, what he inflicts on us, for such refusal, and not, to secure
our selves, rise up against him. For who can stretch his hand against the Lords
anointed, and be guilt less? says David to Abishai, 1 Samuel 26 9. and that at a
time when David was under a great persecution from Saul, nay, had also the
assurance of the Kingdom after him; and St. Paul's sentence in this case is most
heavy, Romans 13. 2. They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Here
is very small encouragement to any to rise up against the lawful Magistrate,
for though they should so far prosper here, as to secure themselves from him by
this means, yet there is a King of kings, from whom no power can shelter them,
and this damnation in the close will prove a sad prize of their victories. What
is on the other side the duty of the Magistrate to the people will be vain to
mention here, none of that rank being like to read this treatise, and it being
very useless for the people to inquire, what is the duty of their Supreme,
wherein the most are already much better read, then in their own, it may
suffice them to know that whatsoever his duty is, or however performed, he is
accountable to none but God and no failing of his part, can warrant them to
fail of theirs.

6 The second sort of Parents are the spiritual; Duties to our Pastors
That is, the Ministers of the Word, whether such, as be Governors in the
Church, or others under them, who are to perform the same Offices to our Souls,
that our natural Parents do to our bodies. Thus St. Paul tells the Corinthians,
that in Christ Jesus he had begotten them through the Gospel, 1 Cor 4. 15. and
the Galatians, chap. 4. 19. that he travels in birth of them, till Christ he
formed in them; and again, 1 Cor. 3. 2. He had fed them with milk; that is,
such Doctrines as were agreeable to that infant state of Christianity they were
then in, but he had stronger meat for them of full age, Heb. 5. 14. All these
are the Offices of a Parent, and therefore they that perform them to us, may
well be accounted as such.

7. Our duty to these is first to love them, Love.
to bear them that kindness, which belongs to those who do us the greatest
benefits. This is required by St. Paul, 1 These 5. 13. I beseech you, brethren,
mark them which labor among you and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you, and esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. The work is such
as ought in all reason to procure them love, it being of the highest advantage
to us.

8. Secondly, Esteem.
It Is our duty to value and esteem them, as we see in the text now mentioned;
and surely this is most reasonable, if we consider either the nature of their
work, or who it is that imployes them. The nature of their work is of all
others the most excellent; we use to value other professions proportionably to
the dignity and worth of the things they deal in. Now surely there is no
Merchandise of equal worth with a Soul, and this is their Traffic, rescuing
precious Souls from perdition. And if we consider further, who it is that
imployes them, it yet adds to the reverence due to them. They are Ambassadors
for Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and Ambassadors are by the Laws of all Nations to
be used with a respect, answerable to the quality of those that send them.
Therefore Christ tells his disciples, when he sends them out to preach, He that
despises you despises me, and he that despises me despises him that sent
me. Luke 10. 16. It seems there is more depends on the despising of Ministers,
then men ordinarily consider, it is the despising of God and Christ both. Let
those think of this, who make it their pastime, and sport to affront, and
deride this calling. And let those also, who dare presume to exercise the
Offices of it, without being lawfully called to it, which is a most high
presumption; It Is as if a man on his own head should go, as an Ambassador from
his Prince; the Apostle says of the Priests of the Law, which yet are
inferior to those of the Gospel, That no man takes this honor to himself,
but he which was called of God, Heb. 5 4. How shall then any man dare to assume
this greater honor to himself, that is not called to it; Neither will it
suffice to say, they have the inward call of the spirit; for since God has
established an order in the Church, for the admitting men to this Office, they
that shall take it upon them without that authority, resist that ordinance, and
are but of the number of those thieves and robbers, as our Savior speaks, Jo.
10. which come not in by the door. Besides the sad experience of these times
show, that many who pretend most to this inward call of the Spirit, are called
by some other spirit, then that of God, the doctrines they v^nt being usually
directly contrary to that word of his, on which all true Doctrines must be
founded. Such are to be looked on as those seducers, those false prophets,
whereof we are so often warned in the Epistles of the Apostles. And whosoever
countenances them, or follows them, partakes with them in their guilt. It is
recorded of Jereboam, as a crying sin, that he made of the meanest of the
people Priests; that is, such as had by Gods institution no right to it, and
whoever hearkens to these uncalled preachers, run into that very sin, for
without the encouragement of being followed, they would not long continue in
the course, and therefore they that give them that encouragement, have much to
answer for, and are certainly guilty of the sin of despising their true
Pastors, when they shall thus set up these false apostles against them. This is
a guilt this age is too much concerned in, God in his mercy so timely convince
us of it, as may put a stop to that confusion and impiety, which breaks in so
fast upon us by it.

9 Thirdly, Maintenance.
We owe to them maintenance: but of this I have spoken already in the first
part of this Book, and shall not here repeat. Fourthly, We owe them obedience,
Obey them, Obedience.
says the Apostle, that have the rule over you and submit your selves, for
they watch for your Souls, Heb. 13. 17. This obedience is to be paid them in
spiritual things; that is, whatsoever they out of Gods word shall declare to
us, to be Gods Commands, these we are diligently to obey, remembering that it is
not they, but God requires it, according to that of Christ, he that hears you
hears me, Luke 10. 16. And this whether it be delivered by the way of public
preaching, or private exhortation, for in both, so long as they keep them to
the rule, which is Gods Word, they are the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts,
Mal. 2. 7. This obedience the Apostle inforceth from a double motive, one taken
from their Ministry, another from themselves. They watch, says he, for your
Souls, as they that must give account that they may do it with joy, andt no
with grief; The people are by their obedience to enable their Pastors to give a
comfortable account of their Souls, and it is a most unkind return of all their
care and labors; to be put to grieve for the ill success of them. But then in
the second place, it is their own concernment also; they may put their Ministers
to the discomfort of seeing all their pains cast away, but themselves are like
to get little by it, that (says the Apostle, Heb. 13. 17.) will be
unprofitable for you; it is your selves, that will finally prove the loosers by
it, you loose all those glorious rewards, which are offered, as the crown of
this obedience, you get nothing but an addition to your sin, and punishment,
for as our Savior tells the Pharisees, If he had not come and spoken to them
they had not had sin, Jo. 15. 24 that is in comparison with what they then had;
so certainly they that never had the Gospel preached to them, are much more
innocent then they that have heard and resisted it. And for the punishment,
what Christ told those to whom he had preached, That it should be more
tolerable for Tire and Sydon, which were Heathen Cities, then for them, the
same undoubtedly we may conclude of our selves.

10. Lastly, Prayer for them.
We are to pray for them; This St. Paul every where requires of his Spiritual
children; thus Ephesians. 6. 7, 8. having commanded prayer for all Saints, he adds,
And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth
boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel; and so again, Col 4. 3. And
this remains still a duty to these Spiritual Fathers, to pray for such
assistances of Gods Spirit to them, as may enable them rightly to discharge
that Holy Calling. I shall omit to set down here, what is the duty of Ministers
to the people, upon the same consideration, on which I forbear to mention the
duty of Magistrates.

11. The third sort of parent is the natural, Duties to our natural Parents.
the fathers of our flesh, as the Apostle calls them, Heb. 12. 9. And to these
we owe several duties, as first we owe them reverence, Reverence.
and respect; we must behave our selves toward them with all humility, and
observance, and must not upon any pretense of infirmity in them, despise or
contemn them, either in outward behavior, or so much as inwardly in our
hearts. If indeed they have infirmities, it must be our business to cover, and
conceal them; like Shem, and Japhet, who while cursed Cham published and
disclosed the nakedness of their father, covered it, Genesis 9. 23. and that in
such a manner too, as even themselves might not behold it. We are as much as
may be to keep our selves from looking on those nakedness of our parents, which
may tempt us to think irreverently of them. This is very contrary to the
practice of too many children, who do not only publish and deride the
infirmities of their parents, but pretend they have those infirmities they have
not; there is ordinarily such a pride, and headiness in youth, that they cannot
abide to submit to the counsels, and directions of their Elders, and therefore
to shake them off, are willing to have them pass for the effects of dotage,
when they are indeed the fruits of sobriety, and experience. To such the
exhortation of Solomon is very necessary, Pro. 23. 22. Hearken to thy father
that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old. A multitude of
texts more there are in that book, to this purpose, which shows that the wisest
of men thought it necessary for children to attend to the counsel of their
parents. But the youth of our age set up for wisdom, the quite contrary way,
and think they then become wits, when they are advanced to the dispising the
counsel, yea mocking the persons of their parents. Let such if they will not
practice the exhortations, yet remember the threatening of the wise man, Pro.
30. 17. The eye that mocketh his father and despises to obey his mother, the
ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it.

A second duty to them is love; Love.
we are to bear them a real kindness, such as may make us heartily desirous of
all manner of good to them, and abhor to do any thing that may grieve or
disquiet them. This will appear but common gratitude; when it is remembered, what
our parents have done for us, how they were not only the instruments of first
bringing us into the world, but also of susteining and supporting us after; and
certainly they that rightly weigh the cares and fears, that go to the bringing
up of a child, will judge the love of that child to be but a moderate return for
them. This love is to be expressed several ways, first, in all kindness of
behavior, carrying our selves not only with an awe, and respect, but with
kindness and affection, and therefore most gladly and readily doing those
things, which may bring joy and comfort to them, and carefully avoiding
whatever may grieve, and afflict them. Secondly, this love is to be expressed in
praying for them. The debt a child owe to a parent is so great, that he can
never hope himself to discharge it; he is therefore to call in Gods aid, to beg
of him, that he will reward all the good his parents have done for him, by
multiplying his blessings upon them; what shall we then say to those children,
that in stead of calling to heaven for blessings on their parents, ransack hell
for curses on them, and power out the blackest execrations against them? This
is a thing so horrid, that one would think there needed no persuasion against
it, because none could be so vile, as to fall into it, but we see God himself,
who best knows men's hearts, saw it possible; and therefore laid the heaviest
punishment upon it: He that curses father or mother, let him die the death,
Exodus 21. 17. And alas! our daily experience tells us, it is not only possible,
but common even this of uttering curses. But it is to be feared, there is
another, yet more common, that is the wishing curses, though fear or shame keep
them from speaking out. How many children are there, that either through
impatience of the Government, or greediness of the possessions of the Parents,
have wished their deaths? But whoever does so, let him remember, that how stylie
and fairly soever he carry it before men, there is one that sees those
secretest wishes of his heart, and in his sight he assuredly passes for this
heinous offender, a curser of his Parents. And then let it be considered, that
God has as well the power of punishing, as of seeing, and therefore since he
has pronounced death to be the reward of that sin, it is not unreasonable to
expect he may himself inflict it; that they who watch for the death of their
Parents, may untimely meet with their own. The fifth Commandment promises long
life as the reward of honoring the Parent, to which it is very agreeable that
untimely death be the punishment of the contrary, and sure there is nothing
more highly contrary to that duty, then this we are now speaking of, the
cursing our Parents.

14. The third duty we owe to them is obedience; Obedience.
This is not only contained in the fifth Commandment, but expressly injoined in
other places of Scripture. Ephesians. 6. 1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord,
for this is right; and again, Col. 3. 20. Children obey your Parents in all
things, for this is well pleasing to the Lord. We owe them an obedience in all
things, unless where their commands are contrary to the commands of God, for in
that case our duty to God must be preferred, and therefore if any Parent shall
be so wicked, as to require his child to steal, to lie, or to do any unlawful
thing, the child then offends not against his duty, though he disobey that
command, nay, he must disobey, or else he offend against a higher duty, even
that he owes to God, his Heavenly Father. Yet when it is thus necessary to
refuse obedience, he should take care to do it in such a modest, and respectful
manner, that it may appear it is conscience only, and not stubborness moves him
to it. But in case of all lawful commands; that is, when the thing commanded is
either good, or not evil, when it has nothing in it contrary to our duty to
God, there the child is bound to obey, be the command in a weightier or lighter
matter; How little this duty is regarded is too manifest every where in the
world, where Parents generally have their children no longer under command,
then they are under the rod; when they are once grown up, they think themselves
free from all obedience to them, or if some do continue to pay it, yet let the
motive of it be examined, and 'twill in too many be found only worldly
prudence; They fear to displease their Parents, lest they should shorten their
hand toward them, and so they shall loose somewhat by it; but how few are there
that obey purely upon conscience of duty? This sin of disobedience to Parents
was by the Law of Moses punishable with death, as you may read Deuteronomy 21. 18. but
if Parents now a days should proceed so with their children, many might soon
make themselves chidless.

15. But of all acts of disobedience, Especially in their Marriage.
that of marrying against the consent of the Parent, is one of the highest.
Children are so much the goods, the possessions of the Parent, that they cannot
without a kind of theft, give away themselves without the allowance of those,
that have the right in them, and therefore we see under the Law, the Maid that
had made any vow, was not suffered to perform it, without the consent of the
Parent. Number. 30. 5. the right of the Parent was thought of force enough to
cancel, and make void the Obligation, even of a vow, and therefore surely it
ought to be so much considered by us as to keep us from making any such,
whereby that right is infringed.

16. A fourth duty to the Parent is to assist, Ministering to their wants.
and minister to them in all their wants of what kind soever, whether weakness,
and sickness of body, decayedness of understanding, or poverty, and lowness of
estate, in all these the child is bound according to his ability, to relieve
and assist them: for the two former, weakness of body, and infirmity of mind,
none can doubt of the duty, when they remember how every child did in his
infancy receive the very same benefit from the Parent, the child had then no
strength to support, no understanding to guide it self; the care of the Parents
was fain to supply both these to it, and therefore in common gratitude,
whenever either of these becomes the Parents case, as sometimes by great age,
or some accident both do, the child is to perform the same offices back again
to them. As for that of relieving their poverty, there is the very same
Obligation to that with the former, it being but just to sustain thy Parent who
has formerly sustained thee; but besides this Christ himself teaches us, that
th^s is contained within their precept of honoring the Parents, for when Mar.
7. 13. he accuses the Pharisees of rejecting the Commandment of God, to cleave
to their own traditions, he instances in this particular, concerning the
relieving of Parents, whereby it is manifest that this is a part of that duty
which is injoined in the fifth Commandment, as you may see at large in the
Text, and such a duty it is that no pretense can absolve, or acquit us of it.
How then shall those answer it, that deny relief to their poor Parents, that
cannot part with their own excesses, and superfluities, which are indeed their
sins, to satisfy the necessities of those to whom they owe their being? Nay,
some there are, yet worse, who out of pride scorn to own their Parents in there
poverty; Thus it often happens, when the child is advanced to dignity or
wealth, they think it a disparagement to them to look on their Parents that
remain in a low condition, it being the betraying, as they think, to the world
the meanness of their birth, and so the poor Parent fares the worse for the
prosperity of his child. This is such a pride and unnaturalness together, as
will surely find a sharp vengeance from God, for if Solomon observe of pride
alone, that it is the forerunner of destruction, Prove. 16. 18. we may much
rather conclude so of it, when it is thus accompanied.

17. To this that has been said of the duty of children to the^r Parents, Duty
to be paid even to the worst Parents.
I shall add only this: That no unkindness, no fault of the Parent can acquit
the child of this duty, but as St. Peter tells servants, 1 Pet. 2. 18. that they
must be subject not only to the good and gentle masters, but also to the
froward, so certainly it belongs to children to perform duty not only to the
kind and virtuous, but even to the harshest, and wicked'st Parent. For though
the gratitude due to a kind Parent, be a very forcible motive to make the child
pay his duty, yet that is not the only, nor chiefest ground of it; That is
laid in the Command of God, who requires us thus to honor our Parents, and
therefore though we should suppose a Parent so unnatural, as never to have done
any thing to oblige the child, (which can hardly be imagined) yet still the
Command of God continues in force, and we are in conscience of that, to perform
that duty to our Parents, though none of the other tie of gratitude should lie
on us.

But as this is due from the child to the Parents, Duty of Parents to children.
so on the other side there are other things also due from the Parents to the
child, and that throughout the several states, and ages of it.

18. First, To Nourish them.
There is the care of nourishing and sustaining it, which begins from the very
birth, and continues a duty from the Parent, till the child be able to perform
it to himself; This is a duty, which nature teaches, even the savages beasts,
have a great care and tenderness in nourishing their young, and therefore may
serve to reproach and condemn all Parents, who shall be so unnatural as to
neglect this. I shall not here enter into the question whether the mother be
obliged to give the child its first nourishment, by giving it suck her self,
because 'twill not be possible to affirm universally in the case, there being
many circumstances, which may alter it, and make it not only lawful, but best
not to do it; all I shall say, is, that where no impediment of sickness,
weakness, or the like does happen, it is surely best for the mother her self to
perform this office, there being many advantages to the child by it, which a
good Mother ought so far to consider, as not to sell them to her own sloth, or
niceness, or any such unworthy motive, for where such only are the grounds of
forbearing it, they will never be able to justify the omission, they being
themselves unjustifiable.

But besides this first care, Bring them to Baptism.
which belongs to the body of the child, there is another, which should begin
near as early, which belongs to their Souls, and that is the bringing them to
the Sacrament of Baptism, thereby to procure them an early right to all those
precious advantages, which that Sacrament conveyes to them. This is a duty the
Parents ought not to delay, it being most reasonable, that they who have been
instruments to convey the stain and pollution of sin to the poor Infant, should
be very earnest and industrious to have it washed off, as soon as may be:
Besides the life of so tender a creature is but a blast, and many times gone in
a moment, and though we are not to despair of Gods mercy to those poor
children, who dye without Baptism, yet surely those Parents commit a great
fault, by whose neglect it is, that they want it.

19. Secondly, Educate them.
The Parents must provide for the education of the child; they must, as Solomon
speaks, Prove. 22. 6. Train up the child in the way he should go. As soon
therefore as children come to the use of reason, they are to be instructed, and
that first in those things, which concern their eternal well-being, they are by
little and little to be taught all those things, which God has Commanded them,
as their duty to perform; as also what glorious rewards he has provided for
them, if they do it, and what grievous and eternal punishments, if they do it
not. These things ought as early, as is possible, to be instilled into the
minds of children, which (like new vessels) do usually keep the savor of that,
which is first put into them, and therefore it nearly concerns all parents to
look they be at first thus seasoned with Virtue and Religion. It Is sure if this
be neglected, there is one ready at hand to fill them with the contrary, the
devil will be diligent enough to instill into them all wickedness and vice, even
from their cradles, and there being also in all our natures so much the greater
aptness to evil, then to good, there is need of great care and watchfulness, to
prevent those endeavors of that enemy of Souls, which can no way be, but by
possessing them at first with good things, breeding in them a love to virtue,
and a hatred of vice, that so when the temptations come, they may be armed
against them. This surely is above all things the duty of Parents to look
after, and the neglect of it is a horrible cruelty; We justly look upon those
Parents, as most unnatural wretches, that take away the life of their child;
but alas! that his mercy and tenderness, compared to this of neglecting his
education, for by that he ruins his Soul, makes him miserable eternally; and
God knows, multitudes of such cruel Parents there are in the world, that thus
give up their children to be possessed by the Devil, for want of an early
acquainting them with the ways of God; nay, indeed how few there are, that do
conscionable perform this duty, is too apparent by the strange rudeness, and
ignorance, that is generally among youth: the children of those who call
themselves Christians, being frequently as ignorant of God and Christ, as the
meerest Heathens. But whoever they are, that thus neglect this great duty, let
them know that it is not only a fearful misery they bring upon their poor
children, but also a horrible guilt upon themselves. For as God says to the
careless watchmen, Ezeck. 3. 18. That if any soul perish by his negligence,
that soul shall be required at his hands, so surely will it fare with all
parents, who have this office of watchmen entrusted to them by God over their
own children: A second part of education is the bringing them up to some
employment, busying them in some honest exercise, whereby they may avoid that
great snare of the Devil, Idleness, and also be taught some useful art or
trade, whereby when they come to age, they may become profitable to the
Commonwealth, and able to get an honest living to themselves.

20. To this great duty of educating of children, Mean toward the educating
of children.
there is required as means, first encouragement, secondly, correction:
encouragement is first to be tried, we should endeavor to make children in
love with duty, by offering them rewards and invitations, and whenever they do
well take notice of it, and encourage them to go on. It is an ill course some
parents hold, who think they must never appear to their children, but with a
face of sowreness and austerity; this seems to be that, which St. Paul
forwarnes parents of, when he bids fathers not to provoke their children to
wrath, Col. 3. 21. To be as harsh and unkind to them, when they do well, as if
they do ill, is the way to provoke them; and then the Apostle tells us in the
same verse, what will be the issue of it, they will be discouraged, they will
have no heart to go on in any good course, when the parent affords them no
countenance. The second means is correction, and this becomes seasonable, when
the former will do no good, when all fair means, persuasions, and
encouragements prevail not, then there is a necessity of using sharper; and let
that be first tried in words, I mean not by railing and foul language, but in
sober, yet sharp reproof; but if that fail too, then proceed to blows, and in
this case as Solomon says, he that spares his rod, hates his son, Prove. 13.
24. It Is a cruel fondness, that to spare a few stripes at present, will
adventure him to those sad mischiefs, which commonly befall the child, that is
left to himself. But then this correction must be given in such a manner, as
may be likely to do good; to which purpose it must first be given timely; the
child must not be suffered to run on in any ill, till it have got a habit, and
a stubborness too. This is a great error in many parents, they will let their
children alone for diverse years, to do what they list, permit them to lie, to
steal, without ever so much as rebuking them, nay, perhaps please themselves to
see the witty shifts of the child, and think it matters not what they do while
they are little: But alas! all that while the vice gets root, and that many
times so deep a one, that all they can do afterward, whether by words or
blows, can never pluck it up. Secondly, correction must be moderate, not
exceeding the quality of the fault, nor the tenderness of the child. Thirdly,
it must not be given in rage, if it be, it w^ll not only be in danger of being
immoderate, but it will lose its effect upon the child, who will think he is
corrected, not because he has done a fault, but because his parent is angry,
and so will rather blame the parent then himself, whereas on the contrary, care
should be taken to make the child as sensible of the fault, as of the smart,
without which he will never be thoroughly amended. The parent to watch over
their souls even when they are grown up.


21. Thirdly, after children are grown up, and are past the age of education,
there are yet other offices for the parent to perform to them: the parent is
still to watch over them in respect of their souls, to observe how they
practice those precepts, which were given them in their education, and
accordingly to exhort, encourage, or reprove, as they find occasion.

22. So also for their outward estate, To provide for their subsistence.
they are to put them into some course of living in the world; if God have
blessed the parents with wealth, according to what he has, he must distribute to
his children, remembering that since he was the instrument of bringing them into
the world, he is according to his ability to provide for their comfortably
living in it, they are therefore to be looked on very unnatural parents, who,
so they may have enough to spend in their own riots, and excess, care not what
becomes of their children, never think of providing for them. Another fault is
usual among parents in this business; they defer all the provisions for them,
till themselves be dead, heap up perhaps great matters for them against that
time, but in the mean time afford them not such a competency, as may enable
them to live in the world There are several mischiefs come from this: first it
lessens the child's action to his parent, nay, sometimes it proceeds so far, as
to make him wish his death, which though it be such a fault, as no tempt^tion
can excuse in a child, yet 't^s also a great fault in a parent to g^ve that
temptation. S^condly, it puts the child upon shifts, and tricks; many times
dishonest ones, to supply his necessities; this is, I doubt not, a common
effect of it, the hardness of parents has often put men upon very unlawful
courses, which when they are once acquainted with, perhaps they never leave,
though the first occasion cease; and therefore parents ought to beware, how
they run them upon those hazards. Besides the parent loses that contentment,
which he might have in seeing his children live prosperously and comfortably,
which none but an arrant earth-worm would exchange for the vain imaginary
pleasure of having money in his chest. But in this business of providing for
children, there is yet another thing to be heeded, and that is, that the parent
get that wealth honestly, which he makes their portion; else it is very far from
being a provision, there is such a curse goes along with an ill-gotten estate,
that he that leaves such a one to his child, do but cheat, and deceive him,
makes him believe he has left him wealth, but has withal put such a canker in
the bowels of it, that is sure to eat it out. This is so common an observation
that I need say nothing to confirm the truth^ of it; would God it were as
generally laid to heart, as it seems to be generally taken notice of: Then
surely parents would not account it a reasonable motive to unjust dealing, that
they may thereby provide for their children, for this is not a way of providing
for them; n^y, it is the way to spoil them of whatever they have lawfully
gathered for them, the least mite of unlawful gain being of the nature of
leaven, which sowres the whole lump, bringing down curses upon all a man
possesses. Let all parents therefore satisfy themselves with such provisions
for their children as God shall enable them honestly to make, assuring
themselves how little soever it be, it is a better portion then the greatest
wealth unjustly gotten, according to that of Solomom, Pro. 16. 8. Better is a
little with righteousness, then great revenues without right.

23. A fourth thing the parent owes to the child is good example. To give them
good example.
he is not only to set him rules of virtue, and godliness; but he must himself
give him a pattern in his own practice, we see the force of example is
infinitely beyond that of precept, especia^ly where the person is one, to whom
we bear a reverence, or with whom we have a continual conversation; both which
usually meet in a Parent. It is therefore a most necessary care in all Parents
to behave themselves so before their children, that their example may be a
means of winning them to virtue; But alas! this age affords little of this
care, nay, so far it is from it, that there are none more frequently the
instruments of corrupting children, then their own Parents. And indeed how can
it be otherwise, while men give themselves liberty to all wickedness, it is not
to be hoped, but that the children which observe it, will imitate it; the child
that sees his father drunk, will sure think, he may be so too, as well as his
father. So he that bears him swear, will do the like, and so for all other
vices, and if any Parent that is thus wicked himself, should happen to have so
much more care of his child's Soul, then his own; as to forbid him the things
which himself practices, or correct him for the doing them; it is certain the
child will account this a great injustice in his father, to punish him for
that, which himself freely does, and so he is never likely to be wrought upon
by it. This consideration lays a most strict tie upon all Parents, to live
Christianly, for otherwise they do not only hazard their own Souls, but those
of their children also, and as it were purchase an estate of inheritance in
Hell.

24. A fifth duty of Parents is blessing their children; To bless them.
the way of doing that is double, first, by their prayer; they are by daily and
earnest prayers to commend them to Gods protection and blessing, both for their
spiritual and temporal estate, and secondly by their piety they are to be such
persons themselves as that a blessing may descend from them upon their
posterity. This is often promised in Scipture to godly men, that their seed
shall be blessed. Thus in the second commandment, God promises to show mercy to
the thousand generation of them that love him and keep his commandments. And it
is very observable in the Jews, that though they were a stiff necked
generation, and had very grievously provoked God, yet the godliness of their
forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, did many times move God to save them
from destruction: on the other side, we see that even good men have fared the
worse for the iniquities of their fathers. Thus when Josiah had destroyed
idolatry restored Gods service, and done good beyond all the Kings that were
before him, yet there was an old arreare of Manasseh his grandfather, which all
this piety of his would not blot out, but he resolves to cast Judah also out of
his sight, as you may read at large, 2 Kings 23. If therefore parents have any
bowels, any kindness toward their children, any real desire of their
prosperity, let them take care by their own godly life to entaile a blessing
upon them.

25 Sixthly, To give no unreasonable commands.
parents must take heed, that they use their power over their children with
equity, and moderation, not to oppress them with unreasonable commands, only to
exercise their own author^ty, but in all things of weight to consider the real
good of their children, and to press them to nothing, which may not consist
with that. This is a rule whereof parents may often have use, but in none
greater, then in the business of marrying their children, wherein many that
otherwise are good parents have been to blame, when out of an eagerness of
bestowing them wealthily, they force them to marry utterly against their own
inclinations, which is a great tyranny, and that which frequently betrays them
to a multitude of mischiefs, such as all the wealth in the world cannot
repair. There are two things, which parents ought especially to consider in
the matching of their children; the first, how they may live Christianly, and
to that purpose to choose a virtuous and pious person, to link them with: the
second is, how they may live cheerfully and comfortably in this world; and to
that end though a competency of estate may be necessary to be regarded, yet
surely abundance is no way requisite, and therefore that should not be too
vehemently sought after; that which much more tends to the happiness of that
state, is the mutual kindness, and liking of the parties, without which
marriage is of all other the most uncomfortable condition, and therefore no
parent ought to thrust a child into it. I have now done with the first sort of
relation, that of a parent.

PARTITION XV.
Of DUTY to our BRETHREN, and Relations; Husband, Wife, Friends, Masters,
Servants.

. 1: THE second sort of relation is that of a brother; Dues to brethren,
now brotherhood may be two fold, either natural, or spiritual, the natural may
in the largest extent contain under it all mankind, all that partake of the
same nature; but I shall not consider it so in this place, having already
mentioned those gegeneral duties, Natural*
which belong to all as such: I now speak of that natural brotherhood, that is
between those that are the children of the same immediate parent; and the duty
of these is to have united hearts, and affections: This nature points out to
them, they partaking in a more especial manner, of each others substance, and
therefore ought to have the greatest tenderness and kindness, each to other;
thus we see Abraham make it an argument, why there should be no contention
between him and Let, because they were brethren, Genesis 13. 8. And though by
brethren there is meant only cousins, yet that helps the more strongly to
conclude, that this nearer relation is in reason to be a greater bar to
strife, as also that this kindness is in some degree to be extended to all that
have any neerness of blood to us.

2. This kindness and love between brethren and sisters ought to be very firmly
grounded in their hearts, The necessity of love among brethren.
if it be not, they will be of all others in most danger of disagreeing; for
the continual conversation that is among them, whilst they are at home in the
fathers house, will be apt to minister some occasion of jar. Besides the
equality that is among them in respect of birth, often makes them inclinable to
envy each other, when one is in any respect advanced above the other. Thus we
see Joseph's brethren envyed him, because he had most of his fathers love, and
Rachel envyed her sister Leah, because she was fruitful; therefore for the
preventing of such temptations, let all who have brethren and sisters, possess
their mind with a great and real kindness to them, look on them as parts of
themselves, and then they will never think fit either to quarrel with them, or
to envy them any advantage, any more then one part of the body does another of
the same body, but will strive to advance, and help forward the good of each
other.

3. The second kind of brotherhood is spiritual; Spiritual brotherhood
that contains all those who profess the same faith with us: the Church in our
baptism becomes a mother to each baptized person, and then surely they that
have the relation of children to her, must have also the relation of brethren
to each other; and to this sort of brethren also we owe a great deal of
tenderness and affection; the spiritual bond of Religion, should of all others
the most closely unite our hearts. This is the brotherhood which St. Peter
exhorts us to love. 1 Pet. 2. 17. And to it we are in an especial manner bound
to do all good offices, Do good, says the Apostle, to all, but especially to
them that are of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10. Our compassions are to be
most melting toward them of all others, in all their needs; Christ tells us,
that whosoever gives but a cup of cold water to any in the name of a disciple
shall not lose his reward, Mat. 10. 42. From whence we may assure our selves
that this peculiar love to Christians, as Christians, is very acceptable in his
sight.

4. Several duties there are required of us to these brethren; one principal,
is the holding communion with them, Our duty to hold communion with these
brethren.
and that first in doctrine; we are constantly to continue in the belief and
profession of all those necessary truths, by which we may be marked out as
followers, and disciples of Christ; this is that faith, which St. Jude speaks
of, which was once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. by keeping whereof we
continue still united to this spiritual brotherhood, in respect of profession,
which we must constantly do, what storms and persecutions soever attend it,
according to the exhortation of the Apostle, Heb. 10. 22. Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering. Secondly, we are also as opportunity
serves, to communicate with them in all holy offices; we must be diligent in
frequenting the assemblies of the Saints, which is as it were the badg of our
profession; and therefore he that willingly withdraws himself from these, gives
ground to suspect, he will be apt to renounce the other also. But these parts
of communion we find strictly maintained by the first Christians, Acts 2. 42.
They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers: they continued, and that steadfastly, they
were not frighted from it by any persecutions, though that were a time wherein
they were tried with the sharpest sufferings; which may teach us, that it is
not the danger, that attends this duty can acquit us of it.

5. Secondly, To bear with their infirmities.
we are to bear with the infirmities of our Christian brethren, according to
the advice of St. Paul, Romans 15. 1. We that are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak. If one that holds all necessary Christian truth,
happen yet to be in some error, we are not for this either to forsake his
communion, or despise his person. This St. Paul teaches us in the case of that
weak brother, who by error made a causlesse scruple about meats, Romans 14. where
he bids the stronger Christians, that is, those who being better instructed,
discerned him to be in an error, yet to receive him nevertheless, and not to
despise him, as on the other side, he bids that weak one not to judge the
stronger; the lesser differences in opinion must be born with on both sides,
and must not in the least abate our brotherly charity toward each other.

6. Thirdly, To restore them after falls.
we are to endeavor the restoring of any fallen brother, that is, to bring him
to repentance, after he has fallen into any sin. Thus St. Paul commands the
Galatians, that they should retore him that was overtaken in a fault,
considering themselves least they also were tempted. We are not to look on him
as a castaway to give him over as utterly desperate, neither are we to triumph
over him, in respect of our own innocence, like the proud Pharisee, over the
poor Publican, Luke 18. 11. but we are meekly to endeavor his recovery,
remembering that our own frailty is such, that we are not secure from the like
falls.

7. Fourthly, To sympathy with them.
We are to have a Sympathy, and fellow feeling-with these brethren, to be
nearly touched with whatsoever befalls them, either as they are considered in
society, or in single persons. In society first, and so they make up a Church,
and that either the universal, which is made up of all Believers throughout the
world, or any particular Church, which is made up of all the Believers in that
particular Nation, and whatever happens to either of these, either the whole
Church in general, or any such single part of it, especially that whereof our
selves are members, we are to be much affected and moved with, to rejoice in
all the prosperities, and to mourn and bewail all the breaches, and desolations
thereof, and daily and earnestly to pray with David, Psalm. 51. 18. O be
favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem; and that
especially when we see her in d^stress, and persecution. Whosoever is not thus
touched with the condition of the Church, is not to be looked on, as a living
member of it, for as in the natural body every member is concerned in the
prosperity of the whole, so certainly it is here: it was the observation of the
Psalmist, that Gods Servants think upon the stones of Sin, and pity to see her
in the dust. Psalm. 102. 14. and surely all his servants are still of the same
temper, cannot look on the ruins, and desolations of the Church, without the
greatest sorrow, and lamentation. Secondly, we are to have this fellow-feeling
with our brethren, considered as single persons; We are to account our selves
concerned in very particular Christian, so as to partake with him in all his
occasions either of joy or sorrow. Thus the Apostle exhorts, Romans 12. 14.
Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with them that weep; and again, 1 Cor. 12.
under the similitude of the natural body he urges this duty, Whether one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it. All these several effects of love we owe to these
spiritual brethren. And this love is that, which Christ has made the badge of
his disciples, Jo. 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples,
if ye have love one to another; so that if we mean not to cast off discipleship
to Christ, we must not forsake this love of the brethren.

8. The third relation is that between Husband and Wife. The wife owes to the
husband obedience.
This is yet much nearer then either of the former, as appears by that Text
Ephesians. 5. 31. A man shall leave Father and Mother and cleave to his wife, and
they two shall be one flesh. Several duties there are oweing from one of these
persons to the other; and first for the wife, she owes obedience. This is
commanded by the Apostle, Col. 3. 18. Wives submit your selves to your own
husbands, as it is fit in the Lord. They are to render obedience to their
Husbands in the Lord, that is in all lawful commands, for otherwise it is here
as in the case of all other superiors, God must be obeyed rather then man, and
the wife must not upon her husbands command do any thing which is forbidden by
God. But in all things, which does not cross some command of Gods, this precept
is of force, and will serve to condemn the peevish stubborness of many wives,
who resist the lawful commands of their husbands, only because they are
impatient of this duty of subjection, which God himself requires of them. But
it may here be asked, what if the husband command something which though it be
not unlawful, is yet very inconvenient, and imprudent, must the wife submit to
such a command? To this I answer, that it will be no disobedience in her, but
duty, calmly and mildly to show him the inconveniences thereof, and to persuade
him to retract that command; but in case she cannot win him to it by fair
entreaties, she must neither try sharp language, nor yet finally refuse to
obey, nothing but the unlawfulness of the command being sufficient warrant for
that

9 Secondly, Fidelity.
The wife owes Fidelity to the husband, and that of two sorts; first that of
the bed, she must keep her self pure and chaste from all strange embraces, and
therefore must not so much as give an ear to any that would allure her, but
with the greatest abhorrence eject all motions of that sort, and never give any
man that has once made such a mot on to her, the least opportunity to make a
second. Secondly, She owes him likewise Fidelity, in the managing of those
worldly affairs, he commits to her; she must order them so, as may be most to
her husbands advantage, and not by deceiving, and cozening of him employ his
good to such uses as he allows not of.

10. Thirdly, Love.
She owes him Love, and together with that all friendliness and kindness of
conversation; she is to endeavor to bring him as much assistance, and comfort
of life, as is possible, that so she may answer that special end of the woman's
creation, the being a help to her husband, Genesis 2. 13. and this in all
conditions, whether health, or sickness, wealth, or poverty, whatsoever estate
God by his providence shall cast him into, she must be as much of comfort and
support to him, as she can. To this all sullenness, and harshness, all
brawling, and unquietness is directly contrary, for that makes the wife the
burden, and plague of the man, in stead of a help and comfort; And sure if it
be a fault to behave ones self so to any person, as has already been showed,
how great must it be to do so to him, to whom the greatest kindness and
affection is owing?

11. Nor let such wives think that any faults, The faults of the Husband
acquits not from these duties.
or provocations of the husband can justify their frowardness, for they will
not, either in respect of Religion or discretion. Not in religion for where God
has absolutely Commanded a duty to be paid, it is not any unworthiness of the
person can excuse from it; Nor in Discretion, for the worse a husband is, the
more need there is for the wife to carry her self with that gentleness and
sweetness, that may be most likely to win him. This is the advice St. Peter
gave the wives of his time, 1 P^t. 3. 1. Likewise ye wives be in subjection to
your own husbands, that if any obey not the word, they may without the word be
won by the conversation of the wives. It seems the good behavior of the wives
was thought a powerful means even to win men from Heathenism to Christianity,
and sure it might now a days have some good effects, if women would have but
the patience to try it: At the least, 'twould have this, that it would keep
some tolerable quiet in Families, whereas on the other side the ill fruits of
the wives unquietness are so notorious, that there are few neighbourhoods, but
can give some instance of it. How many men are there, that to avoid the noise
of a froward wife, have fallen to company keeping, and by that to drunkenness,
poverty, and a multitude of mischiefs? Let all wives therefore beware of
administering that temptation. But whenever there happens any thing, which in
kindness to her husband, she is to admonish him of, let it be with that
softness, and mildness, that it may appear it is love, and not anger, that makes
her speak.

12. There are also on the Husbands part several (...). (...)
There is first Love, which Saint Paul requires, to be very tender and
passionate toward the wife, as appears by the similitudes ^e^nieth in that
matter, Ephesians. 5. The one that of the love a man bears to his natural body, No
man, says he, ver. 2 7. ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes, and
cherishes it. The other the love that Christ bears to his Church, which is far
greater, ver. 26. both which he sets as patterns for this love of husbands
toward their wives. This utterly forbids all harshness, and roughness to them;
Men are to use them as parts of themselves, to love them as their own bodies,
and therefore to do nothing, that may be hurtful, and grievous to them, no more
then they would cut, and gash their own flesh. Let those husbands that
tyrannize over their wives, that scarce use them like humane creatures
consider, whether that be to love them, as their own bodies

13. A second duty of the Husband, is Faithfulness to the Bed. Faithfulness.
This is by God as well required of the husband, as the wife, and though the
world do seem to look on the breach of this duty, with less abhorrence in the
husband, yet sure before that Just Judge, the offense will appear no less on
the man's side, then the woman's. This is certain, it is in both a breach of the
vow, made to each other, at their Marriage, and so besides the uncleanness, a
downright perjury, and those differences in the case, which seem to cast the
scale, are rather in respect of civil and worldly consideration, then merely of
the sin.

14. A third duty of the husband is to maintain, Maintenance.
and provide for the wife. He is to let her partake with him in those outward
good things, wherewith God has blessed him, and neither by niggardliness debar
her of what is fit for her, nor yet by unthriftiness so waste his goods, that
he shall become unable to support her. This is certainly the duty of the
husband, who being, as has been said, to account his wife as a part of his own
body, must have the very same care to sustain her, that he has for himself.
Yet this is not so to be understood, as to excuse the wife from her part of
labor and industry, when that is requisite, it being unreasonable the husband
should toil to maintain the wife in idleness.

15. Fourthly, Instruction
The husband is to instruct the wife in the things which concern her eternal
welfare, if she be ignorant of them. Thus St. Paul bids the wives learn of
their husbands at home, 1 Cor. 14. 36 which supposes, that the husband is to
teach her. Indeed it belongs to every Master of a Family to endeavor, that all
under his charge be taught all necessary things of this kind, and then sure
more especially his wife, who is so much nearer to him, then all the rest. This
should make men careful to get knowledge themselves, that so they may be able
to perform this duty they owe to others.

16. Lastly, Husbands and Wives, Husbands and W^ves mutu^lly to pray for and
assist each other in all good.
are ^utually to pray for each other, to beg all blessings from God, both
temporal and spiritual, and to endeavor all they can to do all good to one
another, especially all good to each others Souls, by stirring up to the
performance of duty and dissuading, and drawing back from all sin, and by being
like true yoke-fellowes, helpful and assistant to each other in the doing of
all sorts of good, both to their own Family, and all others within their reach.
This is of all other the truest, and most valuable love. Nay, indeed how can it
be said they do love at all, who can contentedly let each other run on in a
course that will bring them to eternal misery? And if the love of husbands and
wives were thus grounded in Virtue and Religion, 'twould make their lives a
kind of Heaven on earth, 'twould prevent all those contentions, and brawlings,
so common among them, which are the great plagues of Families, and a lesser
Hell, in passage to the greater, and truly where it is not thus founded, there
is little comfort to be expected in marriage.

17. It should therefore be the care of every one that means to enter upon that
state, The virtue of the person the chief consideration in Marriage.
to consider advisedly before hand, and to choose such a person, with whom they
may have this spiritual friendship, that is such a one, as truly fears God.
There are many false ends of Marriage looked upon in the world: some Marry for
Wealth, others for Beauty, and generally they are only worldly respects, that
are at all considered; but certainly he that would Marry as ^e ought, should
contrive to make his Marriage useful to those better ends, of serving God, and
saving his own Soul; at least he must be sure it be no hinderance to them, and
to that purpose the virtue of the person chosen in more conducing then all the
wealth in the world, though I deny not, but that a competency of that may
likewise be considered

18. But above all things, let all take heed, Unlawful Marriages.
that they make not such marriages, as may not only be ill in their effects,
but are actual sins at the time; such are the marriages of those that were
formerly promised to some other, in which case it is sure they rightly belong to
those, to whom they past the first promise, and then for any other to marry
them, during the life of that person, is to take the husband or wife of that
other, which is direct adultery, as St. Paul tells us, Romans 7. 3. The like
unlawfulness there is also in the marriage of those, who are within those
degrees of kindred forbidden by God, the particulars whereof are set down in
the 18. and 20 of Lev. and whoever marries any that is within any of those
degrees of neerness, either to himself, or to his deceased wife, which is as
bad, commits that great sin of incest, and so long as he continues to live with
such his unlawful wife, remains in that fearful guilt. This wariness in the
choice of the person to be married, would prevent many sad effects, which we
daily see follow such rash or unlawful matches; it were well therefore if
people would look on marriage, as our Church advises, as a thing not to be
undertaken lightly, unadvisealy or wantenly, to satisfy men's carnal lusts and
appetites, but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of
God; and in so doing no doubt a blessing would follow, which otherwise there is
little ground to expect. I have now done with this relation between husband and
wise.

19. The next is that between friends; Friendship.
and this relation if it be rightly founded, it is of great neerness, and
usefulness, but there is none more generally mistaken in the world; men usually
call them their friends, with whom they have an intimacy, and frequency of
conversation, though that intimacy be indeed nothing but an agreement and
combination in sin. The drunkard thinks him his friend that will keep him
company, the deceitful person, him that will aid him in his cheats, the proud
man, him that will flatter him: And so generally in all vices, they are looked
on as friends, that advance and farther us in them. But God knows this is far
from friendship, such a friend as this the Devil himself is in the highest
degree, who is never backward in such offices. The true friendship is that of a
direct contrary making, it is a concurrence and agreement in virtue, not in
vice: in short, a true friend loves h^s friend so, that he is very zealous of
his good, and certainly he that is really so, will never be the instrument of
b^inging him to the greatest evil. The general duty of a friend then must be
resolved to be the industrious pursuit of his friends real advantages, Its
duti^^,
in which there are several particulars contained.

20. As first, Faithfulness.
faithfulness in all trusts committed to him by his friend, whether that of
goods or secrets; he that betrays the trust of a friend in either, is by all
men looked upon with abhorrence, it being one of the highest falsnesses and
treacheries, and for such treacherous wounds the wise man tells us, every friend
will depart, Eclesiasticus 22. 22.

21. Secondly, Assistance.
it is the duty of a friend to be assisting to his friend in all his outward
needs; to counsel him, when he wants advice; to cheer him, when he needs
comfort; to give him, when he wants relief, and to endeavor his rescue out of
any trouble or danger. An admirable example we have of this friendship in
Jonathan to David, he loved him as his own soul, and we see he not only
contrives for his safety when he was in danger, but runs hazards himself to
rescue and deliver his friend, draws his fathers anger upon him, to turn it
from David, as you may read at large, 1 Samuel 20.

22. The third and highest duty of a friend is to be aiding and assisting to
the soul of his friend, Admonition.
to endeavor to advance that in piety and virtue, by all means within his
power, by exhortations and encouragements to all virtue, by earnest and
vehement disswasions from all sin, and not only thus in general, but by
applying to his particular wants, especially by plain and friendly reproofs,
where he knows or reasonably believes there is any fault committed. This is of
all others the most peculiar duty of a friend, it being indeed that which none
else is qualified for such an unwillingness there is in most men to hear of
their faults, that those that undertake that work, had need have a great
prepossession of their hearts, to make them patient of it: Nay, it is so
generally acknowledged to be the proper work of a friend, that if he omit it,
he betrays the offender into security, his not reproving will be apt to make
the other think he does nothing worthy of reproof, and so he tacitly acts that
basest part of a flatterer, sooths, and cherishes him in his sin; when yet
farther it is considered how great need all men have at some time or other, of
being admonished, 'twill appear a most unfriendly, yea cruel thing to omit it;
we have that natural partialities to our selves, that we cannot so readily
discern our own miscarriages, as we do other men's, and therefore it is very
necessary they should sometimes be showed us by those, who see them more
clearly: and the doing this at the first may prevent the multiplying of more:
whereas if we be suffered to go on unreproved, it often comes to such a habit
that reproves will do no good And then how shall that person be able to answer
it either to God or himself, that has by his silence betrayed his friend to
this greatest mischief. It Is the expression of God himself speaking of a
friend, thy friend which is as thine own soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. And sure we should
in this respect account our friends as our own souls, by having the same
jealous tenderness and watchfulness over their souls, which we ought to have
of our own. It will therefore be very fit for all that have entered any strict
friendship, to make this one special article in the agreement, that they shall
mutually admonish and reprove each other; by which means it will become such an
avowed part of their friendship, that it can never be mistaken by the reproved
party for censoriousness or unkindness.

23. Fourthly, Prayer.
To these several parts of kindness must be added that of Prayer, we must not
only assist our friends, our selves, in what we can, but we must call in the
Almighty aid to them, recommending them earnestly to God for all his blessings,
both spiritual, and temporal.

24. Lastly, We must be constant in our friendships, Constancy.
and not out of a slightness of humor grow weary of a friend, only because we
have had him long. This is great injustice to him, who if he have behaved
himself well, ought the more to be valued, by how much the longer he has
continued to do so: And it is great folly in our selves, for it is the casting
away the greatest treasure of humane life, for such certainly is a tried
friend. The wisest of men gives warning of it, Prove. 27. 16. Thine own friend
and thy fathers friend forsake not. Nay farther, it is not every light offense
of a friend, that should make thee renounce his friendship, there must be some
allowance made to the infirmities of men, and if thou have occasion to pardon
him somewhat to day, perhaps thou may give him opportunity to requite thee to
morrow; therefore nothing but unfaithfulness, or incorrigible vice should break
this band.

25. The last relation is that between Masters and Servants, Servant^ owe to
the Masters ^^bedience.
both which owe a duty to each other: That of the servant is first obedience to
all lawful commands; this is expressly required by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 6.
Servants obey in all things your Masters, etc. and this obedience must not be a
grumbling and unwilling one, but ready and cheerful as he there proceeds to
exhort, ver. 7. with good will doing service, and to help them herein, they are
to consider that it is to the Lord, and not unto men; God has commanded
servants thus to obey their Masters, and therefore the obedience they pay is to
God, which may well make them do it cheerfully, how harsh, or unworthy soever
the Master be, especially if what the Apostle farther urges, ver. 8. be
considered, that there is a reward to be expected from God for it.

26. The second duty of the servant is faithfulness, Fidelity.
and that may be of two sorts, one as supposed to eye service, the other to
purloyning or defrauding. The first part of faithfulness is the doing of all
true service to his Master, not only when his eye is over him, and he expect
punishment for the omission, but at all times, even when his Master is not
likely to discern his failing, and that servant that does not make conscience
of this, is far from being a faithful servant; this eye-service being by the
Apostle set opposite to that singleness of heart, which he requires of
servants, Ephesians 6. 5. 6. The second sort of faithfulness consists in the honest
managery of all things entrusted to him by his Master, the not wasting his
goods (as the unjust steward was accused to have done Lu. 16.) whether by
careless embezelling of them, or by converting any of them to his own use
without the allowance of his Master. This latter is that purloyning of which
the Apostle warnes servants, Tit. 2. 10. And is indeed no better then arrant
theft, of this kind are all those ways, that the servant has of gaining to
himself by the loss and damage of his Master, as the being bribed to make ill
bargains for him, and many the like: Nay, indeed this sort of unfaithfulness is
worse then common theft, by how much there is a greater trust reposed, the
betraying whereof adds to the crime. As for the other sort of unfaithfulness,
that of wasting though without gain to themselves, it differs not much in
effect from this, the Master may lose as much by the one as by the other, and
then what odds is it to him, whether he be robbed by the covetousness or
negligence of his servant, and it is still the same breach of trust with the
former, for every Master is supposed to entrust his affairs as well to the care
as the honesty of his servant for it would be little advantage to the Master to
be secured, that his servant would not himself cheat him, whilst in the mean
time he would by his carelessness give opportunity to others to do it; therefore
he that does not carefully look to his Masters prof^t, dece^ves his trust, as
well as he that justly provides for his own.

A third duty of a servant is patience and meekness under the reproofs of his
Master; Submission to rebuke.
not answering again, as the Apostle exhorts, Tit. 2. 9, That is not making
such surely and rude replies, as may increase the Masters displeasure: A thing
too frequent among servants, even in the justest reprehensions, whereas St.
Peter directs them patiently to suffer, even the most undeserved correction,
even when they do well and suffer for it, 1 Pet. 2. 20. But the patient
suffering of rebuke is not all that is required of servants in this matter,
they must also mend the fault they are rebuked for, and not think they have
done enough, when they have (though never so dutifully) given the Master the
hearing.

28. A fourth duty of a servant is diligence; Diligence.
he must constantly attend to all those things; which are the duties of his
place, and not; give himself to idleness, and sloth, nor yet to company
keeping, gameing, or any other disorderly course, which may take him off from
his Masters business. All these are necessary duties of a servant, which they
are carefully and conscionably to perform, not so much to escape the Masters
anger as Gods, who will certainly call every one of them to an account, how
they have behaved themselves toward their earthly Masters.

29. Now on the other side, Masters owe to their Servants Justice.
there are some things also owing from the Masters to their servants: As first
the Master is bound to be just to them, in performing those conditions, on
which they were hired, such are commonly the giving them food and wages, and
that Master that withholds these, is an oppressor.

30. Secondly, The Master is to admonish and reprove the servant in case of
fault, Admonition.
and that not only in faults against them, wherein few Masters are backward,
but also and more especially in faults against God, whereat every Master ought
to be more troubled then at those which tend only to his own loss, or
inconvenience; the dishonor of God and the hazard of the meanest man's soul,
being infinitely more worthy our disquiet, then any thing of the other kind can
be. And therefore when Masters are presently on fire for any little negligence
or fault of a servant toward themselves, and yet can without trouble see them
run into the greatest sins against God, it is a sign they consider their own
concernments too much, and Gods glory and their servants souls too little. This
is too commonly the temper of Masters, they are generally careless how their
servants behave themselves toward God, how disordered and profane their
families are, and therefore never bestow any exhortation, or admonition, to
persuade them to virtue, or draw them from vice; such Masters forget that they
must one day give an account how they have governed their families. It is
certainly the duty of every Ruler to endeavor to advance piety and godliness
among all those that are under his charge, and that as well in this lesser
dominion of a family, as in the greater of a Realm or Nation. Of this David was
so careful, that we see he professes, Psalm. 101. 7. That no deceitful person
should dwell in his house, that he that told lies should not tarry in his
sight, so much he thought himself bound to provide that his family might be a
kind of Church, an assembly of Godly upright persons: And if all Masters would
endeavor to have theirs so, they would besides the eternal reward of it,
hereafter find a present benefit by it, there worldly business would thrive
much the better; for if their servants were brought to make conscience of their
ways, they would then not dare either to be negligent or false.

31. But as it is the duty of Masters to admonish and reprove their servants,
so they must also look to do it in a due manner, that is so, as may be most
likely to do good, not in passion and rage, which can never work the servant to
any thing but the despising or hating him, but with such sober and grave
speeches, as may convince him of his fault, and may also assure him, that it is
a kind desire of his amendment (and not a willingness to wreck his own rage)
which makes the Master thus to rebuke him.

32. A third duty of the Master is to set good example of honesty and godliness
to his servants, Good example.
without which it is not all the exhortations, or reproofs he can use, will ever
do good; for else he pulls down more with his example, then it is possible for him
to build with the other, and it is madness for a drunken, or profane Master, to
expect a sober and godly family.

33. Fourthly. Means of Instruction.
the Master is to provide that his servants may not want means of being
instructed in their duty, as also that they may daily have constant times of
worshipping God, publicly by having prayers in the family; but of this I have
spoken before under the head of Prayer, and therefore shall here say no more of
it.

34. Fifthly, The master in all affairs of his own, Moderation in command^
is to give reasonable and moderate commands, not saying greater burdens on his
servants then they are able to bear, particularly not requiring so much work,
that they shall have no time to bestow on their souls, as on the other side he
is not to permit them to live so idely as may make them either useless to him,
or may betray themselves to any ill.

35. Sixthly, The Master is to give his servants encouragement in well doing,
Encouragement in well-doing.
by using them with that bounty and kindness which their faithfulness and
diligence and piety deserves: And finally in all his dealing with them, he is
to remember that himself has as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 6. 9. A Master in
heaven, to whom he must give account of the usage of his meanest servant on
earth. Thus have I briefly run through those several relations, to which we owe
a particular duty, and so have done with that first branch of duty to our
neighbors; that of Justice.

PARTITION XVI.
Other Branches of our DUTY to our Neighbor. Of CHARITY to men's S^uls, Bodies,
Goo^s, etc.

THE second branch of Duty to our Neighbors is Charity or Love. Charity.
This is the great Gospel-duty, so often injoined us by Christ, the New
Commandment as himself calls it, Jo. 13 34. That ye love one another, and this
is again repeated twice in one Chapter, John 15 12. 17. and the first Epistle
of St. John is almost wholly spent in the persuasion to this one duty, by which
we may see it is no matter of indifference, but most strictly required of all
that profess Christ. Indeed himself has given it as the badge and livery of his
Disciples, John 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples if
ye have love one to another.

This Charity may be considered two ways; In the Affections.
first, in respect of the affections; secondly, of the actions. Charity in the
affections is a sincere kindness, which disposes us to wish all good to others,
and that in all their capacities, in the same manner that justice obliged us to
wish no hurt to any man, in respect either of his Soul, his Body, his Goods, or
his Credit, so this first part of Charity binds us to wish all good to them in
all these.

And first, for the Soul. If we have any the least spark of Charity, To men's
Souls.
we cannot but wish all good to men's Souls; Those precious things which Christ
thought worth the ransoming with his own blood, may surely well challenge our
kindness, and good wishes; and therefore if we do not thus love one another, we
are far from obeying that Command of loving, as he has loved, for 'twas the
Souls of men which he loved so tenderly, and both did, and suffered so much
for. Of this love of his to Souls there are two great and special effects; the
first, the purifying them here by his grace, the second, the making them
everlastingly happy, in his glory; and both these we are so far to copy out in
our kindness, as to be earnestly desirous that all men should arrive to that
purity, and holiness here, which may make them capable of eternal happiness
hereafter. It were to be hoped, that none that himself carried a Soul about
him, could be so cruel to that of another man's, as not sincerely to wish this,
did not experience show us there are some persons, whose malice is so divelish,
as to reach even to the dire^^ contrary, the wishing not only the sin, but the
damnation of others. Thus may you have some, who in any injury, or oppression
they suffer, make it their only comfort, that their enemies will damn
themselves by it; when alas! that should to a Christian be much more terrible,
then any suffering they could bring upon him. He that is of this temper, is a
disciple of Satan's, not of Christ, it being directly contrary to the whole
scope of that grand Christian precept, of loving our neighbors as our selves.
For it is sure, no man that believes there is such a thing as damnation, wishes
it to himself; Be he never so fond of the ways that lead to it, yet he wishes
that may not be his journeys end, and therefore by that rule of Charity should
as much dread it for his Neighbor.

Secondly, We are to wish all good to the Bodies of men, To their Bodies, Goods
and Credit.
all health and welfare, we are generally tender enough of our own bodies,
dread the least pain or ill, that can befall them; Now Charity, by virtue of the
forementioned precept, extends this tenderness to all others, and whatever we
apprehend as grievous to our selves, we must be unwilling should befall another.
The like is to be said of the other two, goods and credit, that as we wish our
own thriving and reputation, so we should likewise that of others, or else we
can never be said to love our neighbor as our selves.

This Charity of the affections, Effects of this Charity.
if it be sincere, will certainly have these several effects, which are so
inseparable from it, that they are often in Scripture accounted as parts of the
duty, and so most strictly required of us; First, it will keep the mind in a
peaceable and meek temper toward others, so far from seeking occasions of
contentions, that no provocation shall draw us to it; for where we have
kindness we shall be unapt to quarrel, it being one of the especial properties
of Charity, that it is not easily provoked, 1 Cor. 13. 5. and therefore whoever
is unpeaceable, shows his heart is destitute of this Charity. Secondly, it
will breed comp^ssion toward all the miseries of others every mishap that
befalls, where we wish well, is a kind of defeat and disaster to our selves and
therefore if we wish well to all, we shall be thus concerned in the calamities
of all, have a real grief, and sorrow, to see any in misery, and that
according to the proportion of the suffering. Thirdly, it will give us joy in
the prosperities of others; Solomon observes Prove. 13. 19. That the desire
accomplished i^ swee^ to the Soul, and then whoever has this real desire of his
neighbors welfare, his desire is accomplished in their prosperity, and
therefore he cannot but have contentment and satisfaction in it. Both these are
together commanded by St. Paul, Romans 12. 12. R^joice with them that rejoice,
weep with them that weep. Fourthly, it will excite and stir up our prayers for
others; We are of our selves impotent, feeble creatures, un^ble to bestow
blessings, where we most wish them, therefore if we do indeed desire the good
of others we must se^k it on their behalf, from him, whence every good and
perfect gift comes, Ja. 1. 17. This is so necessary a part of Charity, that
without it our kindness is but an unsignificant thing, a kind of empty
complement. For how can he be believed to wish well in earnest, who will not
thus put life and efficacy into his wishes by forming them into prayers which
will otherwise be vain and fruitless. The Apostle thought not fit to leave men
to their bare wishes, but exhorts that supplications, prayers, and giving of
thanks be made for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1. which precept all that have this true
Charity of the heart, will readily conform to. These severals are so naturally
the fruits of this Charity that it is a deceit for any man to persuade himself
he has it, who cannot produce these fruits to evidence it by.

But there is yet a farther excellency of this grace, It casts out Envy.
it guards the mind, and secures it from several great and dangerous vices; as
first from Envy; This is by the Apostle taught us to be the property of
Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 4. Charity envieth not; And indeed common reason may
confirm this to us, for envy is a sorrow at the prosperity of another, and
therefore must needs be directly contrary to that desire of it, which we showed
before was the effect of love; so that if love bear sway in the heart, 'twill
certainly chase out Envy. How vainly then do those pretend to this virtue, that
are still grudging, and rep^ning at every good hap of others?

Secondly, It keeps down Pride and Hau^^^iness. Pride.
This is also taught us by the Apostle in the forementioned place, Charity
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up; and accordingly we find, that where
this virtue of love is commanded, their humility is joined with it. Thus it is,
Col. 3. 12. Put on therefore bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of mind,
and Romans 12. 10. Be kindly affectioned on toward another with brotherly love
in honor preferring one another, where you see how close an attendant humility
is of love. Indeed it naturally flows from it, for love always sets a price
and value upon the thing beloved, makes us esteem and prize it; thus we too
constantly find it in self love, it makes us think highly of our selves, that
we are much more excellent then other men. Now if love thus placed on our
selves, beget pride, let us but divert the course, and turn this love on our
brethren, and it will as surely beget humility, for then we should see and
value those gifts and excellencies of theirs, which now our pride, or our
hatreds make us to overlook and neglect, and not think it reasonable either to
despise them, or vaunt and magnify our selves upon such a comparison; we
should certainly find cause to put the Apostles exhortation in practice, Phil.
2 4 That we should esteem others better then our selves. Whoever therefore is
of so h^ughty a temper, as to vilify and disdain others, may conclude he has
not this charity rooted in his heart.

Thirdly, it casts out censoriousness and rash judging charity, Censoriousness.
as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13. 5. Thinks no evil, is not apt to entertain
ill conceits of others, but on the contrary as it follows, ver. 7. believes
all thing, hops all things; that is, it is forward to believe and hope the
best of all men, and surely our own experience tells us the same, for where we
love we are usually unapt to discern faults, be they never so gross (witness
the great blindness we generally have toward our own) and therefore shall
certainly not be likely to create them, where they are not, or to aggravate
them beyond their true size and degree: And then to what shall we impute those
unmerciful censures and rash judgments of others, so frequent among men, but to
the want of this charity.

Fourthly, It casts out dissembling and feigned kindness; Dissembling.
where this true and real love is, that false and counterfeit one flies from
before it, and this is the love we are commanded to have, such as is without
dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. Indeed where this is rooted in the heart, there can
be no possible use of dissimulation, because this is in truth all that the
false one would seem to be, and so is as far beyond it, as nature is beyond
art, nay indeed as a devine virtue is beyond a foul sin, for such is that
hypocritical kindness, and yet it is to be feared that does too generally usurp
the place of this real charity, the effects of it are too visible among us,
there being nothing more common then to see men make large professions to those
who as soon as their back are turned, they either deride or mischief.

Fifthly, it casts out all mercenariness, and self-seeking, Self-seeking.
it is of so noble and generous a temper, that it dispises all projectings for
gain or advantage, love seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13. 5. And therefore that
huckstering kind of love so much used in the world, which places it self only
there, where it may fetch in benefit, is very far from this charity.

Lastly, It turns out of the heart all malice and desire of revenge which is so
utterly contrary to it, Revenge.
that it is impossible they should both dwell in the same breast; it is the
property of love to bear all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7. To endure the greatest
injuries, without thought of making any other return to them then prayers and
blessings, and therefore the malicious revengeful person, is of all others the
greatest stranger to this charity.

It Is true if this virtue were to be exercised but toward some sort of
persons, T^is charity to be extended even to enemies.
it might consist with malice to others, it being possible for a man that
bitterly hates one to love another; but we are to take notice that this charity
must not be so confined, but must extend and stretch it self to all men in the
world, particularly to enemies, or else it is not that divine charity commended
to us by Christ. The loving of friends, and benefactors is so low a pitch that
the very Publicans and sinners, the worst of men were able to attain to it,
Mat. 5. 46 And therefore it is not counted rewardable in a Disciple of Christ;
No, he expects we should soar higher, and therefore has set us this more
spiritual, and excellent precept of loving of enemies, Mat. 5. 44. I say unto
you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you, and whoever does not thus, will never
be owned by him for a disciple. We are therefore to conclude, that all which
has been said concerning this Charity of the affections must be understood to
belong as well to our spitefullest enemy, as our most obliging friend. But
because this is a duty, to which the froward nature of man is apt to object
much, 'twill not be amiss to insist a little on some considerations, which may
enforce it on us.

And first consider, Motives thereunto.
what has been already touched on, that it is the Command of Christ, both in
the Text above mentioned, Command of Christ.
and multitudes of others, there being scarce any precept so often repeated in
the New Testament, as this of loving and forgiving of enemies. Thus Ephesians. 4. 32.
Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another; and again,
Col. 3. 13. Forbearing one another and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. So also, 1 Pet.
3. 9. Not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, but contrariwise
Blessing. A whole volume of Texts might be brought to this purpose, but these
are certainly enough, to convince any man, that this is strictly required of us
by Christ, and indeed I think, there are few that ever heard of the Gospel, but
know it is so. The more prodigiously strange is it, that men that call
themselves Christians, should give no degree of obedience to it, nay, not only
so, but even publicly avow, and profess the contrary, as we daily see they do,
it being ordinary to have men resolve, and declare, that they will not forgive
such, or such a man, and no consideration of Christ's Command can at all move
them from their purpose. Certainly these men understand not what is meant by
the very word Christian, which signifies a Servant, and Disciple of Christ, and
this Charity is the very badg of the one, the lesson of the other; and
therefore it is the greatest absurdity, and contradiction, to profess themselves
Christians, and yet at the same time to resist this so express Command of that
Christ, whom they own as their Master. If I be a Master, says God, where is my
fear? Mal. 1. 6. Obedience and reverence are so much the duties of Servants,
that no man is thought to look on him as a Master, to whom he pays them not.
Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say? says Christ, Luke
6. 46. The whole world is divided into two great Families. Christ's, and Satan's,
and the obedience each man pays, signifies to which of these Masters he
belongs, if he obey Christ, to Christ; if Satan, to Satan. Now this sin of
malice, and revenge is so much the dictate of that wicked spirit, that there is
nothing can be a more direct obeying of him, it is the taking his livery on our
backs, the proclaiming whose servants we are; What ridiculous impudence is it
then, for men that have thus entered themselves of Satan's Family, to pretend to
be the Servants of Christ? Let such know assuredly, they shall not be owned by
him, but at the great day of account, be turned over to their proper Master, to
receive their wages, in fire and brimstone.

A second consideration is the example of God: Example of God.
this is an argument Christ himself thought fit to use, to impress this duty on
us, as you may see Luk 6. 35, 36. where after having given the Command of
Loving enemies, he incourages to the practice of it, by telling, that it is
that which will make us the Children of the Highest (that is, 'twill give us a
likeness and resemblance to him, as children have to their Parents) for he is
kind to the unthankful and the evil; And to the same purpose, you may read Mat.
5. 45. He makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain
on the just and on the unjust; And sure this is a most forcible consideration
to excite us to this duty. God, we know, is the fountain of perfection, and the
being like to him, is the sum of all we can wish for; and though it was
Lucifers fall, his ambition to be like the most high, yet had the likeness he
affected been only that of Holiness and Goodness, he might still have been an
Angel of light; This desire of imitating our Heavenly Father is the especial
mark of a child of his. Now this kindness and goodness to enemies is most
eminently remarkable in God, and that not only in respect of the temporal
mercies, which he indifferently bestows on all, his sun and rain on the
unjust, as in the Text forementioned, but chiefly in his spiritual mercies; We
are all by our wicked works Col. 1. 21. Enemies to him, and the mischief of
that enmity would have fallen wholly upon our selves, God had no motive besides
that of his pity to us, to wish a reconciliation, yet so far was he from
returning our enmity, when he might have revenged himself to our eternal ruin,
that he designs, and contrives how he may bring us to be at peace with him.
This is a huge degree of mercy and kindness, but the means he used for
effecting this, is yet far beyond it; He sent his own Son from Heaven, to work
it, and that not only by persuasions, but sufferings also; So much did he
prize us miserable creatures, that he thought us not too dear bought with the
blood of his Son. The like example of mercy and patience we have in Christ both
laying down his life for us enemies, and also in that meek manner of doing it,
which we find excellently set forth by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 22. 23. 24. and
commended to our imitation. Now surely when all this is considered, we may well
make St. John's inference, Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love
one another, 1 John 4. 11. how shameful a thing is it for us to retain
displeasures against our brethren, when God thus lays by his toward us, and
that when we have so highly provoked him?

This directs to a third consideration, The disproportion between our offenses
against God and men's against us.
the comparing our sins against God, with the offenses of our brethren against
us, which we no sooner shall come to do, but there will appear a vast
difference between them, and that in several respects; For first, there is the
majesty of the person, against whom we sin, which exceedingly increases the
gilt, whereas between man and man, there cannot be so great a distance; for
though some men are by God advanced to such eminency of dignity, as may make an
injury offered to them the greater yet still they are but men of the same
nature with us, whereas he is God blessed for ever; Secondly, there is his
soveraignity and power, which is original in God, for we are his creatures, we
have received our whole being from him, and therefore are in the deepest manner
bound to perfect obedience, whereas all the soveraignity that one man can
possibly have over another, is but imparted to them by God, and for the most
part there is none of this neither in the case, quarrels being most usual among
equals. Thirdly, there is his infinite bounty and goodness to us, all that ever
we enjoy, whether in relation to this life, or a better being wholly his free
gift, and so there is the foulest ingratitude added to our other crimes; in
which respect also it is impossible for one man to offend against another in
such a degree, for though one may be (and too many are) guilty of
unthankfulness toward men, yet because the greatest benefits that man can
bestow, are infinitely short of those which God does, the ingratitude cannot be
near so great as toward God it is. Lastly, there is the greatness and
multitude of our sins against God, which do infinitely exceed all that the most
injurous man can do against us, for we all sin much oftener and more hainously
against him then any man, be he never so malicious, can find opportunity is of
injuring his brethren This inequality and disproportion our Savior intimates
in the parable, Mat. 18. where our offenses against God are noted by the ten
thousand talents, whereas our brethrens against us are described by the hundred
pence, a talent hugely out-weighs a penny, and ten thousand out numbers a
hundred, yet so and much more does the weight and number of our sins exceed all
the offenses of others against us: Much more might be said to show the vast
inequality between the faults which God forgives us, and those we can possibly
have to forgive our brethren: But this I suppose may suffice to silence all the
objections of cruel and revengeful persons, against this kindness to enemies.
They are apt to look upon it as an absurd and unreasonable thing, but since
God himself acts it in so much a higher degree, who can without blasphemy say
it is unreasonable? If this, or any other spiritual duty appear so to us, we may
^earn the reason from the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The carnal man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; it is the
carnality and fleshliness of our hearts, that makes it seem so, and therefore
in stead of disputing against the duty, let us purge our hearts of that, and
then we shall find that true which the spiritual Wisdom affirms of her
Doctrines, Pro. 8. 9. They are all plain^ to him that understands, and right
to them that find knowledge.

Nay, this loving of enemies is not only a reasonable, Pleasantness of this
Duty.
but a pleasant duty, and that I propose as a fourth consideration; there is a
great deal of sweetness and delight to be found in it; of this I confess none
can so well judge as those that have practiced it, the nature even of earthly
pleasures being such, that it is the enjoyment only that can make a man truly
know them: No man can so describe the taste of any delicious thing to another,
as that by it he shall know the relish of it, he must first actually taste of
it, and sur^ it is more so in spiritual pleasures, and therefore he that would
fully know the sweetness and pleasantness of this duty, let him set to the
practice and then his own experience will be the best informer: But in the mean
time, how very unjust, yea, and foolish is it, to pronounce ill of it before
trial: for men to say this is irksome, and intolerable, who never so much as
once offered to try whether indeed it were so or no? Yet by this very means an
ill opinion is brought up of this most delightful duty, and passes current
among men, whereas in all justice the testimony of it should be taken only from
those who have tried it, and they would certainly give another account of it.

But though the full knowledge hereof be to be had only by his nearer
acquaintance, Compared with the painfulness of the contrary.
yet methinks even those who look at it but at a distance, may discern somewhat
of amiableness in it, if no other way, yet at least by comparing it with the
uneasiness of its contrary, malice and revenge are the most wrestlesse,
tormenting passions that can possess the mind of a man, they keep men in
perpetual study and care how to effect their mischievous purposes, it disturbs
their very sleep, as Solomon observes Pro. 4. 16. They sleep not except they
have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away, except they cause some to
fall: Yea, it imbitters all the good things they enjoy, so that they have no
taste or relish of them; a remarkable example of this we have in H^man, who
though he abounded in all the greatness and felicity of the world, yet the
malice he had to a poor despisable man Mordecai, kept him from tasting
contentment in all this, as you may see, Esther 5. where after he had related
to his friends all his prosperities, ver. 11 he concludes thus, ver. 12. Yet
all this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting in the
Kings gate. On the other side, the peaceable spir^t, that can quietly pass by
all injuries and affronts, enjoyes a continual calm, and is above the malice of
his enemies, for let them do what they can, they cannot rob him of his quiet,
he is firm as a rock, which no storms or winds can move, when the furious and
revengeful man is like a wave which the least blast tosses and tumbles from its
place. But besides this inward disquiet of revengeful men, they often bring
many outward calamities upon themselves, they exasperate their enemies, and
provoke them to do them greater mi^chiefs, nay oftentimes they willingly run
themselves upon the greatest miseries in pursuit of their revenge, to which it is
ordinary to see men sacrifice Goods, Ease, Credit, Life, nay soul it self, not
caring what they suffer themselves so they may spite their enemy; so strangly
does this wretched humor besott and blind men. On the contrary, the meek
person he often melts his adversary, pacifies his anger; A soft answer turns
away wrath, says Solomon, Pro. 15. 1. And sure there is nothing can tend more
to that end: but if it do happen that his enemy be so inhumane, that he miss
of doing that, yet he is still a gainer by all he can suffer. For first, he
gains an opportunity of exercising that most Christian grace of charity and
forgiveness; and so at once of obeying the command and imitating the example
of his Savior, which is to a true Christian spirit a most valuable advantage;
and then secondly, he gains an accession and increase to his reward hereafter.
And if it be objected, that that is not to be reckoned in to the present
pleasure of the duty: I answer, that the expectation and belief of it is, and
that alone is a delight infinitely more ravishing then the present enjoyment of
all sensual pleasures can be.

The fourth consideration is, If we forgive not. God will not forgive us.
the danger of not performing this duty; of which I might reckon up diverse, but
I shall insist only on that great one, which contains in it all the rest, and
that is the forfeiting of our own pardons from God, the having our sins against
him kept still on his score, and not forgiven. This is a consideration, that
methinks should afright us into good nature; if it do not, our malice is
greater to our selves then to our enemies. For alas! what hurt is it possible
for thee to do to another, which can bear any comparison with that thou do
thy self, in loosing the pardon of thy sins? which is so unspeakable a
mischief, that the Devil himself with all his malice cannot wish a greater,
it is all he aims at, first, that we may sin, and then that those sins may
never be pardoned, for then he knows he has us sure enough, Hell, and damnation
being certainly the portion of every unpardoned sinner, besides all other
effects of Gods wrath in this life; consider this, and then tell me what thou
have got by the highest revenge, thou ever actedst upon another. It Is a
devilish phrase in the mouth of men, that revenge is sweet: But is it possible
there can be (even to the most distempered palate) any such sweetness in it,
as may recompense that everlasting bitterness that attends it? It Is certain,
no man in his wits can upon sober judging, imagine there is. But alas! we give
not our selves time to weigh things, but suffer our selves to be hurryed away
with the heat of an angry humor, never considering how dear we must pay for
it; like the silly Be, that in anger leaves at once her sting and her life
behind her, the sting may perhaps give some short pain to the flesh it sticks
in, but yet there is none but discerns the Be has the worst of it, that pays
her life for so poor a revenge; so it is in the greatest acts of our malice, we
may perhaps leave our stings in others, put them to some present trouble, but
that compared with the hurt redounds to our selves by it, is no more then that
inconsiderable pain is to death. Nay not so much, because the mischiefs, that
we bring upon our selves are eternal, to which no finite thing can bear any
proportion. Remember then, whenever thou art contriving, and plotting a
revenge, that thou quite mistakest the mark thou think to hit thy enemy, and
las! thou woundest thy self to death. And let no man speak peace to himself, or
think that these are vain terrors, and that he may obtain pardon from God,
though he give none to his brethren. For he that is truth it self has assured
us the contrary, Mat. 6. 15. If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither
will your father forgive your trespasses. And least we should forget the
necessity of this duty, he has inserted it into our daily Prayers, where we
make it the condition, on which we beg pardon from God; Forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. What a heavy curse then
does every revengeful person lay upon himself, when he says this Prayer, he
does in effect beg God not to forgive him; and it is too sure that part of his
Prayer will be heard, he shall be forgiven just as he forgives, that is not at
all. This is yet farther set out to us in the parable of the Lord, and the
servant, Mat. 18. the servant had obtained of his Lord the forgiveness of a
vast debt, ten thousand talents, yet was so cruel to his fellow servant, as to
exact a poor triflng sum of an hundred pence, upon which his Lord recals his
former forgiveness, and charges him again with the whole debt, and this Christ
applies to our present purpose, ver. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly father
do unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every man his brother their
trespasses. One such act of uncharitableness is able to forfeit us the pardon
God has granted us, and then all our sins return again upon us, and sink us to
utter ruin. I suppose it needless to heap up more Testimonies of Scripture,
for the truth of this, these are so clear, as may surely serve to persuade any
man, that acknowledge Scripture, of the great and fearful danger of this sin of
uncharitableness. The Lord possess all our hearts with such a just sense of it
as may make us avoid it.

The Last consideration I shall mention, is that of gratitude, Gratitude to God.
God has showed wonderful mercies to us, Christ has suffered heavy things to
bring us into a capacity of that mercy and pardon from God: And shall we not
then think our selves obliged to some returns of thanfulness? If we will take
the Apostles judgment he tells us, 2 Cor. 5. 15. That since Christ dyed for us
all, it is but reasonable that we should not henceforth live unto our selves,
but unto him that dyed for us. Indeed were every moment of our life consecrated
to his immediate service, 'twere no more then common gratitude requires, and
far less, then such inestimable benefits deserve; what a shameful
unthankfulness is it then, to deny him so poor a satisfaction as this, the
forgiving our brethren? suppose a man that were ransomed either from death or
slavery, by the bounty and sufferings of another, should upon his release be
charged by him, that so freed him in return of that kindness of his, to
forgive some slight debt, which was owing him by some third person, would you
not think him the unthankfullest wretch in the world, that should refuse this
to so great a benefactor? yet such a wretch, and much worse is every revengeful
person: Christ has bought us out of eternal slavery, and that not with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1. 8. But with his own most
precious blood, and has earnestly recommended to us the love of our brethren,
and that with the most moving arguments drawn from the greatness of his love
to us; and if we shall obstinately refuse him in so just, so moderate a demand,
how unspeakable a vileness is it? and yet this we do downright, if we keep any
malice or grudg to any person whatsoever. Nay, farther this is not barely an
unthanfulness, but there is also joined with it a horrible contempt, and
despising of him. This Peace and unity of brethren was a thing so much prized
and valued by him, that when he was to leave the world, he thought it the most
precious thing he could bequeath, and therefore left it by way of legacy to his
Disciples, Jo. 14. 27. Peace I leave with you; we use to set a great value on
the slightest bequests of our dead friends, to be exceeding careful not to lose
them, and therefore if we wilfully bangle away this so precious a Legacy of
Christ, it is a plain sign we want that love and esteem of him, which we have of
our earthly friends, and that we despise him as well as his Legacy. The great
prevailing of this sin of uncharitableness has made me stand thus long on
these consideration^, for the subduing it. God grant they may make such
impression on the reader, as may be available to that purpose.

I shall add only this one advice, that these or whatsoever other remedies
against this sin must be used timly: The first ri^ing of rancour to be suppressed.
It Is oftentimes the frustrating of bodily medicines, the applying them too
late, and it is much oftener so in spiritual, therefore if it be possible, let
these and the like considerations be so constantly and habitually fixed in thy
heart, that they may frame it to such meekness as may prevent all risings of
rancour or revenge in thee, for it is much better they should serve as armor
to prevent, then as balsome to cure the wound. But if this passion be not yet
so subdued in thee, but that there will be some stirrings of it, yet then be
sure to take it at the very first rise, and let not thy fancy chew, as it were,
upon the injury by often rolling it in thy mind, but remember betimes the
foregoing considerations, and withal, that this is a time, and season of trial
to thee, wherein thou may show how thou have profited in Christ's School,
there now being an opportunity offered thee either of obeying and pleasing God,
by passing by this offense of thy brother, or else of obeying and pleaseing
Satan, that lover of discord, by nourishing hatred against him. Remember this,
I say, betimes, before thou be inflamed, for if this fire be thoroughly kindled,
it will cast such a smoke, as will blind thy reason, and make thee unfit to
judge even in this so very plain case, whether it be bettet by obeying God, to
purchase to thy self eternally bliss, or by obeying Satan, eternal torments.
Whereas as if thou put the question to thy self before this commotion, and
disturbance of mind, it is impossible but thy understanding must pronounce for
God; And then unless thy will be so perverse that thou will deliberately choose
death, thou will surely practice according to that sentence of thy
understanding; I shall add no more on this first part of Charity, that of the
Affections.

I prooceed now to that of the Actions; Charity in the Actions
And this indeed is it, whereby the former must be approved, we may pretend
great charity within, but if none break forth in the Actions, we may say of
that love, as Saint James does of the Faith he speaks of, that it is dead, Jam.
2. 20. It is the loving indeed, that must approve our hearts before God, 1 Jo.
3. 18. Now this love in the Actions may l^kewise fitly be distributed, as the
former was, in relation to the four distinct capacities of our brethren, their
Souls, their Bodies, their Goods, and Credit.

The Soul I formerly told you may be considered either in a natural or
spiritual sense, Toward the mind of our Neighbor.
and in both of them Charity binds us to do all the good we can. As the Soul
signifies the mind of a man, so we are to endeavor the comfort and refreshment
of our brethren, desire to give them all true cause of joy, and cheerfulness,
especially when we see any under any sadness or heaviness, then to bring out
all the cordials we can procure, that is, to labor by all Christian and fit
means to cheer the troubled spirits of our brethren, to comfort them that are
in any heaviness, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 1. 4.

But the Soul in the spiritual sense is yet of greater concernment, His Soul.
and the securing of that* is a matter of much greater moment, then the
refreshing of the mind only, in as much as the eternal sorrwes and sadnesses
of Hell exceed the deepest sorrows of this life; and therefore though we must
not omit the former, yet on this we are to employ our most zealous charities;
Wherein we are not to content our selves with a bare wishing well to the Souls
of our brethren, this alone is a sluggish sort of kindness, unworthy of those
who are to imitate the great Redeemer of Souls, who did and suffered so much in
that purchase: No, we must add also our endeavor to make them what we wish
them. To this purpose 'twere very reasonable to propound to our selves in all
our conversings with others, that one great design of doing some good to their
Souls. If this purpose were fixed in our minds, we should then discern perhaps
many opportunities, which now we overlook, of doing something toward it. The
brutish ignorance of one would call upon thee to endeavor his instruction; the
open vile of another, to reprehend and admonish him; the faint and weak virtue
of another, to confirm and encourage him. Every spiritual want of thy brother
may give thee some occasion of exercising some part of this Charity, or if the
circumstances be such, that upon sober judging, thou think it vain to attempt
any thing thy self, as if either thy meanness, or thy unacquaintedness, or any
the like impediment, be like to render thy exhortations fruitless, yet if thou
art industrious in thy Charity, thou may probably find out some other
instrument, by whom to do it more successfully. There cannot be a nobler study,
then how to benefit men's Souls, and therefore where the direct means are
improper, it is fit we should whet our wits for attaining of others. Indeed it is
a shame, we should not as industriously contrive for this great spiritual
concernment of others, as we do for every worldly trifling interests of our
own; yet in them we are unwearied, and try one means after another, till we
compass our end. But if after all our serious endeavors, the obstinacy of men
do not suffer us, or themselves rather, to reap any fruit from them, if all our
wooings and intreatings of men to have mercy on their own Souls, will not work
on them, yet be sure to continue still to exhort by thy example; Let thy great
care and tenderness of thy own Soul preach to them the value of theirs, and
give not over thy compassions to them, but with the Prophet Jer. 13. 17. Let
thy Soul weep in secret for them; and with the Psalmist, Let rivers of waters
run down thy eyes, because they keep not Gods Law, Psalm. 119. 136. Yea, with
Christ himself, weep over them, who will not know the things that belong to
their peace, Luke 19. 42. And when no importunities with them will work, yet
even then cease not to importune God for them, that he will draw them to
himself. Thus we see Samuel, when he could not dissuade the people from that
sinful purpose they were upon, yet he professes notwithstanding, that he will
not cease praying for them; nay, he looked on it as so much a duty, that it
would be sin in him to omit it, God forbid, says he, that I should sin against
the Lord in ceasing to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12. 23. Nor shall we need to fear
that our prayers shall be quite lost, for if they prevail not for those for
whom we pour them out, yet however they will return into our own bosoms, Psalm.
35. 13. we shall be sure not to miss of the reward of that Charity.

In the second place, Charity in respect of the Body.
we are to exercise this Active Charity toward the bodies of our Neighbors;
we are not only to compassionate their pains, and miseries, but also to do
what we can for their ease and relief. The good Samaritan Luke 10. had never
been proposed as our pattern, had he not as well helped as pitied the wounded
man. It Is not good wishes, no nor good words neither that avail in such cases,
as St. James tells us, If a brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily
food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled,
notwithstanding ye give him not those things that are needful for the body,
what does it profit? Jam. 2. 15. 16. No sure, it profits them nothing, in
respect of their bodies, and it will profit thee as little in respect of thy
Soul, it will never be reckoned to thee as a Charity. This releeving of the
bodily wants of our brethren, is a thing so strictly required of us, that we
find it set down Mat. 25. as the especial thing we shall be tried by at the
Last Day, on the omission whereof is grounded that dreadful sentence, ver. 41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. And if it shall now be asked, what are the particular acts of this kind
which we are to perform? I think we cannot better inform our selves for the
frequent and ordinary ones, then from this Chapter, where are set down these
severals, the giving meat to the hungry, and drink to the thirsty, harboring
the stranger, clothing the naked, and visiting the sick, and imprisoned: By
which visiting is meant, not a bare coming to see them, but so coming as to
comfort and relieve them; for otherwise 'twill be but like the Levite in the
Gospel, Lu. 10. who came and looked on the wounded man, but did no more, which
will never be accepted by God. These are common and ordinary exercises of this
charity, for which we cannot want frequent opportunities. But besides these,
there may sometimes by Gods especial providence fall into our hands, occasions
of doing other good offices to the bodies of our neighbors; we may sometimes
find a wounded man, with the Samaritan. and then it is our duty to do as he did;
we may sometimes find an innocent person condemned to death, as Susanna was,
and then are with Daniel to use all possible endeavor for their deliverances:
This case Solomon seems to refer to, Prove. 24. 10. If thou forbear to deliver
him that it drawn unto death, and them that are ready to be slain, if thou
say behold we know it not; does not he that pondereth the heart, consider?
and he that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? shall not he render to every
man according to his deeds; we are not lightly to put off the matter with vain
excuses, but to remember that God, who knows our most secret thoughts, will
severely examine, whether we have willingly omitted the performance of such a
charity: sometimes again (nay God knows, often now a days) we may see a man
that by a course of intemperance is in danger to destroy his health, to shorten
his days, and then it is a due charity not only to the soul, but to the body
also, to endeavor to draw him from it. It is impossible to set down all the
possible acts of this corporal charity, because there may sometimes happen such
opportunities, as none can foresee; we are therefore always to carry about us
a serious resolution of doing whatever good of this kind we shall at any time
discern occasion for, and then whenever that occasion is offered, we are to
look on it as a call, as it were from heaven, to put that resolution in
practice. This part of charity seems to be so much implanted in our natures, as
we are men, that we generally account them not only unchristian, but inhumane,
that are void of it, and therefore I hope there will not need much persuasion
to it, since our very nature inclines us; but certainly that very consideration
will serve hugely to increase the guilt of those that are wanting in it. For
since this command is so agreeable even to flesh and blood, our disobedience to
it can proceed of nothing, but a stubbornness and resistance against God who
gives it.

PARTITION XVII.
Of CHARITY, Alms giving, etc. Of Charity in respect of our Neighbors Credit,
etc. Of PEACEMAKING. Of going to Law: Of Charity to our Enemies, etc.
CHRISTIAN-DUTIES both l'OSSIBLE and PLEASANT.

1: THE third way of expressing this Charity is toward the Charity in respect
of the Goods.
goods or estate of our neighbor; we are to endeavor his thriving and
prosperity in these outward good things; and to that end, be willing to assist
and farther him in all honest ways of improving or preserving them, by any
neighbourly and friendly office. Opportunities of this do many times fall out:
A man may sometimes by his power or persuasion deliver his neighbors goods out
of the hands of a thief, or oppressor; sometimes again by his advice and
counsel, he may set him in a way of thriving, or turn him from some ruinous
course; and many other occasions there may be of doing good turns to another,
without any loss or damage to our selves, Toward the rich.
and then we are to do them, even to our rich neighbors, those that are as
wealthy (perhaps much more so) as our selves; for though Charity do not bind us
to give to those that want it less then our selves, yet whenever we can
further their profit, without lessning our own store, it requires it of us:
Nay, if the damage be but light to us, in comparison of the advantage to him,
it will become us rather to hazard that light damage, then lose him that
greater advantage.

2. But toward our poor brother, Toward the poor.
Charity ties us to much more; we are there only to consider the supplying of
his wants, and not to stick at parting with what is our own, to relieve him,
but as far as we are able give freely what is necessary to him. This duty of
Almsgiving is perfectly necessary for the approving our love not only to men,
but even to God himself, as St John tells us, 1 Jo. 3. 17. Who so has this
worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? It Is vain for him to
pretend to love either God or man, who loves his money so much better, that he
will see his poor brother (who is man, and bears the image of God) suffer all
extremities, rather then part with any thing to relieve him: On the other side,
the performance of this duty is highly acceptable with God, as well as with men.

3. It Is called, Heb 13. 16. A sacrifice wherewith God is well pleased; and
again, Ph^. 4. 18. St Paul calls their alms to him, a Sacrifice acceptable,
wel-pleasing to God, and the Church has always looked on it as such; and
therefore joined it with the solemnest part of worship, the holy Sacrament. But
because even sacrifices themselves under the Law, were often made unacceptable
by being maimed and blemished, it will here be necessary to enquire, what are
the due qualifications of this Sacrifice.

4. Of these there are some that respect the motive, Motives of Almsgiving.
some the manner of our giving. The motive may be three fold, respecting God,
our neighbor, and our selves. That which respects God is obedience, and
thankfulness to him: He has commanded we should give alms, and therefore one
special end of our doing so, must be the obeying that precept of his. And it is
from his bounty alone that we receive all our plenty, and this is the properest
way of expressing our thankfulness for it; for as the Psalmist says. our
goods extend not unto God, Psalm. 16. 2. That tribute which we desire to pay out
of our estates, we cannot pay to his person. It Is the poor, that are as it were
his Proxey and receivers, and therefore whatever we should by way of
thankfulness give back again unto God, our alms is the way of doing it:
Secondly, in respect of our neighbor, the motive must be a true love, and
compassion to him, a tender fellow-feeling of his wants, and desire of his
comfort and relief: Thirdly, in respect of our selves, the motive is to be the
hope of that eternal reward, promised to this performance. This Christ points
out to us, when he bid^ us lay up our treasure in heaven, Mat 6. 20. And to
make us friends of the Mammon of unright^ousness, that they may receive us into
everlasting habitations, Lu. 16. 9. That is by a charitable dispencing of our
temporal goods to the poor, to lay up a stock in heaven, to gain a title to
those endless felicities, which God has promised to the charitable That is
the harvest we must expect of what we sow in these works of mercy, which will
be so rich as would abundantly recompense us, though we should, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Bestow all our goods to feed the poor: But then we must
be sure that we make this our sole aim, and not in stead of this propose to our
selves the praise of men, as the motive of our charity, for that will rob us of
the other; this is expressly told us by Christ, Mat. 6. They that set their
hearts on the credit, they shall gain with men, must take that as their
portion, ver. 3. verily I say unto you, they have their reward; they chose, it
seems rather to have men their Pay-masters, then God* and to them they are
turned off, that little ayery praise they get from them, is all the reward they
must expect: Ye have no reward of my father which is in ^ea^en, ver. 1. we have
therefore need to watch our hearts narrowly, that this desire of vainglory
steal not in and befoole us into that miserable exchange of a vain blast of
men's breath for those substantial and eternal joys of heaven.

5. In the second place we must take care of our almsgiving, in respect of the
manner; Manner of Alms giving.
and in that, first, we must give cheerfully; men usually value a small thing,
Cheerfully.
that is given cheerfully and with a good heart, more then a much greater, that
is wrung from a man with grudging and unwillingnesse; and God is of the same
mind, he loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7. Which the Apostle makes the
reason of the foregoing exhortation, of not giving grudgingly, or as of
necessity, ver. 6. And sure it is no unreasonable thing, that is herein required
of us, there being no duty that has to humane nature, more of pleasure and
delight, unless it be where covetousness or cruelty have quite work't out the
man, and put a ravenous beast in his stead. Is it not a most ravishing pleasure
to him that has any bowels to see the joy, that a seasonable alms brings to a
poor wretch? how it revives and puts new spirits in him, that was even sinking?
certainly the most sensual creature alive knows not how to bestow his money on
any thing, that shall bring him in so great a delight, and therefore me thinks
it should be no hard matter to give not only without grudging, but even with a
great deal of alacrity and cheerfulness, it being the fetching in of pleasure
to our selves.

6. There is but one objection can be made against this, The fear of
impoverishing our selves by it vain and impious.
and that is, that the danger of impove ishing ones self by what one gives, may
take off that pleasure, and make men either not give at all, or not so
cheerfully. To this I answer: That first were this hazard never so apparent,
yet it being the command of God, that we shall thus give, we are yet to obey
cheerfully, and be as well content to part with our goods in pursuance of this
duty, as we are many times called to do upon some other. In which case Christ
tells us, he that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be his D^sciple.

7. But secondly, this is sure a vain supposition: God having particularly
promised, the contrary to the charitable, that it shall bring blessings on
them, even in these outward things. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he
that waters shall be watered also himself, Prove. 11. 25. He that gives to
the poor shall not lack, Prove. 28. 27. And many the like texts there are, so
that one may truly say, this objection is grounded in direct unbelief. The
short of it is, we dare not trust God for this: giving to the poor is directly
the putting our wealth into his hands He that gives to the poor lends unto
the Lord, Pro. 19. 17. And that too on solemn promise of repayment, as it
follows in that verse, that which he has given will he pay him again. It is
amongst men thought a great disparagement, when we refuse to trust them; it
shows we either think them not sufficient, or not honest: How vile an affront
is it then to God thus to distrust him? nay indeed how horrid blasphemy, to
doubt the security of that, for which he has thus expressly past his word, who
is Lord of all, and therefore cannot be insufficient, and who is the God of
truth, and therefore will not fail to make good his promise? Let not then that
infidel fear of future want, contract and shut up thy bowels from thy poor
brother; for though he be never likely to pay thee, yet God becomes his surety
and enters bond with him, and will most assuredly pay thee with increase.
Therefore it is so far from being damage to thee, thus to give, that it is thy
great advantage: Any man would rather choose to put his money into some sure
hand, where he may both improve, and be certain of it at his need, then to let
it lie unprofitably by him* especially if he be in danger of thieves, or other
accident, by which he may probably loose it: Now alas! all that we possess is
in minutely danger of loosing; innumerable accidents there are, which may in an
instant bring a rich man to beggary; he that doubts this, let him but read the
story of Job, and he will there find an example of it: And therefore what so
prudent course can we take for our wealth as to put it out of the reach of
those accidents, by thus lending it to God, where we may be sure to find it
ready at our greatest need, and that too with improvement and increase; in
which respect it is that the Apostle compares alms to seed, 2 Cor. 9. 10. We
know it is the nature of seed that is sown, to multiply and increase and so does
all our acts of mercy, they return not single and naked to us, but bring in
their sheaves with them, a most plenteous and bountiful harvest. God deals not
with our alms, as we too often do with his graces* wrap them up in a napkin, so
that they shall never bring in any advantage to us, but makes us most rich
returns: and therefore we have all reason most cheerfully, yea, joyfully to set
to this duty, which we have such invitations to, as well in respect of our own
interests, as our neighbors needs.

8. Secondly, Give seasonably.
We must give seasonably: it is true indeed there are some so poor, that an
Alms can never come unseasonably, because they always want, yet even to them
there may be some special seasons of doing it, to their greater advantage; for
sometimes an Alms may not only deliver a poor man from some present
extremity, but by the right timeing of it, may set him in some way of a more
comfortable subsistence afterward. And for the most, I presume it is a good
Rule, to dispense what we intend to any, as soon as may be, for delays are
hurtful oftentimes both to them and our selves; first, as to them, it is sure,
the longer we delay, the longer they groan under the present want, Of cru^l^y.
and after we have designed them a relief, it is in some degree to defer
enjoying of it, for so long we prolong their sufferings; you will think him a
hard hearted Phisician, that having a certain cure for a man in pain, should
when he might presently apply it, make unnecessary delays, and so keep the
poor man still in torture: and the same it is here; we want of the due
compassion, if we can be content our poor brother should have one hour of
unnecessary suffering, when we have present opportunity of relieving him, or if
he be in such an extremity of want, yet whatever we intend him for his greater
comfort, he loses so much of it, as the time of the delay amounts to: Secondly,
in respect of our selves; it is ill to defer, for thereby we give advantage to
the temptations either of Satan or our own covetous humor, to dissuade us from
it. Thus it fares too often with many Christian duties; for want of a speedy
execution, our purposes cool, and never come to act; so many resolve they will
repent, but because they set not immediately upon it one delay succeeds
another, and keeps them from ever doing it at all: and so it is very apt to fall
out in this case, especially with men, who are of a covetous temper, and
therefore they of all others should not trust themselves thus to delay.

9. Thirdly, Prud^ntly.
We should take care to give prud^ntly, that is to give most, where it is most
needed, and in such a manner, as may do the receiver most good: Charities do
often miscarry for want of this care, for if ^e give at all adventures to all
that seem to want, we may sometimes give more to those, whose sloth and
lewdness is the cause of their wan then to those who best deserve it, and so
both encourage the one in their idleness, and disable our selves from giving
to the other. Yet I doubt not such may be the present wants even of the most
unworthy, that we are to relieve them, but where no such pressing need is, we
shall do best to choose out the fitter objects of charity, such are those who
either are not able to labor, or else have a greater charge then their labor
can maintain, and to those our alms should be given also in such a manner as
may be most likely to do them good, the manner of which may differ according to
the circumstances of their condition; it may to some be best perhaps, to give
them by little and little, to others the giving it all at once, may tend more
to their benefit; and sometime; a seasonable loan may do as well as a gift, and
that may be in the power sometimes of those who are not able to give but
little: But when we thus lend on charity, we must lend freely without use, and
also with a purpose, that if he should prove unable to pay, we will forgive so
much of the principal, as his needs require, and our abilities will permit.
They want much of this charity, who clap up poor debtors in prison, when they
know they have nothing to answer the debt, which is a great cruelty to make
another miserable, when nothing is gained to our selves by it.

10. Fourthly, Liberally.
We should give liberally, we must not be strait handed in our alms, and give
by such pitiful scantlings, as will bring almost no relief to the receiver, for
that is a kind of mockery; it is as if one should pretend to feed one that is
almost famisht by giving him a crumb of bread, such doles as that would be most
ridiculous, yet I fear it is too near the proportion of some men's alms; such
men are below those Disciples we read of, who knew only the Baptism of John,
for it is to be observed, that John Baptist, who was but the forerunner of
Christ, makes it a special part of his Doctrine, that he that has two coats
should impart to him that has none, Luke 3. 11. He says not he that has some
great Wardrobe, but even he that has but two coats must part with one of them;
from whence we may gather that whatsoever is above (not our vanity but) our
need should thus be disposed of, when our brethrens necessity requires it. But
if we look into the first time of the Gospel, we shall find Christianity far
exceeded this proportion of John's, the converts assigned not a part only, but
frankly gave all to the use of the brethren, Acts 4. and though that being upon
an extraordinary occasion, will be no measure for our constant practice yet it
may show us how prime and fundamental part of Christ^anity, this of charity is,
that at the very first founding of the Church, such vast degrees of it were
practiced; and if we farther consider what precepts of love are given us in the
Gospel, even to the laying down our lives for the brethren, 1 Io. 3. 16. We
cannot imagine our goods are in Gods account so much more precious then our
l^ves that he would command us to be prodigal of the one, and yet allow us to
be sparing of the other.

11. A multitude of Arguments might be brought to recommend this bounty to all
that profess Christ; I shall mention only two, which I find used by St. Paul
to the Corinthians on this occasion. The first is the example of Christ, 2 Cor.
7. 9. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who though he was rich,
yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.
Christ emptyed himself of all that glory and greatness, he injoied in Heaven
with his Father, and submitted himself to a life of much meanness, and poverty,
only to enrich us. And therefore for shame, let us not grudge to empty our
Coffers, to lessen somewhat of our heaps, to relieve his poor members. The
second is, the expectation of reward, which will be more or less, according to
the degrees of our Alms, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully. We think him
a very improvident husbandman, that to save a little seed at present, sowes so
thin, as to spoil his crop; and the same folly 'twill be in us, if by the
sparingness of our Alms, we make our selves a lank harvest hereafter, lose
either all, or a great part of those rewards, which God has provided for the
liberal Alms-Giver. What is the proportion which may be called a liberal
giving, I shall not undertake to set down, there being degrees even in
liberality, one may give liberally, and yet another give more liberally then
he; besides, liberality is to be measured, not so much by what is given, as by
the ability of the giver; A man of a mean estate may give less then one of a
great, and yet be the more liberal person, because that little may be more out
of his, then the greater is out of the others. Thus we see Christ pronounces
the poor widow to have given more to the Treasury, then all the rich men, Luke
21. 3. not that her two mites were more then their rich gifts, but that it was
more for her, she having left nothing behind, whereas they gave out of their
abundance what they might easily spare. Every man must herein judge for
himself; we see the Apostle, though he earnestly press the Corinthians to
bounty, yet prescribes not to them how much they shall give, but leaves that to
their own breasts, 2 Cor. 9. 7. Every man according as he purposes in his
heart, so let him give. But let us still remember, that the more we give
(provided we do not thereby fail in the support of those, that most immediately
depend on us) the more acceptable it will be to God, and the more rewardable by
him. And to secure the performance of the duty of Almes-giving (whatever the
proportion be) we may do very well to follow the advice St. Paul gives the
Corinthians in this matter, 1 Cor. 16. 2. Upon the first day of the week let
every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him; If men would do
thus, lay by somewhat weekly in store for this works of Charity, it were the
surest way not to be unprovided of somewhat to give, when an occasion offered
it self, and by giving so by little and little, the expense would become less
sensible, and so be a means to prevent those grudgings, and repinings, which
are apt to attend men in greater disbursments; And sure this were in other
respect also a very proper course, for when a tradesman casts up his weekly
account, and sees what his gains have been, it is of all others the most
seasonable time to offer this tribute to God out of what he has by his
blessing gained; If any will say they cannot so well weekly reckon their gains,
as by longer spaces of time, I shall not contend with them for that precise
time, let it be done monthly, or quarterly, so it be done; But that somewhat
should still be laid by in bank for these uses, rather then left loose to our
sudden Charities is sure very expedient, and I doubt not, whoever will make
trial of it, will upon experience acknowledge it to be so.

12. The fourth exercise of our Charity is toward the credit of our Neighbor:
Charity in respect of the Credit.
and of this we may have many occasions; sometimes toward the innocent, and
sometimes also toward the guilty. If one whom we know to be an innocent person
be slandered, and traduced, Charity binds us to do what we may for the
declaring his innocence, and delivering him from that false imputation, and
that not only by witnessing when we are called to it, but by a voluntary
offering our testimony on his behalf, or if the accusation be not before a
Court of Justice, and so there be no place for that our more solemn testimony,
but that it be only a slander tossed from one to another, yet even there we are
to do what we can to clear him, by taking all occasions publicly to declare,
what we know of his innocence. But even to the guilty there is some Charity of
this kind to be performed, sometimes by concealing the fault, if it be such
that no other part of Charity to others make it necessary to discover, or it be
not so notorious, as that it will be sure to betray it self; The wounds of
reputation are of all others the most incureable, and therefore it may well
become Christian Charity to prevent them, even where they have been diserved,
and perhaps such a tenderness in hiding the fault may sooner bring the offender
to repentance, if it be seconded (as it ought to be) with all earnestness of
private admonition; But if the fault be such, that it be not to be concealed,
yet still there may be place for this Charity, in extenuating, and lessning it,
as far as the circumstances will bear; As if it were done suddenly, and rashly,
Charity will allow some abatement of the censure, which would belong to a
designed, and deliberate act; and so proportionably in other circumstances. But
the most frequent exercises of this Charity happen toward those of whose
either innocence or guilt we have no knowledge, but are by some doubtful actions
brought under suspicion; And here we must remember, that it is the property of
love, not to think evil, to judge the best; and therefore we are both to
abstain from uncharitable conclusions of them our selves, and as much as lies
in us, to keep others from them also, and so endeavor to preserve the credit
of our neighbor, which is oftentimes as much shaken by unjust suspicions, as
it would be by the truest accusation. To these cases I suppose belongs that
precept of Christ, Mat. 7. 1. Judge not; and when we consider, how that is
backed in the following words, That ye be not Judged, we shall have cause to
believe it no such light matter, as the world seems to account it; Our
unmerciful judging of others will be paid home to us in the strict, and severe
Judgment of God.

13. I have now gone through this Active Charity, The acts of Charity in some
respects acts of Justice also.
as it relates to the four several capacities of our brethren, many of the
particulars whereof were before briefly mentioned, when we spoke of Justice. If
any think it improper, that the same acts should be made part of Justice, and
Charity too, I shall desire them to consider, that Charity being by Christ's
Command become a debt to our brethren, all the parts of it may in that respect
be ranked under the head of Justice, since it is sure paying of debts is a part
of that; Yet because in our common use we do distinguish between the Offices of
Justice, and Charity, I have chose to enlarge on them in particular reference
to Charity. But I desire it may still be remembered, that whatsoever is under
precept, is so much a due from us, that we sin not only against Charity, but
Justice too, if we neglect it; Which deserves to be considered, the more to
stir up our care to the performance, and the rather, because there seems to be
a common error in this point; Men look upon their acts of mercy, as things
purely voluntary, that they have no obligation to; and the effect of it is
this, that they are apt to think very highly of themselves, when they have
performed any, though never so mean, but never blame themselves, though they
omit all: which is a very dangerous, but withal a very natural fruit of the
former persuasion. If there be any Charities, wherein Justice is not concerned,
they are those, which for the height, and degrees of them are not made matter
of strict duty, that is, are not in those degrees Commanded by God, and even
after these 'twill be very reasonable for us to labor; but that cannot be done
without taking the lower and necessary degrees in our way; and therefore let
our first care be for them.

14. To help us wherein, The great rul^ of Charity.
there will be no better means then to keep before our eyes that grand rule of
Loving our Neighbors as our selves; This the Apostle makes the sum of our
Wh^le duty to our Neighbors, Romans 13. 9. let this therefore be the standard,
whereby to measure all thy actions, which relate to others; Whenever any
necessity of thy Neighbors persents it self to thee, ask thy self, whether if
thou were in the like case, thy love to thy self would not make thee
industrious for relief, and then resolve thy love to thy Neighbor must have
the same effect for him. This is that Royal Law, as St. James calls it, Jam. 2.
8. which all that profess themselves subjects to Christ, must be ruled by; and
whoever is so, will not fail of performing all Charities to others, because
it is sure he would upon the like occasions have all such performed to himself.
There is none, but wishes to have his good name defended, his poverty relieved,
his bodily suffering succored; Only it may be said, that in the spiritual
wants there are some so careless of themselves, that they wish no supply, they
desire no reproofs, no instructions, nay, are angry when they are given them;
It may therefore seem, that such men are not by virtue of this rule tied to
those sorts of Charities. To this I answer, that the love of our selves, which
is here set as the measure of that to our Neighbor, is to be understood to be
that reasonable love, which men ought to have, and therefore though a man fail
of that due love he owes himself, yet his Neighbor has not thereby forfeited
his right, he has still a claim to such a degree of our love, as is answerable
to that, which in right we should bear to our selves, and such I am sure is
this care of our spiritual estate, and therefore it is not our despising our own
Souls, that will absolve us from Charity to other men's, yet I shall not much
press this duty in such men, it being neither likely that they will be
persuaded to it, or do any good by it, their ill example will overwhelm all
their good exhortations, and make them unfruitful.

15. There is yet one act of Charity behind, Peace Making.
which does not properly fall under any one of the former heads, and yet may
relate to them all, and that is the Making Peace, and amity among others; By
doing whereof we may much benefit both the Souls, Bodies, Goods, and Credit of
our brethren; for all these are in danger to strife and contention. The
reconciling of enemies is a most blessed work, and brings a blessing on the
actors: We have Christ's word for it, Blessed are the Peacemakers, Mat. 5. 9.
and therefore we may be encouraged diligently to lay hold of all opportunities
of doing this Office of Charity, to use all our Art, and endeavor to take up
all grudges and quarrels we discern among others; Neither must we only labor
to restore peace, where it is lost, but to preserve it, where it is: First,
generally, by striving to beget in the heart of all we converse with a true
value of that most precious Jewel, Peace; Secondly, particularly, by a timely
prevention of those jarres, and unkindnesses, we see likely to fall out. It may
many times be in the power of a discreet friend or neighbor, to cure those
mistakes, and misapprehensions, which are the first beginning of quarrels and
contentions; and it will be both more easy and more profitable, thus to
prevent, then pacify strifes. It Is sure it is more easy, for when a quarrel is
once broken out, it is like a violent flame, which cannot so soon be quenched, as
it might have been, whilst it was but a smothering fire. And then it is also
more profitable, for it prevents many sins, which in the progress of an open
contention, are almost sure to be committed. Solomon says, In the multitude of
words there wants not sin, Prove. 10. 19. which cannot more truly be said of
any sorts of words, then those that pass in anger, and then though the quarrel
be afterward composed, yet those sins will still remain on their account; and
therefore it is a great Charity to prevent them.

16. But to fit a man for this so excellent an Office of Peace Making, He that
undertakes it must be Peaceable himself.
It Is necessary that he be first remarkably peaceable himself; for with what
face can thou persuade others to that, which thou will not practice thy self?
or how can thou expect thy persuasions should work? 'twill be a ready reply
in every man's mouth, Thou Hypocrite cast out first the beam out of thine own
eye, Mat. 7. 5. and therefore be sure thou qualify thy self for thy work. There
is one point of Peaceableness which seems to be little regarded among men, and
that is in the case of Legal trespasses; Men thingk it nothin to go to Law
about Of going to Law.
every pity trifle, and as long as they have but Law on their side, never think
they are to blame: but sure had we that true Peaceableness of spirit, which we
ought, we should be unwilling for such slight mattets to trouble, and disquiet
our Neighbors. Not that all going to Law is utterly unchristian, but such kind
of suits especially, as are upon contentiousness, and stoutness of humor, to
defend such an inconsiderable right, as the parting with will do us little or
no harm, or which is yet worse, to avenge such a trespass. And even in greater
matters, he that shall part with somewhat of his Right, for love of Peace, does
surely the most Christianly, and most agreeably to the advice of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 6. 7. rather to take wrong, and suffer our selves to be defrauded. But if
the damage be so unsupportable, that it is necessary for us to go to Law, yet
even then we must take care of preserving Peace; first, by carrying still a
friendly, and Christian temper toward the party, not suffering our hearts to
be at all estranged from him; secondly, by being willing to yield to any
reasonable terms of agreement, whenever they shall be offered; and truly if we
carry not th^s temper of mind in our suits, I see not how they can be
reconcilable with that peaceableness so strictly required of all Christians.
Let those consider th^s who make it their pleasure themselves to disqui^t their
Neighbor, or their Trade to stir up others to do it. This tender regard of
Peace both in our selves, and others, is absolutely necessary to be entertained
of all those, who own themselves for servants of him, whose title it is to be
the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6.

17. All that remains to be touched on concerning this Charity of the Actions is
the extent of it, This Chari^y of the Actions must reach to Enemies
which must be as large as the former of the Affections, even to the taking in
not only strangers, and those of no relation to us, but even of our bitterest
enemies. I have already spoken so much of the Obligation we are under to
forgive them, that I shall not here say any thing of that, but that being
supposed a duty, 'twill sure then appear no unreasonable thing to proceed one
step further, by doing them good turns; for when we have once forgiven them, we
can then no longer account them enemies, and so 'twill be no hard matter even
to flesh and blood to do all kind things to them. And indeed this is the way,
by which we must try the sincerity of our forgiveness: It Is easy to say, I
forgive such a man, but if when an opportunity of doing him good is offered,
thou declinest it, it is apparent there yet lurks the old malice in thy heart;
Where there is a thorough forgiveness, there will be as great a readiness to
benefit an enemy, as a friend: ^ay, perhaps in some respects a greater, a true
charitable person looking upon it as an especial prize, when he has an
opportunity of evidencing the truth of his reconciliation, and obeying the
precept of his Savior, by doing good to them that hate him, Mat 5. 44. Let us
therefore resolve that all acts of real kindness are to be performed to our
enemies, for which we have not only the command, but also the example of
Christ, who had not only some inward relentings toward us his obstinate, and
most provoking enemies, but showed it in acts, and those no cheap, or easy
ones, but such as cost him his dearest blood. And surely we can never pretend
to be either obeyers of his Command, or followers of his example, if we grudge
to testify our love to our enemies by those so much cheaper ways of feeding
them in hunger, and the like, recommended to us by the Apostle, Romans 12. 20.
But if we could perform these acts of kindness to enemies in such a manner, as
might draw them from their enmity, and win them to Peace, the Charity would be
doubled; And this we should aim at, for that we see the Apostle sets as the end
of the forementioned acts of feeding, etc. that we may heap coals of fi^e on
their head^, not coals to burn, but to melt them into all love and tenderness
toward us; and this were indeed the most complete way of imitating Christ's
example, who in all he did, and suffered for us, designed the reconciling of us
to himself.

18. I have now showed you the several parts of our duty to our Neighbor, Self
love (...) hinderance to this Charity.
toward the performance whereof I know nothing more necessary, then the
turning out of our hearts that self love, which so often possesses them, and
that so wholly, that it leaves no room for Charity, nay, nor justice neither to
our Neighbor. By this self-love I mean not that true love of our selves, which
is the love and cure of our Souls (for that would certainly help, not hinder us
in this duty) but I mean that immoderate love of our own worldly interests, and
advantages, which is apparently the root of all, both injustice and
uncharitableness toward others. We find this sin of self-love set by the
Apostle in the head of a whole troop of sins, 2 Timothy 3. 2. as if it were some
principal officer in Satan's camp, and certainly not without reason, for it
never goes without an accursed train of many other sins, which like the Dragons
tail Rev. 12. 4. sweeps away all care of duty to others. We are by it made so
vehement, and intent upon the pleasing our selves, that we have no regard to
any body else, contrary to the direction of St. Paul, Romans 15. 2. Which is not
to please our selves, but every man to please his neighbor for his good to
edification; which he backs with the example of Christ, ver. 3. For even Christ
pleased not himself: If therefore we have any sincere desire to have this
virtue of charity rooted in our hearts, we must be careful to weed out this sin
of self-love, for it is impossible they can prosper together.

19. But when we have removed this hindrance, we must remember that this,
Prayer a means to procure is.
as all other graces proceeds not from our selves, it is the gift of God, and
therefore we must earnestly pray to him to work it in us, to send his holy
Spirit, which once appeared in the form of a dove, a meek and a g^ll-lesse
creature to frame our hearts to the same temper, and enable us rightly to
perform this duty.

20. I have now past through those several branches I at first proposed,
Christian duties both possible and pleasant.
and showed you, what is our duty to God, our selves, and our neighbor: Of
which I may say as it is, Luke 10 28. This do and thou shall live. And surely
it is no impossible task to perform this, in such a measure, as God will
graciously accept, that is in sincerity, though not in perfection, for God is
not that austere Master, Lu. 19. 21. That reap^ where he has not sowed, he
requires nothing of us, which he is not ready by his grace to enable us to
perform; if we be not wanting to our selves, either in asking it by prayer, or
in using it by diligence. And as it is not an impossible, so neither is it such
a sad melancholy task, as men are apt to think it. It Is a special policy of
Satan's, to do as the spies did, Number 23. 28. bring up an ill report upon this
good land, this state of Christian life, thereby to discourage us from entering
into it, to fright us with I know not what ^yants, we shall meet with; but let
us not thus be cheated, let us but take the courage to try, and we shall
indeed find it a Canaan, a land fl^wing with milk and honey: God is not in this
respect to his people a wilder^ess, a land of darkness, Ier. 2. 31. His service
does not bereave men of any true joy, but helps them to a great deal: Christ's
yoke is an easy, nay a pleasant yoke, his burden a light, yea a gracious burde.
There is in the practice of Christian duties a great deal of present pleasure,
and if we feel it not, it is because of the resistance our vicious and sinful
customs make, which by the contention raises an uneasinesse. But then first
that is to be charged only on our selves, for having got those ill customs,
and thereby made that hard to us, which in it self is most pleasant, the duties
are not to be accused for it. And then secondly, even there the pleasure of
subduing those ill habits, overcoming those corrupt customs is such, as hugely
outweigheth all the trouble of the combat.

21. But it will perhaps be said, that some parts of piety are of such a
nature, Even when they expose us to outward sufferings.
as will be very apt to expose us to persecutions, and sufferings in the world,
and that those are not joyous but grievous; I answer, that even in those there
is matter of joy: we see the Apostles thought it so, they rejoiced that they
were counted worthy to suffer for Christ's name, Acts 4. 41. and St. Peter tells
us, that if any suffer as a Christian, he is to glorify God for it, 1 Pet. 4.
16. There is such a force, and virtue in the testimony of a good conscience, as
is able to change the greatest suffering into the joyfullest triumph, and that
testimony we can never have more clear, and lively, then when we suffer for
righteousness sake; so that you see Christianity is very amiable even in its
saddest dress, the inward comforts of it do fat surpass all the outward
tribulations, that attend it, and that even in the instant, while we are in the
state of warfare upon earth. But then if we look forward to the crown of our
victories, those eternal rewards in heaven, we can never think those tasks sad,
though we had nothing at present to sweeten them, that have such recompenses
await them at the end; were our labors never so heavy, we could have no cause
to faint under them: Let us therefore whenever we meet with any discouragements
in our course, fix our eye on this rich prize, and then run with patience the
race which is set before us, Heb. 12. 2 Follow the Captain of our salvation
through the greatest sufferings, yea even through the same red Sea of blood
which he has waded, whenever our obedience to him shall require it; for though
our fidelity to him should bring us to death it self, we are sure to be no
losers by it, for to such he has promised a Crown of life, the very
expectation whereof is able to keep a Christian more cheerful in his fetters
and dungeon, then a worldling can be in the midst of his greatest prosperities.

22. All that remains for me farther to add, The danger of del^ying our turning
to God.
is earnestly to entreat and beseech the Reader, that without delay, he puts
himself into this so pleasant, so gainful a course, by setting sincerely to the
practice of all those things, which either by this book, or by any other means
he discerns to be his and the further he has formerly gone out of his way, the
more haste it concerns him to make to get into it, and to use the more
diligence in walking in it. He that has a long journey to go, and finds he
has lost a great part of his day in a wrong way, will not need much entreaty
either to turn into the right, or to quicken his pace in it. And this is the
case of all those that have lived in any course of sin, they are in a wrong
road, which will never bring them to the place they aim at; Nay, which will
certainly bring them to the place they most fear and abhor; much of their day
is spent, how much will be left to finish their journey in, none knows,
perhaps the next hour, the next minute the night of death may overtake them;
what a madness is it then for them to defer one moment to turn out of that
path, which leads to certain destruction, and to put themselves in that, which
will bring them to bliss and glory? Yet so are men bewitched, and enchanted
with the deceitfulness of sin, that no entreaty, no persuasion can prevail with
them, to make this so reasonable, so necessary a change, not but that they
acknowledge it needful to be done, but they are unwilling to do it yet, they
would enjoy all the pleasures of sin, as long as they live, and then they hope
at their death, or some little time before it, to do all the business of their
Souls; But, alas! Heaven is too high to be thus jumped into, the way to it is a
long and leasurely ascent, which requires time to walk. The hazards of such
deferring are more largely spoken of, in the discourse of Repentance, I shall
not here repeat them, but desire the Reader seriously to lay them to heart, and
then surely he will think it seasonable counsel that is given by the wise man,
Ecclus: 5. 7. Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to
day.

PRIVATE DEVOTIONS For Several OCCASIONS.

London, Printed for T. Garthwait, at the little North Door of St. Paul's.

CHRISTIAN READER,
I Have for the help of thy devotions, set down some FORMS of PRIVATE-PRAYER,
upon several occasions; If it be thought an omission, that there are none for
Families, I must answer for my self, that it was not from any opinion, that God
is not as well to be worshipped in the Family, as in the Closet; but because the
providence of God and the Church has already furnished thee for that purpose,
infinitely beyond what my utmost care could do. I mean the PUBLIC LITURGY, or
COMMON PRAYER, which for all public addresses to God (and such are
family-Prayers) are so excellent and useful, that we may say of it as David did
of Goliah's sword, 1 Samuel 21. 9. There is none like it.

DIRECTIONS for the MORNING.
As soon as ever thou awakest in the morning, lift up thy heart to God in this
or the like short Prayer.
LORD, As thou have awaked my body from sleep, so by thy grace awaken my soul
from sin; and make me so to walk before thee this day and all the rest of my
life, that when the last trumpet shall awake me out of my grave, I may rise to
the life immortal, through Jesus Christ.

WHEN thou have thus begun, suffer not (without some urgent necessity) any
worldly thoughts to fill thy mind, till thou have also paid thy more solemn
devotions to Almighty God, and therefore during the time thou art dressing thy
self (which should be no longer then common decency requires) exercise thy mind
in some spiritual thoughts: As for example, Consider to what temptations thy
business, or company that day are most like to lay thee open, and arm thy self
with resolutions against them; or again consider, what occasions of doing
service to God, or good to thy neighbor are that day most likely to present
themselves, and resolve to embrace them, and also contrive ho^ thou may
improve them to the uttermost. But especially it will be fit for thee to
examine, whether there have any sin escaped thee since thy last nights
examination. If after these considerations any farther leisure remain, thou
may profitably employ it in meditating on the general resurrection (whereof
our rising from our beds is a representation) and of that dreadful judgment,
which shall follow it, and then think with thy self in what preparation thou
art for it, and resolve to husband carefully every minute of thy time, toward
the fitting thee for that great account. As soon as thou art ready, retire to
some private place, and there offer up to God thy Morning Sacrifice of Praise
and Prayer.

PRAYERS for the MORNING.
At thy first kneeling down say,
O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God, have mercy
upon me a miserable sinner.

Lord, I know not what to pray for as I ought, O let thy spirit help my
infirmities, and enable me to offer up a spiritual sacrifice acceptable to thee
by Jesus Christ.

A THANKSGIVING.
O Gracious Lord, whose mercies endure for ever, I thy unworthy servant, who
have so deeply tasted of them, desire to render thee the tribute of my humblest
praises for them; In thee, O Lord, I live and move and have my being, thou
first made me to be, and then that I might not be miserable, but happy, thou
sentest thy Son out of thy bosom to redeem me from the power of my sins, by
his grace, and from the punishment of them, by his blood, and by both to bring
me to his glory. Thou have by thy mercy caused me to be born within thy
peculiar fold, the Christian Church, where I was early consecrated to thee in
Baptism, and have been partaker of all those spiritual helps, which might aid
me to perform that Vow I there made to thee, and when by my own willfulness or
negligence, I have failed to do it, yet thou in thy manifold mercies have not
forsaken me, but have graciously invited me to repentance, afforded me all
means both outward and inward for it, and with much patience have attended, and
not cut me off in the acts of those many damning sins I have committed, as I
have most justly deserved. It is O Lord thy restraining grace alone, by which I
have been kept back from any the greatest sins, and it is thy inciting and
assisting grace alone, by which I have been enabled to do any the least good,
therefore not unto me, not unto me, but unto thy name be the praises: For these
and all other thy spiritual blessings my Soul does magnify the Lord, and all
that is within me praise his Holy Name. I likewise praise thee for those many
outward blessings I enjoy, as Health, Friends, Food, and Raiment, the comforts
as well as the necessaries of this life, for those continual protections of thy
hand, by which I and mine are kept from dangers, and those gracious
deliverances thou have often afforded out of such as have befallen me, and for
that mercy of thine whereby thou have sweetened and alayed those troubles thou
have not seen fit wholly to remove; For thy particular preservation of me this
night, and all other thy goodness toward me, Lord, grant that I may render
thee, not only the fruit of my lips, but the obedience of my life, that so
these blessings here may be an earnest of those richer blessings thou have
prepared for those that love thee, and that for his sake, whom thou have made
the Author of eternal Salvation to all that obey him, even Jesus Christ.

A CONFESSION.
O Righteous Lord, who hate iniquity, I thy sinful creature cast my self at
thy feet, acknowledging that I most justly deserve to be utterly abhorred and
forsaken by thee, for I have drunk iniquity like water, gone on in a continued
course of sin and rebellion against thee, daily committing those things thou
forbiddest, and leaving undone those things thou command, mine heart which
should be an habitation for thy Spirit, is become a cage of unclean birds, of
foul and disordered affections, and out of this abundance of the heart my mouth
speaks, my hands act, so that in thought, word and deed I continually
transgress against thee. [Here mention the greatest of thy sins] Nay, O Lord, I
have despised that goodness of thine, which should lead me to Repentance,
hardening my heart against all those means thou have used for my amendment. And
now, O Lord, what can I expect from thee but judgment and fiery indignation,
that is indeed the due reward of my sins. But, O Lord, there is mercy with
thee, that thou may be feared, O fit me for that mercy, by giving me a deep
and hearty Repentance, and then according to thy goodness let thy anger and thy
wrath be turned away from me, look upon me in thy Son, my blessed Savior, and
for the merit of his sufferings, pardon all my sins; And, Lord, I beseech thee,
by the power of thy grace so to renew, and purify my heart, that I may become a
new creature, utterly forsaking every evil way, and living in constant,
sincere, universal obedience to thee all the rest of my days, that behaving my
self as a good and faithful servant, I may by thy mercy at last be received
into the joy of my Lord; grant this for Jesus Christ his sake.

A PRAYER for GRACE.
O Most gracious God, from whom every good and perfect gift comes, I wretched
creature, that am not able of my self so much as to think a good thought,
beseech thee to work in me both to will and to do according to thy good
pleasure, inlighten my mind, that I may know thee, and let me not be barren, or
unfruitful in that knowledge; Lord, work in my heart a true faith, a purifying
hope, and an unfeigned love toward thee, give me a full trust on thee, zeal
for thee, reverence of all things that relate to thee, make me fearful to
offend thee, thankful for thy mercies, humble under thy corrections, devout in
thy service, sorrowful for my sins, and grant that in all things I may behave
my self so, as befits a creature to his Creator, a servant to his Lord: enable
me likewise to perform that duty I owe to my self, give me that meekness,
humility, and contentedness, whereby I may always possess my soul in patience,
and thankfulness, make me diligent in all my duties, watchful against all
temptations, perfectly pure, and temperate, and so moderate in my most lawful
in joyments, that they never become a snare to me; make me also, O Lord, to be
so affected toward my neighbor, that I never transgress that royal Law of
thine, of loving him as my self; grant me exactly to perform all parts of
justice, ye^lding to all whatsoever by any kind of right becomes their due, and
give me such bowels of mercy and compassion, that I may never fail to do al
acts of charity to all men, whether friends* or enemies, according to thy
command and example. Finally, I beseech thee, O Lord, to sanctify me
throughout, that my whole spirit, and soul and body may be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost
be all honor and glory for ever: Amen.

INTERCESSION.
O Blessed Lord, whose mercy is over all thy works, I beseech thee to have
mercy upon all men, and grant that the precious ransom which was paid by thy
Son for all, may be effectual to the saving of all. Give thy inlightning grace
to those that are in darkness, and thy converting grace to those that are in
sin; look with thy tenderest compassions upon the Universal Church, O be
favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem, unite all
those that profess thy Name to thee, by Purity, and Holiness, and to each other
by Brotherly love. Have mercy on this desolate Church, and sinful Nation* thou
have moved the Land and divided it, heal the sores thereof for it shakes, make
us so truly to repent of those sins, which have provoked thy Judgments, that
thou also may turn, and repent, and leave a blessing behind thee. Bless
those whom thou have appointed our Governors, whether in Church, or State, so
rule their hearts, and strengthen their hands, that they may neither want will,
nor power to punish wickedness and vice, and to maintain Gods true Religion and
Virtue. Have pity, O Lord, on all that are in affliction. Be a Father to the
fatherless, and plead the cause of the widow, comfort the feeble minded,
support the weak, heal the sick, releeve the needy, defend the oppressed, and
administer to every one according to their several necessities; let thy
blessings rest upon all that are near and dear to me, and grant them whatsoever
thou see necessary either to their bodies or their Souls, [Here name thy
nearest Relations] Reward all those that have done me good, and pardon all
those that have done, or wished me evil, and work in them and me all that good
which may make us acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ.

For PRESERVATION.
O Merciful God, by whose bounty alone it is, that I have this Day added to my
life, I beseech thee so to guide me in it by thy grace, that I may do nothing
which may dishonor thee, or wound my own Soul, but that I may diligently apply
my self to do all such good works, as thou have prepared for me to walk in; and
Lord I beseech thee, give thy Angels charge over me, to keep me in all my
ways, that no evil happen unto me, nor any plague come nigh my dwelling, but
that I and mine may be safe under thy gracious protection, through Jesus Christ.

O Lord, pardon the wanderings and coldness of these petitions, and deal with
me, not according either to my prayers, or deserts, but according to my needs,
and thine own rich mercies in Jesus Christ, in whose blessed Name, and Words, I
conclude these my imperfect prayers, saying

Our Father, etc.

DIRECTIONS for NIGHT.
AT NIGHT, when it draws toward the time of rest, bethink thy self, how thou
have passed the day, examine thine own heart, what sin either of Thought, Word,
or Deed thou have committed, what opportunity of doing good thou have omitted,
and whatsoever thou find to accuse thy self of, confess humbly and
penitently to God, renew thy purposes, and resolutions of amendment, and beg
his pardon in Christ, and this not slightly, and only as of course, but with
all devout earnestness, and heartiness, as thou would do, if thou were sure
thy death were as near approaching, as thy sleep, which for ought thou know
may be so indeed, and therefore thou should no more venture to sleep
unreconciled to God, the^ thou would dare to die so. In the next place,
consider what special and extraordinary mercies thou have that day received, as
if thou have had any great deliverance, either in thy inward man, from some
dangerous temptations, or in thy outward, from any great and apparent danger,
and offer to God thy hearty and devout praise for the same; Or if nothing
extraordinary have so happened, and thou have been kept even from the approach
of danger, thou have not the less but the greater cause to magnify God, who
has by his protection so guarded thee, that not so much as the fear of evil
hat^ assaulted thee. And therefore omit not to pay him the tribute of humble
thankfulness, as well for his usual and daily preservations, as his more
extraordinary deliverances. And above all, endeavor still by the
considerations of his mercies to have thy heart the more closely knit to him,
remembering that every favor received from him is a new engagement upon thee,
to love and obey him.

PRAYERS for NIGHT.
O Holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon me a miserable sinner.

Lord I know not what to pray for as I ought, O let thy Spirit help my
infirmities, and enable me to offer up a spiritual Sacrifice acceptable unto
thee by Jesus Christ.

A CONFESSION.
O MOST Holy Lord God, who are of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, now shall
I abominable wretch dare to appear before thee, who am nothing but pollution; I
am defiled in my very nature, having a backwardness to all good, and a
readiness to all evil; but I have defiled my self yet much worse by my own
actual sins and wicked customs; I have transgrest my duty to thee, my
neighbor, and my self, and that both in thought, in word, in deed, by doing
those things which thou have expressly forbidden, and by neglecting to do those
things thou have commanded me. And this not only through ignorance, and
frailty, but knowingly, and wilfully, against the motions of thy Spirit, and
the checks of my own conscience to the contrary. And to make all these out of
measure sinful, I have gone on in a daily course of repeating these
provocations against thee, notwithstanding all thy calls to, and my own
purposes and ^owes of amendmeut; yea, this very day I have not ceased to add
new sins to all my former guilts. [Here name the Particulars] And now, O Lord,
what shall I say, or how shall I open my mouth, seeing I have done these
things, I know that the wages of these sins is death; but O thou who willest
not the death of a sinner, have mercy upon me; work in me, I beseech thee, a
sincere contrition, and a perfect hatred of my sins, and let me not daily
confess, and yet as daily renew them, but grant, O Lord, that from this instant
I may give a bill of divorce to all my most beloved ^lusts, and then be thou
pleased to marry me to thy self, in truth, in righteousness and holiness, And
for all my past sins, O Lord, receive a reconciliation; accept of that ransom
thy blessed Son has paid for me, and for his sake whom thou have set forth as
a propitiation, pardon all my offenses, and receive me to thy favor. And when
thou have thus spoken peace to my soul, Lord keep me that I turn not any more
to folly, but so establish me with thy grace, that no temptation of the world,
the Devil or my own flesh may ever draw me to offend thee, that being made free
from sin, and becoming a servant unto God, I may have my fruit unto holiness,
and the end everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A THANKSGIVING.
O Thou Father of mercies, who art kind even to the unthankful, I acknowledge my
self to have abundantly experimented, that gracious property of thine, for
notwithstanding my daily provocations against thee, thou still heapest mercies
and loving kindness upon me. All my contempts and despisings of thy spiritual
favors have not yet made thee withdraw them, but in the riches of thy goodness
and long-suffering, thou still continuest to me the offers of grace, and life
in thy Son. And all my abuses of thy temporal blessings thou have not punished
with an utter deprivation of them, but art still pleased to afford me a liberal
portion of them. The sins of this day thou have not repayed as justly thou
might, by sweeping me away with a swift destruction, but have spared and
preserved me according to the greatness of thy mercy; [Here mention the
particular mercies of that day.] What shall I render unto the Lord for all
these benefits he has done unto me? Lord, let this goodness of thine lead me
to repentance, and grant that I may not only offer thee thanks and praise, but
may also order my conversation aright, that so I may at the last see the
salvation of God, through Jesus Christ.

Here use the Prayer for Grace and that of Intercession appointed for the
Morning.

For PRESERVATION.
O Blessed Lord, the Keeper of Israel, that neither slumbrest nor sleep, be
pleased in thy mercy to watch over me this night, keep me by thy grace from all
works of darkness, and defend me by thy power from all dangers, grant me
moderate and refreshing sleep, such as may fit me for the duties of the day
following. And Lord make me ever mindful of that time, when I shall lie down in
the dust, and because I know neither the day, nor the hour of my Masters
coming, grant me grace that I may be always ready, that I may never live in
such a state, as I shall fear to dye in, but that whether I live, I may live
unto the Lord, or whether I dye, I may dye unto the Lord, so that living and
dying I may be thine, through Jesus Christ.

Use the same concluding prayer as in the Morning.

As thou art putting off thy clothes, think with thy self that the time
approaches, that thou must put off thy body also, and then thy soul must appear
naked before Gods judgment feat and therefore thou had need be careful to
make it so clean, and pure by repentance and holiness, that he who will not
look on iniquity, may graciously behold and accept it.

Let thy bed put thee in mind of thy grave, and when thou lie down, say,

O Blessed Savior, who by thy precious death and burial did take away the
sting of death and power of the grave, grant me the joyful fruits of that thy
victory, and be thou to me in life and death advantage.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only, that
make me dwell in safety.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed it, O Lord, thou
God of truth.

IN the ANCIENT CHURCH there were besides morning and night, Four other times
every day which were called HOURS OF PRAYER, and the zeal of thos^ first
Christians was such, as made them constantly observed. It would be thought too
great a strictness now in this lukewarm age, to enj^yn the like frequency, yet
I cannot but mention the example, and say, that for those who are not by very
necessary business prevented, it will be but reasonable to imitate it, and make
up in public and private those FOUR TIMES of PRAYER besides the OFFICES,
already set down for MORNING and NIGHT: and that none may be to seek how to
exer ise their devotions at these times, I have added diverse COLLECTS for
several Graces, whereof every man may use at each such time of Prayer, so many
as his zeal and leisure shall point out to him, adding if he please, one of the
Confessions appointed for morning or night, and never omitting the LORDS PRAYER.

But if any man's state of life be really so busy, as will not allow him time
for so long, and solemn devotions, yet certainly there is no man so overlayed
with business, but that he may find leisure oftentimes in a day to say the
LORDS PRAYER alone* and therefore let him use that if he cannot more. But
because it is the Charracter of a Christian, Phil. 3. 20. That he has his
conversation in Heaven, it is very fit that besides these set times of Prayer,
he should diverse times in a day by short and sudden E^^C^LATIONS, dart up his
soul thither. And for this sort of devotion no man can want leisure, for it may
be performed in the midst of business; the Artificer at his work, the husband
man at his plough may practice it. Now as he cannot want time, so that he may
not want matter for it, I have thought it not unuseful out of that rich store
house the BOOK of PSALMS, to furnish him with some texts, which may very fitly
be used for this purpose, which being learned by heart will always be ready at
hand to employ his devotion; and the matter of them being various, some for
pardon of sin some for grace, some for the light of Gods countenance, some for
the church, some for thanksgiving, etc. every man may fit himself a cord^n^ to
the tresent need and temper of his soul. I have given these not as a full
collection, but only as a taste, by which the Readers appeti^e may be raised to
search after more in that Book, and other parts of holy Scripture.

COLLECTS for several GRACES.
For FAITH.
O Blessed Lord, whom without Faith it is impossible to please, let thy Spirit
I beseech thee work in me such a Faith as may be acceptable in thy sight, even
such as works by love, O let me not rest in a dead ineffectual Faith, but
grant that it may be such as may show it self by my works, that it may be that
victorious Faith which may enable me to overcome the world, and conform me to
the Jmage of that Christ, on whom I believe, that so at the last I may receive
the end of my Faith, even the salvation of my soul, by the same Jesus Christ.

For HOPE.
O Lord; who art the hope of all the ends of the earth, let me never be
destitute of a well grounded hope, nor yet possessed with a vain presumption,
suffer me not to think thou will either be reconciled to my sins, or reject my
repentance, but give me, I beseech thee, such a hope as may be answerable to
the only ground of hope, thy promises, and such as may both encourage and
enable me to purify my self from all filthiness, both of flesh and Spirit,
that so it may indeed become to me an anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast entering even within the vail, whither the forerunner is for me
entered, even Jesus Christ my high Priest and blessed Redeemer.

For the LOVE of GOD.
O Holy and gracious Lord, who art infinitely excellent in thy self, and
infinitely bountiful and compassionate toward me, I beseech thee suffer not my
heart to be so hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, as to resist such
charms of love, but let them make deep and lasting impressions on my soul.
Lord, thou art pleased to require my heart, and thou only have right to it. O
let me not be so sacrilegiously unjust as to alienate any part of it, but
enable me to render it up whole and entire to thee. But, O my God, thou see
it is already usurped, the world with its vanities has seized it, and like a
strong man armed keeps possession, O thou who art stronger come upon him, and
take this unworthy heart of mine as thine own spoil, refine it with that
purifying fire of thy love, that it may be a fit habitation for thy Spirit:
Lord, if thou see it fit, be pleased to let me taste of those joys, those
ravishments of thy love, wherewith thy Saints have bin so transported. But if
in this I know not what I ask, if I may not choose my place in thy Kingdom, yet
O Lord deny me not to drink of thy cup, let me have such a sincerity and degree
of love, as may make me endure any thing for thy sake, such a perfect love as
may cast out all fear and all sloth too, that nothing may seem to me too
grievous to suffer, or too difficult to do in obedience to thee, that so
expressing my love by keeping thy Commandments, I may by thy mercy at last
obtain that Crown of life, which thou have promised to those that love thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For SINCERITY.
O Holy Lord, who requirest truth in the inward parts, I humbly beseech thee to
purge me from all hypocrisy and unsincerity. The heart, O Lord, is deceitful
above all things, and my heart is deceitful above all hearts, O thou who
searchest the heart, and reins, try me, and seek the ground of my heart, and
suffer not any accursed thing to lurk within me but purify me even with fire,
so thou consume my dross. O Lord, I cannot deceive thee, but I may most easily
deceive my self, I beseech thee let me not rest in any such deceit, but bring
me to a sight and hatred of my most hidden corruptions, that I may not cherish
any one darling lust, but make an utter destruction of every Amalekite; O
suffer me not to speak peace to my self, when there is no peace, but grant I
may judge of my self, as thou judge of me, that I may never be at peace with
my self, till I am at perfect peace with thee, and by purity of heart be
qualified to see thee in thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ.

For DEVOTION in PRAYER.
O Gracious Lord God, who not only permittest, but invitest us miserable and
needy creatures, to present our petition to thee, grant I beseech thee, that
the frequency of my prayer may be somewhat proportionable to those continual
needs I have of thy mercy: Lord, I confess, it is the greatest honor and the
greatest advantage, thus to be allowed access to thee, yet so sottish and
stupid is my profane heart, that it shuns or frustrates the opportunities of
it. My Soul, O Lord, is possessed with a spirit of infirmity, it is bowed
together, and can in no wise lift up it self to thee. O be thou pleased to cure
this sad, this miserable disease, to inspirit and inliven this earthy drossy
heart, that it may freely mount toward thee, that I may set a true value on
this most valuable privilege, and take delight in approaching to thee, and
that my approaches may be with a reverence, some way answerable to that awful
Majesty I come before, with an importunity and earnestness, answerable to those
pressing wants I have to be supplied, and with such a fixedness and attention
of mind, as no wandering thoughts may interrupt; that I may no more incur the
guilt of drawing near to thee with my lips, when my heart is far from thee, or
have my prayers turned into sin, but may so ask that I may receive, seek that I
may find, knock that it may be opened unto me; that from praying to thee here,
I may be translated to the praising thee eternally in thy glory, through the
merits and intercession of Jesus Christ.

For HUMILITY.
O Thou High and Lofty one, that inhabitest Eternity, yet art pleased to dwell
with the humble spirit, pour into my heart, I beseech thee, that excellent
grace of Humility, which may utterly work out all those vain conceits I have of
my self; Lord convince me powerfully of my own wretchedness, make me to see
that I am miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and not only dust, but
sin, that so in all thy dispensations toward me I may lay my hand upon my
mouth, and heartily acknowledge that I am less then the least of thy mercies,
and greater then the greatest of thy Judgments. And, O Lord, grant me not
only to walk humbly with my God, but even with men also, that I may not only
submit my self to thy rebukes, but even to those of my fellow Christians, and
with meekness receive and obey their admonitions. And make me so to behave my
self toward all, that I never do any thing through strife or vainglory; and
to that end grant, that in lowliness of mind I may esteem every other man
better then my self, and be willing that others should esteem them so also;
that I neither nourish any high opinion of my self, nor covet one among others,
but that despising the vain praise of men, I may seek that praise which comes
from thee only. That so in stead of those mean servile Arts I have used to
recommend me to the esteem of men, I may now employ all my industry and care to
approve my self to thee, who resistest the proud, and gives grace to the
humble: grant this, O Lord, for his sake, who humbled himself unto the death of
the Corss, Jesus Christ.

For the FEAR of GOD.
O Glorious Majesty, who only art high, and to be feared, possess my Soul with
a Holy awe and reverence of thee, that I may give thee the honor due unto thy
Name, and may bear such a respect to all things which relate to thee, that I
may never profane any Holy thing, or sacrilegiously invade what thou have set
apart to thy self. And, O Lord, since thou art a God that wilt not clear the
guilty, let the dread of thy justice make me tremble to provoke thee in any
thing, O let me not so misplace my fear, as to be afraid of a man that shall
die, and of the Son of m^n who shall be made as grass, and forget the Lord my
Maker; But replenish my Soul with that fear of the Lord, which is the beginning
of wisdom, which may be as a bridle to all my brutish appetites, and keep me in
a constant conformity to thy Holy will* Hear me, O Lord, I beseech thee, and
put this fear in my heart, that I may not depart from thee, but may with fear
and trembling work out my own Salvation, through Jesus Christ.

For TRUST on GOD.
O Almighty Lord, who never failest them that trust on thee, give me grace, I
beseech thee, in all my difficulties and distresses, to have recourse to thee,
to rest and depend on thee; thou shall keep him, O Lord, in perfect peace,
whose mind is staid on thee, O let me always rest on this firm Pillar, and
never exchange it for the broken reeds of worldly succors, suffer not my heart
to be overcharged with cares of this life, taking thought what I shall eat, or
drink, or wherewithal I shall be clothed, but grant, that having by honest
labor and industry done my part, I may cheerfully commit my self to thy
providence, casting all my care upon thee, and being careful for nothing, but
to be of the number of those whom thou ownest and carest for, even such as keep
thy Testimonies and think upon thy Commandments to do them. That seeking first
thy Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, all these outward things may be
added unto me, in such a measure as thy wisdom know best for me; grant this,
O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake.

For THANKFULNESS.
O Most Gracious and Bountiful Lord, who fillest all things living with good,
and expectest no other return* but praise and thanksgiving, let me O Lord,
never defraud thee of that so easy tribute, but let my heart be ever filled
with the sense, and my mouth with the acknowledgment of thy mercies. It is a
joyful and a pleasant thing to be thankful, O suffer me not, I beseech thee, to
loose my part in that Divine pleasure, but grant that as I daily receive
blessings from thee, so I may daily from an affectionate and devout heart offer
up thanks to thee, and grant that not only my lips, but my life may show forth
thy praise, by consecrating my self to thy service, and walking in Holiness and
Righteousness before thee all the days of my life, through Jesus Christ my
Lord and blessed Savior.

For CONTRITION.
O Holy Lord, who art a merciful embracer of true penitents, but yet a
consuming fire toward obstinate sinners, how shall I approach thee, who have
so many provoking sins to inflame thy wrath, and ^o little sincere repentance
to incline thy mercy! O be thou pleased to soften and melt this hard obdurate
heart of mine, that I may heartily bewail the iniquities of my life, strike
this rock, O Lord, that the waters may flow out, even floods of tears, of wash
my polluted conscience; My drowzy Soul has too long slept securely in sin,
Lord, awake it, though it be with thunder, and let me rather feel thy terrors,
then not feel my sin. Thou sentest thy blessed Son to heal the broken hearted,
but Lord what will that avail me, if my heart be whole. O break it, that it may
be capable of his healing virtue; and grant, I beseech thee, that having once
tasted the bitterness of sin, I may fly from it, as from the face of a
serpent, and bring forth fruits of repentance, in amendment of life, to the
praise and glory of thy grace, in Jesus Christ our blessed Redeemer.

For MEEKNES.
O Blessed Jesu, who were led as a sheep to the slaughter, Let, I beseech thee,
that admirable example of Meekness quench in me all sparks of anger, and
revenge, and work in me such a gentleness, and calmness of spirit, as no
provocations may ever be able to disturb. Lord, grant, I may be so far from
offering the least injury, that I may never return the greatest, any otherwise
then with prayers and kindness, that I who have so many talents to be forgiven
by thee, may never exact pence of my brethren, but that putting on bowels of
mercy, meekness, long-suffering, thy peace may rule in my heart, and make it an
acceptable habitation to thee, who art the Prince of peace, to whom, with the
Father, and Holy Spirit, be all honor and glory for ever.

For CHASTITY.
O Holy and immaculate Jesus, whose first descent was into the Virgins womb,
and who do still love to inhabit only in pure and virgin hearts, I beseech
thee send thy Spirit of purity to cleanse me from all filthiness, both of flesh
and spirit; my body, O Lord, is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, O let me never
pollute that Temple with any uncleanness. And because out of the heart proceed
the things that defile the man, Lord, grant me to keep my heart with all
diligence, that no impure or foul thoughts be harbored there, but enable me, I
beseech thee, to keep both body and Soul pure and undefiled, that so I may
glorify thee here both in my body and spirit, and be glorified in both with
thee hereafter.

For TEMPERANCE.
O Gracious Lord who have in thy bounty to mankind afforded us the use of thy
good creatures, for our corporal refreshment, grant I may always use this
liberty with thankfulness, and moderation, O let me never be so enslaved to
that brutish pleasure of the taste, that my Table become a snare to me, but
give me, I beseech thee, a perfect abhorrence of all degrees of excess, and let
me eat and drink only for those ends, and according to those measures, which
thou have assigned me, for health and not for luxury. And Lord, grant that my
pursuits may be, not after the meat that perishes, but after that which
endures to everlasting life, that hungring and thirsting after righteousness,
I may be filled with thy grace here, and thy glory hereafter, through Jesus
Christ.

For CONTENTEDNES.
O Merciful God, thy wisdom is infinite to choose, and thy love forward to
dispense good things to us, O let me always fully and entirely resign my self
to thy disposals, have no desires of my own, but a perfect satisfaction in thy
choices for me, that so in whatsoever estate I am, I may be therein content.
Lord grant I may never look with murmuring on my own condition, nor with envy
on other men's. And to that end I beseech thee, purge my heart of all covetous
affections, O let me never yield up any corner of my Soul to Mammon, but give
me such a contempt of these fading riches, that whether they increase o^
decrease, I may never set my heart upon them. But that all my care may be to be
rich toward God, to lay up my treasure in Heaven, that I may so set my
affections on things above, that when Christ who is my life shall appear, I may
also appear with him in glory. Grant this, O Lord, for the merits of the same
Jesus Christ.

For DILIGENGE.
O Lord, who have in thy wisdom ordained that man should be born to labor,
suffer me not to resist that design of thine, by giving my self up to sloth,
and idleness; But grant I may so employ my time, and all other talents thou
have entrusted me with, that I may not fall under the sentence of the slothful
and wicked servant; Lord, if it be thy will, make me some way useful to others,
that I may not live an unprofitable part of mankind, but however, O Lord, let
me not be useless to my self, but grant, I may give all diligence to make my
calling and election sure; My Soul is beset with many and vigilant adversaries,
O let me not fold my hands to sleep in the midst of so great dangers, but watch
and pray, that I enter not into temptation, enduring hardness, as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ, till at last from this state of warfare, thou
translate me to the state of triumph and bliss, in thy Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ.

For JUSTICE.
O Thou King of righteousness, who have Commanded us to keep judgment and do
Justice, be pleased by thy grace to cleanse my heart and hands from all fraud
and injustice, and give me a perfect integrity and uprightness in all my
dealings. O make me ever abhor to use my power to oppress, or my skill to
deceive my brother, and grant I most strictly observe that sacred rule, of
doing as I would be done to, that I may not dishonor my Christian profession,
by an unjust or fraudulent life, but in simplicity, and godly sincerity, have
my conversation in this life, never seeking to heap up treasures of wickedness,
but preferring a little with righteousness, before great revenues without
right. Lord, make me exactly careful to render to every man what by any sort of
obligation becomes his due, that I may never break the bond of any of those
relations, thou have placed me in, but may so behave my self toward all, that
none may have any evil thing to say of me: That so if it be possible, I may
have peace with all men, or however I may by keeping innocence and taking heed
to the thing that is right, have peace at the last, even peace with thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For CHARITY.
O Merciful Lord, who have made of one blood, and redeemed by one ransom all
Nations of men, let me never harden my bowels against any that partake of the
same nature and redemption with me, but grant me an Universal Charity toward
all men. Give me, O thou Father of compassions, such a tenderness and
meltingness of heart, that I may be deeply affected with all the miseries and
calamities outward or inward of my brethren, and diligently employ all my
abilities for their succor and relief. O let not an unchristian self-love
possess my heart, but drive out that accursed spirit, and let thy Spirit of
love enter and dwell there, and make me seek not to please my self, but my
Neighbor for his good to edification, even as Christ pleased not himself.
Lord, make me a faithful steward of all those talents, thou have committed to
me, for the benefit of others, that so when thou shall call me to give an
account of my stewardship, I may do it with joy and not with grief: grant this,
merciful Lord, I beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake.

For PERSEVERANCE.
O Eternal and unchangeable Lord God, who art the same yesterday and to day and
for ever. Be thou pleased to communicate some small ray of that excellence,
some degree of that stability to me thy wretched creature, who am light and
unconstant, turned about with every blast; my understanding is very deceivable,
O establish it in thy truth, keep it from the snares of seducing spirits, that
I may not be led away with the error of the wicked* and fall from my own
stedfastness; my will also, O Lord, is irresolute, and wavering, and does not
cleave steadfastly unto God, my goodness is but as the morning cloud, and as the
early dew it passes away. O strengthen and confirm me, and what ever good work
thou have wrought in me, be pleased to accomplish and perform it, until the day
of Christ. Lord thou see my weakness, and thou know the number and
strength of those temptations I have to struggle with, O leave me not to my
self, but cover thou my head in the day of battle, and in all spiritual combats
make me more then conqueror, through him that loved me. O let no terrors or
flatteries either of the world, or my own flesh ever draw me from my obedience
to thee, but grant that I may continue steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord, and by patient continuance in well-doing, seek, and at
last obtain glory, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

A brief Paraphrase of the LORDS PRAYER To be used as a Prayer.
[Our FATHER which art in Heaven.]

O Lord, who dwell in the highest heavens, thou art the Author of our being,
thou have also begotten us again unto a lively hope, and carryest toward us
the tenderness and bowels of a most compassionate father, O make us to render
to thee the love and obedience of children; and that we may resemble thee our
father in heaven (that place of true delight and purity) give us a holy disdain
of all the deceitful pleasures and foul pollutions of this world, and so raise
up our minds that we may always have our conversation in heaven, from whence
we look for our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.

[1. Hallowed be thy Name.]

Strike such an awe into all our hearts, that we may humbly reverence thee in
thy Name, which is great, wonderful, and holy, and carry such a sacred respect
to all things that relate to thee and thy worship, as may express our reverence
of thy great Majesty: Let all the people praise thee, O God, let all the people
praise thee.

[2. Thy Kingdom Come.]

Establish thy throne and rule for ever in our souls, and by the power of thy
grace subdue all those rebellious corruptions that exalt themselves against
thee, they are those enemies of thine which would not that thou should reign
over them, O let them be brought forth and slain before thee, and make us such
faithful subjects of this thy Kingdom of Grace, that we may be capable of thy
kingdom of glory, and then Lord Jesus come quickly.

[3. Thy Will be done in earth, etc.]

Enable us by thy grace cheerfully to suffer thy will in all thy inflictions,
and readily to perform it in all thy commands, give us of that heavenly zeal to
thy service, wherewith the blessed Angels of thy presence are inspired, that we
may obey thee with the like fervor and alacrity, and that following them in
their obedience, we may be joined with them to sing eternal praises in thy
Kingdom to God, and to the Lamb for ever.

[4. Give us this day our daily bread.]

Give us that continual supply of thy grace, which may sustein and nourish our
souls unto eternal life. And be thou pleased also to provide for our bodies all
those things which thou see fit for their support, through this our earthly
pilgrimage, and make us cheerfully to rest on thee for them, first seeking thy
Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, and then not doubting but all these
things shall be added unto us.

[5. Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them, etc.]

Heal our souls, O Lord, for we have sinned against thee, let thy tender
mercies abound toward us, in the forgiveness of all our offenses; And grant O
Lord, that we may never forfeit this pardon of thine, by denying ours to our
brethren, but give us those bowels of compassion to others which we stand in so
much greater need of from thee, that we may forgive as fully and finally upon
Christ's Command, as we desire to be forgiven, for his merits and intercession.

[6. Lead us not into Temptation but deliver, etc.]

O Lord, we have no strength against those multitudes of temptations that daily
assalt us, only our eyes are upon thee, O be thou pleased either to restrain
them or assist us, and in thy faithfulness suffer us not to be tempted above
that we are able, but in all our temptations make us a way to escape that we be
not overcome by them, but may when thou shall call us to it, resist even unto
blood* striving against sin, that being faithful unto death, thou may give
us the crown of life.

[For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, etc.]

Hear us and graciously answer our petitions for thou art the great King over
all the earth whose Power is infinite and artable to do for us above all that
we can ask or think, and to whom belongs the Glory of all that good thou
workest in us or for us. Therefore blessing, honor, glory and power be unto
him, that sits upon the throne, to our God, for ever and ever. Amen.

PIOUS EJACULATIONS Taken out of the Book of PSALMS.
For PARDON of SIN.
HAve mercy on me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the multitude
of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness and cleanse me from my sin.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

My misdeeds prevail against me, O be thou merciful unto my sins.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified.

For thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

Turn thee O Lord and deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercies sake.

For GRACE.
TEach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God.

Teach me thy way O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth, O knit my heart to
thee, that I may fear thy name.

Make me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

O let my heart be found in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.

Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness.

Turn away mine eyes, least they behold vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way.

I am a stranger upon earth, O hide not thy Commandments from me.

Lord teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto Wisdom.

For the LIGHT of Gods COUNTENANCE:
LOrd, why abhorrest thou my soul, and hidest thy face from me, O hide not thou
thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thy loving kindness is better then life it self.

Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me.

Comfort the Soul of thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my Soul.

THANKSGIVING.
I Will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

Thou art my God, and I will thank thee, thou art my God and I will praise thee.

I will sing unto the Lord, as long as I live, I will praise my God whilst I
have my being.

Praised be God which has not cast out my prayer, nor turned his mercy from me.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things.

And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever, and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty; Amen, Amen.

For DELIVERANCE from TROUBLE.
BE merciful unto me, O Lord, be merciful unto me, for my Soul trusts in
thee, and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, until these
calamities be overpast.

Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies, for I fly unto thee to hide me.

O keep my Soul, and deliver me, let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in thee.

Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of
the net.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged, O bring thou me out of my troubles.

For the CHURCH.
O Be favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long? Why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture?

O think upon thy Congregation, whom thou have purchased and Redeemed of old.

Look upon the Tribe of thine Inheritance, and Mount Sion where thou have dwelt.

It is time for thee, Lord, to lay to thy hand, for they have destroyed thy Law.

Arise, O God, and maintain thine own cause.

Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

Brief heads of SELF-EXAMINATION, Especially before the SACRAMENT, Collected
out of the foregoing Treatise, concerning the breaches of our DUTY.
To GOD.
NOt believing there is a God. Not believing his Word. Not believing it
Practically, so as to live according to our belief. Despairing of Gods mercy,
so as to neglect duty.
Presuming groundlesly on it, whilst we go on in wilful sin. Not loving God
for his own excellencies. Not loving him for his goodness to us. Not laboring
to please him. Not desiring to draw near to him in his Ordinances. Not longing
to enjoy him in Heaven. Not fearing God so as to keep from offending him.
Fearing man above him, by committing sin, to shun some outward suffering. Not
trusting on God in dangers and distresses. Using unlawful means to bring us out
of them. Not depending on God for supply of our wants. Immoderate care for
outward things. Neglecting to labor, and expecting God should support us in
our idleness. Not looking up to God for a blessing on our honest endeavors.
Not having a high esteem of God. Not submitting obediently to act his will. Not
patiently suffering it, but murmuring at his corrections. Not amending by them.
Not being thankful to him. Not acknowledging his wisdom in choosing for us, but
having eager and impatient desires of our own. Not honoring God by a reverend
usage of the things that relate to him. Behaving our selves irreverently in his
House Robbing God, by taking things that are consecrated to him. Profaning Holy
times, the Lords Day, and the Feasts, and Fasts of the Church. Neglecting to
read the Holy Scriptures, not marking when we do read. Being careless to get
knowledge of our duty. Choosing rather to continue ignorant, then put our selves
to the pains or shame of learning. Placing Religion in hearing of Sermons,
without practicing them. Breaking our vow made at Baptism. By resorting to
witches, and conjurers; i. e. to the Devil. By loving the pomps and vanities of
the world, and following its sinful customs. By fulfilling the lusts of the
flesh. Profaning the Lords Supper. By coming to it ignorantly, without
examination, contrition, and purposes of new life. By behaving our selves
irreverently at it, without devotion, and spiritual affection. By neglecting to
keep the promises made at it. Profaning Gods Name, by blasphemous thoughts, or
discourse. Giving others occasion to blaspheme him, by our vile and wicked
lives. Taking unlawful oaths. Perjury. Swearing in ordinary communication. Not
worshipping God. Omitting prayers, public or private, and being glad of a
pretense to do so. Asking unlawful things, or to unlawful ends. Not purifying
our hearts from sin, before we pray. Not praying with Faith and Humility.
Coldness and deadness in prayer. Wandering thoughts in it. Irreverent gestures
of body in prayer. Neglecting the duty of Repentance. Not calling our selves to
daily account for our sins. Not assigning any set or solemn times, for
humiliation, and confession, or too seldom. Not deeply considering our sins, to
beget, contrition for them. Not acting revenges on our selves, by fasting, and
other acts of Mortification. Outward Idolatry in worshipping of creatures.
Inward Idolatry, in placing our love, joy, and other affections more on
creatures, then the Creator.
To our SELVES.
Being pufft up with high conceits of our selves: In respect of natural parts
as beauty, wit, etc Of worldly riches, and honors. Of Grace. Greedily seeking
the praise of men. Directing Christian Actions, as prayer, alms, etc. to that
end. Committing sins, to avoid reproach from wicked men. Disturbing our minds
with anger, and peevishness. Not carefully examining, what our estate toward
God is. Not trying our selves by the true rule, i. e. our obedience to Gods
Commands. Not weighing the lawfulness of our actions, before we venture on
them. Not examining our past actions, to repent of the ill, to give God the
glory of the good. Uncontentedness in our estates. Greedy desires after honor
and riches. Seeking to gain them by sinful means. Envying the condition of
other men. Being negligent in observing, and resisting temptations. Not
improving Gods gifts, outward or inward, to his honor. Abusing our natural
parts, as wit, memory, strength, etc. to sin. Neglecting, or resisting the
motions of Gods Spirit. Uncleanness, adultery, fornication, unnatural lusts,
etc. Uncleanness of the eye, and hand. Filthy, and obscene talking. Impure
fancies, and desires. Heightning of lust, by pampering the body. Not laboring
to subdue it, by fasting or other severities. Eating too much. Making pleasure,
not health, the en^ of eating. Being too curious, or costly in meats.
Drunkenness. Drinking more then is useful to our bodies, though not to
drunkenness. Wasting the time, or estate, in good fellowship. Abusing our
strength of brain, to the making others drunk. Immoderate sleeping. Idleness,
and negligence in our callings. Using unlawful recreations. Being too vehement
upon lawful ones. Spending too much time at them. Being drawn by them to anger,
or covetousness. Being proud of apparel. Striving to go beyond our rank.
Bestowing too much time, care, or cost about it. Abstaining from such excesses,
not out of conscience, but covetousness. Pinching our bodies, to fill our
purses.
To our NEIGHBOR.
Being injurious to our Neighbor. Delighting causlesly to grieve his mind.
Ensnaring his Soul in sin, by command, counsel, enticement, or example.
Affrighting him from Godliness, by our scoffing at it. Not seeking to bring
those to Repentance, whom we have led into sin. Murder open, or secret. Drawing
men to intemperance or other vices, which may bring diseases or death. Stirring
men up to quarrelling, and fighting Maiming, or hurting the body of our
Neighbor. Fierceness, and rage against him. Coveting our Neighbors wife.
Actually defiling her. Spoiling the goods of others, upon spite and mal^ce.
Coveting to gain them to our selves. Oppressing by violence, and force, or
color of Law. Not paying what we borrow. Not paying what we have voluntarily
promised. Keeping back the wages of the servant, and hireling. Unfaithfulness
in trusts, whether to the living or dead. Using Arts of deceit, in buying and
selling. Exacting upon the necessities of our Neighbors. Blasting the credit
of our Neighbor: By False Witness. By Railng. By whispering. Encouraging
others in their slanders. Being forward to believe ill reports of our
Neighbor. Causeless suspicions. Rash judging of him. Despising him for his
infirmities. Inviting others to do so by scoffing and deriding him. Bearing any
malice in the heart. Secret wishing of death, or any kind of hurt to our
Neighbor. Rejoicing, when any evil befalls him. Neglecting to make what
satisfaction we can, for any sort of injury done to our Neighbor. Lying.
Churlish, and proud behavior to others. Froward and peevish conversation.
Bitter and reproachful language. Cursing. Not paying the respect due to the
qualities or gifts of others. Proudly overlooking them. Seeking to lessen
others esteem of them. Not employing our abilities whether of mind or estate,
in administering to those whose wants require it. Unthankfulness to our
Benefactours. Especially those that admonish us. Not amending upon their
reproof. Being angry at them for it. Not reverencing our Civil Parent, the
lawful Magistrate. Judging and speaking evil of him. Grudging his just
tributes. Sowing sedition among the people. Refusing to obey his lawful
commands. Rising up against him, or taking part with them that do. Despising
our Spiritual Fathers. Not loving them for their works sake. Not obeying those
Commands of God they deliver to us. Seeking to withold from them their just
maintenance. Forsaking our lawful Pastors; to follow factious teachers.
Stubborn and irreverent behavior to our natural Parents. Despising and
publishing their infirmities. Not loving them, nor endeavoring to bring them
joy and comfort. Contemning their counsels. Murmuring at their Government.
Coveting their estates, though by their death. Not ministering to them in their
wants of all sorts. Neglecting to pray for Gods blessing on these several sorts
of Parents. Want of natural affection to children* Mothers refusing to nurse
them without a just impediment, Not bringing them timely to Baptism. Not early
instructing them in the ways of God. Suffering them for want of timely
correction to get customs of sin. Setting them evil examples. Discouraging
them by harsh and cruel usage. Not providing for their subsistence, according
to our ability. Consuming their portions in our own riot. Reserving all till
our death, and letting them want in the mean time. Not seeking to entail a
blessing on them by our Christian lives. Nor heartily praying for them. Want of
affection to our natural brethren. Envyings and heart-burnings toward them.
Not loving our spiritual brethren; i. e. our fellow Christians. Having no
fellow-feeling of their sufferings. Causelessly forsaking their commnnion in
Holy Duties. Not taking deeply to heart the desolations of the Church. Marrying
within the degrees forbidden. Marrying for undue ends, as covetousness, lust,
etc. Unkind, froward, and unquiet behavior toward the husband, or wife.
Unfaithfulness to the bed. Not bearing with the infirmities of each other. Not
endeavoring to advance one another good, spiritual or temporal. The wife
resisting the lawful command of her husband. Her striving for rule and dominion
over him. Not praying for each other. Unfaithfulness to a friend. Betraying his
secrets. Denying him assistance in his needs. Neglecting lovingly to admonish
him. Flattering him in his faults. Forsaking his friendship upon flight, or no
cause. Making leagues in sin, in stead of virtuous friendships. Servants
disobeying the lawful commands of their Masters. Purloining their goods.
Carelessly wasting them. Murmuring at their rebukes. Idleness. Eye service.
Masters using servants tyrannically and cruelly. Being too remiss, and
suffering them to neglect their duty. Having no care of their Souls. Not
providing them means of instruction in Religion. Not admonishing them, when
they commit sins. Not allowing them time, and opportunity for prayer, and the
worship of God. Want of bowels, and Charity to our Neighbors. Not heartily
desiring their good spiritual, or temporal. Not loving, and forgiving enemies.
Taking actual revenges upon them. Falsen^ss, professing kindness, and acting
none. Not laboring to do all good we can to the Soul of our Neighbor. Not
assisting him to our power in his bodily distresses. Not defending his good
name, when we know or believe him slandered. Denying him any neighbourly
office, to preserve or advance his estate. Not defending him from oppression,
when we have power. Not relieving him in his poverty Not giving liberally, or
cheerfully. Not loving peace. Going to Law upon slight occasions. Bearing
inward enmity to those we sue. Not laboring to make peace among others. The
use of this Catalogue of sins is this: Upon days of Humiliation, especially
before the Sacrament, read them consideringly over, and at every particular ask
thine own heart, Am I guilty of this? And whatsoever by such examination thou
find thy self faulty in, confess particularly, and humbly to God, with all
the heightning circumstances, which may any way increase their guilt, and make
serious resolutions against every such sin, for the future; After which thou
may use this f^rm f^ll^wing.
O LORD, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, for my iniquities
are increased over my head, and my trespass is grown up even unto Heaven. I
have wrought all these great provocations, and that in the most provoking
manner, they have not been only single but repeated acts of sin: for, O Lord,
of all this black Catalogue which I have now brought forth before thee, how few
are there which I have not often committed, nay, which are not become even
habitual and customary to me? And to this frequency, I have added both a
greediness, and obstinacy in sinning, turning into my course as the horse
rusheth into the battle, doing evil with both hands, earnestly, yea hating to
be reformed, and casting thy words behind me, quenching thy Spirit within me,
which testified against me, to turn me from my evil ways, and frustrating all
those outward means, whether of judgment or mercy, which thou have used to draw
me to thy self. Nay, O Lord, even my repentances may be numbered amongst my
greatest sins, they have sometimes been feigned and hypocritical, always so
slight and ineffectual, that they have brought forth no fruit in amendment of
life, but I have still returned with the dog to his vomit, and the sow to the
mire again, and have added the breach of resolutions and vows, to all my
former guilts. Thus, O Lord. I am become out of measure sinful, and since I
have thus chosen death, I am most worthy to take part in it, even in the second
death, the lake of fire and brimstone. This this, O Lord, is in justice to be
the portion of my cup, to me belongs nothing but shame and confusion of face
eternally. But to thee, O Lord God, belongs mercy and forgiveness, though I
have rebelled against thee. O remember not my sins and offenses, but according
to thy mercy think thou upon me O Lord for thy goodness. Thou sentest thy Son
to seek and to save that which was lost, behold, O Lord, I have gone astray
like a sheep that is lost, O seek thy servant, and bring me back to the
Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul; let thy Spirit work in me a hearty sense and
detestation of all my abominations, that true contrition of heart, which thou
have promised not to despise. And then be thou pleased to look on me, to take
away all iniquity, and receive me graciously, and for his sake who has done
nothing amiss, be reconciled to me, who have done nothing well, wash away the
guilt of my sins in his blood, and subdue the power of them by his grace, and
grant, O Lord, that I may from this hour bid a final adieu to all ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, that I may never once more cast a look toward Sodom, or long
after the flesh pots of Egypt, but consecrate my self entirely to thee, to
serve thee in Righteousness and true Holiness, reckoning my self to be dead
indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord and blessed
Savior.

This PENITENTIAL PSALM May also fitly be used.
PSALM. 51.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I knowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou
might be justisted in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean, thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whiter then snow.

Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of my health,
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee, but thou delightest
not in burnt-of^ering.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, a broken and contrite heart, O God,
shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the Sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burn^-^fferings and oblations, then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
altar.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

PRAYERS BEFORE the receiving of the blessed SACRAMENT.
O Most merciful God, who have in thy great goodness prepared this spiritual
feast for sick and famished Souls, make my desires and gaspings after it,
answerable to my needs of it. I have with the prodigal wasted that portion of
grace thou bestowedst upon me, and therefore do infinitely want a supply out of
this treasury: But O Lord, how shall such a wretch as I dare to approach this
holy table: I am a dog, how shall I presume to take the childrens bread, or how
shall this spiritual Manna, this food of Angels be given to one, who has
chosen to feed on husks with swine, nay to one who has already so often
trampled these precious things under foot, either carelessly neglecting, or
unworthily receiving these holy mysteries? O Lord, my horrible guiltiness makes
me tremble to come, and yet makes me not dare to keep away, for where, O Lord,
shall my polluted Soul be washed, if not in this fountain which thou have
opened for sin and for uncleanness? Hither therefore I come, and thou have
promised that him that comes to thee thou will in no wise cast out: This is, O
Lord, the blood of the New Testament, grant me so to receive it, that it may be
to me for remission of sins. And though I have so often and so wretchedly
broken my part of that Covenant, whereof this Sacrament is a seal, yet be thou
graciously pleased to make good thine, to be merciful to my unrighteousness,
and to remember my sins and mine iniquities no more, and not only so, but to
put thy laws into my heart, and write them in my mind, and by the power of thy
grace dispose my soul to such a sincere and constant obedience, that I may
never again provoke thee; Lord grant that in these holy mysteries, I may not
only commemorate, but effectually receive my blessed Savior, and all the
benefits of his passion: And to that end give me such a preparation of soul, as
may qualify me for it, give me a deep sense of my sins, and unworthiness, that
being weary and heavy laden. I may be capable of his refreshings, and by being
suppled in my own tears, I may be the fitter to be washed in his blood, raise
up my dull and earthly mind from grovelling here below, and inspire it with a
holy zeal, that I may with spiritual affection approach this spiritual feast:
and let O Lord, that infinite love of Christ, in dying for so wretched a
sinner, inflame my frozen benumbed soul, and kindle in me that sacred fire of
love to him, and that so vehement that no waters may quench, no floods drown
it, such as may burn up all my dross, not leave one unmortified lust in my
soul, and such as may also extend it self to all whom thou have given me
command and example to love, even enemies as well as friends. Finally, O Lord,
I beseech thee to cloth me in the wedding garment, and make me though of my
self a most unworthy, yet by thy mercy an acceptable guest at this holy tab^e,
that I may not eat and drink my own condemnation, but may have my pardon
sealed, my weaknesses repaired, my corruptions subdued, and my soul so
inseparably united to thee, that no temptations may ever be able to dissolve
the union, but that being begun here in grace, it may be consummated in glory;
Grant this, O Lord, for thy dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ.

ANOTHER.
O BLESSED Jesus, who once offeredst up thy self for me upon the Cross, and now
offerest thy self to me in the Sacrament, let not, I beseech thee, my
impenitence and unworthiness frustrate these so inestimable mercies to me, but
qualify me by thy grace to receive the full benefit of them. O Lord, I have
abundant need of thee, but am so clogged with guilt, so holden with the cords of
my sins, that I am not able to move toward thee, O lose me from this band,
wherewith Satan and my own lusts have bound me, and draw me that I may run
after thee. Lord, thou see daily how eagerly I pursue the paths that lead to
death, but when thou invitest me to life and glory, I turn my back and forsake
my own mercy. How often has this feast been prepared, and I have with
frivilous excuses absented my self, or if I have come, it has been rather to
defy then to adore thee, I have brought such troops of thy professed enemies,
unrepented sins along with me, as if I ^ame not to commemorate, but renew thy
passion, crucifying thee afresh, and putting thee to open shame: and now of
what punishment shall I be thought worthy, who have thus trampled under foot
the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing! yet O
merciful Jesu, this blood is my only r^^^ge, O let this make my atonement or I
perish eternally, wherefore did thou shed it, but to save sinners, neither
can the merit of it be overwhelmed either by the greatness or number of sins. I
am a sinner, a great one, O let me find its saving efficacy. Be merciful unto
me, O God, be merciful to me for my soul trusts in thee, and in the clefts of
thy wound, shall be my refuge until thy fathers indignation be overpast. O
thou, who have as my high Priest sacrificed for me, intercede for me also, and
plead thy meritorious sufferings on my behalf, and suffer not, O my Redeemer,
the price of thy blood to be utterly lost: And grant, O Lord, that as the sins
I have to be forgiven are many, so I may love much: Lord thou see what faint,
what cold affections I have toward thee, O warm and enliven them; and as in
this Sacrament, that transcendent love of thine in dying for me is showed
forth; so I beseech thee, let it convey such grace into me, as may enable me to
make some returns of love: O let this divine fire descend from heaven into my
soul, and let my sins be the burnt offering for it to consume, that there may
not any corrupt affection, any accursed thing be shelterd in my heart, that I
may never again defile that place, which thou have chosen for thy temple. Thou
dyedst, O dear Jesu to redeem me from all iniquity, O let me not again sell my
self to work wickedness, but grant that I may approach thee at this time with
most sincere and fixed resolutions of an entire reformation, and let me receive
such grace, and strength from thee, as may enable me faithfully to perform
them: Lord, there are many old habituated diseases, my soul groans under. [
Her mention thy most prevailing corruptions.] And though I lie never so long at
the pool of Bethesda, come never so often to thy table, yet unless thou be
pleased to put forth thy healing virtue, they will still remain uncured. O thou
blessed Physician of souls, heal me, and grant I may now so touch thee, that
every one of these loath some issues may immediately stanch* that these
sicknesses may not be unto death but unto the glory of thy mercy in pardoning,
to the glory of thy grace in purifying so polluted a wretch. O Christ, hear me,
and grant I may now approach thee with such humility and contrition, love and
devotion, that thou may vouchsafe to come unto me, and abide with me,
communicating to me thy self, and all the merits of thy passion. And then, O
Lord, let no accusations of Satan, o^ my own conscience amaze or distract me,
bu^ having peace with thee, let me also have peace in my self, that this wine
may make glad, this bread of life may strengthen my heart, and enable me
cheerfully to run the way of thy Commandments. Grant this merciful Savior* I
beseech thee, for thine own bowels and compassions sake.

EjACULATIONS to be used at the LORDS TABLE.
LOrd I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.

I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men.

[ Here recollect some of thy greatest sins]

If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may
abide it?

But with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Redemption.

Behold, O Lord, thy beloved Son, in whom thou art well pleased.

Hearken to the cry of his blood, which speaks better things then that of
Abel.

By his Agony, and bloody Sweat, by his Cross, and Passion good Lord deliver me.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, grant me thy Peace.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me.

Immediately before Receiving.
THou have said that he that eats thy flesh and drinks thy blood has
eternal life.

Behold the servant of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word.

At the Receiving of the Bread.
BY thy Crucified Body deliver me from this body of death.

At the Receiving of the Cup.
O let this blood of thine purge my conscience from dead works, to serve the
living God.

Lord if thou will thou can make me clean.

O touch me, and say, I will, be thou clean.

After Receiving.
WHat shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me?

I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

Therefore blessing, honor, glory, and power be to him that sits upon the
Throne and to the Lamb, for ever and ever, Amen.

I have sworn* and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments.

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

A Thanksgiving after the Receiving of the Sacrament.
OThou Fountain of all goodness, from whom every good and perfect gift comes,
and to whom all honor and glory should be returned, I desire with all the most
fervent and inflamed affections of a grateful heart, to bless and praise thee
for those inestimable mercies thou have vouchsafed me; Lord what is man that
thou should so regard him, as to send thy beloved Son to suffer such bitter
things for him? But Lord, what am I, the worst of men, that I should have any
part in this atonement, who have so often despised him and his sufferings, O the
height, and depth of this mercy of thine, that art pleased to admit me to the
renewing of that Covenant with thee, which I have so often and so perversely
broken, that I who am not worthy of that daily bread, which sustains the body,
should be made partaker of this bread of life, which nourishes the Soul, and
that the God of all purity should vouchsafe to unite himself to so polluted a
wretch: O my God, suffer me no more, I beseech thee, to turn thy grace into
wantonness, to make thy mercy an occasion of security, but let this unspeakable
love of thine constrain me to obedience, that since my blessed Lord has died
for me, I may no longer live unto my self but to him; O Lord, I know there is
no concord between Christ and Belial, therefore since he has now been pleased
to enter my heart, O let me never permit any lust to chase him thence, but let
him that has so dearly bought me, still keep possession of me, and let nothing
ever take me out of his hand. To this end be thou graciously pleased to watch
over me, and defend me from all assaults of my spiritual enemies, but
especially deliver me from my self, from the treachery of my own heart, which
is too willing to yield it self a prey. And where thou see I am either by
nature or custom most weak, there do thou, I beseech thee, magnify thy power
in my preservation. [ Here name thy most dangerous temptations] And Lord let my
Saviors sufferings for my sins, and the vows I have now made against them,
never depart from my mind, but let the remembrance of the one enable me to
perform the other, that I may never make truce with those lusts, which nailed
his hands, pierced his side, and made his Soul heavy to the death. But that
having now a new listed my self under his banner, I may fight manfully, and
follow the Captain of my Salvation even through a Sea of blood. Lord, lift up
my hands that hang down, and my feeble knees, that I faint not in this warfare,
O be thou my strength, who am not able of my self to struggle with the
slightest temptations. How often have I turned my back in the day of battle?
How many of these sacramental vows have I violated? And Lord I have still the
sa^e unconstant deceitful heart, to betray me to the breach of this. O thou who
art Yea and Amen, in whom there is no shadow of change, communicate to me, I
beseech thee, such a stability of mind, that I may no more thus start aside,
like a broken bow, but that having my heart whole with thee, I may continue
steadfast in thy Covenant; That not one good purpose which thy Spirit has
raised in me this day, may vanish, as so many have formerly done, but that they
may bring f^rth fruit unto life eternal. Grant this, O merciful Father, through
the merits, and Mediation of my Crucified Savior.

A Prayer of Intercession to be used either before or after the receiving of
the Sacrament.
O MOST Gracious Lord, who so tenderly lovedst mankind, as to give thy dear Son
out of thy bosom, to become a propitiation for the sins of the whole world,
grant that the effect of this Redemption may be as Universal, as the design of
it, that it may be to the Salvation of all. O let no person by impenitence and
wilful sin forfeit his part in it, but by the power of thy grace bring all,
even the most obstinate sinners to Repentance. Inlighten all that sit in
darkness, all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics, take from them all
blindness, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word, and so fetch them home,
blessed Lord, unto thy fold, that they may be saved among the number of the
true Israelites. And for all those upon whom the Name of thy Son is called,
grant, O Lord, that their conversations may be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, that his Name be no longer Blasphemed among the Heathen through us. O
blessed Lord, how long shall Christendom continue the vilest part of the world,
a sink of all those abominable pollutions, which even Barbarians detest. O let
not our profession, and our practice be always at so wide a distance. Let not
the Disciples of the Holy and Immaculate Jesus, be of all others the most
profane and impure. Let not the subjects of the Prince of Peace be of all
others the most contentious, and bloody, but make us Christians indeed, as well
as in name, that we may walk worthy of that Holy Vocation, wherewith we are
called, and may all with one mind and one mouth glorify thee, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Have mercy on this languishing Church, look down from Heaven
the Habitation of thy Holiness and of thy glory, where is thy Zeal, and thy
strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward us? Are they
restrained? Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever,
but though our backslidings are many, and we have grievously rebelled, yet
according to all thy goodness, let thy anger and thy sury be turned away, and
cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, which is desolate, for the Lords
sake; and so separate between us and our sins, that they may no longer separate
between us and our God. Save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes, and
Governors, especially those to whom we owe subjection, plead thou their cause,
O Lord, against those that strive with them, and fight thou against those that
fight against them, and so guide and assist them in the discharge of that
office whereunto thou have appointed them, that under them we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty* Bless them that wait at thine
Altar, open thou their lips that their mouth may show forth thy praise, O let
not the lights of the world be put under bushels, but place them in their
candlesticks, that they may give light to all that are in the house. Let not
Jeroboams Priests profane thy service, but let the seed of Aaron still minister
before thee. And O thou Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, succor and
relieve all that are in affliction, deliver the outcast and poor, help them to
right that suffer wrong, let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before
thee, and according to the greatness of thy power, preserve thou those that are
appointed to dye; grant ease to those that are in pain, supplies to those that
suffer want, give to all presumptuous sinners a sense of their sins, and to all
dispa^ring, a sight of thy mercies, and do thou, O Lord, for every one
abundantly above what they can ask or think. Forgive my enemies, persecutors,
and slanderers, and turn their hearts. Power down thy blessings on all my
friends, and benefactors, all who have commended themselves to my Prayer. [
Here thou may name particular persons.] And grant, O merciful father, that
through this blood of the cross, we may all be presented pure and unblameable,
and unreprovable in thy sight; That so we may be admitted into that place of
purity, where no unclean thing can enter, there to sing eternal praises to
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, for ever.

A Prayer in times of common Persecution.
O BLESSED Savior, who have made the cross the badg of thy Disciples, enable
me, I beseech thee, willingly and cheerfully to embrace it; thou see, O Lord,
I am fallen into days, wherein he that departs from evil makes himself a
Prey, O make me so readily to expose all my outward concernments, when my
obedience to thee requires it, that what falls as a prey to men, may by thee
be accepted as a sacrifice to God: Lord preserve me so by thy grace that I
never suffer as an evil doer, and then, O Lord, if it be my lot to suffer as a
Christian, let me not be ashamed, but rejoice that I am counted worthy to
suffer for thy name: O thou who for my sake enduredst the cross, and despisedst
the shame, let the example of that love and patience prevail against all the
tremblings of my corrupt heart, that no terrors may ever be able to shake my
constancy, but that how long soever thou shall permit the rod of the wicked to
lie on my back, I may never put my hand unto wickedness: Lord, thou know
whereof I am made, thou remembrest that I am but flesh, and flesh, O Lord,
shrinks at the approach of any thing grievous. It is thy Spirit thy Spirit
alone, that can uphold me, O stablish me with thy free Spirit, that I be not
weary and faint in my mind. And by how much the greater thou discernest my
weakness, so much the more do thou show forth thy power in me, and make me, O
Lord, in all temptations steadfastly to look to thee, the author and finisher of
my faith, that so I may run the race, which is set before me, and resist even
unto blood, striving against sin: O dear Jesus, hear me, and though Satan
desire to have me, that he may winnow me as wheat, yet do thou, O blessed
Mediator, pray for me that my faith fail not, but that though it be tried with
fire, it may be found unto praise and glory and honor at thy appearing. And O
Lord, I beseech thee, grant that I may preserve not only constancy toward God,
but charity also toward men, even those whom thou shall permit to be the
instruments of my sufferings, Lord, let me not fail to imitate that admirable
meekness of thine, in loving and praying for my greatest persecutors, and do
thou, O Lord, overcome all their evil with thy infinite goodness, turn their
hearts, and draw them powerfully to thy self* and at last receive both me and
mine enemies into those mansions of peace and rest, where thou reignest with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, one God, for ever.

A Prayer in time of Affliction.
O JUST and holy Lord, who with rebukes do chasten man for sin, I desire
unfeignedly to humble my self under thy mighty hand, which now lies heavy upon
me, I heartily acknowledge, O Lord, that all I do, all I can suffer, is but the
due reward of my deeds, and therefore in thy severest infl^ctions I must still
say, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments. But, O Lord, I
beseech thee in judgment remember mercy, and though my sins have enforced thee
to strike, yet consider my weakness, and let not thy stripes be more heavy, or
more lasting then thou see profitable for my soul; correct me but with the
Chastisement of a father, not with the wounds of an enemy, and though thou take
not off thy rod, yet take away thine anger: Lord do not abhor my soul, nor cast
thy servant away in displeasure, but pardon my sins, I beseech thee, and if yet
in thy fatherly wisdom, thou see fit to prolong thy corrections, thy blessed
will be done, I cast my self, O Lord, at thy feet, do with me what thou
please. Try me as silver is tried so thou bring me out purified. And Lord
make even my flesh also to subscribe to this resignation, that there may be
nothing in me, that may rebel against thy hand, but that having perfectly
suppressed all repining thoughts, I may cheerfully drink of this cup. And how
little soever thou shall please to make it, Lord, let it p^ove medicinal, and
cure all the diseases of my soul, that it may bring forth in me the peaceable
fruit of righteousness. That so these light afflictions which are but for a
moment, may work for me a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
through Jesus Christ.

A Thanksgiving for Deliverance.
O BLESSED Lord, who art gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great
kindness, and repentest thee of the evil, I thankfully acknowledge before thee,
that thou have not dealt with me after my sins, nor rewarded me according to my
iniquities. My rebellions O Lord, deserved to be scourged with scorpions, and
thou have corrected them only with a gentle and fatherly rod, neither have thou
suffered me to l^e long under that, but have given me a timely and a gracious
issue out of my late distress: O Lord, I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy
for thou have considered my trouble and have known my soul in adversity. Thou
have smitten and thou have healed me, O let these various methods of thine have
their proper effects upon my soul; That I who have felt the smart of thy
chastisements, may stand in awe, and not sin, and that I who have likewise felt
the sweet refreshings of thy mercy, may have my heart ravished with it, and
knit to thee in the firmest bands of love, and that by both I may be preserved
in a constant entire obedience to Thee all my days, through Jesus Christ.

Directions for the time of Sickness.
WHEN thou find thy self visited with sickness, thou art immediately to
remember that it is God, which with rebukes does chasten man for sin. And
therefore let thy first care be to find out what it is that provokes him to
smite thee, and to that purpose examine thine own heart, search diligently what
guilts lie there, confess them humbly and penitently to God, and for the
greater s^^urity renew thy repentance for all the old sins of thy former life,
beg most earnestly and importunately his mercy, and p^rd^n in Christ Jesus, and
put on sincere and zealous resolutions of forsaking every evil way, for the
rest of that time which God shall spare thee. And that thy (...) heart deceive
thee not in this so weighty a business, it will be wisdom to send for some
godly Divine, not only to assist thee with his Prayers, but with his counsel
also. And to that purpose open thy heart so freely to him, that he may be able
to judge whether thy repentance be such as may give thee confidence to appear
before Gods dreadful Tribunal, and that if it be not, he may help thee what he
can toward the making it s^. And when thou have thus provided for thy better
part, thy soul, then consider thy body also, and as the Wise man says, Eccl.
38. 12. Give p^a^e to the Physician, for the Lord has created him: Use such
means as may be most likely to recover thy health, but always remember that
the success of them must come from God, and bew^^^ of Asa's sin, who sought to
the Physicions, and not to the Lord, 2 Chr. 6. 12. Dispose also betimes of thy
temporal affairs, by making thy will, and setting all things in such order as
thou meanest finally to leave them in, and defer it not till thy sickness grow
more violent, for then perhaps thou shall not have such use of thy reason as
may fi^ thee for it, or if thou have, it will be th^n much more seasonable to
employ thy thoughts on higher things, on the world thou art going to, rather
then that thou art about to leave, we cannot carry the things of this world
with us, when we go hence and it is not fit we should carry the thoughts of
them. Therefore let those be early dispatched that they may not disturb thee ^t
last.

A Prayer for a sick Person.
O MERCIFUL and Righteous Lord, the God of health and of ^^ckness, of life, and
of death, I most unfeignedly acknowledge that my great abuse of those many days
of strength and welfare, which thou have afforded me, has most justly
deserved thy present visitation. I desire, O Lord, humbly to accept of this
punishment of mine iniquity, and to bear the indignation of the Lord, because I
have sinned against him. And, O thou merciful Father, who designest not the
ruin but the amendment of those whom thou scourgest, I beseech thee by thy
grace so to sanctify this correction of thine to me, that this sickness of my
body may be a means of health to my soul, make me d^ligent to search my heart,
and do thou. O Lord enable me to discover every accursed thing, how closely
soever concealed there, that by the removal thereof, I may make way for the
removal of this punishment. Heal my soul, O Lord, which has sinned against
thee, and then if it be thy blessed will, heal my body also, restore the voice
of joy and health unto my dwelling, that I may live to praise thee, and to
bring forth fruits of repentance. But if in thy wisdom thou have otherwise
disposed, if thou have determined that this sickness shall be unto death, I
beseech thee to fit and prepare me for it give me that sincere and earnest
repentance, to which thou have promised mercy and pardon; weane my heart from
the world, and all its fading vanities, and make me to gasp and pant after
those more excellent and durable joys which are at thy right hand for ever.
Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, and in all the pains
of my body, in all the agonies of my spirit, let thy comforts refresh my soul,
and enable me patiently to wait, till my change come. And grant, O Lord, that
when my earthly house of this Tabernacle is dissolved, I may have a building of
God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. And that for his
sake, who by his precious blood has purchased it for me, even Jesus Christ.

A THANKSGIVING for RECOVERY.
O GRACIOUS Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, in whose hand my time
is. I praise and magnify thee, that thou have in love to my soul, delivered it
from the pit of corruption, and restored me to health again, it is thou alone,
O Lord, that have preserved my life from destruction, thou have chastned and
corrected me, but thou have not given me over unto death, O let this life which
thou have thus graciously spared be wholly consecrated to thee. Behold, O Lord,
I am by thy mercy made w^ole, O make me strictly careful to sin no more, least
a worse thing come unto me. Lord, let not this reprieve thou have now given me,
make me secure, as thinking that my Lord delayeth his coming, but grant me, I
beseech thee, to make a right use of this long suffering of thine, and so to
employ every minute of that time, thou shall allow me that when thou shall
appear, I may have confidence and not be ashamed before thee at thy coming.
Lord, I have found by this approach toward death, how dreadful a thing it is
to be taken unprepared. O let it be a perpetual admonition to me, to watch for
my Masters coming; And when the pleasures of sin shall present themselves to
entice me, O make me to remember how bitter they will be at the last. O Lord,
hear me, and as thou have in much mercy afforded me time, so grant me also
grace to work out my own salvation, to provide oil in my lamp, that when the
Bridgroom comes, I may go in with him to the marriage. Grant this, I beseech
thee, for thy dear Sons sake.

A Prayer at the approach of death.
O ETERNAL and everliving God, who first breathedst into man the breath of
life, and when thou take away that breath, he dies and is turned again to his
dust, look with compassion on me thy poor creature, who am now drawing near the
gates of death, and which is infinitely more terrible, the bar of judgment.
Lord my own heart condemns me, and thou art infinitely greater then my heart,
and know all things. The sins I know and remember, fill me with horror; but
there are also multitudes of others, which I either observed not at the time,
or have since carelessly forgot, which are all present to thee. Thou set my
misdeeds before thee, and my secret sins in the light of thy countenance, and
to what a mountainous heap must the minutely provocations of so many years
arise? How shall one so ungodly stand in thy Judgment, or such a sinner in the
Congregation of the Righteous? And to add yet more to my terror, my very
repentance I fear will not abide the trial, my frequent relapses heretofore
have sufficiently witnessed the unsincerity of my past resolutions. And then, O
Lord, what can secure me that my present dislikes of my sins are not rather the
effects of my amazing danger, then of any real change; and, O Lord, I know
thou art not mo^ked, nor wilt accept of any thing that is not perfectly
sincere. O Lord, when I consider this, fearfulness and trembling comes upon me,
and an horrible dread overwhelmeth me, my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and
my heart is wounded within me. But, O Lord, one deep calls upon another, the
depth of my misery upon the depth of thy mercy. Lord, save now, or I perish
eternally. O thou who willest not that any should perish, but that all should
come to Repentance, bring me, I beseech thee, though thus late, to a sincere
Repentance, such as thou will accept, who tryest the heart. Create in me, O
God, a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me: Lord one day is with
thee as a thousand years, O let thy mighty Spirit work in me now in this my
last day, whatsoever thou see wanting to fit me for thy mercy, and
acceptance. Give me a perfect and entire hatred of my sins, and enable me to
present thee with that sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, which thou
have promised not to despise; that by this I may be made capable of that
atonement, which thy dear Son has by the more excellent oblation of himself
made for all repenting sinners. He is the propitiation for our sins, he was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was on him, O heal me by his stripes, and let the cry
of his blood drown the clamor of my sins: I am indeed a child of wrath, but he
is the Son of thy love, for his sake spare me* O Lord, spare thy creature, whom
he has redeemed with his most precious blood, and be not angry with me for
ever. In his wounds, O Lord, I take Sanctuary, O let not thy vengeance pursue
me to this city of refuge: my Soul hangs upon him, O let me not perish with a
Jesus, with a Savior in my arms. But by his Agony and bloody Sweat, by his
Cross and Passion, by all that he did and suffered for sinners, good Lord
deliver me, deliver me, I beseech thee* from the wages of my sins, thy wrath
and everlasting damnation, in th^s time of my tribulation, in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment. Hea^ me O Lord, hear me; and do not now
repay my former neglects of thy calls, by refusing to answer me in this time of
my gr^atest need. Lord, there is but a step between me and death, O let not my
sun go down upon thy wrath, but sea^ my pardon, before I go hence and be no
more seen. Thy loving kindness is better then the life it self, O let me have
that in exchange, and I shall most gladly lay down this mortal life; Lord thou
know all my desire, and my groaning is not hid from thee, Deal thou with me,
O Lord, according to thy Name, for sweet is thy mercy take away the sting of
death, the guilt of my sins, and then though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, I will lay me down in peace, and Lord
when I awake up, let me be satisfied with thy presence in thy glory. Grant this
merciful God for his sake, who is both the Redeemer, and Mediator of sinners,
even Jesus Christ.

PSALMS.
PVT me not to rebuke O Lord in thi^^ anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure, neither is there
any rest in my bones by reason of my sins.

For my wickednesses are gone over my head, and are a sore burden too heavy for
me to bear.

My wounds stink and are corrupt through my foolishness.

Therefore is my spirit vexed within me, and my heart within me is desolate.

My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up, yea, they
are more in number, then the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me.

But thou, O Lord God, art full of compassion and mercy, long suffering,
plenteous in goodness and truth.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me for I am desolate, and in misery.

If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may
abide it.

O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according to thy mercy
think thou upon me, for thy goodness.

Look upon my adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sin.

Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble, O haste thee and hear
me.

Out of the deep do I call unto thee, Lord hear my voice.

Turn thee O Lord, and deliver my Soul, O save me for thy mercies sake.

O go not from me, for trouble is hard at hand, and there is none to help.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee, my Soul gaspeth unto thee, as a thirsty
land.

Draw nigh unto my Soul and save it, O deliver me, because of my enemies.

For my Soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell.

Save me from the Lions mouth, hear me from among the horns of the Unicorns.

O set me up upon the rock that is higher then I, for thou art my hope, and a
strong Tower for me against the enemy.

Why art thou so heavy, O my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me?

Put thy trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks, for the help of his
countenance.

The Lord shall make good his loving kindness toward me, yea, thy Mercy O Lord
endures for ever, despise not then the work of of thine own hands.

O GOD, thou art my God, early will I seek thee.

My Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also longs after thee, in a barren and
dry land where no water is.

Like as the heart desires the water brooks, so longs my Soul after thee O
God.

My Soul is a thirst for God, even for the living God, when shall I come to
appear before the presence of God?

How amiable are thy dwellings, O Lord of Hosts?

My Soul has a desire and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord, my
flesh and my heart rejoice in the living God.

O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away and be at rest.

O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me unto
thy Holy Hill, and to thy dwelling.

For one day in thy Courts is better then a thousand.

I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
tents of wickedness.

I should utterly have fainted, but that I believed verily to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living.

Thou art my Helper and my Redeemer, O Lord make no long tarrying.

EjACULATIONS.
O LORD of whom may I seek for succor, but of thee who for my sins art justly
displeased, yet O Lord God most Holy, O Lord most mighty, O Holy and most
Merciful Savior, deliver me not into the bitter pains of eternal death.

Thou know Lord the secrets of my heart, shut not up thy merciful eyes to my
prayer, but hear me O Lord most Holy, O God most Mighty, O Holy and Merciful
Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer me not at my last hour for any
pains of death to fall from thee.

Father I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am no worthy to be
called thy child, yet O Lord do not thou cast off the bowels and compassions of
a Father, but even as a Father pittieth his own children, so b^ thou merciful
unto me.

Lord, the prince of this world comes, O^ let ^im have nothing in me, but as
he accuses, do thou absolve, he lays many and grievous things to my charge,
which he can too well prove, I have nothing to say for my self, do thou answer
for me, O Lord my God.

O Lord I am clothed with filthy garments, and Satan stands at my right hand,
to resist me, O be thou pleased to rebuke him, and pluck me as a brand out of
the fire, cause mine iniquities to pass from me, and cloth me with the
righteousness of thy Son.

Behold, O God, the Devil is coming toward me, having great wrath because he
knows that he has but a short time, O save and deliver me, lest he devour my
Soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces while there is none to help.

O my God, I know that no unclean thing can enter into thy Kingdom, and I am
nothing but pollution, my very righteousness are as filthy rags, O wash me and
make me white in the blood of the Lamb, that so I may be fit to stand before
thy Throne.

Lord the snares of death compass me round about. O let not the pains of Hell
also take hold upon me, but though I find trouble and heaviness, yet O Lord I
bese^ch thee deliver my Soul.

O dear Jesus, who have bought me with the precious price of thine own blood,
challenge now thy purchase, and let not all the malice of hell pluck me out of
thy hand.

O blessed high Priest, who art able to save them to the utmost, who come unto
God by thee, say me I beseech thee, who have no hope, but on thy merits and
intercession.

O God I confess I have defaced that Image of thine, thou did imprint upon my
Soul, yet O thou faithful Creator, have pity on thy creature.

O Jesu, I have by my many and grievous sins crucified thee afresh, yet thou
who prayedst for thy persecutors, intercede for me also, and suffer not, O my
Redeemer, my soul (the price of thy blood) to perish.

O Spirit of grace, I have by my horrid impieties done despite to thee, yet, O
blessed comforter though I have often grieved thee, be thou pleased to succor
and relieve me, and say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

Mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord, in thee is my trust, O cast not out my soul.

O Lord in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded.

O Blessed Lord, who scourgest every Son whom thou receivest let me not be
weary of thy correction, but give me such a perfect subjection to thee the
Father of Spirits, that this chastisement may be for my profit, that I may
thereby be partaker of thy holiness.

O thou Captain of my salvation, who were made perfect by sufferings, sanctify
to me all the pains of body, all the terrors of mind, which thou shall permit
to fall upon me.

Lord, my sins have deserved eternal torments make me cheerfully and thankfully
to bear my present pains, chasten me as thou please here, that I may not be
condemned with the world.

Lord, the waters are come in even unto my soul, O let thy Spirit move upon
these waters, and make them like the pool of Bethesda, that they may cure
whatsoever spiritual disease thou discernest in me.

O Christ, who first sufferedst many and grievous things, and then enteredst
into thy glory, make me so to suffer with thee, that I may also be glorified
with thee.

O dear Jesus, who humblest thy self to the death of the cross for me, let that
death of thine sweeten the bitterness of mine.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the Kingdom
of heaven to all believers.

I believe that thou shall come to be my Judge.

I pray thee therefore help thy servant whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood.

Make me to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting.

Thou art the resurrection and the life, he that believes in thee, though he
were dead, yet shall he live, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better: Lord, I
groan earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with that house from heaven.

I desire to put off this my tabernacle, O be pleased to receive me into
everlasting habitations.

Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto thy name.

Lord, I am here to wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but with
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness, O take me from these tents
of Kedar, into the heavenly Jerusalem, where Satan shall be utterly trodden
under my feet.

I cannot here attend one minute to thy service, without distraction, O take me
up to stand before thy throne, where I shall serve thee day and night.

I am here in heaviness through many tribulations, O receive me into that place
of rest, where all tears shall be wiped from my eyes, where there shall be no
more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain.

I am here in a state of banishment, and absence from the Lord, O take me where
I shall for ever behold thy face, and follow the lamb whither soever he goes.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness.

O Blessed Jesu, who has loved me, and washed me from my sins in thine own
blood, receive my soul.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord thou God
of truth. Come Lord Jesu, come quickly.

PRAYERS for their use who Mourn in secret for the PUBLIC CALAMITIES, etc.
Psalm 74. O God, wherefore art thou absent, etc. 79. O God, the Heathen are
come, etc* 80. Hear, O thou Shepherd of Israel, etc.
A Prayer to be used in these times of Calamity.
O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, I desire humbly to confess before
thee, both on my own behalf, and that of this nation, that these many years of
calamity we have groaned under, are but the just (yea mild) returns of those
many more years of our provocations against thee, and that thy present wrath is
but the due punishment of thy abused mercy. O Lord, thou have formerly abounded
to us in blessings above all people of the earth. Thy candle shined upon our
heads, and we delighted our selves in thy great goodness, peace was within our
walls, and plenteousness within our palaces, there was no decay, no leading
into captivity, and no complaining in our streets: But we turned this grace
into wantonness, we abused our peace to security, our plenty to riot and
Luxury, and made those good things, which should have endeared our hearts to
thee, the occasions of estranging them from thee; Nay, O Lord, thou gave us
yet more precious mercies, thou were pleased thy self to pitch thy Tabernacle
with us, to establish a pure and glorious Church among us, and give us thy word
to be a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our paths; But O Lord we have made
no other use of that light, then to conduct us to the chambers of death, we
have dealt proudly, and not hearkened to thy commandments, and by rebelling
against the light, have purchased to our selves so much the heavier portion in
the outer darkness. And now, O Lord, had the overflowings of thy vengeance been
answerable to that of our sins, we had long since been swept away with a swift
destruction, and there had been none of us alive at this day to implore thy
mercy. But thou art a gracious God, slow to anger, and have proceeded with us
with much patience and long suffering, thou have sent thy judgments to awake us
to repentance, and have also allowed us space for it: But alas! we have
perverted this mercy of thine beyond all the former, we return not to him that
smites us, neither do we seek the Lord, we are slidden back by a perpetual
backsliding, no man repents him of his wickedness, or says what have I done?
It Is true indeed we fear the rod (we dread every suffering, so that we are
ready to buy it off with the foulest sin) but we fear not him that has
appointed it, but by a wretched obstinacy harden our necks against thee, and
refuse to return. And now, O God, what balm is there in Gilead that can cure
us; who, when thou would heal us, will not be healed, we know thou have
pronounced that there is no peace to the wicked, and how shall we then pray for
peace, that still retain our wickedness? 'This this, O Lord, is our forest
disease, O give us medicines to heal this sickness, heal our souls, and then we
know thou can soon he^l our land. Lord, thou have long spoken by thy word to
our ears, by thy judgments even to all our senses, but unless thou speak by thy
Spirit to our hearts, all other calls will still be uneffectual, O send out this
voice, and that a mighty voice, such as may awake us out of this Lethargy: thou
that did call Lazarus out of the grave, O be pleased to call us, who are
dead, yea putrified in trespasses and sins, and make us to awake to
righteousness. And though, O Lord, our frequent resistances even of these
inward calls have justly provoked thee to give us up to the lusts of our own
heart; yet O thou boundless ocean of mercy, who art good not only beyond what
we can deserve, but what we can wish, do not withdraw the influence of thy
grace, and take not thy holy Spirit from us. Thou were found of those that
sought thee not, O let that act of mercy be repeated to us, who are so
desperately, yet so insensibly sick, that we cannot so much as look after the
Physician, and by how much our case is the more dangerous, so much the more
sovereign remedies do thou apply; Lord help us, and consider not so much our
unworthiness of thy aid, as our irremediable ruin, if we want it; save Lord,
or we perish eternally. To this end dispense to us in our temporal interest,
what thou see may best secure our spiritual; if a greater degree of outward
misery will tend to the cureing our inward, Lord, spare not thy rod, but strike
yet more sharply, Cast out this Devil, though with never so much foaming and
tearing. But if thou see that some return of mercy may be most likely to melt
us, O be pleased so far to condescend to our wretchedness, as to afford us
that, and whether by thy sharper, or thy gentler methods, bring us home to thy
self. And then, O Lord, we know thy hand is not shortened, that it cannot save,
when thou have delivered us from our sins, thou can and wilt deliver us from
our troubles, O show us thy mercy, and grant us thy salvation, that being
redeemed both in our bodies and spirits, we may glorify thee in both, in a
cheerful obedience, and praise the name of our God, that has dealt wonderfully
with us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer for This Church.
O Thou great God of recompenses, who turnest a fruitful, land into barrenness
for the wickedness of the^ that dwell therein; thou have most justly executed
that fatal sentence on this Church; which having once been the perfection of
beauty, the joy of the whole earth is now become a scorn and derision to all
that are round about her. O Lord, what could have been done to thy vineyard,
that thou (...) not done in it, and since it has brought forth nothing but
wild grapes, it is perfectly just with thee to take away the hedge thereof, and
let it be eaten up. But O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, yet
do thou it for thy Names sake; for our backslidings are many, we have sinned
against thee. O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why
should tho^ be as a stranger in the land, as a wayfaring man that turns
aside to carry for a night? Why should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty
man that cannot save? Yet thou, O Lord art in the midst of us, and we are
called by thy name, leave us not, deprive us of what outward enjoyments thou
please, take from us the oppor^unities of our Luxury, and it may be a mercy,
but, O take not from us the means of our reformation, for that is the most
direful expression of thy wrath. And though we have hated the light, because
our deeds were evil, yet. O Lord, do not by withdrawing it condemn ^s to walk
on still in darkness, but let it continue to shine, till it have guided our
feet into the way of peace; O Lord, arise, stir up thy strength and come and
help us, and deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove (this disconsolate Church)
unto the multitude of the enemy; but help act, O God, and that right early. But
if, O Lord, our rebellions have so provoked thee, that the Ark must wander in
the wilderness, til all this murmuring generation be consumed, yet let not that
perish with us, but bring it at last into a Canaan, and let our more innocent
posterity see that, which in thy just judgment thou denyest to us. In the mean
time let us not cease to bewail that desolation, our sins have wrought to think
upon the stones of Sion, and pity to see her in the dust, nor ever be ashamed
or afraid to own her, in her lowest and most persecuted condition, but esteem
the reproach of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, and so
approve our constancy, to this our afflicted mother, that her blessed Lord and
head may own us with mercy, when he shall come in the glory of thee his father
with the holy Angels. Grant this merciful Lord for the same Jesus Christ ^is
sake.

A Prayer for the Peace of the Church.
LOrd Jesus Christ, which of thine almightiness made all creatures both
visible and invisible, which of thy godly wisdom governest and set all
things in most goodly order, which of thine unspeakable goodness keep,
defendest and furtherest all things, which of thy deep mercy restorest the
decayed, renewest the fallen, raisest the dead: vouchsafe we pray thee at last,
to cast down thy countenance upon thy well-beloved Spouse the Church; but let
it be that amiable and merciful countenance wherewith thou pacifiest all things
in heaven, in earth, and whatsoever is above heaven and under the earth:
vouchsafe to cast upon us those tender and pitiful eyes, with which thou did
once behold Peter that great Shepherd of thy Church, and forthwith he
remembered himself, and repented, with which eyes thou once did view the
scattered multitude, and were moved with compassion, that for lack of a good
Shepherd, they wandered as sheep dispersed and strayed a sunder. Thou see (O
good Shepherd) what sundry sorts of Wolvs have broken into thy sheep cotes, of
whom every one cries: Here is Christ, here is Christ. So that if it were
possible the very perfect persons should be brought into error. Thou see with
what winds, with what waves, with what storms thy silly ship is tossed, thy
ship wherein thy little flock is in peril to be drowned. And what is now left,
but that it utterly sink, and we all perish? Of this tempest and storm, we may
thank our own wickedness and sinful living; we espy it well and confess it, we
espy thy righteousness, and we bewail our unrighteousness: but we appeal to thy
mercy which (according to the Psalm of thy Prophet) surmounteth all thy works;
we have now suffered much punishment, being sousted with so many wars, consumed
with such losses of goods, scourged with so many sorts of diseases and
pestilences, shaken with so many floods, feared with so many strange sights
from heaven, and yet appears there no where any Haven or Port unto us being
thus-tired and for lorn among so strange evils, but still every day more
grievous punishments, and more seem to hang over our heads. We complain not of
thy sharpness, most tender Savior, but we espy here also thy mercy, forasmuch,
as much grievouse^ plagues we have deserved. But O most merciful Jesu, we
beseech thee, that thou will not consider not weigh what is due for our
deservings, but rather what becomes thy mercy, without which neither the
Angels in heaven can stand sure before thee, much less we filly vessels of
clay. Have mercy on us, O redeemer, which art easy to be entreated, not that
we be worthly of thy mercy, but give thou this glory unto thine own Name.
Suffer not that the Jews, Turks, and the rest of the Panims, which either have
not known thee, or do envy thy glory, should continually triumph over us, and
say, Where is their God, where is their Redeemer, where is their Savior, where
is their Bridegroom, that they thus boast on? These opprobrious words and
upbraidings redound unto thee. O Lord, while by our evils, men weigh and esteem
thy goodness: they think we be forsaken, whom they see not amended. Once when
thou sleptst in the Ship, and a Tempest suddenly arising threatened death to all
in the Ship, thou awokest at the outcry of a few Disciples, and straightway at
thine Almighty word the waters couched, the winds fell, the storm was suddenly
turned into a great calm; the dumb waters know their makers voice. Now in this
far greater tempest, wherein not a few men's bodies be in danger, but
innumerable souls: we beseech th^e at the cry of thy holy Church, which is in
danger of drowning, that thou will awake. So many thousands of men do cry, Lord
save us, we perish, the tempest is past man's power: yea we see that the
endeavors of them that would help it, do turn clean a contrary way. It is thy
word that must do the deed, Lord Jesu. Only say thou with a word of thy mouth,
Cease O tempest, and forthwith shall ^he desired calm appear. Thou would have
spa^ed so many thousands of most wicked men, if in the City of Sodo^ ^ad been
found but ten good men. Now here be so many thousands (...) men, which love the
glory of thy name, which sigh for the beauty (...) thy house; and will thou not
at these men's prayers let go thine an^r, and remember thine accustomed and old
mercies? Shall thou ^ot with thy heavenly policy turn our folly into thy glory?
Shall thou ^ot turn the wicked men's evils into thy Churches good? For thy merry
is wont then most of all to succor, when the thing is with us past ^medy, and
neither the might nor wisdom of men can help it. Thou ^one b^ingest things that
be never so out of order, into order again: which art the only Author and
maintainer of peace. Thou framedst that old confusion, which we call Chaos,
wherein without order, without fashion confusedly lay the discordant seeds of
things, and with a ^onderful order the things that of nature fought together,
thou did ^ly and knit in a perpetual band. But how much greater confusion is
^is, where is no charity, no fidelity, no bonds of love, no reverence either of
laws, nor yet of rulers, no agreement of opinions, but as (...) were in a
misordered quire, every man sings a contrary note. A^ong the heavenly Planets
is no dissension, all four Elements keep ^^eir place, every one do their office
whereunto they be appointed. And will thou suffer thy Spouse, for whose sake
all things were made ^hus bycontinual discords to perish, and go to wrack?
Shall thou ^^ffer the wicked spirits, which be authors and workers of discord,
(...) bear such a swing in thy Kingdom unchecked? Shall thou suffer ^e strong
Captain of mischief, whom thou once overthrewest, again (...) invade thy tents,
and to spoil thy soldiers? When thou were here man conversant among men, at
thy voice fl^d the Devils. Send forth (...) beseech thee, O Lord, thy spirit
which may drive away out of the ^ests of al them that profess thy name, the
wicked spirits masters of ri^^, of covetousness, of vainglory, of carnal lust,
of mischief, and of dis^ord. Create in us, O our God and King, a clean heart,
and renew thy holy spirit in our breasts pluck not from us thy holy Ghost.
Render unto us ^e joy of thy saving health, and with thy principal spirit,
strengthen ^y Spouse and the Herdmen thereof. By this Spirit thou reconciledst
^^e earthly to the heavenly: by this thou did frame and reduce, so ^any
tongues, so many nations, so many sundry sorts of men into (...) body of a
Church; which body by the same Spirit is knit to thee ^^eir Head. This Spirit
if thou will vouchsafe to renew in all men's ^earts, then shall also these
foreign miseries cease, or if they cease ^ot, at least they shall turn to the
profit and avail of them which love ^ee. Stay this confusion, set in order this
horrible Chaos (O Lord ^e us;) let thy spirit stretch out it self upon these
waters of evil wa^ering opinions. And because thy spirit, which according to
thy Pro^ets saying contains all things has also the sience of speaking* make
that like as unto all them which be of thy house, is all one light, one
Baptism, one God, one Hope, one Spirit; so they may also have one voice, one
note, and song, professing one Catholic truth. When thou did mount up to
heaven triumphantly, thou threwest out from above thy precious things, thou
gave gifts amongst men, thou dealtest sundry rewards of thy Spirit. Renew
again from above thy old bountifulness, give that thing to thy Church, now
faincing and growing downward, that thou gave unto her shooting up, at her
first beginning. Give unto Princes and Rulers the grace so to stand in awe of
thee, that they so may guide the Commonweal, as they should shortly render
account unto thee that art the King of kings. Give wisdom to be always
assistant unto them, that whatsoever is best to be done, they may espy it in
their mind, and pursue the same in their doings. Give to the Bishops the gift
of prophecy, that they may declare and interpret holy Scripture, not of their
own brain, but of thine inspiring. Give them the threefold charity which thou
once demandest of Peter, what time thou did be^ake unto him the charge of thy
sheep. Give to the Priests the love of soberness and of chastity. Give to thy
people a good will to follow thy Commandments, and a readiness to obey such
persons as thou have appointed over them. So shall it come to pass, if through
thy gift thy Princes shall command that thou requirest, if thy Pastors and
Her^men shall teach the same, and thy people obey them both: that the old
dignity and tranquillity of the Church shall return again with a goodly order
unto the glory of thy name. Thou sparedst the Ninevites appointed to be
destroyed, as soon as they converted to repentance; and will thou despise thy
house falling down at thy feet, which in stead of sackcloth has sighs, and
instead of ashe^ tears? Thou promisedst forgiveness to such as turn unto thee,
but this self thing is thy gift, a man to turn with his whole heart unto thee,
to the intent all our goodness should redound unto thy glory. Thou art the
maker, repair the work that thou have fashioned. Thou art the Redeemer; save
that thou have bought. Thou art the Savi^ur, suffer not them to perish which do
hang on thee. Thou art the Lord and owner; challenge thy possession. Thou art
the head, help thy memb^rs. Thou art the King, give us a reverence of thy laws.
Thou art the Prince of peace; breathe upon us brotherly love. Thou art the God,
have p^ty on thy humble bes^ec^ers; be thou according to Paul's saying, all
things in all men, to the intent, the whole quire of thy Church with agre^ing
minds and consonant voices for mercy obtained at thy hands, may give thanks to
the Father, Son and holy Ghost which after the most perf^ct example of concord,
b^ distincted in property of Persons, and one in nature, to whom be praise and
glory eternally. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
The Reader is desired to Correct these Errata's with his pen, ^t the sense be
not disturbed.

In the Preface.
^^ge. Line. ^^6. 23 for Job, read Joab. ^^8. 32 for vice, r. voice.
In the Treatise
^^4. 6. sure r. pure. (...). 3. so considerable, r. so inconsiderable. (...)
26. to fit us, r. to find us. (...) 29. Discords r. disorders. (...) 26.
revilings, r. revellings (...) 8. means, r. meaning. (...) 21. dele not before
only. (...) 12. B^eaches r. Branches. (...) 19. howsoever, r. how soon soever.
(...) 16. false, r. safe. (...) 32. protest, r. profess. (...) 3. the favor,
r. the favourer. (...) 5. offered, r. afforded. (...) 24. after, r. often.
(...) 21, 22. solemn, r. seldom. (...) 12. trance, r. frame. (...) 9. after is
r. not. (...) 14. r. occasional. (...) 25. fifth, r. third. (...) 6. our, r.
other. (...) 6. greatness, r. gentleness. (...) 31. prayer, r. praise. (...) 6.
mercies, r. miseries. (...) 29. such, r. sick. 153. 4. force, r. face. 26.
after punishments, r. thy. 155. 27. after any add thing 182. 16. r. to resist,
the Graces of God to improve 210. 2. souls, r. houses. 220. 1. gift, r. guest.
234. 3. two rest, r. to w^est. 253. 28. act, r. art. 259. 7. dele not, r. and
that it is only. 277. 8. happy, r. unhappy. 300. 25. action, r. affection^ 318.
1. in, r. is. 321. 1. put a comma at for, 323. 22, supposed, r. opposed. 324.
33. justly, r. unjustly. 325. 4. surely, r. surly. 327. 11. put the comma at
hereafter, 334. 32. put the comma at judging. 353. 17* the open vile, r. open
vice. 365. 27. after degree, read thus, a cruelty to defer enjoying of it. 367.
16. dele not. 381. 6. cure, r. care.
In the Devotions.
628. 26. little, r. bitter.

