A DISCOURSE Concerning The BEAUTY OF HOLINESS.

By the Author of The Duty of Man, Laid down in Express words of Scripture.

1 CHRONICLES. 16.29. Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness.

Imprimatur.

July 18th, 1678. GUIL. SILL.



LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Robert Soliers, at the King's Arms in
Ludgate Street. 1679.



THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Nature of Holiness. page 7. CHAP. II. Of the Rule of Holiness.
11 CHAP. III. Motives and inducements to the practice of Holiness. 48 Sect. 1.
The noble pattern of Holiness. 49 (...) above all things most advantageous. 124
Chap. IV. Frivolous Cavils and Objections removed. 142
THE INTRODUCTION.
MAn in his original condition, when he first came out of the hands of his
Maker, was a very noble and venerable Creature, adorned with many peculiar
excellencies; and as the Psalmist observes, Only made a little lower than
glorious Angels: But of all his perfections, Holiness, as it was the principal
and most oriental, so did it also give a beauty and luster to the rest; It made
his Authority and Power lovely and desirable, his Wisdom and Knowledge
venerable, and every other attribute, which without this is terrible and
dreadful, to be comely and praiseworthy. This was that single perfection that
raised Man above the beasts

(...) It Is, indeed, matter of great sadness to consider the lofty and
intolerable affronts that are now cast upon Holiness; how men are arrived at
that pitch of impiety, to scorn and deride Religion, which former ages were at
some pains to advance; as if Holiness were inconsistent with the principles of
Generosity, and only becoming mean and morose spirits.

How transcendent a folly and madness this is, will easily appear by what I
shall afterward lay down. Me thinks the naked representation of Holiness,
should be motive enough (if not to court it, yet) to engage men to correct
their unreasonable prejudices they entertain against it; and even force its
greatest Antagonists to become its Advocates. But alas! vice has cast such a
dark shadow upon men's Judgments, that they are become as unfit Judges of its
beauty, as blind men are of colors; otherwise we might yet expect to see
contemned Virtue much more in vogue than ever Vice was.

To excite our desires, Scripture has represented it under the most comely
dress, has discovered its beauty and excellency, and recommended it by the
most endearing motives which are apt to work both upon our hope and fear: Upon
our hope, by proposing an infinitely-valuable reward to the righteous, besides
the present advantages that attend it. Upon our fear, by opening to our view
the powers of the world to come, and discovering the insupportable misery that
the damned suffer day and night; so that if men would but so far actuate their
Reason, as soberly to consult their own interest and happiness, I doubt not but
this alone should be motive enough to excite them to the practice of Holiness,
and scare them from those ways of sin that lead down to the chambers of death.

It would make (one would think) the greatest Sensualist to relinquish the
momentary pleasures he enjoys here, to be possessed of those eternal joys that
the pure in spirit shall reap in the Kingdom of their Father: and the most
hardened and impregnable sinner tremble, to think of dwelling with devouring
flames.

Now the only infallible way to attain those celestial felicities, and to
evite the miserable consequences of vice, and those pains and tortures that it
exposes its votaries to, is to abandon every lust, be it never so impetuous,
and to cleanse our selves (as the Apostle advises us) from all filthiness of
the flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God.

For the better directing our present inquisition, I shall first briefly
represent the nature of true Holiness, and show the beauty and excellency of
it. Secondly, I shall discourse of its rule, and more particularly discover the
several branches of Holiness. Thirdly, I shall propound several motives and
inducements to engage men to the practice of Holiness; and indeed this is what
I chiefly intend to insist upon. Fourthly, I shall remove all those Cavils and
Objections that are urged against Holiness. And Lastly, conclude with some
short Reflections and Inferences.

CHAP. I. Of the nature of Holiness.
I Intend not here to descend to the consideration of every particular branch
of holiness, but to discourse of it in the general, as it is the combination of
all Christian virtues: and as it is thus considered, I need not, I think, in
the description of it, accurately study all those Logical rules Philosophers
require in a good definition For my part, it fully enough satisfies me to know,
that holiness is a conformity to the Divine Law, and a hearty and sincere
compliance with those original dictates of humane nature, and the Commands
revealed in sacred Writ.

So long as man remained obedient to the Laws of his Maker, his holiness was
untainted, and his Beauty and primitive congenite comeliness continued; but by
his woeful apostasy he lost that noble embellishment of his nature, which did
indeed give a grace to all his other accomplishments, and is now become ugly
and deformed. Holiness and purity of Spirit are different words, but of the
same signification, and are promiscuously used in Scripture to express the same
(...) present state, expects not more from us than we are able to perform. He
is not so rigorous a Lord to require Brick where there is no Straw: the terms
of the Gospel are accommodated to our capacities, and only require a holiness
which is possible for the Creature to attain; at least it exacts and expects no
more, but that we endeavor sincerely and unfeignedly to obey all those
precepts he has enjoined; that we habituate our selves to perform good actions;
that the general propension and inclination of our wills and appetites be
toward the doing of what is imposed upon us, and abstaining from all kind of
evil.

By what has been said, it may appear, that holiness consists not in
Speculation, but in Practice: It Is not the knowledge of duty, but the actual
performance of it that intitles men to be holy; and that too, not
superficially, or in a good mode, and rarely performed; but sincerely, and
throughout the whole course of our lives. For men to know their duty and not
perform it, is to inhance their own misery, and to secure to themselves double
stripes: and to perform some good actions, and abstain from the grosser
pollutions of the world, and yet to be vicious in the general course of their
lives, this is such a holiness that will never profit any man. The rule of
holiness, to which we must heartily study an actual conformity, does not
dispense, no not with the commission of the least sin, nor omission of the
smallest duty.

But because general descriptions of things are frequently overlooked, I shall
not think it unnecessary to descend to a more particular survey, and consider
Holiness in its several branches, as they are plainly described by the
Christian rule of Holiness.

CHAP. II. Of the Rule of Holiness.
ALthough the whole Canon of Scripture is useful to instruct us in our duty;
yet because many things, if not approved, yet dispensed with under the old
dispensation, are now quite antiquated and abrogate, I shall therefore at
present confine my discourse to the Gospel-Oeconomy, and by the rule discover
wherein the Nature of true Holiness, and undefiled Religion before God consists.

(...) touch. It Is an odd and strange operation, that streams of Love only
meet with contempt and disdain.

Sure I am, there is a concurrence of all sorts of motives and arguments to
engage us to love God; and those indeed so charming and endearing, that it is
strange any body should fail in it. Methinks the work it self is so sweet and
delectable, so ravishing and lovely, that men need not be courted to it by
persuasion. O what a great deal of satisfaction, of ineffable delight, does the
devout soul find in those actings of love toward God! And if the Voluptuous
and Sensualist would but abandon those sinful delights he now finds so
charming and bewitching, and betake himself to the practice of holiness: If he
would change the object of his love, and place it where it ought to be; I doubt
not but he should quickly perceive there is more pleasure, more contentment and
satisfaction in the love of God, than in the enjoyment of all carnal pleasures.

That man that shall make a just estimate of things, shall be easily convinced
there is nothing worthy of love in comparison of God. Alas! the pleasures of
this world are but shadows and fancies, which will soon disappear! Its beauty
and splendor is but gilded and delusory: and is it reasonable, nay, is it not
extreme madness to place the strength of our affections on such uncertain and
quickly-removed vanities?

The usual arguments of love amongst men, are Relation, Interest, or the Beauty
and Excellency of the Object. Now all these lay much stronger obligatios upon
us to love God. For Relation, is he not our Lord and Maker, who gave us life
and being, who as a tender Father kindly compassionates our condition, and in
our low estate has carefully minded us, when our other Relations have accounted
us aliens and strangers? This the Royal Psalmist experimented; and I make no
question but many good men have been, and are living instances of this truth.

And indeed, that man that consults his own interest, cannot but be strongly
excited to love that God who is the best benefactor, and equally willing and
able to bestow favors upon him. It is an argument of a very base and mean
spirit, to despise our benefactors: but thus have we requited God, who daily
loadeth us with mercies, and renews his blessings every morning: we have, God
knows, most insolently carried our selves, even then, when he has been
displaying a banner of love over us.

As for Beauty and Excellency, what in the world can compete with him, who is
glorious in holiness, and whose Name is excellent in all the earth? How quickly
are all created beauties winked into darkness? At the best they are but streams
derived from this glorious being; and is it not hugely reasonable, that he who
is the original of these, should be the chief object of our love, and make us
with the Psalmist say, Whom have I in the heaven but thee; and there is none
upon the earth I desire besides thee?

I know there is no man would take it well, nay who would not be highly
incensed, and think himself much wronged, to have his Love called in question;
but God knows how little reason the far greater part of Mankind have to
pretend love, who stand not to break his Laws, to cast behind them, and
lightly esteem his precepts, the obedience of which is made the best and surest
character of Love.

Would God it were as easy to persuade as it is to propose our duty. But how
hard is it to convince men of the folly, the extreme and strange madness, of
being lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God? But the truth is, there is
such a mire and puddle of pollution in our hearts, that it quite choaks and
extinguisheth all sparks of Love, makes us violate the principles of humanity,
and become more ungueate than the beasts who have no understanding.

But if this Divine flame be kindled in our Hearts, if it be sincere and
superlative as it ought to be, it will easily employ all the faculties of our
soul in his service; it will engage, and enable us too, to perform the several
Duties of Piety the Laws of Christianity enjoin; which because they are some of
the particular branches of Holiness, I shall briefly mention, with their
encouragements; and for method and order reduce to four Heads. First, it will
instruct and enable us to trust and depend upon God. Secondly, to submit and
obey his Will. Thirdly, to honor and reverence his great and sacred Name. And
Lastly, to worship and adore him according to the method he has himself
prescribed.

I begin with the first, namely, That Love where it is sincere, is a noble and
generous (...) (says our Lord) I say unto you, Take no thought for your life,
what you shall eat, or what you shall drink; neither for your body, what ye
shall put on: Is not the life more than meat? and the body than raiment? Behold
the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into
barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much better than they?
etc. Matthew. 6.25, 26. It Is rejected and condemned as a Pagan and Heathnish sin,
to be querulous and sollicitous of what we shall eat, or what we shall drink,
or wherewithal we shall be clothed: for after all these things do the Gentiles
seek, v. 31, 32.

I confess, as I cannot sufficiently enough pity the madness of some men, who
will trust God with their Souls, but not with their secular Concerns; so could
I never yet project what may be the reason why better men than the former are
so apt to distrust God in times of danger and want. I wish such men would
consider how shrewd a presumption this is of Atheism, at least of establishing
the Epicurean notion of a Deity who is quite unconcerned about inferior
beings, and sequestrated from the care of sublunary affairs. For if we did
indeed think that he takes notice of us, we could not but confidently rely upon
his care.

Secondly, we are by the perfect rule of Piety and Holiness instructed to
submit to the divine Will, and comply with the Gospel-precepts, which
concerning all things are right. Perhaps the lot infinite Wisdom has carved out
to us, is no ways relishing to flesh and blood. Whilst others are walking
amongst roses, enjoy all secular advantages, and are placed in the sunshine of
prosperity; may be we are forced to hang our harps upon the willows, and spend
our few days in sorrow and grief. However, let us, not even under these sad
circumstances, charge God foolishly, or be impatient under the severity of his
correction; for this is no argument of the hatred of a Father. Let us rather in
this case view the unspeakable reward, and the divine promises, which are
sufficient arguments to revive our fainting and most languishing hopes, and
able to form our souls to true patience.

Philosophers, if ever they attained to a perfection in any virtue, it was in
their patience under the instability of worldly things; and yet their grounds
and motives to patience were sandy and ineffectual, and no ways comparable to
the arguments (...) habit and custom, while this is the very thing that
enhances their guilt: neither will it, I think, a whit lessen the crime, that
Great persons have given it such a vogue in the world.

The Name of God is a sacred thing, which must not be appealed to, but in the
most weighty and serious cases: Thou shall swear (says the Prophet) that the
Lord lives, in truth, justice, and judgment. If we either affirm or promise
any thing by oath, it must be after mature deliberation, after we have
ascertained our selves of the truth and lawfulness of it: this the very Poet
could dictate, Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus
Inciderit --
It were to be wished, that the Hectors of this age would learn of the very
Heathens more reverence; and that those men that pretend to good breeding,
would be so civil, even sometimes for the companies sake, as to forbear those
Oaths that tender ears cannot hear without offense.

In the last place, the divine Love, if scattered in our Hearts, will excite us
to worship God after the method himself has prescribed: It will direct us to
the rule of Piety, where we shall find every thing that relates to our
immediate intercourse with God in divine Ordinances and Worship exactly
ordered. I confess, the Heathen-world, as they were confused in their notions
of a Deity, and almost quite ignorant of the eternal reward; so were they
superstitious in their Worship, and sometimes ignorantly erected Altars to an
unknown God. Their Worship was attended with a great deal of external pomp, was
very grateful to their external senses; but it reached not the Heart. But the
Christian rule instructs us to worship God in Spirit, and prescribes the best
method of devotion: It requires that We worship and bow before the Lord our
maker, with all possible humility and reverence; that we possess our Hearts
with the greatness and glory of that Majesty we adore; that we be intent in our
devotion, and not suffer secular concerns to intrude and interrupt us; that we
act faith upon him, and believe that he is a rewarder of those that diligently
seek him; and that we approach the throne of grace in the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

If Devotion were not a duty, yet methinks the advantages thereof should invite
(...) and that which finally excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven, where nothing
that pollutes can enter, 2 Cor. 6.9. Rev. 21.27.

It Is indeed not wonder though the Religion of the Gentiles, which contained a
prodigious mixture of vanity and impiety, gratified the inclinations of
uncleanness: for if we consult their writings, we shall observe, that the most
abominable vice wanted not a Deity to patronize it amongst them; which upon the
matter was an establishing iniquity by Law, and an argument more sufficient to
encourage than to correct vice: And although the Writings of some Philosophers
have been more refined, yet the Lives even of such were full of the foulest
actions. Nay, the rules which the best Masters of Morality amongst them
prescribed, never reached to the purifying of the Heart.

I confess, that man that shall take notice (and who, having eyes in his head,
can evite this, when men proclaim their sin like Sodom?) of the prodigious
uncleanness this profane age has arrived at, shall be strongly tempted to
suspect the purity of the Christian Rule, if he make no farther enquiry than to
the practices of most that are called Christians. We may indeed very aptly
write to the professors of this age, as the great Apostle did to the Church of
Corinth: It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such
fornication as is not so much as named amongst the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 5.1. And I
am a little afraid, if the Church should strictly observe that charge that the
Apostle gives there, and excommunicate all such wicked persons, that our Church
should not need to brag much of the number of Christians.

It Is indeed matter of great sadness, to consider how much the Christian
Religion has suffered, upon the account of the scandalous practices of Titular
Christians; and I make no doubt but this age has been at more pains than any
that precedes it, to increase the scandal: but sure it is but a silly artifice
to challenge the exactness of the Rule, and with Celsus impudently allege that
the Christian Religion encourages men to the practice of immorality and vice,
since of all Religions, the Christian only can produce the strictest Laws
against all filthiness of flesh and spirit. It Is a Doctrine, as blessed Apostle
tells us, according to godliness, and lays undispensible obligations upon its
followers, both to think upon, and to do, (...) dearing a quality, and so noble
an embelishment of our nature, that where this is wanting, all other advantages
are little regarded; and not only men, but the great God also resists the
proud, it being a vice which, besides Christianity, Morality also-condemns, as
universally unbecoming to Humane nature; and that which not only disturbs ones
self, but also disquiets whole societies: But God gives grace to the humble; he
takes such persons into favor, as being more pliable to receive the impress of
his love.

And as a humble, so also a meek and quiet spirit is in the sight of God of
great price. And can there be a more convincing motive than this, to recommend
meekness to Christians? And indeed we cannot pretend to be the Disciples of
holy Jesus, if we refuse to learn that lesson he has copied out to us, Matthew.
11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.

Although a calm and quiet spirit is a reward to it self, as every virtue is;
yet it wants not a claim to a temporal felicity also, Matthew. 5.5. Blessed are
the meek; for they shall inherit the earth. These be the persons to whom by
right of promise this stately Fabric of earth belongs. And if we now view that
unpleasant vice of Anger opposite to it, this will yet add more to its luster,
and help to recommend it the more effectually. Anger being such an unpleasant
humor, that it makes those men it possesses unfit for humane society, it being
not unfitly defined by the Poet to be a short madness; which indeed agrees very
well with the Wise man's verdict of it, Eccl. Anger rests in the bosom of fools.
If then men would but compare the calm and happy serenity of Meekness, with
that inward and outward trouble and disquietment that is the effect of Anger,
they could not but esteem the one, and declaim against the other.

In the next place, our Christian rule recommends contentment as the most
precious Jewel in the Saints Diadem; it is that noble ingredient that makes the
most bitter cup sweet and pleasant: it renders things, otherwise unsavory and
burdensome, to be indeed relishing and easy. This is it that seasons the
meanest meal; makes a dish of herbs a feast, and a cup of cold Water please the
palate: This is that virtue which makes men in the midst of storms represent a
calm, and in the saddest circumstances to sing sweetly. He (...) us in those
duties that concern our selves; so it also teaches us how to carry toward
others. And in the first place, it recommends the Royal Law of love, as the
spring and source of all other duties, Romans 13.9. If there be any other
commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. This, for its excellency and comprehensiveness, is
said to be the fulfilling of the Law, as those who neglect it are said to sin
against the Law.

Now if this rule of Charity were well observed, it would help to correct,
first, all undue Thoughts and Wishes. Secondly, all injurious Words and
Speeches. And thirdly, all unjust Actions and Dealings toward our Neighbors.

First, it would very much conduce to the regulating of our wishes, and to the
keeping of our minds in a meek and peaceable temper toward others. Charity,
if sincere, is a noble and generous virtue, which believes and hops the best
of all men: It thinks no evil, as the Apostle amongst many of its other good
properties observes, 2 Cor. 13.5. It eradicates and supplants all censorious
thoughts, and is incompatible with those tormenting passions of Malice and
Revenge, which, as the Wise man describes, suffer not men to sleep except they
have done mischief, Prove. 4.16.

And indeed this is but the least part of a Christians duty, it is but an
evidence of the lowest degree of Charity, to retrench those irregular and undue
wishes, which oftentimes do more prejudice to our selves than others: If it be
sincere, it will have a further and more important influence; it will help us
to govern our tongues also that we may, as the great Apostle advises us, speak
evil of no man, Tit. 3.2. to lay aside all malice, and all guile and
hypocrisy, and evil speaking, 1 Pet. 2.1. and according to this precept did
primitive Christians walk.

But alas! we have degenerated in nothing more conspicuously from their
practice than in this: In place of their love, we have substituted an
industrious search into the iniquities of others, Psalm. 64.4. and have fully
verified the Apostles description of the tongue, Jam. 3.8. that it is an unruly
evil which no man can tame, a world of iniquity that sets the whole creation on
fire.

Neither Majesty nor innocence can now guard against its darts; its malignity
(...) blessings, v. 10. and it is noted as an evidence that the love of God
dwells not in those persons, who having this worlds goods, shut up their
bowels of compassion from those that have need, 1 John 3.17. Alas! little do men
know how quickly the balance may change; how soon the richest may be in
poverty, and stand in need of that supply that they now in the days of their
plenty deny others the instances to prove this, are more numerous than that
they can be doubted or need to be related.

Indeed the performance of this duty passes not without a temporal reward God,
who accounts it a lending to himself, has promised to repay it; and sure there
cannot be better security than his promise. And I question not but all ages can
attest the truth of what the Wise man observes, Prove. 11.24. There is that
scatters, and yet increases; and there is that witholdeth more than is meet,
but it tends to poverty.

I confess, I know no virtue more becoming a Christian than Charity, and scarce
any more scandalously neglected; and I am sorry to think that those good men
who compassionate the wants of the indigent, should be so unworthily
scandalized, as if they were but lukewarm Protestants, and established the
Popish Merit: but this is a piece of madness I shall rather pity than inveigh
against; and although I be no friend to merit, yet I cannot but speak
honorably of those whose charity and good works make them lovely in the sight
of God, who has accounted it pure religion and undefiled, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, Jam. 1.27.

In the next place, the Christian rule requires Justice in our intercourse and
commerce, and that in our dealings we be exactly conscientious, according to
that great rule of equity, Matthew. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and the prophets.
Injustice is a vice so mean and ignoble, that I cannot but admire how great men
should court it: and if men would but actuate their Reasons, I am sure they
should never become guilty of that which, if charged with, they cannot
patiently endure, nor be reconciled with the persons which freely reprove them.
There is no man, I think, that would be satisfied to be called a Cheat; and is
it not unreasonable to think they shall evite this character who practice
injustice?

(...) were easy to show how miserably they failed. The famous Peripatetick
pleaded for the revenging of Injuries: The divine Plato allowed the community
of Wives: The strict Stoics patronized the lawfulness of Self-murder; and
thus professing themselves to be wise, they became fools.

And yet (to the shame of Christians) how conspicuous was the moral gallantry
of the Romans! how famous and glorious are they esteemed for their Justice and
Constancy in friendship by all succeeding ages! their virtue did conquer
respect and esteem from their Enemies, and made them beloved by those who
feared their power. And here I cannot but take notice of St. Augustin's
commendation of the old Romans: Because God (says he) would not bestow Heaven
upon the Romans, they being Pagans, he bestowed the Empire of the world upon
them, because they were virtuous.

And yet the best rules those Illustrious Hero's and Lawgivers taught, are not
comparable to the Laws of Christianity, upon these three accounts. First, the
Pagan Law is deficient in many things, and many particular Laws mightily tend
to the promoting of vice; their Lawgivers being ignorant of the introduction
of sin, never made any precepts against the first motions to forbidden objects.
Secondly, those good Laws they taught, are more clearly revealed in the Gospel,
Which has brought life and immortality to light. As the Gospel commands only
such things that are good, and forbids only vice; so it more conspicuously
manifests what is good, that we may do it, and what is evil, that we may evite
it. The good Laws that Epaminondas in Thebes, Lycurgus in Lacedemon, and
Aristides in Athens taught, are in the Gospel-Oeconomy more excellently
confirmed; and we are now undoubtedly secured, that we do well in observing
what is commanded, and in abstaining from what is prohibited; which Numa
Pompilius, Marcus Antonius, and all the Lawgivers either of Greece or Rome,
could never be fully ascertained of. Thirdly, we have better encouragements and
inducements to obey the Gospel-precepts than any other Religion prescribes. The
best motive to virtue amongst the Heathens was, that virtue is a reward to it
self; that it is the means to be celebrated by after-ages, and such like; which
were but insignificant encouragements, if compared with the eternal and (...)
gives of the Gospel, Romans 1.16. That it is the power of God to salvation.

CHAP. III. Motives and inducements to the practice of Holiness.
AS the naked proposal and representation of an excellent and beautiful object,
is motive enough to excite our love, and draw out our affections to it: so
methinks Holiness, which of all, things is the most noble, most excellent, and
the most lovely, should, even abstracted from the considerations of its utility
and advantages, conquer our esteem. But God knows how much our depraved natures
in this lapsed estate stand in need of encouragements to excite us to our duty;
and I wish common experience did not make it too certain, that all motives are
little enough to form us to Holiness.

In the former Chapters I have only laid a foundation to this: for I thought
it fit to tell men what I understand by Holiness, before I should excite them
to it. In this dark age of the world we want not instances (God knows, too
many) of men's too frequent mistaking vice for virtue; to prevent which error,
it was thought necessary to show men their duty; and having done this, the next
thing I proposed, was to lay down several motives and inducements to engage men
to the practice of Holiness, founded solely upon this, that all those endearing
arguments that prevail with us to perform any duty or action relating to our
secular concerns, do more powerfully oblige us to be holy.

This is, I confess, a subject which for its nobleness deserves a better
judgment, a more clear wit, and a more enlivened and quick fancy to handle it
than I can pretend to: yet if I can but prevail with others to perfect what I
have begun, I shall not think I have much mis-employ'd my time in writing this
Discourse.

This Chapter is like to be somewhat disproportionable to the rest in length,
it being at first the only designed subject to be discoursed on; I shall
therefore divide it into several Sections.

SECT. 1. The noble pattern of Holiness.
The great inclination of Mankind to Imitation, gave ground (I doubt not)

And now, seeing Examples, have so much force, methinks I hear the Captain of
our salvation saying, as Abimelek said to the men that were with him, Judge.
9.48. Make haste, and do as I have done. Christ Jesus has by his example
taught us our duty, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. As he which has called you is holy, so be
ye holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy as I
am holy. Upon which account we are seriously exhorted in Scripture to look unto
Jesus, and to walk as he walked; and can any consideration more abundantly
serve to inspirit and excite us to live holy, than this? Methinks our having so
brave an example should provoke us to follow his footsteps, who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth.

There are two chief reasons that greatly prevail with us to imitate other
examples. First, the dignity and greatness of the person. Secondly, Interest
and advantage. Now both these motives should most powerfully prevail with us to
make Christ the copy of our lives: For first, if we consider the dignity and
worth of his person, is he not the Son of the living God, who in the days of
his humiliation thought it no robbery to be called equal with God? He was not a
person of a mean and low extraction, how meanly soever he lived here, but one
of extraordinary worth, who by partaking of humane nature elevated it to the
highest degree of honor: He was not only the chiefest amongst ten thousands,
but the delight of Heaven and Earth, before whom the Princes of the Earth must
appear, and the great men, to give him an account of their works. And as for
Interest, I shall afterward make it plain, that we in nothing more cross our
advantage, than in walking contrary to Christ.

But alas! how little are we moved by this noble president to mind Holiness?
how seldom do we express in our actions the virtues of our spiritual King?
although there is nothing more rational, more equitable and just, than to
follow his footsteps who has called us to his Kingdom and Glory; nothing more
honorable, nor can advance our happiness more than to be conform to the image
of Christ; yet in opposition to the most endearing encouragements, we have as
much set at naught his example, as Herod and his men of war did his person,
Luke 23.11. Alas! what tears are sufficient to express and set forth this
exceeding great madness and insolency?

us to learn meekness and humility of him, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart. Throughout the whole course of his life he did
evidence a spirit full of calmness and quietness. If we trace his footsteps
from the Cradle to the Cross, we shall not find him either by his words or
actions discovering the least expression of wrath, or revenge; but the most
admirable disposition of gentleness and meekness, even then when his insulting
Enemies endeavored to cast upon him the most ignominious affronts. We read,
Numb. 12.3. of Moses his great meekness; but how was he once and again
transported with passion! but never did our meek Jesus, by the most
insufferable abuses he received, ever discover a discomposed spirit. Isa. 53.7.
He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is
brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb,
so he opens not his mouth. He did indeed frequently meet with extraordinary
provocations to anger; but yet how sweet were his reproofs? when the Samaritans
refused to receive him, Luke 9.53. he did not treat them with contumelious
speeches, nor revenge himself upon them, although he could have done it with
ease; but being desired by his exasperated Disciples to call for fire from
Heaven to consume them, he rebuked their revengeful motion with The Son of man
is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. It would be too prolix a
business to instance the several examples of his Gentleness and Meekness; only
let us view the last scene of his life, where we shall behold lively instances
to confirm this. When he did find his three Disciples, whom he had commanded
to watch, sleeping, he did not upbraid them for their negligence, but gently
asks them, What, could not ye watch with me one hour? and when he was
treacherously accoasted by his own Disciple, who became leader to a great
multitude who came out with Swords and Staves to apprehend him, with what
astonishing mildness did he entertain this Traitor, who had the impudence to
betray him with a kiss? Friend, wherefore art thou come? Mat. 26.50. or, as
another of the Evangelists expresses it, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man
with a kiss? This was all the hard language he treated him with. And after he
was apprehended, with what horrid contumelies and affronts did his barbarous
Enemies entertain him? they did spit in his face, and buffet him; (the highest
affronts imaginable) they stripped him of his ordinary clothes, and put upon
him a fools robe and a Crown of Thorns; and being thus disguised, they expose
him to the mockery and contempt of the Spectators: Notwithstanding of all
which, he opened not his mouth; but with a most sedate and serene temper he
received all these abuses, as the Apostle Peter expresses it, 1 Pet. 2.23.
When he was reviled he reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously.

Meekness, I confess, is so noble a virtue, accompanied with so many admirable
and charming advantages, that it needs (as one would think) but few words to
recommend it to men; but no argument is like to prevail more with generous
minds, then the example of so excellent and perfect a Pattern. Sure I am, it
is the most unaccountable thing imaginable, for the Disciples of so meek a
Master to be of a disposition and temper quite opposite to his.

But as his meekness, so is his humility also recommended to our imitation: As
he was of a meek, so also of a lowly spirit. His first appearance upon earth
was but mean and despicable; he was born (as the Scripture informs us) in a low
estate, more fit for the meanest of his Disciples, than for so great a Prince.
He was not brought forth in some stately Palace, nor born in a Chamber
curiously decked, but in a vile Stable where the bruit beasts had their
residence. Nay, after he had discovered himself by his Illustrious works to be
a great Prophet, the true Messiah who enlighteneth every one that comes into
the world, yet how humbly did he walk! his Companions he did choose were but
mean Fishermen; his Occupation and Employment was no ways honorable; and his
Revenues were but small, as he himself did testify, The foxes have holes, and
the birds of the air nests; but the Son of man has not where he may lay his
head.

Although his descent and extraction was incomparably great, yet he rather
endeavored to conceal than to brag of it; and so humble was he, that he chose
rather to attribute the praise of his admired works to his Father, than take
the honor of them to himself, Joh. 8.28. I do nothing of my self, but as my
Father has taught me I speak these things.

He was not ambitious of Rule and Government, but modestly refused to be a
Ruler and Judge. Nay, when the multitude thought to make him a King, he shunned
their society by an invisible removal, it being quite contrary to his design
in coming into the world, (as he tells us, Matthew. 20.28.) he came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister. And to correct the insolent pride and ambition
of his followers, how did he stoop to wash his Disciples feet! a most admirable
evidence of his lowliness of spirit.

And now since our great Lord and Master did so wonderfully debase himself to
the form of a Servant; since in all his actions he did manifest that he was
meek and lowly, how prodigiously incongruous is it for those who profess
themselves to be his Disciples to be proud and lofty?

I confess, Humility is a grace well becoming our state as creatures; we are
but dependent beings, having life and motion, and all those endowments we are
proud of, from the Father of spirits, from whom every good gifts comes. The
fresh communications of his love we constantly participate of, are freely
bestowed; which he may therefore, when he thinks fit, with an equal freedom and
ease remove, without being guilty of injuring us.

Humility is that peculiar grace that qualifies and fits us to receive the
divine aid and assistance; as the Apostle St. James tells us, he gives grace to
the humble. Upon which account we may with the Wise man well conclude: Better
is it to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with
the proud, Prove. 16.19.

I doubt not but every considering man will find his own Reason suggest a
sufficient store of arguments to confute the imperious assaults of Pride and
Ambition: but methinks none can more powerfully prevail with ingenuous spirits,
than the consideration of Christ's humility: with this how effectually may he
repel every temptation to pride, by saying, Was my Master lowly of spirit, and
does it become me to be proud?

Thirdly, Christ is also set forth as our Pattern in his sufferings: If when ye
do well (says the Apostle) and suffer for it ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God; for even hitherto were ye called: for Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his (...) there than allays
the distemper, though it augments the degrees of our trouble, and disenables us
to bear the stroke of Adversity; yet we will not be persuaded to a calm and
quiet submission to the divine Will. Though impatience exasperates the pain,
yet we think we do well to be angry. If we meet with injuries, our appetite of
revenge is stirred up; flesh and blood we say cannot endure such affronts; we
imagine it stains our Reputation and Honor in the world, and is degenerous and
servile.

Thus do we sew Fig Leaves to cover our nakedness; but the all-seeing God knows
that all these repinings are arrows directed against his providence; otherwise
we should with the Royal Psalmist say, I will not open my mouth, for thou did
it. To this impregnable Fortress he had his recourse, when causlesly cursed and
reviled by Shimei: it was this that silenced old Eli, It is the Lord, let him
do what seems him good: he durst not quarrel at the message, but quietly he
submits. There is a secret providence which does overrule the most terrible
accidents, and is not accountable to humane Reason. All those calamities and
sufferings we undergo, are ordered by infinite Counsel; and in repining at such
dispensations, we indirectly blame Almighty Goodness and Wisdom.

Is it fit and congruous that God should take measures from men in his Economy
of the World? is it reasonable that the whole course of things should be put
out of order, to satisfy every private man's humor? can there be any greater
madness, than to prescribe rules of Government to infinite Wisdom? Why then
are we dissatisfied with our adverse state? why do we repine and complain?

If we did indeed compare our Mercies with our Sufferings, our Receipts with
our Merits, or our Condition with that of some others, we could not but be
convinced of our folly: but we still pore upon the sore; all our thoughts are
taken up and in exercise about our affliction: if we would deal rationally, let
us view the sufferings of our blessed Redeemer, and see if we dare make a
contrary conclusion to that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.1. Forasmuch then as
Christ has suffered for us in flesh, let us arm our selves likewise with the
same mind: He suffered patiently and calmly for us; and it is but reasonable
that Servants imitate their Master, and suffer the disasters they meet (...)
our rule, yet how ready are we to despise it, if in the least it cross our
humors or carnal interest? Alas! little do we consider, that obedience is
essentially necessary in order to our supreme happiness; and that torments, as
severe and intolerable as they are lasting, are the lot of the disobedient.

It were to be wished that the rebellious posterity of Adam would but seriously
ponder what they will be able to say in the great day of Audit. Sure I am, the
whole Contexture and Harmony of the divine Precepts and Doctrines are equitable
and just, and therefore call for our hearty compliance with them. The wise God
never issued out any Command which could not be obeyed; he is not like the
Egyptian Taskmasters, to require Brick while there is no Straw. Nay indeed
our duty and interest are coupled together so closely, that if we disobey and
rebel, we may thank our selves for the misery we have chosen..

And as his Obedience is set before us for imitation, so is his Love, Charity,
and Compassion also. His whole life was spent in doing good to men: how
transcendent is his love in pitying us in our degenerate and forlorn estate?
when we were at odds with Heaven, and incapable to help our selves, then, even
then, did he commiserate our case, and by his own Blood reconciled us to the
Father. It is the greatest demonstration of love imaginable, for a man to lay
down his life for his friend, Joh. 15.13. and yet more wonderful was the love
of our Redeemer in passing through so many cruel sufferings for us, who were
but Rebels and Enenemies. O how should the remembrance of his boundless
compassions transport and ravish us with love? how strange is it, that the
highest endearments of Love have not inflamed our spirits, and made Love mutual
and reciprocal?

Love is a most excellent affection, of a noble original, by which we resemble
the best of beings; the great God being by the beloved Disciple described to be
Love: and indeed well does this description suit with his dealings with men.
But alas! how unlike are we to God in this? there is scarce any duty more
frequently inculcated by our Savior than Love, John 15.12. This is my
commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you: and yet how little
efficacy has either his precept or example with us?

Blessed Redeemer! how unworthy do (...) since it has produced so little love
in us to himself. But however, I need not take much pains to prove that hereby
we demonstrate our selves to be of all men the most ungrate, and justly liable
to the severest punishment ever inflicted upon the greatest criminal.

It would be too prolix to enumerate the several instances wherein Christ is
set forth as our Pattern: sure I am, he has by his example taught us the
exercise of all virtues; and I may say (as himself said in another case) If we
know these things, happy are we if we do them.

To sum up this Section, it will not be amiss to obviate an Objection, which is
indeed but very trivial, although it be too commonly urged: the Objection is,
How is it possible for men to conform to Christ, and be holy as he is holy?
Ans. I have already told, that it is not expected that we should imitate our
blessed Redeemer in all and every of those actions he performed: but in all
those moral duties which he has enjoined by his righteous precepts, and
encouraged us by his example to perform, these we must by no means neglect: and
to manifest the possibility of doing these, we may satisfy our selves by
viewing the pious and devout lives of primitive Christians. It is a great
mistake to think we are commanded to a rigorous and strict conversation which
cannot be attained; the faithful in former ages have run the same race that is
set before us; they have fully enough cleared the possibility of our duty:
Wherefore seeing we also (as the Apostle argues) are compassed about with so
great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that
does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set
before us, Heb. 12.1. For shame, let us rather imitate the excellent holiness
of primitive Christians, than the impure practices of those who are strangers
from the sacred Covenant.

O the perfect love and imitable kindeness of the first professors of the
Gospel! what purity, what integrity and innocence appeared in their lives? how
ravishing and splendant were their virtues and graces; their Patience in
suffering, their Courage and Magnanimity in death, their Temperance and
Moderation, their Charity and Compassion, their Equality and Justice, and their
Contempt of this World and all earthly concerns for the sake and honor of
their Master? These were the virtues they were adorned with, which

There is nothing more certain, than that only holy souls are in a capacity of
participating of that future felicity; and these may without the least charge
of presumption claim an interest in it: But for those vicious wretches, who are
wholly polluted, who have devoted themselves to commit sin with greediness, and
take pleasure in doing evil; how utterly incapable are they (if they continue
such) to dwell in his presence, who is not a God that takes pleasure in
wickedness?

And now seeing there is such an inseparable connection between Happiness and
Holiness, it cannot be amiss if we take a short view of the excellency of this
celestial felicity, that it may more plainly appear what a notable
encouragement and motive it is to holiness.

There be two things that forcibly recommend the excellency of that future
state of bliss. First, A perfect freedom and immunity from all evils. And
Secondly, a perpetual enjoyment of the chief good.

First, it is a blessedness wholly exempt from evils whether of sense or loss;
it is a happiness attended with no inconveniences, nor dismal circumstances, as
the happiest state here is: we now walk in the midst of perplexing doubts and
fears; temptations increase our inquietudes, and dangers our continual fears:
our complaints are by far more numerous than our joys; nay, what is our whole
life, but a scene where sorrow and fears act their parts! Man that is born of a
woman is of few days, and full of evil.

But our future blessedness quite excludes all those evils; there is nothing
admitted to imbitter that pleasant state, Rev. 21.4. And God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are
passed away. The holy soul shall then no more complain of any dolorous hours;
the heavenly Jerusalem is a place unacquainted with every thing that is uneasy
and troublesome.

And yet this is but the least part of the Saints felicity: for as they shall
enjoy a perfect freedom from evil, so shall they also be advanced to the
fullest fruition of that God, where all the streams of goodness do finally
empty themselves: Blessed are the pure in spirit, for they shall see God,
Matthew. 5.8. They shall see him, not as now through a Glass darkly, but then
face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. they shall, as the Angels in heaven, always behold
the face of their Father, Matthew. 18.10. in whose presence (as the Psalmist
assures us) is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11. O the unspeakable delectability of the Saints future
state! where the most blessed God shines forth in his Glory, where the beams of
beauty ravish the beholders, who stand continually in his presence receiving
the manifestations of his Glory!

Sure if the faint expectation of enjoying the company of virtuous men in their
fancied Elyzium, did instigate some Heathens to imitate their virtues; how much
more persuasive should the heavenly Jerusalem, and the City of the living God
be? where the holy Soul shall be admitted to converse with an innumerable
company of holy Angels, and taken into the blessed Society and Church of the
firstborn; where all those imperfections that imbitter our communion here, are
removed; where the holy Soul shall see Jesus the blessed Mediator of the new
Covenant, Heb. 12. who suffered so much for sinners, now sitting in glory and
majesty; not crowned (as once he was) with thorns, nor wearing a purple robe;
but having on his head the most transplendent Diadem, and clothed with Majesty
and Beauty. Methinks the thoughts of beholding this glory, and participating of
so much felicity, should excite the most lazy to follow Holiness, and to walk
worthy of him who has called us to his Kingdom and glory.

But I confess I am not able to express half of the glory of that future
felicity: The blessed Apostle seems to intimate, that all Hyperbolical
expressions fall short in describing it, 2 Cor. 4.17. where he styles it, A far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: and 1 Cor. 2.9. he tells us, Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive what God has pepared for those that love him. For although we may be
assured that the reward is of infinite value, and that the righteous shall
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father: yet the most glorious
part is hid from the eyes of viators; it is only those who taste the Honeycomb
that can best discover its sweetness.

And yet it is prodigiously strange that the imperfect glance of future Glory
that men may here behold, is so ineffectual to form them to Holiness; that men
who know they may be for ever happy, if they would study and endeavor to be
holy in all manner of conversation, yet live as if they thought such a happy
state not worthy to be noticed.

I confess, if the faithful and true God had not promised this state of
blessedness, and discovered by revelation the truth and reality of it, we could
never have dreamed of partaking of so much happiness. The Heathen world could
never be ascertained (by Natures dim light) that the Soul is beyond all doubt
immortal, and that there is a future state of rewards and punishments. The
wisest of their Philosophers, by their most laborious search, were exceedingly
confused in their thoughts about it, and could at the most only entertain some
probable guesses and conjectures, founded upon moral arguments, which could
never perfectly conquer their doubts: They did indeed think it was very
reasonable to believe that God (who is holy, just, and good) would in another
life (since he did it not in this) reward good men, and punish the bad; but
they could not be, beyond all doubt, ascertained that it would be so. The most
celebrated Socrates, who parted with this life in expectation of a better,
plainly told his Friends, it was God only who knew whether there were a future
felicity or not; much less could either he or any other, without revelation,
discover the nature and quality of the blessedness of that future state. And
indeed, although they entertained some imperfect notions of a future life of
bliss for the Soul, yet they never thought of the resurrection of the Body:
although it is true, the felicity they formed, was more congruous by far to
satisfy sensual appetites than rational Soul: the Poets Elyzium being much of
the same nature with the Mohammedan Paradise, exactly accommodated to their
flesh and senses.

In these thick clouds of darkness and ignorance did the wisest of the Heathens
walk: Exceedingly perplexed they were what to think, their doubts being greater
than their hopes. But the arising of the Sunshine of Righteousness has wholly
dispelled all that darkness; the Gospel has brought life and immortality to
light, 2 Timothy 1.10. and has undoubtedly assured us that there is a reward for
the Righteous, and that Holiness shall be crowned with Happiness.

SECT. 3. Holiness the only safe way to escape the wrath to come.
Fear is a passion so extremely violent, and repugnant to Humane nature, that
nothing imaginable is of more force to conquer the unruly wills of men to duty.
Hence is it, that even humane Laws are much more secured by punishments than
rewards: Therefore if the promise of Heaven be not forcible enough to work upon
our rebellious Wills, we have a Map of eternal and intolerable torments to
excite our fear, and to affright us from the commission of those sins that lead
down to the chambers of death; and that drawn so exactly, that it is the
greatest miracle, that men will notwithstanding slight Holiness, which is the
only means to evite these lasting tortures.

In sacred Writ, the torments of the damned are represented by such terrifying
expressions, that it is a wonder they impress not a fear and terror upon the
most daring sinner. The Apostle St. Jude describing Hell, calls it, The
vengeance of eternal fire, and the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 7, 13.
And the Apostle St. John calls it, A lake of fire and brimstone, Rev. 20.10,
15. Our Savior more emphatically describes it to be A fire that can never be
quenched, and where the worm dies not, Mark 9.46. All which phrases do most
significantly express the severity and intolerableness of the torments: for
what punishment is so terrible as that of Fire? and how unspeakably does it
inhance the misery, in that it is eternal? and that too, as inflicted by an
offended God, who is executing his vengeance upon sinners.

Would God sinners would seriously consider whether they are able to endure the
eternal pains of a gnawing Conscience? or can patiently dwell with devouring
Flames? Whether the momentary pleasures of sin, are to be balanced with those
furious reflections, those horrid stings and intolerable tortures the damned
suffer day and night, where nothing of life remains but the sense of pain?
Alas! will no argument prevail with men? how amazing is it to think that the
everlasting God has used all the methods of love to excite men to Holiness, and
to reclaim them from sin, and all to no purpose? May I not well say to such
men, as St. Paul said to the Galatians, Unwise sinners, who has bewitched you?

they endure, we may also add that celestial felicity they are for ever
excluded from. How tormenting will it be to think of an everlasting separation
from the divine Presence, and instead of a holy Society, to keep a continual
correspondency with impure Spirits?

Would God that this brief discovery of the powers of the world to come, might
prevail with men to be holy in all manner of conversation.

But methinks I hear the over-zealous Professor too ignorantly objecting* that
it is servile, mercenary, and legal, to be holy for love of Heaven, or fear of
Hell. Truly if it were so as these men teach, I know not what can be the
intent and design of all the promises and threatenings of the Gospel. And
although I question not but it is a generous and Christian principle, to serve
God out of pure love; yet I can never be induced to think, that to be holy for
love of Heaven and fear of Hell, can be separate from that principle of love to
God.

God knows how much in need men stand, both of arguments to work upon their
hope and fear, to excite them to duty. And since he who knows our natures, has
used promises to allure us, and threatenings to awaken us, we must not pretend
to be wiser than God, and reject those motives he has thought fit to prescribe:
and indeed, if it were not for the fear of evil, and the hope of good, it is to
be feared, the pressing of other motives should be but a mere beating of the
Air.

But that this is not servile and mercenary, needs no other argument to prove
it, but our Savior's enduring the Cross, and despising the Shame, for the joy
that was set before him; a Scripture sufficient enough to stop the mouths of
all opponents.

SECT. 4. Holiness the main design of the Gospel, and the end of all Christ's
sufferings.
Subjects who know the intent and design of those Laws issued forth by their
Prince, will be loath to contemn his Authority, especially when the whole
intent of these is to make them by their obedience the more happy; and sure
it is the most unaccountable thing that can be, if they notwithstanding despise
his Laws, and quite counter-act his design.

Now the main design of the Christian (...) help himself, our blessed Lord
redeemed us from our captivity, by offering up himself a ransom to satisfy
divine Justice; and all this, that we might walk in newness of life. And now
what ingratitude is it to despise so much love? Sure, If he that despised Moses
law died without mercy, of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood
of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing? Heb. 10.28, 29.

He must certainly be of a very base and disingenuous spirit, who takes
pleasure in sin, when he considers how dearly Christ paid for it. Has he been
at so much pains, undergone such dismal sufferings to purchase our peace, and
will we notwithstanding frustrate his design? how strange to astonishment is
this, that men should prefer captivity to freedom?

Alas! is it not enough that our blessed Master was so barbarously and
despitefully used by the Jews and Roman Soldiers, but must we be also Actors
in the Tragedy, and by our sins crucify him again?

Did he not die that we might live? and shall we spend our life in offering
despite unto him? Strange, that so much madness should lodge in the breasts of
any into whom God has breathed the breath of life!

I might here also add, that it is a contemning, and offering of the greatest
despite to the Holy Spirit, to despise Holiness: for upon this account is the
third person of the blessed Trinity called the Holy Ghost, because his peculiar
office is to enable us to perform holy actions: now if we continue in our
rebellion, if we reject the offers of grace, and the internal motions of the
Spirit to Holiness, we do hereby become guilty of quenching the Spirit of God,
and offering despite unto him; which is so horrid a piece of villainy, that
Heaven threatens it with the severest torments.

SECT. 5. Holiness the most proper and effectual means for attaining length of
days.
Of all outward and temporal blessings, length of days has justly the
precedence, since without this all others can afford little or no comfort: The
possession and enjoyment of other mercies, can bestow no satisfaction to men
lying on their beds (...) Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who
has wounds without cause? they that tarry long at the wine, etc. Holiness is
repugnant and inconsistent with excess, which naturally puts a period to the
lives of men: It forbids all manner of vice, which leads down to the chambers
of death; and keeps men within due bounds in their eating and drinking.

Before mankind had corrupted themselves by their notorious and impudent
vitiousness, we read of their great length of days; but the increase of sin
multiplied diseases, which hurry men to untimely deaths.

I deny not but the great Lord and Master of the Universe may, for holy and
wise ends known unto himself, cut short the lives of the righteous; yet surely
if we consult either Experience or Reason, we shall find it certain beyond
doubt, that virtuous men enjoy, for ordinary, far the longest lives.

Some good men may be naturally of a brittle constitution, yet how strangely
has their life been protracted by their moderation and sobriety? and how many
strong men have had their days shortened by their intemperance and excess?

Indeed, he that considers this well, shall find, that Holiness is the most
effectual means to promote long life, both upon a moral and natural account.
Upon a moral account, long life is the reward which the divine promises do
secure to such men; and on the contrary, wickedness is threatened with shortness
of days. Upon a natural account, the fire does not more naturally produce heat,
than Holiness does procure health and length of days; and there is nothing more
evident, than that the most of vices have a physical efficacy in the shortening
of humane life. That this is the necessary product and genuine effect of
intemperance and lasciviousness, needs no other argument to prove it, but the
daily examples of multitudes, whom those sins have hurried to their graves. And
truly there is not any vice which does not like fire in men's bosoms torture
and consume them; and so disorders and discomposes them, that they even neglect
the necessary means of their health. See Period of Humane life, page 111, 124.
Edit. 2.

SECT. 6. Holiness that which makes men honorable; vice rendering men mean and
ignoble.
Honor is an ornament so noble and venerable, that he is but very sottish, if
not quite brutish, who does not court and caress it. Upon this account it is
nothing strange, that ancient Philosophers, who wanted the assistance of
revelation, placed man's happiness in it.

How many brave and gallant actions have been performed, which if they had
wanted the bait of Honor had never been attempted! Gallant souls, who despise
all other rewards, have been hereby excited to undergo the greatest dangers.

Now, since honor is so highly esteemed, especially by those who pretend to
generositie; I shall, to encourage such to befriend Holiness, endeavor to
prove, that the most effectual means to procure Honor, and to be in esteem
both with God and man, is to live (as the Apostle advises men) soberly,
righteoously, and godly.

Only before I proceed to prove this, I shall premise one Caution, namely,
that by Honor I do not chiefly understand one dignified with any extrinsecal
honor arising either from his Birth or Office; though both these are to be
highly esteemed, and must not be denied that external respect due unto them:
but by Honor I understand that esteem and reputation that the best and wisest
men do give to any whose Moral honor is conspicuous; and under this notion the
Stoick-Moralists has very well expressed it, Nobilitas sola est atque unica
virtus. which upon the matter disagrees not much from that sacred position of
the Wise man, Prove. 22.1 A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches.

Having premised this, I come now to prove that Holiness is the pathway to
Honor. And indeed, this is so plainly asserted in Scripture, that it is
needless to insist. The God of Heaven has assured us, that those that Honor
him, he will honor; and those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. Much like to this, is that inducement to Holiness urged by our Lord
Christ, Joh. 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. Now men
cannot honor God more, than by being holy: for the word is comprehensive, and
includes all those duties that God has enjoined; but every vice is a despising
of his sacred Authority. If then holy men are those only whom God will honor,
and vicious men those whom he will contemn, we may easily conclude, who are the
honorable, and who are the base and ignoble. Sure those men must be
honorable, whom the Fountain of Honor esteems such.

It Is upon this account that the Saints are called (in Scripture) the excellent
of the earth, and the worthies of the world, (how meanly soever men esteem
them) of whom the world is not worthy: And the righteous is said to be more
excellent than his neighbor. And indeed, Holiness does not only promote the
honor and esteem of private persons, but of public Communities and Kingdoms
also, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a nation; but sin is a reproach to
any people.

This is a truth which the wisest of the Heathens, who yet wanted Revelation,
constantly taught, namely, That Honor is the reward of virtue. Hence the large
Lectures they have written in the commendation thereof: it would be too tedious
to transcribe even the Elogies that they have written in the praise of Virtue;
and indeed it is well worthy of our observation, that as they have illustrated
Virtue by their large Encomiums of it, so Virtue (which they courted) has made
them venerable to posterity, and transmitted to us their memories under the
most amiable Encomiums imaginable: And however their birth was but mean and
almost regardless, yet their virtues have made them more famous than Princes
and Emperors. The virtues of Aristides, Socrates, Seneca, Marcus Regulus, and
many others, have made their renown glorious; whileas many Emperors and great
men have had their names buried in silence.

Let a man be as rich as ever any of Adam's posterity was, or (that I may
extend it farther) as high as his ambitious thoughts can wish; let him be wise
as Solomon, and endued with all other perfections and advantages; yet if he
want virtue, how insipid will his Name be to posterity? It is Virtue alone that
conduces to fame. It Is true, some wicked men (called in Scripture vile,
notwithstanding their authority) have been set in high places, and honored for
fear, when alive; yet they never received that honor which has in all ages
accompanied the Righteous. They have had the external, (which is indeed due to
men by virtue of their Descent or Office) but wanted that internal reverence
and honor which is only due to good men: and I doubt not to say, that there
is nothing more incongruous and unsuitable, than to see Honor given to such
men. As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest; so honor is not seemly for a
fool, Prove. 26.1.

Vice is in the judgment of all considering men so mean and base, that it
casts a stain and reproach upon men; makes their names unsavory, and stink in
the nostrils of after-ages: but Holiness forces a veneration from men, and
makes posterity raise Elogies in their memory; but the memory of the wicked
shall be forgotten.

Virtue was that alone whereby many Kingdoms and Empires have been raised; was
that which made them so flourishing and potent, and prevailed more to their
establishment and advancement, than Strength or Policy. Thus it was with the
old Romans, (for their virtues are a shame to the present state of that Empire)
their Clemency and Justice conquered Kingdoms, and made Rome renowned and
glorious beyond all other Kingdoms and Commonwealths: and as Virtue has raised
Kingdoms, so has it also particular Persons; whileas Vice has cast Emperors
from their Thrones, and made them as unfortunate as they were wicked.

Many of the primitive Martyrs, who were renowned by Kingdoms and Commonwealths
(who keep Festivals in honor of their memories) were but of an inferior
degree, and had nothing to recommend them to posterity but their Holiness and
Sanctity; and indeed, any man that consults Reason, will easily find himself
constrained to reverence and esteem virtuous men.

It Is a wonder that any man who pretends to generosity should be vicious, there
being nothing so mean and base as Vice, which like to cowards always lurketh,
and dares not approach the light. I doubt not but this present age has arrived
at as high a confidence in proclaiming their sins as Sodom, as ever any former
age acquired; and it may (to the reproach of it) be said, as ever any is like
to reach to: yet till men cast quite off humanity, it cannot be expected that
Vice shall have Advocates to plead in its defense. It Is a noble saying of the
great Moralist Seneca; Licet Deus nesciret nec homo puniret peccatum, non tamen
peccarem ob peccati vilitatem.

It Is no wonder then though Vice appear (as the Devil in Samuel's mantle) under
the cloak of Virtue; though Lust mask it self with the pretense of Love, and
Cruelty of Zeal: but by this means it proclaims its timorousness, not daring to
own publicly what it really is.

It were a large field, to descend to the consideration of every particular
virtue and vice, and show that there is not any virtue but tends to the
advancement of a man's honor and fame, and no vice which is not ungentile,
mean, and base: But the brevity I have designed will not allow me to enlarge;
only in brief I shall demonstrate the truth of this by some few Instances.

Justice is so gallant a virtue, that it advanced the renown of those whom it
adorned, beyond what riches or preferment could ever bestow. The Romans were
more famous, and (where they were Enemies) more formidable for their Justice
than their Power: it was this virtue which in a peculiar manner made Scepters
and Kingdoms submit to their Government. But Injustice is so base and
contemptible a vice, that it has made those who are captivated by it, despised
as the unworthiest of men, not deserving to be taken into friendship, but to be
excluded from humane Societies. How unsavory has the name of unjust Judges
been to posterity, while every one is ready to strew some Elogies in honor of
the just!

To this I may annex Constancy in friendship, as a virtue as noble as amiable:
For who will not admire and celebrate the man who remains fixed to his friend,
whatever alterations or changes there may be in his condition? And sure
whosoever fails in his friendship, lays himself open to the most merciless
condition, and needs expect to be left to befriend himself when the wheel of
Providence lays him below those he thought unworthy of his favor.

Of all virtues, Liberality, Charity, and Compassion are so noble, that common
speech adapts this Elogie to them by way of emphasis; and indeed, I think I
need not say much to raise an estimate of these: for no man can be so base as
to despise those who bestow favors upon him. Sure there is no virtue that
makes men more famous, that wins the hearts and affections of people more, than
Liberality: but Avarice is ungentile and sordid; and so odious a vice, that it
ever lessens all other virtues, and makes those it possesses the most hateful
of men.

Charity is an obliging virtue; and as it has its original from, so does it
also necessarily produce Love, and esteem too: he who prefers the necessities
of others before his own superfluities, and who does supply the wants of
others, does so cheer the languishing hearts of the needy, that nothing can be
more generous, nor generally meets with a greater recompense of honor and
esteem.

To compassionate the case of the Fatherless, of the Poor and Needy, is so
noble a virtue, that the Apostle makes this qualification alone the evidence of
pure and undefiled religion. It is a most unnatural and more than brutish sin,
to slight and forget such.

Meekness and Humility are such noble embellishments of humane nature, as I
have formerly showed, that none but proud and insolent spirits, who have been
always condemned as insufferable, durst ever disesteem them.

To these I may join Affability or Courtesy, as a virtue near allied to
Humility and Meekness; which being noble in its causes and effects, cannot but
denominate the person it illustrates both noble, and amiable, and lovely: It Is
indeed an evidence of a very base and abject spirit, to be sullen and morose.
Persons of a noble education and original, are frequently known by their
condescending and obliging behavior; and I am sure Reputation and Esteem are
the apparent effects of Courtesy.

Temperance and Moderation are virtues more noble than that they need eloquence
to advance their value, as its contraries are too mean and beastly to be
inveighed against. How brutish and contemptible is a drunken man, who is
rather an object of pity, (as madmen are) than reproach; who being a more apt
resemblance of a beast than a man, deserves as little Honor, as he is ignorant
what Honor means?

SECT. 7. Holiness attended with the most solid and real pleasures.
In all things that concern practice, there is scarce any motive more forcible
than Pleasure; and of all plesures, those that entertain the Soul are the most
excellent. We indeed need no argument but experience, to demonstrate how
ravishing sensual pleasures and delights are, how much they are caressed and
courted, till men be glutted and filled with them. But alas! how inconsiderable
are all sensitive delights? the enjoyment of these cannot raise us above the
beasts that perish; but those pleasures which are fitted for the rational
nature, are noble and lasting; and such are all those delights that arise from
a holy conversation; no joy, without this, being able to make a man's life
pleasant and delightful.

There is in Holiness an internal delectability, that is better felt, than it
can be expressed; but how loathsome and odious is Vice? it is compared in
Scripture to the most ugly and unpleasant things: But Holiness is so comely, so
delightful, and ravishing, that it is very fitly (according to the
Scripture-Epithet of it) called, the Beauty of Holiness. It is this alone that
produces a calm and serene Conscience; from which necessarily results
acquiescence and delight: and indeed, this is no fantastic and imaginary joy,
(as the Atheists of this Age would make men believe) but a true and real one,
affording much more complacency and satisfaction, than all the pleasures of
sense. To the truth of which, I doubt not but those men who question it should
assent, if they would but make the experiment; and till they do this, they give
us too evident an instance of their folly, in denying the reality of those
raptures of joy resulting from a holy conversation.

But besides Experience, this truth is likewise confirmed by Reason: For who is
in more probable circumstances to participate of pleasures, than he who is
Master of his Passions, who has subdued his appetites, and freed himself from
those imperious Lords, who denied him the liberty of tasting and relishing
pleasures? The pious Soul may have no large allowance of temporal mercies; yet
having Contentment, he is richer than the wicked man whose coffers are full.

But we need not doubt of the reality of those pleasures; the Wise man has
long since put this out of question, Prove. 3.17. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness. There is here a concurrence of all those circumstances that
contribute to make any thing delectable: it is a way pleasant for its plainness,
and desirable for its end. There is not indeed any thing wanting in it, that
usually draws out men's delight.

All beauty falls inconceivably short of this; it being Holiness alone, that
makes the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father:
without this, all natural comeliness is imperfect, and, as the Wise man
expresses it, is deceitful and vain, Prove. 3^.30.

And yet what an universal Empress is external beauty become? nothing being of
equal force to attract the eye of beholders as it does. How has she conquered
the mighty, and made the Nobles of the Earth Vassals to lacquey after her?
There is an almost irresistible power and force in her charmings, which
conquereth the hearts of men insensibly.

Now if Beauty mixed with so much deformity, accompanied with so much
attendance and slavery, be so enchanting and attractive; how much more
powerfully should the Beauty of Holiness, which is every whit perfect and
unspotted, and attended with no dismal accidents, raise our admiration, and
make us say (as David of Goliah's Sword) There is none like it?

Alas! all earthly beauty will be quickly laid in the dust! a little time will
deface the fairest face, and make its beauty consume like a Moth: an unexpected
accident may disfigure it, and mar the most lovely features; and there is no
doubt but old Age, which draws on apace, will make wrinkles in the smoothest
face, and make it wither as a flower: But the Beauty of Holiness is lasting; it
fades not with time, nor can it be impaired by the most loathsome and
nauseating disease.

Since then Pleasure is so ready to excite our affections, and draw out our
complacency, it is pity that the noblest, the most satisfying, and most lasting
should be so much contemned. Eccl. 5.10. He that loves silver, shall not be
satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance, with increase. All the
caresses of this World are unable to satisfy the Soul; but how ravishing are
the joys of a holy conversation? The pleasures of this world are short and
momentary, are only (as the Apostle phraseth them) for a season, which quickly
passes; but the joy of the Holy Ghost is as lasting as unspeakble; and this
joy (says Christ to his Disciples) no man shall take from you. It is without
the reach of the malice of men and Devils too.

Alas! how dimunitive does it make the pleasures of the wicked, to say they are
short? how exceedingly does this one circumstance diminish them? But indeed
this were not so very considerable, if there were a concurrence of no worse
circumstances; but that which mostly is an allay and damp to temporal
pleasures, is the consequence, a painful and lasting eternity of the severest
punishments. It Is this life that puts a period and conclusion to the joys of
wicked men; whileas the pious have Rivers of pleasures for evermore to delight
and ravish them: it is at Death that they enter into joy of their Lord.

This is a subject so ravishing and pleasant, that I cannot without reluctance
conclude it. O how unsatisfactory are all the delights of Sense, if compared
with those Spiritual Joys the holy Soul partakes of! The delights that the
Drunkard has in his Cups and Companions, the Covetous in his Riches, the
Ambitious in his Preferments, etc. fall all incomparable short of that joy that
is the lot of the righteous.

The delights that the holy man enjoys do upon a double account far over-poise
the transitory pleasures of the wicked. First, the present satisfaction that
the holy Soul tastes of in this valley of tears, is incomparably greater than
the delights that arise from sense. The soul that has once tasted of the love
of God, finds more pleasure in the very acts of mutual love, than in all the
feasts of delight that sense is capable to enjoy. Food is indeed sweet to the
hungry, and drink to those who are languishing with thirst: the taste does
without doubt find some meats sweet and relishing, even where there is no
extremity of hunger, much more where it is: for, to the hungry every bitter
thing is sweet. Beauteous Sights ravish the Eye, melodious Music the Ear, and
Odoriferous things please the Smell: But alas! how far beyond these is the
delight which the devout soul receives in Ordinances! the antipasts of joy
which their Heavenly Father bestows upon them, are more delightful than the
concurrence of all sensual pleasures. The soul that is in trouble can fetch
more consolation from the promises of the Word, than the carnal man can from
his pleasures: Unless thy Law had been my delight (says the Psalmist) I had
perished in my affliction. Other things could not avail him, they could afford
no relief: but to have access to God in prayer, and to pour out our complaints
to our willing God, this is more ravishing than I can express. And I am sure
there is no man who has tasted these joys, who would part with them for
sensual pleasures; and no man dare inveigh against those spiritual delights,
but strangers who intermeddle not with this joy.

The very Heathens have taught us, that Virtue is a reward to it self; they
experimented more real satisfaction in moderation and temperance, than in
Drinking and Whoring. But Christianity gives us more uncontrolable evidences of
the reality of that joy that good men even in this state of absence taste of.
Into what a rapture and unexpressible ecstasy of joy did the abundance of
revelation St. Paul met with put him! and the Apostle St. Peter was so
transported with joy when he did see Christ in his Transfiguration, that he
could not forbear crying, Master, it is good being here. How full of joy have
Martyrs been in the midst of the flames? what comforts have they even then
expressed? And is not all this evidence, that the joy of holy men is more real,
more sweet and ravishing, than the transitory pleasures of the wicked, which in
several seasons can afford no delight? a little pain or disease is such an
allay and damp to their pleasures, that it quite extirps them.

But besides those foretastes of joy that the holy Soul experiments here,
which, as I have showed, infinitely overwhelms all trouble and pain; that which
contributes most to advance the joy of good men, are those felicities above,
which are prepared for them; and to these wicked men can lay no claim, their
farthest prospect being confined to temporal delights.

What abundance of delights and unexpressible pleasures are laid up for the
holy Soul above! How delectable will it be, to be constant residents in the
Heavenly Jerusalem, whose Streets are pure Gold, and whose Gates are Pearl? how
ravishing will it be, to be always in his presence, where there are Streams and
Rivers of perpetual pleasures? How sweet will it be, to be a member of that
blessed Society of the firstborn in Heaven, where there is a perfect concord
and agreement? But I confess, I am not able to express half the joy of this
future felicity: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into
the hearts of men to conceive, what a store of happiness God has laid up in
Heaven for those who are holy in all manner of conversation.

SECT. 8. Holiness accompanied with Peace.
There is nothing more suitable to, and agreeable with Humane nature, that
Peace; as those who endure trouble and vexation can fully attest: Amongst
earthly blessings it deserves not the last place, it being a mercy which crowns
all others, and without which, the fullest fruition could not prove
satisfactory.

Those languishing, and much to be pitied, Kingdoms, which now lie bathed in
blood, can attest the evils and mischiefs of War, much more pathetically than
words can express. How sweet and acceptable would Peace (a word always sounding
sweetly) be to them?

Now the Apostle St. James has given us a brief, but unquestionably true,
account of the real causes of Wars and Fightings, Jam. 4.1. From whence come
wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war
in your members? From these sinful causes have all the disorders and jars in
Kingdoms and private Societies had their real (I speak not of their pretended)
original. How impetuous are the lusts of turbulent spirits! like the raging
waves of the Sea, they are still in motion, casting forth filth and dirt.
Ambition is so unquiet and restless a passion, that no man is ignorant what
desolations it has wrought in the earth: How many famous Kingdoms has it
ruined and destroyed? what inquietudes and disorders are occasioned by
coffeehouse? All these are things so evident, that I need not enlarge upon
them: but how repugnant are these vices to Holiness? and can it be rationally
imagined that their genuine and proper effects can be more reconcilable with it?

I confess, Religion has too frequently been pretended as a Cloak to cover the
greatest Villainies, Confusions, and Rebellions: but sure I am, nothing
imaginable contains a greater contradiction, than to say these impieties have a
warrant from the sacred Laws of the Gospel, the combination of which is the
rule of Holiness, as I have formerly explained. Is not Christ called the Prince
of Peace, and the Gospel, the Gospel of Peace? and it is certain, if men would
be ruled by the Laws of so peaceable a Prince, they should be of a calm and
quiet spirit: then should we indeed see Righteousness and Peace kissing each
other.

When ever therefore we read in ancient prophesies of the great peace that
shall be in the Messiahs reign, we must thereby understand, that the nature of
the Gospel and its precepts are such, that if men would conform their lives to
them, there should be an universal Peace. How strictly are all the causes of
Envy, Contention, Ambition, and Rebellion, prohibited? and sure if these causes
were removed, their effect should have no place: Then should the Bow be broken,
and the Spear cut in sunder: Swords should be turned into Plough shares, and
the Instruments of War into more necessary uses: War should cease unto the ends
of the earth, and Peace should be within each wall.

By this it is apparent how much holiness conduces to the establishment of
public peace. But that which I would more especially take notice of, is, the
internal serenity and calmness of Conscience, which is the only effect of
holiness: and truly upon this account there is no peace to the wicked.

I might here appeal to every man's breast, whether Holiness does not calm and
quiet the Consciences of men; whileas a natural horror results from the
commission of vice, more heavy than the severest lashes ever inflicted by
Ceditius or Rhadamanthus. What unspeakable peace and ease does attend holiness
of life! there is no jar nor contention, no check of Conscience, nor wound of
spirit, to disturb the inward repose of the Righteous: but that remorse that
results from the commission of sin, even after men have acquired what they
sinfully lusted after, is like that handwriting, Dan. 5.5. which made the
stout heart of Belshazzer to tremble, and his knees to smite one against
another: It troubles the thoughts of the most daring sinner, and makes him a
terror to himself. There is no imaginable torment that can equal the terrors
of an awakened guilty Conscience; it has put men to choose strangling and death
rather than life: all which is fully verified by the Word of truth: The spirit
of a man can sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?

O the secret pangs and fears that possess the spirits of wicked men! the
severe checks and lashes of Conscience that seize upon transgressors, which all
imaginable divertisements cannot quite stifle and suppress! All the attendance
of the most dear Relations cannot give ease and comfort to them. How dismal and
inconsolable was Spira's condition? how amazing are the very thoughts of those
gnawings and horrors of Conscience he suffered? The fears and apprehensions of
a future misery, mar all the joy and mirth of carnal men. In their most
flourishing state it continually haunts them, and so fills them with horror and
inquietude, that they cannot quietly enjoy themselves. Whilst the Soul acts
within the Body, it cannot but present those horrid and disquieting reflections.

Hi sunt qui trepidant and ad omnia fulgora pallent. These are the men who in
the midst of outward felicity are amazed with tormenting fears, which cannot be
eradicated but by a sincere repentance.

But the holy Soul, in the extremity of outward troubles, enjoys an internal
calmness and quiet of mind: the very Pagan, who could not be beyond doubt
assured of the certainty of a future reward, could yet say, -- Hic murus
ahenaeus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla palescere culpa.
But the Word of truth has made this more unquestionably sure: Psalm. 119.165.
Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them.

SECT. 9. Holiness the best evidence of true Wisdom, and real Worth, and
Courage.
Wisdom and Courage having their rise and source from nobler Principles than
external helps, have therefore in all Ages been esteemed excellent and
venerable virtues; and much preferable to those others which depend upon
external advantages. Wisdom is (as the Wise man speaks) the principal thing,
Prove. 4.7. It is that virtue which in a peculiar manner raises the Humane
nature above that of Bruits, who act without consideration and counsel. And
Courage is that which subdueth that ignoble passion of fear, which hinders men
from attempting a^tions praiseworthy. Hence it is, that to be called a Fool,
or Coward, are such reproachful denominations, that nothing imaginable is more
shameful.

That Holiness is an infallible evidence of true Wisdom, is more plain than it
can be doubted. In sacred Writ, Wisdom and Religion are used as convertible
terms, as words expressing the same thing. And unto man he said, Behold, the
fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, that is
understanding, Job 28.28. Hence the impious and wicked are frequently called
Fools, and men void of understanding and wisdom. And however this profane Age
of ours has accounted those men great wits, who have cast off all Religion,
and who Burlesque Scripture; who think it the greatest folly to be kept in awe
by the fears of future danger, and to be kept in thraldom by the apprehension
of an invisible being: yet men who consider things aright, have in all ages
accounted those Atheists both fools and madmen.

Fools, in condemning that which all wise men have assented too. But it is no
wonder, since sin is that which overclouds and stupifies the judgment, and
deprives them of those intellectual abilities whereby men acquire a right
judgment of things. Alas! why should such be accounted wise, who cast
themselves in the dirt and puddle, who contaminate and pollute their Souls, who
prefer a temporal to an eternal felicity, who blindly and inconsiderately
expose themselves to the wrath of a God revenging sin? Sure the greatest Idiots
are not comparably so unwise as these men, who venture their Souls upon such
hazards.

There is nothing that does so much debase Humane nature, as sin: the Psalmist,
who but upon a surprisal vented his impatience and envy, yet characterizeth
himself a fool for doing so, Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was
as a beast before thee. It Is Religion alone that is the most certain and
uncontrovertable difference betwixt men and bruits. The very Pagan Satyrist
could say, -- Separat haec nos
A grege brutorum --


Reason will easily convince every man that will but take pains to consider,
that those men who neglect their greatest interest, can never shun to be
esteemed fools. Now to be serious and careful about the Soul, to be ascertained
how it shall go with us in the other world, this is the greatest concern of
man, about which the greatest care and diligence possible is little enough: and
sure those men who design happiness (a thing implanted in the natures of men)
must either make use of the right means in order to their acquiring of it,
otherwise they too plainly proclaim their folly: but the holy Soul makes
Religion its whole business; he knows that it is his greatest interest to be
holy, and that without this he can never expect to be happy hereafter. And
indeed, whatever may be the present apprehensions and thoughts of men, yet they
shall ere long pass this verdict of circumspect walkers, That they were the
only wise men: and the God of wisdom, who can give the best judgment in the
case, does account the Saints to be wise men. Let us then hearken to the
Apostles advice, Ephesians. 5.15. See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise.

But as Holiness does thus entitle men to wisdom, so does it also promote true
valor; it mightily conduces to inspirit men with courage and magnanimity: The
righteous are bold like a lion; but the wicked flee when no man pursues. And
the reason of both is plain: the one has secured his future state; but the
other expects no better inheritance. And however wicked men may be very daring,
yet they cannot be said to be truly valiant; for this is always rational and
deliberate: but if wicked men should soberly consider the unspeakable hazard
they run upon, they durst not be so daring; for what considering man would thus
expose himself to danger to be esteemed gallant, who knows if he miscarry he is
everlastingly miserable? If this merits the Encomium of courage, why may not
those madmen who inconsiderately expose themselves to danger, be also
accounted valiant? Nay, the Horse that undauntedly, but inconsiderately, runs
so many dangers, encounters so many perils in battle, may be as truly said to
be valiant, as those men: But this is to mistake quite the true notion of
courage.

That man that is affrighted with a small danger because it is present, but
nothing amazed with a future danger which is certain and intolerable, is
certainly both Fool and Coward. A Fool, in judging so badly, and mistaking his
own interest and well-being: A Coward, in being afraid for a danger because it
is present. He who runs from his Colors in time of Battle, proclaims himself
to be a coward, although thereby he exposes himself to a greater danger if he
be apprehended, even the severe Sentence of the Martial Law justly inflicted
upon Fugitives. How then can those men be accounted valiant, who for fear of
some small danger they may run the hazard of here for Holiness, expose
themselves to those vials of fury which is the portion of ungodly men hereafter?

SECT. 10. Holiness universally profitable, and above all things most
advantageous.
In all secular affairs that concern practice, Gain and Advantage is the great
argument and attracting inducement that prevails upon men; it is like oil to
the wheel, making its motion more easy and swift. There is no danger so
terrifying, but men have hazarded on, who have had this motive to animate them:
this is it that prompts the Mariner to expose himself to the dangers of the
merciless Ocean, that excites Servants to toil so industriously, and
encourages Soldiers to fight battles.

That men may also be inspirited and allured to court Holiness upon the account
of its utility and profit, I shall (abstracting from those advantages I have
already instanced) now briefly discover, that Holiness is, first, profitable to
men in every condition and state. Secondly, that it is attended with all
outward blessings, and wants not a claim to a temporal felicity. Thirdly, That
without it all other mercies are useless, and unable to quiet the Soul.
Fourthly, That it is the most incomparable blessing, and frees the Soul from
the worst of evils. Fifthly, That it is the best evidence of our being in
favor with God, and of our adoption to Gods Family. And Lastly, That it is the
best cordial against the fears of death, and affords the greatest satisfaction
to men lying on their beds of languishing.

That Holiness is profitable and advantageous

That Holiness is profitable and advantageous to men in every condition and
state, seems to be clearly enough asserted by the Apostle, when he says,
Godliness is profitable for all things. But besides Scripture, Experience and
Reason do jointly agree in the proof of this. That man that is advanced above
others in riches, has no ground to expect honor and reverence from men, if he
walk not according to the rule of Holiness; that is, if he be not moderate and
compassionate, if he restrains not his ambition and pride: And sure, without
this love and reverence from others, his condition is not very happy, he lies
exposed to infinite dangers.

Again, if a man be exposed to a mean and adverse estate, is environed with an
infinite number of perplexing difficulties; yet this case is not altogether
hopeless: for if he be not vicious, but on the contrary religious, besides the
divine aid that is engaged for his relief, the circumstances he is stated in
are apt motives to stir up bowels of compassion toward such a person.

Unless the Magistrate, who is invested with Supreme Power and Authority,
imitate God in goodness as well as in greatness, his Authority will produce
fear rather than love. The very Moralist could say, Sine bonitate nulla
majestas. Those who will be at the pains to consult Experience, shall find
that good Princes have always been in the greatest esteem; and sure it is the
most unpardonable villainy to attempt any evil against religious Kings.

Holiness is also profitable for Subjects to teach them obedience, and to
submit, not merely upon the account of wrath, but for Conscience sake; which is
certainly the only safe expedient to secure the obedience of Subjects: And, I
confess, I know not how that man can be a true Subject to his earthly Prince,
who stands not to offend the God of Heaven. I know some who have pretended to
much Holiness, have been the greatest villains; but this proves not that the
rule of Holiness gives a Supersedeas or allowance to any to disobey Authority.

Art thou a Parent? the rule of Holiness (to which holy men conform) will
instruct thee to be gentle and tender to thy Children, and not to provoke them
to wrath, which is the only thing that lessens their affection. Art thou a
Child? it will teach thee to reverence and honor thy parents; in doing of
which, thou entitlest thy self to the promise annexed to the fifth Commandment.
In a word, it is profitable to make all manner of Relations live in quietness
and peace, and to bestow mutual offices of love upon each other. It instructs
men to be faithful in every calling and employment: and certainly the good man
is to be trusted far rather than the wicked; for Religion lays an awe and
restraint upon the one, but the other pretends no such motive to engage him to
fidelity, especially if he may deceive and not be noticed. To this purpose
Plutarch has a notable saying: Pietate (says he; Not. Deor. lib. 1.) sublata
sides etiam and Societas humanae generis, and una excellentissima virtus
justitia tollitur.

There are several things useful for some men, but altogether unprofitable for
others; but Holiness is equally profitable for all; there are none exempt from
tasting its utility, but those who exclude themselves by a vicious conversation.

Secondly, Holiness is attended with all outward blessings, and wants not a
claim to a temporal felicity, Matthew. 6.33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and
his righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you. The promise of
inheriting the Earth (by which all temporal felicity is meant) is made to the
meek: Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth. And
indeed, we find this blessing even promised to the posterity of those that
fear the Lord, Psalm. 25.13. And to put this beyond all doubt, we find the
Psalmist repeating this five times in one Psalm, Psalm. 37.9, 11, 22, 29, 34.
And the great Apostle tells us, that it is Godliness that has the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. The God of
Heaven has also assured us, that he will withhold no good thing from them that
walk uprightly. Upon this account well might Wisdom say, Prove. 8.18. Riches and
honor are with me: a plain instance of which, we have in Solomon, who because
of his asking Wisdom to govern his Subjects, when he might as freely have asked
Riches and Honor, he receives this answer from God, I have also given thee
both riches and honor, 1 King. 3.13.

But however this discriminating providence does not so discernedly appear
here, yet there is no man but can attest Vice has impoverished thousands;
there being several sins that have a natural tendency to poverty. By means of a
whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread, Prove. 6.26. The like we
may truly enough say of several other sins. I have seen (says the Psalmist)
the wicked great in power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree; yet he
passed away, and lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found,
Psalm. 37.35, 36. I confess, good men may be reduced to great wants, may be
destitute of necessary provisions; nay, how frequently is this the lot of the
most excellent and gallant Souls? yet this may be safely said, That a little
that a righteous man has, is better than the riches of many wicked.

But then those things that best deserve the name of riches, because of their
enriching the Soul, which being more excellent than the Body, must upon that
account be of greater value than these things that only respect the Body,
these are only peculiar to holy men: and such are the graces of the Holy
Spirit, the combination of Christian virtues, the price of which is above that
of Rubies. These are riches which are of a more lasting nature than those which
the ignoble of the world call riches; they are not subject to the casualties
which Gold and Silver and precious Stones are; which upon that account cannot
be called a man's own, as Pagan Moralists have largely and excellently
confirmed: And if we will not dispute with God, and contest his determination,
we shall find one single virtue receiving a more ample commendation than ever
riches did; 1 Pet. 3.4. The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is in the sight
of God of great price.

Although the holy and devout Soul may be reduced to our Saviors straits, not
to have where to lay his head; yet how can he be said to be poor, since he
possesses him who is All? The most adverse chances that befall such a Soul,
cannot denominate it poor; there is a Crown and Princely Inheritance which
belongs to it. Nay, besides that glorious reversion, we have express promises
that such Souls shall not be altogether destitute of necessaries to sustain and
support them in this their pilgrimage.

I have already showed, that Honor and Pleasures are the attendants of
Holiness: What in the world is more glorious, than for a man to conquer those
lusts and inordinate appetites that seek the mastery over him? what pleasure is
able to contest with those ravishing joys which result from a holy
conversation? There is nothing imaginable that so exhilarates and revives men,
as a calm and quiet Conscience. But I pass this.

In the next place I come to show, that the enjoyment of all other blessings
can never profit that man that wants Holiness. This is plainly attested by our
Savior, saying, What has a man profited if he should gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul? To have an affluence of temporal mercies, cannot so much
as contribute to a present felicity, where the forementioned qualification is
lacking. Outward favors, not attended and chained with real Holiness,
contribute only to enhance the misery of their possessor; they being proper
fuel to increase the flame of inquietude and restlesness, but unfit to allay
it. The greatest plenty of riches cannot satisfy the covetous mind, which
like the Grave cries, Give, give. The whole world could not satisfy
Alexander's insatiable ambition; but, as the Poet speaks, Aestuat infoelix
angusto limite mundi.

It Is indeed impossible for a man to enjoy that earthly felicity he designs, if
he want Holiness: For, suppose he be possessed of it, yet the secret
acknowledgement of a superior power, impairs the delights that do arise from
such a state, and makes him in the height of his fancied felicity startle and
quake. Conscience, upon the apprehension of guilt, and the vengeance due to it,
recoils upon the sinner, and disturbs his quiet enjoyment of the pleasures he
might otherwise freely enough delight in. O how does it molest and torment him
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem. to have an inward principle of
Fear haunting the sinner in his most retired enjoyment of pleasures, which
cannot be silenced by his utmost endeavors! This, this is it that torments him
with anguish and confusion, that allays the imaginary pleasure of the most
charming Lust, and in the midst of laughter makes his heart heavy: which fully
verifies the truth of what I said; that the enjoyment of all other blessings
can never free a man from torment, nor a whit profit him that is destitute of
Holiness.

Fourthly, Holiness is the most incomparable blessing, and frees and Soul from
the worst of evils. What David said of Goliahs Sword, I may more safely say of
Holiness, There is none like it; nothing in the world so apt to remove those
disasters and turmoiling fears that inwardly work upon and damp the minds of
men with severe checks and lashes, as Holiness, which being diametrically
opposite to sin, which is the worst of evils, must therefore by a necessary
consequence be the best of blessings.

Now seeing contraries placed near to other are the more discernable, I shall
therefore take a short view of the evil and malignity of sin, that hereby the
beauty and excellency of Holiness may appear the brighter, and have the greater
force to conquer our affections.

To express the evil and malignity of sin, Scripture represents it by the most
ugly and abominable things, by the most dangerous and terrible Diseases: Nay,
the great Apostle seems to want language and comparisons too, to express the
evil of it, when he calls it exceedingly evil, as if he had said, it infinitely
transcends all other evils; the malignity of which, no Pen can fully delineate
and describe, either in its nature or consequences.

In its Nature; the Scripture-character of it is, it is an enmity against God;
a transgression and voluntary violation of his most holy and righteous Law; a
disobedience of his Authority, and a wicked contempt of all the divine
Attributes: it is the woeful stain and blemish of our Natures, the disease of our
Souls, and the reproach of our Reason.

The consequences of sin are fearful and fatal. So bad a cause can never fail
to produce the worst effects; for besides all the temporal calamities and
mischiefs that befall Mankind, those unspeakable miseries and extreme torments
that accompany men to the other world, are also the dreadful and sad effects of
sin. I have already showed, that every vice is naturally attended with some
particular punishment: but that indeed which is most terrible, which should
mightily amaze and startle the sinner, are the dreadful miseries of another
world: Alas! how dismal is the condition of those men who have lost the divine
Image, and consequently his love and favor, and are liable to his fury and
wrath? who are possessed with a legion of impure lusts, which lead them
captive, and hurry them headlong to perdition, where they must have their
everlasting abode with impure spirits and devouring flames.

How impossible is it to give a just List and Catalogue of the sad and dreadful
consequences of sin, or fully describe the evil and malignity of it! But yet
this imperfect glance may in part satisfy and inform us, that a holy and
virtuous life, which excludes all those mischiefs and inconveniences which
both in this and the next life attend sin, is the best of blessings, and frees
us from the worst of evils.

Fifthly, Holiness is the best evidence of our being in favor with God, and of
our adoption to Gods Family. How sedulous and inquisitive are many good
Christians to understand their spiritual state and condition, that they may
know into which of the two regions of the other world they shall be stated
after death? This is certainly a matter of the greatest consequence, and
deserves every man's most serious consideration; a mistake here being so
exceedingly dangerous, like a wound in the vital parts, it proves mortal and
incurable if continued in. Now the most infallible mark and character of our
being in favor with God, and that which comprehends all others, is that which
the beloved Apostle sets down, 1 John 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Little children, let no
man deceive you: he that does righteousness is righteous. (And every one that
does righteousness is born of God, Chap. 2.29.) He that commits sin is of
the Devil -- Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin -- In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: Whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God. Let men pretend what they will, if they be
destitute of righteousness, they are of their Father the Devil, and can claim
no interest in God as their Father; seeing it is purity of Spirit that gives us
a title to be the Children of the most high; 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Be ye separate,
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. The
whole tenor of the Scripture abounds with so many such instances, that I shall
supersede a tedious citation of texts.

This then being so infallible and certain a character, methinks every rational
man may quickly come to the knowledge of his spiritual estate. A bad man may
certainly enough know whether he breaks the divine Laws, and goes in a
continued course of sin; and a good man may sufficiently know whether he obeys
the divine Laws, and is sincere in his actions. These are things so plain and
undeniable, that all doubts of this kind are ridiculous. Now it is no
difficulty to draw these plain inferences: I break the divine Laws, therefore I
am not of God: or, I obey them, therefore I am a Child of God. And this every
considering man, who impartially considers, and exactly examines his life and
actions, may be fully enough ascertained whether he be a Child of God or not.
Alas! how useless and dangerous is it to ascend unto Heaven to search the
secret and eternal Decrees of God, which belong not to us to pry into, that we
may know whether our Names be written in the Book of Life or not? He that does
righteousness needs not fear any latent Decree concerning his reprobation; and
it is the vainest thing imaginable, for impenitent and obstinate sinners to
dream that God has from eternity elected them to life. The pure nature of God
is so perfectly opposite to sin, that it is quite impossible there can be any
agreement betwixt him and sinners, no more than there can be betwixt light and
darkness. The Psalmist acquaints us, That he is not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness. And the Apostle has told us, That the wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. But yet the
righteous Lord loves the righteous: These are the men whom he esteems his
Children, to whom the promises of eternal life belong.

In the last place, there is nothing in the world that will prove so effectual
to comfort men at the hour of death, as the sweet thoughts of their being
separated from the pollutions of the world. How unspeakably comfortable is it
for men, when they are just stepping into the other world, to reflect upon the
good life they have led, and that they carry in their bosoms Consciences void
of offense both toward God and toward man? This is indeed that noble and
Sovereign Cordial that revives the spirits of good men, in their passage
through the valley and shadow of death, and makes their comforts abound and
overflow.

Death is not so small a matter as some men think; in Scripture it is not
unfitly called the King of terrors: Now nothing can free men from the terror
of it, but a good Conscience; and this cannot be had without Holiness, which
makes all calm and serene within. It will afford men little pleasure when they
come to die, to reflect upon the earthly pleasures they have enjoyed: these
things profit not in the day of wrath; but the Conscience of well doing makes
men salute death without dread and astonishment, and lift up their heads with
joy, because the day of their redemption approaches.

But with the ungodly and wicked it is not so; then their sins stare them in
their face, and so terrify and affright them, that no wonder though in the
extremity of their agony they prefer strangling and death to life. If holy Job
does so heavily complain of the terrors of God, how much more terrifying shall
the apprehensions of a severe and terrible judgment be to the unsanctified and
polluted? To think how shortly he must be everlastingly separate from the good
things he enjoyed here, and be cast into utter darkness, to have his portion
with the damned in devouring Flames, to be an everlasting resident in the Lake
of fire and brimstone, where he shall be continually tormented with that
gnawing worm that never dies: These are the amazing thoughts that will seize
upon the sinner: his Conscience then will not sleep; nothing will be able to
allay those Storms and Tempests that are raised by the fearful expectation of
the reward due to sin. At death, men are generally wiser than at other times;
then they begin to consider what they have been doing, and call themselves fool
a thousand times for their disobedience and wickedness. The smoke of worldly
cares that formerly blinded their eyes, are now dispelled; they see their
folly, when it is too late to mend it; and if they do no more, yet Balaam-like,
they will cry, O that I might die the death of the righteous!

CHAP. IV. Frivolous Cavils and Objections removed.
THe former Chapters having discovered the Beauty of Holiness, and the mighty
power and force of Arguments that excite to the practice of it; one who weighs
all this by the measures of equity, cannot (as any man would think) but look
upon it as the strangest prodigy, that so just a Cause should raiss of its
effect, and find the sons of men, who pretend to be such Masters of Reason, so
monstrously foolish in rejecting it upon the account of some frivolous and very
fallacious cavils: But the truth is, resolute Impiety is set upon the bench and
made Judge; and no wonder though it pass an unjust sentence, and condemn
Holiness because of its opposition to Vice.

The common imputations and prejudices which wicked men load Holiness with, I
shall reduce to the four following Heads. First, Holiness lays upon men heavy
burdens, and grievous to be born, which makes humane life joyless and uneasy,
they being so inconsistent, first, with Peace; and secondly, with Pleasure and
Satisfaction.

Secondly, Experience informs us, that wicked men enjoy pleasure and
satisfaction in their ways, there being no men so jovial and merry as they; and
that men who pretend to Holiness are fullen and melancholy, and are exposed to
heavy sufferings and trials.

Thirdly, It Is singularity and ambition that prevail more with men than any
other motive to be holy.

Fourthly, It Is the greatest piece of folly, ignorance, and impudence, for men
to quit with present pleasures for mere uncertainties.

The first being the most material Objection, I shall therefore more largely
and distinctly examine it; and in doing of this, I shall desire these four
things may be considered. First, that the divine Laws are not grievous and
uneasy. Secondly, that Vice is much more troublesome and difficult than Virtue.
Thirdly, that Holiness conduces both to the Peace and Happiness of humane
Societies, and to the temporal Advantage of private persons. And Fourthly, that
there is a great deal of more pleasure in the ways of Holiness, than in the
commission of sin.

That the divine Laws are not grievous and uneasy, but extremely reasonable
and wise, is a truth I have already made plain, when I discoursed of the rule
of Holiness. The whole tenor of the Laws of Christianity being so exceedingly
suitable to the very nature of men, it cannot be rationally supposed that they
can be grievous to them. St. Paul to the Philippians, gives us a brief and
compendious, but very full and comprehensive, account of what things the Laws
of our Christianity enjoin, viz. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, and whatsoever things are of good report: all which are so
agreeable to Reason, that even the light of Nature prompts men to the doing of
them, and fully discovers it self to be an irreconcilable Enemy to all kind of
vices.

It Is not then Reason, but the impetuous Lusts of men, that determines a holy
Law to be grievous and uneasy: and indeed, no wonder though this unjust Judge
make Holiness appear formidable, and represent it as grievous to Mankind; it
being so much the interest of this partial Judge to condemn it as criminal, and
to decrie it as a yoke intolerable and grievous to be born. It Is not probable
that the most innocent shall pass uncondemned, when an Enemy is set up in the
Judgment Seat to pass Sentence: our blessed Savior must be pronounced guilty
by Pilat, although even this unjust Judge openly professed, he found no fault in
him. And seeing our great Lawgiver met with so severe a sentence, who can
expect any more upright verdicts should pass upon his Laws?

But that the divine Laws are not indeed grievous to be born, may easily appear
from plain Texts of Scripture (which is the only infallible rule.) Our great
Lord has himself taught his Disciples, That his yoke is easy, and his burden
light. And one of his inspired Disciples has assured us, that his commands are
not grievous: two Texts sufficient methinks to remove all those prejudices that
are cast upon a holy life, as if it were full of fatigue and trouble.

But besides Scripture, Reason and Experience too, come in to witness this
truth. First, Reason bears witness that the divine Commands are extremely
reasonable and natural; and is it not against the common vote of Mankind, to
say, What is natural, is uneasy and difficult? Men who impose hard and
grievous tasks upon others, are by all men condemned as unreasonable; which
certainly implies, that whatever is reasonable, is not grievous and difficult.
It Is true, sinners, who by their many-repeated acts of disobedience have
contracted a habit of sin, do indeed commit it with less trouble than those who
first engage to this Tyranny; as Slaves, who by custom look upon that as easy,
which at their first entrance upon such a slavery was very difficult and
grievous: And yet whatever ease the most daring sinner may pretend is to be
found in the acts of sin, I durst appeal to his own breast, whether he might
not with a great deal of more ease, and less fatigue, have kept the divine
Laws, than he met with in breaking of them.

I confess, the Laws of Christianity are not natural in a strict and confined
sense; but only in so far as they correspond with, and are suitable to, the
nature of Mankind: hence some sins are said to be unnatural; not because all
sins may not adopt to themselves that title, but because upon a more peculiar
and special account, all men are sensible that they are brutish, and
unbecoming any who carry in their bosom a rational Soul. There is not any vice,
but it infests and prejudges Nature. Anger is a degree of Madness, that
violently transports men, and quite mars their inward ease and repose. Revenge,
a more lasting and deliberate fury, preys upon the Soul where it resides, and
so distracts and hurries it with inquietude and restlesness, that nothing
imaginable can be supposed a greater Enemy to Nature, how sweet soever and
luscious it may seem to depraved nature. Intemperance, and Uncleanness, are
sins which debase Humane nature below that of beasts, and are the cause of many
intolerable pains and Diseases, which make Humane life but an uneasy burden.
But besides all these troubles, we may add that horror of Conscience that
haunts the sinner with fear and astonishment. All which contribute to clear the
truth of what I assert.

Again, Reason tells a man, that it cannot be grievous to him to perform that
which is so much his interest and advantage. Men in their secular concerns
find no difficulties in any undertaking wherein their interest is concerned;
and sure it is man's greatest interest to keep the divine Precepts, as I have
already at some length discovered. It Is an excellent saying, of as excellent an
Author: Reason (says he) must first cease to be Reason, and commence Phrenzie,
before it is possible it can set it self in defiance of those Laws of Christ,
which are accommodated to its greatest interest. Causes of the decay of
Christian Piety, Chap. 5.

But besides Reason, Experience bears also witness to this truth, that the
divine Laws are not grievous. But before I proceed to prove this, I shall
premise two Cautions: First, when I say that Experience makes it plain, that
the Laws of Christianity are not grievous; I do not mean that a sinner when he
first forsakes his sins, and betakes himself to a holy and virtuous life,
shall encounter with no difficulties; no sure, this cannot reasonably be
expected: for his former habit in sin will at the first give him work enough;
he has an old custom to oppose and struggle with, which will cost him no small
pains to overcome. Secondly, far less must we fondly imagine that the Law of
Christianity is so easy, as supersedes and gives a discharge to humane
industry, vigilance, and care: they are but strangers to a holy life, and never
knew what it is to obey Gods Commands, who never were at any pains, nay who are
not very industrious and careful to observe them. When our Savior says, his
yoke is easy, he does not hereby intend to persuade men to be like Solomon's
sluggard; sure Heaven was never designed for loiterers in Gods Vineyard: but
his intent there, is to remove a common prejudice men were like to entertain
against Christianity, as if it were an intolerable yoke, and insupportable
task: now this Christ forewarns his Disciples is not true.

These two things being premised, I now appeal to Experience (which often
corrects error in speculation) whether the Laws of Heaven or Hell are most
grievous. And to condescend as far as possible, I shall not here call in the
Experiences of good men, who all unanimously assent that there is more ease and
less fatigue in obeying, than in breaking the divine Laws; but I shall submit
to the sinners own testimony, when he is in his most sober state; I mean, when
he is under the extremity of some pain inflicted by his sins, or when he lies
upon his deathbed: at other times, when he is in the pursuit of some Lust, no
wonder though he pass as unjust a sentence as sick men do of tastes, who having
their palates infected with some venomous and filthy humor, judge every thing,
be it really never so pleasant, to be bitter and harsh.

Go then to sinners when they come to themselves (as it is said of the
Prodigal, He came to himself, as if he had been before mad or distracted) and
ask them whether they find more trouble in their doing or omitting of sin? Ask
the Drunkard, who by his intemperance lies smarting under the tormenting pains
of the Gout, whether he had been wiser, and suffered less trouble, if he had
been temperate, and abstained from excess? Nay, besides the diseases that many,
if not most of vices bring upon men; there are some sins that make men sensibly
in the time find pain and trouble. Go to the Lascivious and Wanton person who
is tormented with the Pox, and ask whether his sin be grievous to him or not?
There are few sins which are not attended with grievous concomitants. But I
shall not insist.

I confess, no men's Experiences are so likely to demonstrate this truth, nor
are more pertinently appealed to, as theirs who have once experimented the
pleasures and pains of both states: Ask therefore those who were once Drunkards
and Adulterers, but are now sanctified and settled in a course of Holiness; and
I am sure they shall verily testify, that it is only Satan's Yoke that is
uneasy and burdensome.

But granting that there is some difficulty in the exact observation of the
Laws of Christianity, (as sure any man who consults the corruption of his own
nature, and the depraved inclinations thereof, against which they are levelled,
will never deny) yet if this shall be judged a good Argument to cancel the Laws
of Christianity, all Laws whatsoever shall be quite dashed out, and banished
the world; for who shall be guilty, if he may have the liberty to use this for
a relevant excuse?

This being then so unreasonable to imagine, (and if it should be admitted,
should yet never a whit excuse the sinner, who to his experience finds sin to
be so uneasy and troublesome) yet I shall add two Considerations that
demonstrate, the Laws of Christianity are more easy than any other Laws that
ever were invented; and that they are not (as carnal men represent them) hard
sayings which none can bear. First, the Author of the Gospel-precepts has
offered to us an assistance, able to conquer all the difficulties that can be
supposed to attend the keeping of his Mandates. It Is true, if Christ had
enjoined his followers to obey a Law which could not possibly be kept; I
confess, in that case, his Commands had been grievous, and his Yoke
insupportable: Or if he had been satisfied with no less than perfect innocence,
and unsinning obedience, I don't see how this prejudice and cavil could have
been removed. But he who prescribed those Precepts, considered the frailties of
our nature, and the weakness of man in this lapsed estate; and therefore he has
provided help for us, if we will but be at the pains seriously to implore it;
For he gives his Spirit to them that ask it. And upon this account the beloved
Apostle encourages Christians to obey the precepts of the Gospel, because
Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

Secondly, The excellency of the Reward that is promised to the obedient, is a
most noble consideration to make men (as the Psalmist speaks) run the way of
Gods Commandments. The promissory part of the Gospel, renders the preceptive
part easy. Methinks the holy Soul should with comfort thus express it self,
when the greatest difficulties offer: Good God! shall I be discouraged to obey
the hardest (if any thing proceeding from infinite Wisdom and Goodness can be
said to be difficult) of thy Commandments, when so glorious a prize is the
reward thereof? If a terrene and temporal felicity animates others to encounter
the most Giant-difficulties, how much more unconcernedly should I slight all
hazards, and contemn by a fearless courage all dangers, for that blessed hope
that is set before me? Can I remember there is a Kingdom promised, and yet be
terrified from it by supposed difficulties, or complain that the way is
inaccessible? Do I really know that it is indeed a good Land, and am yet
discouraged to attempt the taking of it, because it will require some violence?
Shall I, like the Reubenites and Gadites, set up my rest on this side of
Jordan, notwithstanding this proposal of Canaan? No sure, eternal Life is too
noble a prize to be lost, for fear of fighting the Good sight. I regard no
difficulties while I eye the Crown; I cannot think those Precepts grievous,
that are enforced by so many excellent promises. So great a recompense of
reward should, methinks, inspire the dullest Heart, and sweeten the hardest
Service; should make any one willing and content to sacrifice his most beloved
lusts, to cut off the right Hand, and pluck out the right eye, which stand in
the way, and hinder him from entering into Heaven.

Having thus endeavored to explain upon what account the Laws of Christianity
are not grievous, I hope I shall not need to insist long upon the following
particulars. At first sight it seems plain, that since the case is so, Vice
must certainly be more troublesome than Virtue; and that it is easier for men
to live holily, than wickedly: and yet, I know not by what strange artifice,
Holiness has had the bad luck to be represented as being extremely difficult. I
confess, I intend not to inveigh against the sacred Tribe of Levi, who have
represented Heaven almost as unaccessible, as the Israelitish Spies did the
good Land of Canaan; knowing they thereby only design to raise men's
endeavors: although I could have wished that they had considered better, how
readily men of corrupt minds and vicious practices lay aside all care of Gods
Commandments, upon this suggestion, that they are grievous; and are deterred
from a holy and virtuous life.

But that Vice is more troublesome and uneasy than Virtue, will (besides what
I have formerly said) appear to be so, from the following Considerations.
First, Sacred Records represent sinners as men who weary themselves with sin;
and the Prophet Isaiah describes their trouble by a very apt similitude, Isa.
57.20. The wicked is like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt. The ways of sin are frequently called crooked paths, and
wicked men are said to walk astray; whileas the way of Holiness and Virtue is
said to be a straight and high way: All which Phrases plainly enough imply,
that the former is full of intricacy and perplexities, and the latter plain and
easy.

Experiences to prove this, are every day so multiplied, that they may
abundantly serve to silence all doubts. The Drunkard can experimentally tell
the costliness of his sin, and the tormenting diseases that are frequently the
effect of an overcharged Stomach; the uneasy belchings and overturnings
within, the grievous pains of Head and Joints. The Wanton and Lascivious can
produce his painful boils and sores, to witness the uneasiness of Lust; at
best, he can only produce an hectic Body. But besides those loathsome
diseases that are the effects of Lasciviousness, how restless and uneasy is
the condition of such persons? But how impossible is it to give a just list of
those miseries that Wantonness and Intemperance hurry men to? To what a
multitude of amazing difficulties does Pride expose men! what mischiefs, jarrs
and contests does it raise? Envy and Revenge torment men's spirits, and so
disquiet and perturb them, that men may as well take fire into their bosom, and
pretend they perceive no torment, as lodge those horrid lusts in their breasts
without the sense of their extreme misery and pain. The Covetous mind is never
at rest, but is ever craving and desirous of more. But to show how troublesome
the practice of every sin is, requires a larger discourse than I can well allow.

But how easy is Virtue, if compared with Vice? At what trouble and pains are
men, to invent a lie? and when they have contrived it, they cannot but be
afraid lest it be discovered. But how easy is it to speak the truth? With how
much art and pains do men trouble themselves to conceal their vices? The
Adulterer is wearied with watching convenient opportunities, and afraid lest he
be discovered; whileas the chaste person enjoys himself quietly, and is troubled
with no such attender. The covetous Miser is cruciate and tormented with a
desire of what he cannot expect; is extremely tormented by an incessant care,
lest he lose what he has, and ever toiling to acquire more; whileas the
virtuous Soul is contented with what he enjoys, and grudgeth not to bestow a
part of what is his to others.

There is no man who is not quite given up to commit all manner of wickedness,
and whose conscience is not seared as with a hot Iron, but can tell by his
experience, how perplexing and uneasy Vice is. And to make this yet more
plain, I shall add these few following Reasons. First, the nature of Vice is
so reproachful, that men are even troubled to coin shifts to avoid the owning
it; and sure this cannot but be uneasy to men. Secondly, the most viciously
inclined persons, who will not practice, yet are force for their interest to
pretend Virtue, and usually indeed become greater Zealots than those who are
really virtuous: But this cannot but be exceedingly troublesome to them, it
being against their inclinations, and contradictory to the internal sentiments
of their minds. And besides, at what pains are they to make other men believe
that they are real in what they only pretend? Thirdly, Vice is very perplexing
and difficult, upon the account that it requires hard, if not impossible
performances: the Covetous mind is prompted to attempt many difficulties to
obtain what it craves, and after all is disappointed. Nay, indeed, Covetousness
is a vice so uneasy and troublesome, that it proposes what can never be
acquired: for after it has got what is designed, it is restless, and as ready
to say Give, give, as ever. But Lastly, that which contributes most to render
Vice uneasy, are those after-pangs of Conscience which fill the Soul with
horror and amazement; the consciousness of guilt stings and torments it, and
makes the sinner a terror to himself. It Is impossible either to gag or corrupt
Conscience, that it shall never give any check. But now how quieting and
solacing is Virtue? no man ever yet complained that terrors haunted him for
living holily. O how do the thoughts of a virtuous life refresh men in the
midst of greatest dangers? Let us go to sinners on their deathbed, and then we
shall find this truth preached to the full; an evidence valid enough to
condemn sin as the uneasiest thing imaginable.

And thus we have seen how many difficulties attend sin, both before, and after
it is committed. And now what reason can any man allege for the pretended
easiness of sin? I confess, I know not any thing, except it be custom, that can
be pertinently adduced; but how weak is this Plea? for although Custom, which
is a second nature, may contribute very much to stupifie the Judgment, and
harden the Conscience, and so consequently make Vice the more easy; ye^ we can
hardly suppose that ever Humane nature will so far assimilate the nature of
mere Animals, as to be deprived of Reason and Conscience: And sure, so long as
any of these remain, Vice must needs meet with opposition. But Secondly, if men
will compare the easiness of Virtue and Vice, they must put them in equal
circumstances; and then I doubt not but Vice shall stand condemned, as the
great troubler of peace and quietness. For instance, let us suppose that a man
is accustomed to a holy life, and is habituate to live soberly, righteously,
and godly; in this case, let any man make but the experiment, and I am sure he
shall ingenuously acknowledge, that a good life affords more tranquillity and
peace, than Vice dares lay claim to.

And yet, I know not by what bad luck, Holiness has been represented as
opposite to men's present welfare, and hurtful to their peace and tranquillity.
How groundless this prejudice is, I have already endeavored to show. I shall
therefore now only in a few words make it plain, that Holiness is the most
effectual method that can be taken, to exalt the public peace and happiness of
a Nation. And Secondly, that it infinitely conduces to the happiness, peace,
and tranquillity of particular persons; and that nothing is so inconsistent
with, and hurtful to both, as sin.

How much Holiness tends to the advancement of public peace in a Kingdom and
Nation, appears very plainly from the Wise man's observation, Prove. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a nation; but sin is the reproach of any people. And the
Apostle St. James gives us a true account of the causes of public jars, Jam.
4.1. From whence come wars and sightings amongst you? are they not hence, even
from your lusts that war in your members? If mankind had not corrupted their
ways, and degenerated from their pristine purity, how peaceable and happy had
humane societies been? but in this lapsed state, Ambition, Pride, and Injustice
act their tragical parts, and so tend to the destruction of humane societies,
that if there did not remain some sparks and remainders of Religion, it is not
possible that humane society could evite an utter ruin. And he that well
ponders the settled course of divine Providence, shall easily assent, that in
all Ages Righteousness and Virtue have been rewarded with a temporal
tranquillity and happiness; and that fruitful lands have been turned into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. And indeed it is very
reasonable to think that the divine Justice will reward a righteous Nation, and
punish a rebellious People. It Is true, he may defer his Judgments for a while,
yet his Justice will not always give place to mercy and forbearance; but a
Nation that continues and increases its provocations, must expect to be
punished in this world, (which is the only proper place) as a righteous Land
may expect a present reward.

That Holiness does also conduce to the peace and quietness of particular
persons, is nothing less evident from Scripture: Psalm. 119.165. Great peace
have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them: but the wicked is
like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt,
Isa. 57.20. I have once and again showed, that there can be no inward
tranquillity and peace, where Holiness is wanting: the very thoughts of God,
which above all things are most sweet, are notwithstanding troublesome to
wicked men. But because Humane nature is in this degenerate state extremely
sunk down into Sense, and more apt to be wrought upon by temporal advantages,
than what only concern the Soul, and have a prospect to things that are
future; I have also in the former part of this Discourse endeavored to make
plain, how advantageous Holiness is upon the foresaid account; and that length
of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor: That her
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace: That Godliness is great
gain, having the promises of the life that now is, as well as of that which is
to come. And indeed, any man, who considers the nature and reason of the thing,
cannot but be inclined to think it must be so: For how can that man be exposed
to trouble and disquietment, who has gotten the mastery over his Passions? And
I dare appeal to the sinners own experience, whether vices have not been
prejudicial to his health, macerated his Body, and filled him with tortures and
pains? whether some sins have not brought him to poverty and disgrace, ruined
both his estate and fame? Can any man produce any good effect that ever sin
caused? sure, if men would speak impartially, they should acknowledge all this
to be true.

That there is a great deal of more pleasure in the ways of Holiness than in
the commission of sin, (which is the fourth thing proposed to be considered)
needs not puzzle any man to prove it. How delightful are all acts of Piety and
Virtue? how unexpressible is that comfort that the devout Soul finds in
conversing with God? Well might the Psalmist say, Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. he often
experienced that sweetness and satisfaction that is the result of obedience;
whileas Solomon, who could pass the best verdict of sensual pleasures, yet
concludes them to be but vanity and vexation of spirit.

There be two things that allay the pleasures of sin: First, the unruliness of
immoderate passions, which fret and vex the minds of men, and hinder the
sinner from tasting its pleasure. Secondly, the fear of an invisible being,
armed to punish them for their misdemeanors: Conscience, upon the apprehension
of guilt, recoils upon the sinner, and mars all the pleasure he promised
himself to enjoy: This made Belshazzer, a King, and environed with his Nobles,
tremble and quake in the midst of his cups. But supposing vices did bring as
much pleasure along with them as they pretend, yet upon two accounts they are
not half so delicious as the pleasure that spring from a good life. First, the
pleasures of sin are so interrupted, of a short duration, or, as the Apostle
expresses them, they are but for a season: how quickly will a period be put to
all these pleasures, which now make so much noise? They are very fitly compared
by Solomon, to the crackling of thorns under a pot, which are scarce sooner in
a blaze, than they vanish; but the joys that spring from a good conversation,
are at their lowest ebb here: they do indeed continue, for no man takes away
this joy; but Heaven is the designed place for the good Soul to feed upon those
Rivers of pleasures that are at God's right hand for evermore. Secondly,
sensual pleasures do soon cloy men's appetites: we cannot enjoy long any sensual
delight, but we are quickly weary of it: but it is not so with spiritual
delights; it is only the absence of them, when suspended for our sins, that
troubles and molests us. It Is impossible that sensual pleasures can satisfy
the soul of man, which was never framed for a Mohammedan Paradise; nor can it be
rationally expected, that he who is conscious to himself of guilt, should be
free from fear; which being so tormenting, can never permit men to enjoy
pleasure freely.

But let us descend to sensual pleasures, and we shall find, that he who is
temperate and moderate, is more likely to relish the pleasantness of Meat,
Drink, and Pastime, than the intemperate and immoderate. He who relieves the
Poor, and refreshes the Needy, cannot but find more real sweetness and
satisfaction in doing so, than he who drinks away his Estate. He who speaks the
truth, finds not those tormenting checks of Conscience which are the just
reward of lying. But all this will more plainly appear, by the Solution of the
next Objection.

The second Imputation is brought from Experience; namely, that wicked men are
for ordinary very jovial and cheerful, and enjoy a great deal of satisfaction
in their ways; whereas men who pretend to Piety and Holiness, are very sad and
disconsolate.

To this I answer; That the Question is not whether wicked men have some
pleasure in their sins, or not? but, whether that pleasure that arises from a
good life, be not infinitely preferable to these? Alas! the most promising
sensual pleasure (supposing it to be lawful) is much inferior to the
satisfaction and comfort that springs from a good Conscience. How much more
inconsiderable must sinful pleasures be, which are attended with so black and
dismal consequences? Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every
soul of man that does evil. Sinful pleasures are at the best but short; and
sure this consideration contributes very much to lessen their value: But that
which makes them so mean, and not worth the enjoying, is the painful Eternity
that succeeds to them.

However then the wicked may appear jovial and merry, yet their inward thoughts
(if we could discover them) cannot be at quiet and ease: Whatever pleasure they
may reap in the present act, yet they cannot afterward look unto themselves
without horror and amazement: The after-stings of sin are so painful, that he
buys those present pleasures at a rate no reasonable man would purchase them.

But that wicked men cannot really enjoy that pleasure and contentment they
pretend to, seems very plain from Reason. For first, How can any man be
satisfied with those actions which are so cross to his very nature, and
opposite to Reason, as every sin is? Can a man find pleasure in doing that
which he knows he ought not to do? sure the reboundings of Conscience, upon the
apprehension of doing amiss, will soon raze out any pleasure that sin affords;
and a sick man may more rationally expect rest, than those men pleasure and
contentment. Secondly, it can afford little pleasure to men, to act quite
contrary to their own interests; it is rather like the laughter of fools and
mad men, than a real pleasure, that such men can pretend to. Now every sinner
quite ruins his interest and happiness, while he runs headlong to
destruction; and for a present pleasure, which is only grateful to the sensual
appetite, loses those lasting Rivers of pleasure, which, though future, are
yet certain, and which are calculated for the Soul. Thirdly, What pleasure can
any man enjoy, who is sure to be eternally tormented? As there is no peace, so
no pleasure to the wicked, who are at odds with God, whose favor is better
than life.

But what reason have good men to be sad and disconsolate, since all the causes
of grief are removed from them? Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness
for the upright in heart; so that the Apostle had good reason to double that
Exhortation, Rejoice in the Lord, again I say rejoice. O how satisfying and
pleasant is it for men to act reasonably, and to be assured that they have done
their duty, and have acted for their own interest! Our rejoicing is this,
(says the Apostle) the testimony of our consciences, that in all simplicity
and godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world.

Sure there was never any man who was troubled for living holily, there being
no reason why any should: It Is true, good men may be of a melancholy
disposition, and naturally inclined to sadness; but this can be no reflection
on Holiness, as if it were the cause of that melancholy temper: nay, the best
of men have their own failings, and no wonder though these breed some trouble
and disquiet: But this is not to be disconsolate for being good, but for doing
evil. And indeed, I may add, that the great abominations and profanity, the
contempt of Religion, and dishonor that is done to God that abounds, may very
rationally make good men with the Psalmist say, Rivers of tears run down my
eyes, because men observe not thy Law.

And thus this imputation cast upon Holiness, is easily wiped off. Grief and
sadness are not the effect of a good life; but of an imperfect obedience: And
while our sins call for mourning and fasting, it were a piece of madness for
men to be jovial and merry, and entertain themselves with those deceitful
melodies, which will end in weeping and gnashing of teeth.

And yet the sorrow of truly good men is not so obvious to the eye of men, as
it is to him who is the searcher of the heart; it is rather the artifice of the
formal Penitent, and hypocritical Professor, than the character of the
Righteous, to disfigure their faces, and appear sad and demure. A good man
chooses rather, with David, to mourn in secret, and when he appears in public
to wash his face, than with those Hypocrites of whom Isaiah speaks, who bow
down their head like a bull-rush, who have chosen affliction rather than
innocence.

The next imputation cast upon Holiness is, that it is but a piece of
singularity, and a vain ambition to walk alone. Ans. I am heartily sorry that
the universal deluge of Impiety should make good men say as once Elijah did in
another case, I am only left: the few number of good men, compared with the
vast multitude and Armies of transgressors, makes them to be esteemed singular
and precise; and brings upon them the wrath and fury of ungodly sinners,
because they will not run with them to the same excess of riot, and wallow in
the mire as they do. But truly this charge is not more rational, than if a
company of mad men should call one a singular fool, because he does not comply
with them in all their extravagant actings, which do really rather require pity
and compassion than imitation.

I doubt not but Singularity in some cases is a very intolerable temper, and
unbecoming any man who pretends wisdom: but yet, if it be universally
condemned, and in no case admitted as reasonable, I don't see but the charge
will rebound upon the sinner, who in this degenerate age thinks the worse of
himself, if he exceed not others in wickedness.

But since Holiness is so conformable to Humane reason, so advantageous and
beneficial to every man; what madness is it to condemn it as singular? Sure, he
who intends to walk as a man who is of a good understanding, (as good men are
said to be) who intends to mind his interest and happiness, will never be
frighted from Holiness, because may be it is not in vogue, nor become the mode
of the Kingdom. If a whole Kingdom (excepting a few) should rebel against
their Prince, would it be any blot upon these few Loyal Subjects, that they
affected Singularity?

But this cavil is so insignificant and silly, that I need not enlarge. Sure,
since Holiness is the peculiar excellency and noble embellishment of Humane
nature; since it is so venerable and lovely, and of all perfections the most
excellent; he must be degenerate to the brutal nature, who condemns Singularity
in Holiness; for this is in truth a condemning a man because he is more
excellent than his neghbour, as the righteous is said to be in Scripture.

The last heavy Charge is, that it is folly and madness for men to quit with
their present pleasures, and expose themselves to grievous troubles, for a
future reward which is uncertain, and which no body ever saw. To this I Answer,
First, it is a great mistake to think that Holiness exposes men to relinquish
temporal and sensual pleasures, there being no men in the world so qualified to
experiment the sweetness of these, none who live in so happy and flourishing
condition, who are more healthful, and enjoy a greater measure of peace and
quietness, than good men. The only inconveniency they are exposed to, is
affliction upon the account of Religion; which when Christianity did commence,
was no rare thing, but now is not so ordinary. But supposing good men were
exposed to greater afflictions than other men, yet there is a great deal of
satisfaction in submitting to them, since they are but light afflictions, and
momentary too, which work for us a far more exceeeding and eternal weight of
glory. These small evils are rather to be endured, than lasting pains and
torments. Sure, Of two evils, the least is to be chosen.

Secondly, Although the reward of Holiness be future, yet it is not uncertain.
We have as great assurance that there will be a reward for the Righteous in
another world, as the nature of the thing is capable of: and sure he is an
unwise man that asks any other demonstration or proof. Now that there is a
reward laid up for good men, which though unseen, is yet as certain as if it
were obvious to sense, we have the greatest rational evidence, and the best
moral arguments to confirm it. For first, if there be a God; Secondly, if the
Scriptures be the Word of God, then there is not any thing more certain, than
that there is a state of rewards and punishments after this life. First, if
there be a God, then we can have no reasonable scruple about the future reward:
for since God is holy and just (perfections essential to a Deity) then
certainly he will, as the great Governor of the World, reward Virtue, and
punish Vice. But this does not always fall out so here; therefore it is
reasonable to conclude, that he has reserved the wicked till that great day of
wrath, and prepared a reward for the righteous. Secondly, If the Scripture be
the Word of God, then he who runs may read this truth.

We have then the greatest moral assurance possible, that there is a future
reward; which may sufficiently encourage men to hazard all they enjoy here, for
the expectation of it. But I shall only suppose that the future reward is
possible; (which I think few will deny, or can prove it to be impossible) yet
even upon this supposition, good men who part with the transitory things of
this life, prove a great deal wiser than those who condemn them: For if there
be no life after this, all the loss a good man suffers, is that of temporal
convenience; he has denied himself the enjoyment of sensual pleasures, so far
as he judges them sinful; he is not so intemperate as other men, and perhaps
is exposed to some hazards for his Religion; at the most, all that he is to
hazard is but very small. But if there be a future reward, in what a dismal
state are the wicked, who shall everlastingly be deprived of it, and be
irrecoverably plunged into a state of lasting and severe torments?

But since we are assured of a future reward, and know certainly, that the
righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father, and that
the wicked shall be cast into utter darkness; What folly and madness is it to
be careful for the Body, and careless what becomes of the Soul; to provide for
Time, and neglect Eternity? Sure it is no wonder though the Wise man does so
frequently characterize the sinner a fool, and represents him as one that
lacks understanding: And indeed, we may rationally say, This their way is
their folly; their foolish choice proclaims, that those workers of iniquity
have no knowledge.

The Conclusion.
WE have now seen the Excellency and Beauty of Holiness, have discovered the
absolute Perfection of its Nature, and the Compleatness of its Rule; have taken
a view of its Allurements and powerful Motives, and have discovered the
weakness of those Cavils that are urged against it: and what remains, but that
we set about this work with the greatest seriousness imaginable; that we give
no sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our eyelids, till we forsake our sins,
and enter upon a course of Holiness?

If God had imposed upon us a heavy and intolerable yoke; if he had commanded
us to perform some grievous and uneasy service, had we not been obliged to
have obeyed? But since he only commands us to wash and be clean, requires
only our consent to what is so much our own interest, only exacts that we
separate our selves from those lusts that pollute and defile us, that vex and
torments our minds, and which (if continued in) will certainly ruin and undo
us; what fools and mad men are we if we refuse to hear his voice?

Almighty God has been drawing us with the Cords of Love; has presented to us
the most charming motives to excite our love and esteem; has carried us (as it
were) to the Pinnacle of the Temple, and discovered to us all the glory and
beauty of this world; has taken us to Pisgah, and given us a view of the good
Land of Canaan, of the City of the living God, of which glorious things are
spoken; and promised, that all these things shall be ours, if we will but be
holy in all manner of conversation: And to excite our fear, he has opened to
our view, the powers of the world to come; has plainly told us of the pains and
torments that the damned suffer day and night, and that indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, remains as the due portion of those that do evil. And
now may he not take up that same protestation that he used to his ancient
People the Jews; What more can I do for you? But alas! we have in the most
insolent manner despised all these charms of Love, and, like the mad man in the
Gospel, have broken to pieces the strongest Fetters and Chains. We are, God
knows, as deeply sunk into sensuality and bruitishness, as those to whom the
Grace of God that brings salvation has never appeared. It Is not credible, (I
may say possible) that men could have been more wicked than they now are,
supposing they had never heard of Heaven or Hell.

It Is a wonder (as any one would think) that those very men who profess they
believe in Christ, should so grossly and openly contradict his plain Precepts;
that those who believe, that without holiness no man shall see the Lord, and
that the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, yet
persist in their abominable wickedness, and are neither awed with fears, nor
animated with hopes. What is all this, but for men to expose themselves to the
contempt rather than pity of discerning men?

We have surveyed the several advantages which attend Holiness; have discovered
how much man's temporal as well as his eternal welfare and happiness depends
upon it: We have explained how in her right hand is length of days, and in her
left hand are riches and honor: that her ways are ways of pleasantness, and
all her paths peace: And now may we not give the same testimony of it which
Joshua and Caleb did of Canaan, Numb. 14. The land which we passed through to
search, it is an exceeding good land? The Sons of Anak (I mean the pretended
difficulties) are not so strong as some men represent them to be; we need not
be discouraged to encounter with them; greater is he that is in you, than he
that is in the world. Alas! what Objection can men possibly make against a Duty
that is so excellent, useful, and necessary, that is founded upon such mighty
motives, as may prevail with any who is not quite petrified in desperate
Impiety? Good God! what stupid folly is this, that men hide their hands in
their bosom, and will not so much as stretch them out to this tree of Life,
that they may eat of this fruit, which is pleasant to the eye, and profitable
both to our present and future happiness.

It Is indeed pity, that men should be thus permitted to run headlong to
destruction. Alas! is perdition so lovely and desirable, that, like Rachel, a
double servitude is thought light for it? and shall wise and discerning men be
Eyewitnesses of the bad bargain those men make, and not warn them of their
folly? I know this is a duty chiefly incumbent to our spiritual Watchmen to
discharge; I doubt not but many of them stand upon their watch, and warn men of
their danger. It were to be wished that all and every of them were thus
faithful; but sure every man is in some manner concerned to be his brothers
keeper; and he is highly criminal, who should see a mad man running upon
danger, and not stop him in his course.

I wish some new-coined Doctrines had not an inauspicious influence upon the
bad practices of many, had not too much countenanced and authorized vice: but
my present design is so far from controversial, that I shall rather think my
self concerned to inveigh against needless disputes, than start any. If I may
speak from my own experience, I ingenuously confess, I find Disputes so
insipid and fruitless, and in the review so unsatisfactory, that I am resolved
henceforth to bid an eternal adieu to them, and to condemn them as the great
underminers of Christian Piety: And if any shall after this fair warning
assault any Doctrine I have elsewhere owned, I hope discerning men will neither
esteem me nor the Cause the worse, that I draw not my Sword in its defense.

And now what shall I say more, but conclude with Moses's passionate
Exhortation, Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your hearts to the words which I testify to you
this day: for it is not a vain thing, because it is your life. Let us no longer
delay and put off this duty; while it is called to day, let us not harden our
hearts through the deceitfulness of sin; but seriously search and try our ways,
and turn to the Lord: this is the proper season for so necessary a work; ere
long there will be no time left us to consider our ways: O that in this our day
we did understand the things that belong to our peace, before they be hid from
our eyes! If men would but be induced to imitate the Psalmists Example, Psalm.
119.59. I thought on my ways, I doubt not but they should also imitate the
course he did take, I made haste and delayed not to keep thy commandments: But
men consider not what they are doing, and so no wonder though they perish, no
wonder that they prefer darkness to light, and despise Holiness as a thing of
no value. Let us therefore humbly and heartily invoke the Father of Lights to
open the Eyes of men, whom the God of this world has blinded, that they may
flee from the wrath to come, by cleansing themselves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by Robert Sollers, at the Kings Arms in
Ludgate Street.
SErmons preached upon several occasions before the King at Whitehal. By the
Right Reverend Father in God John Wilkins, late Lord-bishop of Chester; to
which is added A discourse concerning the beauty of Providence, by the same
Author.

Rome a-la-mode: or the Sentiments of the Court and Cardinals there, concerning
Religion and the Gospel, as they are delivered by Cardinal Palavicini in his
History of the Council of Trent.

Syncrisis, or the most natural and easy method of learning Latin by
comparing it with English. Together with the holy History of Scripture-war: Or
the sacred Art Military, Illustrated in fourteen Copper Plates; with the rude
Translation opposite, for the exercise of those that begin to make Latin. By
E. Coals.

Cocker's Arithmetic: the second Impression.

Cocker's Morals, fitted for the use of all Grammar and Writing-schools: For
the Scholars of the first to turn into Latin; and for those of the other to
transcribe into all their various and curious Hands.

Nugae venales: or, the complaisant Companion; being new Jests Domestic and
Foreign, Bulls, Rhodomontado's, pleasant Novels and Miscellanies.

Asteria and Tamberlain; or, the Distressed Lovers, a Novel.

Madam Wheedle: or, the fashionable Miss discovered: with all her modest
Pretenses, and subtle Stratagems.

Scaramouch, a Philosopher, etc. Acted at the Theater Royal: A Comedy, written
by Edward Ravenscroft, Gent.

A Treatise of the nature of a Minister in all his Offices. To which is
annexed, an Answer to Dr. Forbes, concerning the necessity of Bishops to
ordain; which is an Answer to a Question proposed in these late unhappy times
to the Author, What is a Minister? By William Lucy Lord Bishop of St. David's.


