The Gentleman's CALLING

(...) 1. Cor. VII. 24

LONDON Printed for Tim; Garthwait 1660



Reputation
When I prepared my Seat -- The Aged Stood up Job. Chap. 29. ver. 7. 8. 9



Nobility


Religion


The Gentleman's CALLING

Former Felicityes
-- The Lillies -- They neither Toil nor Spin and yet Sollomon etc.



LONDON

Printed for T. Garthwait at the Little North-doore of S. Paul's 1660.

THE PREFACE.
1. THe Authority of Custom has so much a more general praevalency then that
of Truth; that he that shall adventure to assault that with this, may be
thought not to have well digested the prudent Caution of our Savior, Luke 14.
31. To sit down and consider whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him,
that comes against him with twenty thousand; for doubtless such, and much
greater is the ods between the Abettors of these two Litigants. And to the
imputation of this unwariness I cannot but foresee the present design very
liable.

2. GENTILITY has long since confuted Jobs Aphorism, Man is born to labor,
and in stead thereof, has pronounced to its Clients the Rich man's Requiem, Soul
take thine ease, eat drink and be merry. A Gentleman is now supposed to be
only a thing of pleasure, a creature sent into the World, as the Leviathan
into the deep, to take his pastime therein (and the better to complete the
Parallel to devour his underlings too) and then 'twill be no wonder if it be
adjudged a ridiculous soloecisme to attempt to define his Calling, whose very
Essence is thought to consist in having none. Nay perhaps it will be deemed not
only absurd but malicious, a Levelling project, of robbing him of his
Birthright, of degrading him from those privileges, which belong to his
quality, and of moulding him again into that vulgar Mass, from which divine
Providence and humane Laws have distinguished him. But from this jealousy I
dare trust the ensuing leaves to be their own vindicators.

3. I have been no unconcerned (much less insulting) spectator of the
depressions the Gentry have fallen under in these latter years, but have paid
them my just tribute of compassion, yet I confess, I think those scarce worthy
a regret, in comparison with those voluntary descents, too many of them have
made from true worth and virtue. It Is sure a far less deplorable spectacle to
see a Gentleman spoiled of his Fortune by his Conscience, then his Luxury, and
to behold him under the stroke of the Headsman, then under those more infamous
Executioners, his Lust, or Intemperance. Yet I fear if the Martyrologie even of
these suffering times were scanned, Venus and Bacchus would be found to have
had many more Martyrs, then God and Loyalty.

4. But I confess it an impertinence thus to balance the two mischiefs of doing
and suffering ill, since it is certain the latter is to be resolved into the
former, and has no existence of it self, but what it derives from that.
Punishments are but the results of sins, and therefore whatever Malignity is in
the Effect, becomes entirely chargeable upon the Cause, and we are to look upon
our Vice not only as our greatest, but our only unhappiness. This Consideration
shows us the source of all our sufferings, and is it self no less obvious, then
those; though one would think it as concealed as the head of Nilus, that should
only observe how many other Originals of our Calamities are assigned, whilst
this is scarce dreamt of. This Jonah is suffered to sleep securely in the ship,
while her more innocent fraught is cast over board, Jon. 1. 5. Every the least
sparkle from without is charged as an Incendiary, when alas, like Aetna, our
own bowels send out that fire, which has so near reduced us to ashes. But as in
Diseases we account the discovery of the Cause the first and most necessary
step to the Cure, so certainly is it here, the conviction of our guilt is a
most indispensable preparative toward the ease of our Pressures, and we must
be heavy laden in the Christian sense, Matthew. 11. 28. before we shall cease to
be so in the Civil.

5. But I fear men proceed in this affair rather like Mountebanks then good
Physicians, use some palliating Medecines to allay the Effects, or perhaps
Anodynes to stupifie the patient, and wholly neglect the root of the malady.
Nor do I appropriate this error to the Gentry, it is too visible that all sorts
and qualities have too just a claim to it, to let any one go away with the
enclosure: But because the present design makes them my peculiar Province, I
shall, waving all others, address my self at this time to them only, with this
most passionate request, that they would not use that cruelty to themselves,
for which Amalek stands branded toward Israel, Deu. 25. 18. By their
persevering impieties smite and destroy those feeble and faint remains of their
former felicities, but that they would now at last seriously advert to this
their so great and important concernment, and pitch upon the true Achan, that
has thus long troubled their Israel; and that being done, that story directs
the next step of the Process, even the bringing him to execution, cutting that
off, which will else infallibly bring down a fatal excision upon themselves.
Nor is this to be deferred, for alas the Disease is come to too great a height,
too dangerous a Crisis, to admit any delay of the remedy.

6. When Egypt had smarted under a succession of miraculous plagues for
deteining the Israelites, the Servants of Pharaoh importune him to release
them, and conclude their advice with this Pathetique enforcement, Know thou
not yet that Egypt is destroyed? And God knows I may but too properly give the
same edge to mine; For alas, Gentlemen, are not your Estates wasted, your
Privileges violated, your Splendors eclipsed, your Persons restrained, your
Families broken and shattered, your Dignities trampled upon by the meanest of
the Vulgar, and finally your selves quite transposed in your station, now made
the Tail who were once the Head, Deuteronomy. 28. 44. And is it not yet time to
dismiss those Sins which are the Authors of all this? If you are still of
Pharaohs mind, and resolve to retain them, you are certainly no less obstinate
then he, but much more irrational: he had somewhat of visible advantage to
tempt him to detein the Israelites, they were his Slaves, wrought hard at his
work, built him Cities. But how far is that from the case here, they are not
your Slaves, but your Taskmasters, which you are so unwilling to part with,
those that set you to the vilest and most servile drudgeries, and are so far
from bringing you in profit, that I may boldly make the Apostles challenge,
Romans 6. 21 What fruit have you had of those things? and doubt not the only
account you can bring in of your harvest, must be the Inventory of your
miseries; we are witnesses of many Houses, many Cities they have demolished and
laid waste, but we have no structure of theirs to show, but a Babel of
confusion.

7. But alas, these your secular Ruins are but their modest and petty
outrages, Take another view of them, and it will like Ezekiels vision, Ezekiel
8. 6. present you with more and greater abominations then these, even the
abomination of desolation in the holy place. Your sins have not only desolated
your own houses, but Gods: That Beauty of his Ornament which he set in Majesty,
Ezekiel. 7. 20. has by these your detestable things been exposed to spoil and
pollution; we are not yet grown so old in our miseries as to have out-worn the
aggravation of remembering our happier estate, and how sad, how wounding a
contemplation is it to compare the past and present condition of this Church?
When the Temple was rebuilding, the joy of that restoration could not
suppress the grief of those who remembered the so much more Glorious Fabric of
the first, but they laid the foundation in their tears, the text says, They
wept with a loud voice, Neh. 3. 12. But what tears, what ejulations can be
bitter or loud enough for us, who are to lament not partial and imperfect
repairs, but total ruins and vastations, that see the materials of our Sion
now reduced to dust and rubbish, who once saw them happily compacted, built
together as a City at unity in its self!

8. And while we thus remember Sion, and are our selves by the waters of
Babylon, it is sure but proper we sit down and weep, bid, as those Captives Ps.
37 a solemn Adieu to all entertainments of joy and pleasure; and would God we
all, particularly you to whom I now speak, did as exactly parallel them in this
sad and pious resentment, as we do in the motives of it, that so your quarrel
to sin might be accended to its full height, as that which robs you not only of
your spiritual, but (that which many of you have more gust of) your carnal
joys also. It Is your sins, I would I could say, yours alone, which have been
the persecuting Saul's, that have thus made havoc of the Church; The
Securities, Profaness, and Licentiousness of your prosperous days made the
first breaches in her walls, and now the Impenitence and Incorrigibleness of
your calamitous, like the Edomites, cry down with her, down with her even to
the ground. 'Twas among the Jews a Capital Guilt to curse a Parent, and shall
it now pass for an easy, or no crime, not only to curse, but destroy our common
Mother, to abette and maintain those Troops which thus defy, yea invade her? O
why should you not at last recall your exiled Piety, and assume a holy and
becoming indignation against these her cruel her implacable Enemies?

9. But this you cannot be supposed to do, whilst You arraign only other men's
sins, and leave your own out of the Indictment. I doubt not many of you do with
displeasure, perhaps more then enough, charge her ruin upon the immediate
Instruments, accuse the bold Intrusion of ignorant Teachers, of having depraved
her Doctrine, Ambition and Envy of impatient inferiors, of subverting her
Discipline, the Pride and Faction of busy Spirits, of disturbing her Peace,
the greedy Avarice of Sacrilegious persons, of devouring her Patrimony; and
these I shall not deny to have been the Weapons, that have thus mortally
wounded her, but let it be remembered that these were wielded and whetted by the
more general impieties, from whence they borrowed their destructive power, and
therefore to transfer the guilt here, is but the artifice of slaying Uriah with
the sword of the Children of Ammon, which you know acquitted not David from
being a murderer. No, God knows, here lies a Carcass of a poor bleeding
Church, but which of you our Elders are qualified for the purgation the Law
assigns in that case Deu. 21. 8. which of you can say, our hands have not shed
this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.

10. Yet the less capable you are of thus washing your hands in innocence the
greater need you have to VVash them in Penitence, and therefore since as you
are Sons to this Mother, the Office of Avenger of blood devolves on you. O
bring forth fruits of repentance by discharging that part faithfully, drag out
these Criminals which have taken Sanctuary in your breasts, and there dwell
securely, as in a City of Refuge, and hew them in pieces, as Samuel did Agag
before the Lord. And as your incentives to this are infinitely greater and more
pressing, then in other murders, so will the effects also vastly transcend
those of Common Justice, that only revenges, but this may repair the
mischief, recall the vital spirits and reunite the scatterd limbs of this
mangled body, such an Omnipotency is there in sincere Repentance, that it is
able even to effect a resurrection. O that you would be ambitious of working
this Miracle, and by this pious Prodigy beget your Mother, that you would weep
so long over her ashes, till that moisture had rendered them prolifical, and you
see her spring out of her Urne.

11. This, this is your only way of reversing that extirpating Decree which
these Hamans, your sins have procured, and if You neglect this, Mordecaies
menace to Hester, will be too applicable to you, if God in his unfathomable
mercy should cause deliverance and enlargement to arise from some other place
to this poor desolate Church, Yet your selves can expect nothing but
Destruction. If you have no sense of the desolations of Sion, no pity to see
her in the Dust, but still choose to Cherish those impieties, which have brought
her thither, yet even they will at the last avenge her quarrel, bring You
those miseries, the sense whereof it will be impossible for You to avoid, or
extinguish.

12. For alas to represent your sins to you as the Originalls merely of
Temporal, whether Private or Public Ruins, is to give you too fair and
flattering a portraicture of them; these are but the light prelusory skirmishes
to a more dismal Slaughter, the Prologue to the fa^all Tragedy; Take their
fuller character from the Apostle, To. 6. 21. The end of these things is death,
even death eternal. It is our usual comfort against the persecutions of men,
that they can pursue us no farther then to the Grave, there, as Job speaks, the
weary be at rest; But this Tyrant in our own breasts has no such limits to its
malice, but then especially begins, when all other cruelties cease, tortures
infinitely by the g^wings of that worm which never dies, and the scorchings of
that fire which never shall be quenched.

13. And now who can sufficiently wonder at the Infatuation, that you should
demurre upon the dismissing of so treacherous a Guest, that you should cherish
this Viper in your Bosoms, which you already feel cating your Bowels,
devouring all your temporal Felicities, and yet takes those but in the way to
your Heart, your more precious and eternal part. It Is the common Maxim even of
those that receive advantage by the perfidiousness of Others, to love the
treason but hate the Traitor, but here is that Rule quite inverted; you hate
the treason, are impatient of the afflicting Consequences of your sin, yet love
the Traitor, hug that in your closest Embraces. The Apostle indeed forwarnes
us of the Deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13. but sure this is a pitch beyond
that, this is not deceit, but enchantment, some powerful Philtrum it must
needs be, that can thus make men in love not only with deformity, but disease.

14. But all the Magicians of Egypt are not able to stand before Moses, this
Magic is not so irresistible, but that Reason and Religion will yield you
countercharmes, able to disenchant You, if You will but suffer them to come in
to your aid. Do but once step out of the Devils Circle, the actual vertiginous
pursuit of Your sinful appetites and give your Faculties some intermission, so
much breath from that hot chase as may qualify them for a calm considerate
view of Other things, and then it is certain You will discern that Virtue has a
much more ravishing appearance, infinitely more delectable and enamouring, then
all the Devils Optics could put upon your highest and most gustfull
sensualities. Do you only bestow some attentive looks upon her, let her once in
at your eyes, and then leave her to make her own way to your heart. And this is
sure a very moderate request, that you will but vouchsafe to look upon what is
thus amiable, and with what pretense can you deny it; You who to gaze on those
transitory beauties which are only your snares, stick at no difficulty, will
be content to come (those of you that have no other motives) even to Church
upon that errand, O do not here put off your curiosity, where alone it may
Avail You, but rather take this opportunity of hallowing that (hitherto
profane) part of your temper.

15. It has been none of the Devils meanest or unluckiest Arts to infuse
prejudices into men's minds against Christian practice, by representing it in
the most averting forms, he changes shapes with it, and as he transformes
himself into an Angel of light, so he does this into one of Darkness, makes it
appear a State of the most dismal sadness, and horror, a region of Antipodes
to all Joy and Cheerfulness. And how much more ready men are to take the
Devil at his word, then Christ at his, who professes his Yoke easy and his
Burden light, appears too visible in the general aversation those have to
Piety, who never so much as tried it, but take up implicit confused prejudices
against it, and retain those as fast, as if they were the products of many
years costly experiences, and it is to be feared these have taken the deepest
root in the richest Soil, they seeming no where more to flourish, then among
You of the highest Quality, yet sure, of all others You are most obliged to
eradicate them, they implying such a gross injustice, as any ingenious mind
must be ashamed of.

16. You will your selves readily pronounce, that Judge not only corrupt, but
impudent, that condemns a person whose plea he never heard, yet if you will but
reflect, You will find your own verdict rebound upon your selves, with a Tu ^s
homo, for it is evidently your case here. It is time for you therefore to be so
just, if not to Virtue, yet to your own Reputations, as to retract that
condemnatory sentence, you have past upon her, and put on so much at least of
the form of Justice, as to give her a fair Trial. But this you cannot do by
hearing the tongues of men and Angels plead for her, none but her self can
manage her cause, you must admit her into your society, and converse, take her
into such a familiarity, as may bring her within distance of your Observation,
before you pronounce of her. In short if you will indeed render your selves
competent Judges, whither a Virtuous life be a pleasant or a dismal thing,
enter upon it, and let your own experiences be your informers.

17. I cannot suspect the age so degenerous, as not to believe there are diverse
particular persons among you, who have made the experiment, and to their
Testimony I dare appeal, and doubt not they will from Judges turn Advocates,
and recommended it to you, and sure you will have no cause in this instance to
wave your wonted Privilege of being tried by your Peers, to except against
their judgment in the case, who being placed in equal circumstances with you
must be supposed to understand your utmost Temptations to Vice, from whence
alone all the seeming difficulties and uneasinesses of Virtue do arise.

18. It were the work of many Volumes to describe the several distinct
Advantages toward a pleasant Being, which are wrapped up in this one
comprehensive Felicity. I shall instance only in that, to which the ensuing
Tract particularly relates, and that is that it furnishes you with a succession
of very Agreeable and Cheerful Employments. Virtue is of a busy and active
Nature, and as in its several Operations it has an opposition to all the
several sorts of Vice, so in its very Constitution and Principle it bears an
avowed Antipathie to that one fertile Seminary of most other Sins, Idleness;
and sure the rescuing you from that is no contemptible Benefit. For though you
seem to challenge it as a considerable part of your Inheritance, that you may
live and do Nothing, and are very tenacious of that Claim, yet, it is most
evident, that what you contend for, as your Priveledge, your selves esteem your
burden, yea so much so, that to be rid of it, you cast away Estate, Health,
Soul and all for Company, employ your selves the most ruinously, rather then
endure to be Idle; nay, quite confute your own Pretensions to ease, by those
laborious and toilsome Vices, which you are fain to call Pleasures, to render
them tolerable; but have certainly no pretense to that Title on any other
score, but that they keep you doing.

19. And now what more grateful Office can possibly be done for men in this
Condition, then to show them how they may free themselves of this load without
contracting a worse; I mean the guilt of those sins which like Rehoboam
converts Whips into Scorpions, yet are now fain to be resorted to, as the only
instruments of their relief. And this a Christian Life will be sure to do for
you, It will constantly provide you with innocent divertisements, nay much
more, it will give You business, so excellent, and worthy the dignity of Your
Natures, so Noble and answerable to the Splendor of your Qualities, so every
way agreeable to the aims of Rational Men, that You will have cause to
acknowledge with Our Church, that Gods Service is perfect Freedom.

20. I shall not undertake to give you a particular view of all the Severals of
those Emploiments; Those Precepts of the Gospel which assign your Tasks, do
sufficiently inform You of the Nature and Excellency of them, my whole Scheme
is comprised in that One, which directs an Attendance on that Calling wherein
God has placed men, and therefore I am to treat only of those particular
Duties which are incumbent on You as Gentlemen, and therein show You that
considered as such, You have a Calling, and so free you of that reproach and
misery of being unprofitable burdens of the earth, and then evince to you also
that that Calling is so far from implying any thing of real toil or
uneasiness, that it is only an Art of refining and sublimating your Pleasures,
rendering them more gustfull and exquisite and so will (if attended to) make
good to you in earnest your mistaken pretense to a Life of sensuality and
delight.

Mr. Garthwait,
I Need not tell you with what success you published the Excellent Treatise,
The whole Duty of Man: It is your Felicity to be again instrumental to the
profit of this Church and Nation, by your Edition of these Religious and
Prudent Instructions. And although the Address be not so Universal in this, as
in the former; yet this will have a large influence upon other Conditions
besides Gentlemen: Their Converse, if reformed, will be exemplary, and
operative upon others. A Gentry that would afford an obedient Ear to these
Admonitions, and a Clergy that would to Piety and Learning, join Humility,
Modesty, and Sobriety, will be the best Humane means to recover this sinful
Nation, and oppressed Church, from the miseries, Spiritual and Civil, under
which we now groan. So that the Argument is well chosen, and it is so managed,
that I know not what a Reader that is somewhat morose can desire, which is not
here. The Author keeps close to his intended province and design, his Reasons
are sinewy and convincing, his Reproofs are severe and grave, yet pleasing; and
they whom he chides, must needs love him. There is nothing in his Periods
redundant or defective; he has a Native Elegancy that invites his Reader;
variety of Learning couched, not vaunted; and a Perspicuity such, as will make
his Reasonings appear to a weak Eye: A Manual which is enriched with all these
Graces, shall (I trust) not only be frequently and attentively perused, but
that it will lively affect, and sit close to the Reins, and penetrate the Heart
of the Reader, especially that Reader for whom it is designed; and for this
Blessing on the Gentry, it is our Duty to solicit the Divine Goodness.

SAR. 27 October. 1659. Your assured Friend H. H.

JEREMIAH -- 13. 17. -- Mine Eye shall run down with tears because the Lords,
flock is carried away Captive --



ZEDEKIAH -- Ier. 39. -The Anointed of the Lord was taken in their Nets under
whose shadow we said we should live in peace etc - Lament: 4. 20



The Gentleman's Calling.
SECT. I. Of Business and Callings in general.
1. HE that by sloth and improvidence dissipates and consumes that Stock which
is properly his own, falls justly under the blunt censure of folly, and usually
under the sharper and more smarting penance of poverty and want: But he that is
but a deputed manager, if he neglect his depositum, is liable to a heavier
weight both of obloquy and discipline: The weakness of the one may possibly
meet with somewhat of pity; but the falseness and treachery of the other is
the object of an universal detestation, and is oftentimes very severely
sentenced by those, who, if they would impartially reflect, would find
themselves deeply involved in the same guilt.

2. God has placed Man in the world not as a Proprietary, but a Steward; he
has put many excellent things into his possession, but these in trust to be
not only kept, but negotiated with, and by traffic improved to the use of the
true owner: Yet herein dealing as a most bountiful Master by not only promising
transcendent rewards in the future to his fidelity, but even annexing at the
present (as to the Heifer that treads out the corn) a most liberal
subsistence, interweaving his Interest so with his Duty that the discharge of
it is his only means of being happy even in this world.

3. This certainly is the state of mankind in general; every (I mean Rational)
person having something of this kind entrusted to him: No man that has
understanding, be that of a higher or lower size, but has variety of abilities
of one sort or other, and withal that actuating power, which should set them on
work; and then surely he that has not been excluded from the receipts, must not
pretend an exemption from the disbursements, the tasks, but is under a strict
obligation of improving what he has thus received, of bringing in fruit to the
granary, as well in order to his own account and joy in the auditing of the
harvest, as also to the glory of God from whom alone he derives (and must
impute) both the seed, and irrigation, and the very increase. And he that on
these grounds and according to these measures decently administers his
province, sedulously attends his duty in this matter, will find himself placed
in such an active state of business, that he shall have little cause to suspect
himself neglected, or forgotten by God and Nature, or placed in the world
without a Calling.

4. From what is thus indispensably required of all men, no one rank or
individual of that species can plead an immunity: And therefore till those whom
birth, education and wealth, and the common d^alect of the world has made
known by the style of Gentlemen, shall think fit to expunge the latter part of
that title and disclaim the nature of men, as they are willing to do the duty,
they must certainly retract this error, and acknowledge they have their shares
in this common obligation.

5. Nay indeed if they could so far imitate the Prince of the morning, as to
succeed to that rank which he was willing to leave, I mean to ascend above
humanity and assume the nature of Angels, yet even thither would this pursue
and overtake them. Among all the orders of that divine Hierarchy they would not
find one patron or president of Idleness: For as the spirituality of their
essence renders them more agile and active, so that activity is perpetually
exercised in employing the divine abilities they have received, to the glory of
God the donor, and that not only in bearing a part in that Celestial quire
which incessantly sings his praises, but in the more laborious and servile
offices of being ministering spirits, yea even to those to whom both in respect
of nature and innocence they are ^itely superior. And this they do with perfect
alacrity and cheerfulness, thinking it their greatest honor and dignity to be
thus busied; their regitive power over the world, says Gerson, is not so
suitable an ingredient for a Magnificat of their composing, as that greater
dignity of receiving, and performing God's commands: An evidence how much the
measures of honor differ between the Courtiers of heaven, and earth; the
inhabita^s of that refined, and this gross region. Thus then the prospect lies
before the Gentleman; if he choose either to look level on the same nature with
himself, or direct his eyes upward on that of the glorious spirits that
encompass Gods throne, he will not in all the records of earth or heaven find
ever a patent for sloth, any clause of exemption in this universal law.

6. Nay if this man in honor would bid farewell to his birthright, and become
like the beasts that perish, Ps. 49. 20. if he could be content, in pursuit of
this one fancied privilege of a Gentleman, to renounce all the real ones of a
man, and make Nebuchadnezzar's punishment his option, yet neither the field nor
forest could give him sanctuary, afford him any number of associates to aid,
or but countenance him in his muting against this divine decree, they would
rather be his tutors and monitors to obey it: For what rank even of the most
savage animals is there, which we can indict of the not employing those
faculties they have received? Are they not generally in a perpetual and regular
motion to those ends for which they were created? in continual exeircise of
those powers with which they are ndued? yea some of them with such improvement
to all their necessary purposes, that it has raised a doubt whether they act
by instinct or reason, by fancy or judgment: Pythagoras is discernibly on their
side; and Aristotle that was less kind to them, seems by one saying to have
yielded the cause, when of those creatures which he says want reason, he
confesses that fancy supplies its place. I need not take part in this dispute;
whatsoever their faculties or talents are, none can doubt of their use of them,
or whether this their uninterrupted obedience to the law of their creation
reflects the proportionable glory on their Creator.

7. To descend one degree lower yet; The very inanimate creatures afford their
consort to this divine harmony; every one of them perform those offices, fail
not in the exercise of all those (not unactive) qualities God has put into
them: The Sun has received a power of cherishing and enlivening terrestrial
bodies, and it folds not up its rays, but communicates and dispenceth them
freely; the Earth has received a power of fructifying, giving sap and verdure
to that which grows upon it, and it withholds not that vital moisture, but like
a tender nurse sends it forth liberally to all that expect nourishment from her
breasts; and so proportionably do all other parts of this great body; and that
all this serves to illustrate the glory of that omnipotent wisdom which has
placed them in this so excellent a subordination, is most visible without the
help of a perspective. When the Queen of Sheba saw the magnificence and
regularity of Solomon's Court, she brake out into an admiration of his wisdom:
And surely a far greater occasion is ministered to all those who contemplate the
admirable order of the Universe, with all transportation of soul to magnify
and adore the Divine Disposer of it, as we see frequently exemplified to us in
the sublime raptures of the holy Psalmist, who never better approves his right
to be called the sweet singer of Israel, then on this ravishing theme.

8. And now can it be fancied a privilege and dignity, to be the one jarring
string in this great instrument? to discompose this divine melody, and become
the only unprofitable useless part of the creation? Shall those whom God has
made little lower then the Angels, subdue and debase their natures beneath the
very lowest rank of creatures? and shall this (not humble but) sordid
exinanition be looked upon with reverence, courted as a preferment? This
certainly is such an absurdity, as wants nothing to its confutation, but merely
to be considered: And therefore if Gentlemen would but soberly reflect, there
is little doubt but they would resign at once their claim, and their value of
this so defaming a piece of honor, so abasing an exaltation.

9 We can let down our thoughts but one step lower, and that is into the
bottomless pit; and from thence sure none will desire to fetch a president; yet
if he did, even that black region could not afford it: For though it must be
confessed, those accursed spirits accord not with the former instances, in
respect of the end of their actions, yet they do in the activity it self;
theirs is a busy state, though to an ill purpose; Satan goes to and fro in
the earth, Job 2. 2. and he walks about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet 5.
12. yea he imploys all his faculties too, makes diligent use of all that
acuteness and dexterity which either his nature or experience have furnished
him with, toward that end he pursues; so that it were a wronging, a
calumniating even of the very Devil, to charge him with idleness; which though
it be a sin which yields him such liberal crops, that he may well seek both to
plant and cherish it in humane nature, yet he cannot offer such violence to his
own, as to become an example of it.

10. We may hence make a measure, how scandalous, reproachful a thing this is,
which neither Heaven Earth, nor Hell it self will own, but is like an
illegitimate birth, disclaimed by all: How unreasonable, nay how infamous will
it then be, for those to take up this exposed brat, to foster this vice in
their bosoms, who have of all others the greatest and most particular
obligation to detest it, as having received the most of those Talents which
engage them to action. And that such is the Gentleman's condition, a slight
inspection will serve to demonstrate.

SECT. II. Of Varieties of Callings.
1. NOw since the universal obligation, which is incumbent upon all and renders
it strict duty to have a Calling, rests upon this undeniable ground, that all
men have received from God some abilities to actuate, some Talents to improve;
it follows by all laws of inference, that those who have received the most of
these, can of all others the least reasonably pretend to an exemption, but must
on the contrary be acknowledged under the constraint of the stronger and more
numerous ties, the general duty which herein lies upon all, extending and
spreading it self into several branches, according to the quality and
proportion of men's re^its.

2. Hence it comes to pass, that men's callings and employments become so
various, not only by the free choices of the several men, but even by the
direction and assignation of God and nature, because one man is furnished with
an ability, which qualifies him for one sort of calling, another is by his
distinct propriety marked out for another. And hence also it is, that those
callings, which are distinct in several persons, may come to be united in one
man, because the several abilities, which constitute those Callings, concurring
in him, the duties must by unavoidable consequence do so also. This is in some
degree observable in most men, who besides the general powers common to
mankind, do receive some peculiar in order to some special end, and so are
obliged not only to those exercises which belong indifferently to their whole
species, but to those also for which they are individually qualified. Thus
those whom God has called to Christianity, are by that empowered for those
performances which that holy profession exacts; and so have the calling of
Christians superadded to the other, which either natural or civil obligation
had laid upon them; so that the same man may have various callings, in relation
to his differing capacities, unless as we distinguish men's souls into the
vegetative, the animal and the rational, which in stricter speaking may be said
to be only diverse operations of the same soul; so in truth what we term
several callings, be but the same comprehensive one, stretching it self into
the several faculties of the person.

3. I need not attempt to evince the impropriety of the phrase 'twill serve my
end as well that they pass for several, and the application I shall make of it,
is to show those who are unwilling to hear of any Calling at all, that they
have obligations indispensable to more then one. They have whatever can belong
to them as men, they have also what belongs to them as Christians; and they
have also a peculiar addition appertaining to them as Gentlemen, that is by
interpretation, those who are distinguished from the vulgar, not only by empty
names and aerie titles, but by real donatives, distributed to them by God, as so
many distinct advantages, fertile and prolifical abilities, toward the
bringing him in his expected harvest of honor and glory.

4. It is too much to be doubted, many of them may need admonition concerning
the two former of these callings; the duties even of men, much more of
Christians being so far worn out of practice, that they seem to be out of
memory too, or if they be at all reflected on, it is with the same scorn that
the antiquated habits of our forefathers are, as things fit only to dress a man
up, an object of laughter and derision. But this would be too vast a Theme, and
besides is superseded by the many pious labors of others; my purpose therefore
is not to crea^ at all of them, otherwise then they shall happen to be linked
and interwoven, ^s in many particulars they are, with the third that of the
Gentleman

5. And here they need not fear that I mean to put the Spade or Hammer into
their hands, to require them to become either Husbandmen or Mechanics; my
whole design is founded in their distinction from these, namely in those
things; wherein either in kind or degree they excel them. That many such
things there are, they will need no Monitor at another time, when the Question
is only of the Reverence and Respect due from such their Inferiors: In such
cases every one can m^ke large Scrolls and Catalogues (written, like ^kiel's
Roll, within and without) of his Advantages and Prerogatives, and stretch them
to the exacting the very last mite of Tribute they can possibly pretend to But
let them remember, that God is as jealous of his Ho^r, as they can be of their
own; and therefore as they make those Pre-eminences, instruments of attracting
Glory from those below them, so they must also of reverberating and returning
it home to that divine Power above them, who bestowed them to that end, and
will not finally be deluded; but if they will disappoint his primary intention,
that of having his Grace glorified in their faithful managery of those Talents,
they shall not be able to defeat his secondary, that of having his Justice
magnified in the fatal doom of such slothful Servants; if they will envy him
the more agreeable satisfaction of bestowing rewards, they cannot defraud him
of that (though inferior) of executing vengeance.

SECT. III. The Particulars of the Gentleman's Advantages above others.
1. BUt to dwell no longer on Generals, I shall descend to Particularize those
Advantages, by which they are severed and discriminated from the vulgar, and
which consequently by being peculiar to them, devolve on them an obligation of
a distinct Duty. And here I shall be careful to prevent dispute, and therefore
take in none but what are so obvious, as to be universally acknowledged; and
then having my premises granted, I shall hope they will not betray themselves
such ill Logicians, as to resist or disclaim the Conclusion.

2. I begin with that advantage which they are earliest possessed of, that of an
ingenuous and refined Education; of which, I hope none that has had it, will
so far confute the Efficacy, as to despise and undervalue. What the Apostle
urges in a higher Argument, Romans 9. may be appliable here. Men's minds are
naturally of the same Clay, Education is the Potters hand and wheel that forms
them into Vessels of honor or dishonor; and though experience shows us, it is
too possible for Men to deface those nobler Impressions which they have thus
received, yet that makes it not cease to be in it self a most estimable
Blessing, any more then that excellency of Gods Image wherein Man was created,
could be defamed by his fall. It is certain, there is no Humane means more
effectual toward the refining and sharpning Men's intellects, giving them an
edge and quickness, and that the more, because it takes them in that Age
wherein their faculties are, as their joints, pliant and tractable, and so
capable of being by exercise improved into great degrees, both of strength and
activity. This Advantage the meaner sort generally want, the expencefulness of
such a breeding, sets it beyond their reach: The indigence of whose condition,
does on the contrary determine their pursuits to that only, which may bring
them in a subsistence, fastens them to the Shop or Plough, and so leaves their
minds uncultivated and unapt for those more excellent productions which the
happier Institution of Gentlemen enable them for; as we see it observed by the
Wiseman, Eccles. 38. 25. to the end of that Chapter.

3. A second Advantage is that of Wealth which to Gentlemen seems to be, as it
were, rained down from the Clouds, both in respect of the plenty and the
easiness of its acquisition Fair Patrimonies, large Inheritances descend on
them without one drop of their sweat, one minutes toil or solicitude, as if
they were the undoubted Heirs of the Israelites Blessings, Successors in their
Canaan, who were to Possess Houses full of all good things which they fi^ed
not, and Wells dug which they dug not; Vineyards and Olive Trees which
they planted not, as it is D^ut 6 11. The Poet has placed it in the front of
his Inventory, the prime ingredient in the compleatest felicity of this life,
Res (...) ^erta labor sed relicta; whereas on the other side the lower rank of
Men fetch their mere necessaries out of the Earth, which being, as it were,
hardened and petrified by Adams sin, must be mollified and suppled with their
sweat, before it will become penetrable, will not yield them food, but gives
them also a portion of sorrow with it: They must first be torn with those
Thorns and Briars which cover her surface, before they can fetch nourishment
out of her Bowels, they must buy their Bread with their sweat, as if they had
engrossed the penalty of their first Fathers sin, whilst Gentlemen sweat only
by the engagement of their sports, or by the direction of the Physician, to
digest their fullness of Bread, which every one must confess a sufficient
inequality.

4. A third is that of Time. This depends by way of consequence on the former;
for God having made such liberal provisions for them, thus prevented them with
the Blessings of his Goodness, they can have no need to employ their time to
gain that, wherewith they already abound; and so being exempted from that one
devouring expense of it, have a great stock to bestow on other more excellent
purposes; whereas the poor Man has scarce any vacant minute, or such as he can
call his own; they are all forestalled by those pressing necessities which lie
unremoveable upon him; his day-hours are challenged by his labor, his nights by
his rest; and the satisfying of these Claims so necessary, that his own
support, perhaps that also of a numerous family depends upon it; and therefore
he may not attempt to defeat them: So that if Time be to be accounted a
Treasure, as undoubtedly it is, here is a second sort of Poverty to which he is
exposed as a result of the former; and another manifest inequality between him
and the Gentleman.

5. A fourth is that of Authority, by which I mean not that which belongs to
those which are advanced to Public Office; for that being peculiar to some few
only, will not bear a distinct part in my present consideration; b^ I
understand by it that more private influence which Gentlemen generally have on
those tha^ are their Dependents. And this also may be reckoned an effect of the
former, their Wealth. For in proportion to that, the number of Servants,
Tenants, and Pensioners, (yea, perhaps of Friends too) is to be measured; and
over all these they have somewhat (though not o^ absolute despotical dominion,
yet) of sway and prevalency. On the other side, the poor Man's authority is
bounded within the narrow circuit of his little Cottage, being in effect no
other then the propagation of that Pow^ Nature has given him over his own Body
to those Branches that spring from it, hi^ Children; and to that Cien which is
ingraf^ into it, his Wife: And if he shall but pee^ out of this little
Principality, attempt to enlarge his Territories, and prescribe to any
forreigner, he will soon be taught how little hi^ power is acknowledged, and
consequently a^ how great a distance he stands in this particula^ also from the
Gentleman.

6. The fifth is that of Reputation and Esteem; which as the World goes is a
shadow that waits only on the greater Bodies. Wealth and Honor, are the things
that render any person considerable amongst Men, prepar^ them with an aptness
to embrace his Dictates to consider his Counsels, to transcribe hi^ Copies; and
though now it often falls out to be an unjust measure, yet perhaps it may have
no unjust Original: For if such persons did make use of those advantages they
have, to make their Minds as rich as their Fortunes, this were but their due:
And therefore if it be paid them upon this supposition, it is they only that
are guilty of the injustice, by defeating the ground of it. But by what tenor
soever they hold it, it is sure; it may be made an apt Instrument to many good
purposes, and therefore well deserves to be accounted into the number of their
advantages. But now if you look on the poor Man, you shall see him loaded with
Contempts; from which, no inward Excellencies he possesses can rescue him. It
is the observation of the wisest of Men, that the poor man's wisdom is despised,
Eccles. 9. 16. So hated and scorned a thing is Poverty, that it seems the Fate
of it is infectious, and casts reproach upon the most estimable things that
cohabit with it The World is so full of instances of this truth, that we need
go no higher then our own times; but if we should look back, we may find one
as ancient as Job, who in his own person experimented these distant effects of
Prosperity and Adversity; while he was in a flourishing condition Men gave ear
to him, and waited, and kept silence at his counsel. After his words, they
spoke not again, and his soul dropped on them, Job 29. 21, 22. But in the next
Chapter we find the Scene quite changed, and this reverenced and adored person
is become a song and a byword to the basest of men I shall readily acknowledge
this injurious treating of the poor to be a great Barbarism: But though there
can nothing be inferred from it as de jure, yet its being so d^ facto, proves
all I am about to assert, vi^ The great unevenness that is (in this instance as
well as the former) between Gentlemen and their Inferiors.

7. Having given this Schedule of undeniable Privileges they enjoy, I shall
before I proceed farther, beseech them here to make^ stand, and sob^rly to
consider whither it be imaginable, that God has put so many excellent
Instruments of Action into their hand^ only to make them less active. That
were t^ accuse the Divine Wisdom of such an unskil^ kind of managery, as the
shallowest Huma^ Providence falls not under. Will any of them be at the care
and expense to furnish a Servan^ with all Materials and Utensils for Work, with
no other design, but that he may spend h^ time either in sleep or riot. If they
will not, (...) shall ask how they would like a Servant tha^ should so absurdly
pervert their intentions And according to the answer they give to that, leave
them to conclude of their own acceptableness, with their great Master; who no^
only in a single instance, but in an habitu^ course behave themselves as
preposterously. (...) cannot see how such a reflection, if made wit^ any
seriousness, can miss of being attend^ with a severe self condemnation, and
then that ^eing so proper a basis and groundwork, should me thinks by a kind,
even of natural ^nergy, invite them to superstruct on it more Noble and
Christian purposes; that they who ^re so apt to expect Adoration from others,
(...) willing to be Idolized, may not yet any ^nger be willing to be indeed
Idols (have ^ouths and speak not, etc. Psalm. 135, as many ^nactive powers, as
those have Organs) but ^ay rather aspire to some degree of resem^lance to that
Divine Essence, whose opera^ons are as Incessant as Excellent, and by an
^intermitted Industry in employing those ad^antages God has put into their
hands, answer ^s design in bestowing them.

SECT. IV. The Branches of his Calling founded in the first Advantage, that of
Educacation.
1. I Presume it is by this time rendered sufficiently evident, that a Gentleman
has a Calling; it is now seasonable to advance, and show what that is, and o^
this the ground has already been laid in the last Section by the enumeration
of those peculiar Advantages he possesses; which being those Talents committed
to his managery, h^ Calling will be the most exactly anatomize^ and distributed
into its parts, by unfolding those several Branches of his Receipts, and
e^amining what improvements each of them (...) capable of, which as so many
distinct Lim^ make up the entire Body of his Calling.

2. This I shall do, not only in the gro^ but severally, through every one of
them, an^ shall take the liberty of doing it with the addition of a double
reflection; the one on t^ contrary practice, the other on the pleasu^ and
satisfaction that will infallibly attend the discharge of this Duty.

3. I begin with that of their Education; the former part whereof commonly
Commences as timely as the first Exercises of their Reason: It is so creditable
a thing to have Children put into an early nurture, that there are few Parents
so careless of their own reputation, as to neglect it, but do either by
themselves, or some others to whom they assign the charge, put them under such
a Discipline as may break their natural rudeness and stubbornness, mould them
into some form of Civility, and teach them that first Fundamental Lesson of
Obedience, on which all future Instructions must be built. And this is a huge
Advantage, not only toward the succeeding parts of Education, but toward the
regularity of the whole life: For by having their Infant-Passions thus checked
and bridled, they become more tame and governable ever after. The next part of
Education, is Erudition and Instruction, and under a Succession of this they
are for many years: Scarce any that owns the name of Gentleman, but will commit
his son to the care of some Tutor, either at home or abroad, who at first
instills those Rudiments, proper to their tenderer years, and as Age matures
their parts, so advances his Lectures, till he have let them in to those
spacious Fields of Learning, which will afford them both Exercise and Delight.
This is that Tree of Knowledge, upon which there lies no interdict, which
instructs not, as that in Ed^ did, by sad and costly experience, but by fai^
and safe intuitions, and may well be looked o^ as a principal Plant in that
Paradise, wherei^ God has placed this rank of Men.

4. These two parts of Education united qualify a man for many excellent
purposes. It will be impossible to enumerate all, because a mind thus subdued
and cultivated, must y^ owe the opportunities of many actions to ou^ ward
circumstances and occasions, which being various and accidental, can with no
certainty be brought into the account, but abstracting from these, there are
diverse more i^ trinsick benefits, which nothing but a Man self can frustrate;
and those alone I shall i^sist on.

5. First, a Man thus Educated, is better prepared to resist all Errors that
may invade h^ Understanding, his discerning Faculty is mo^ nimble and agile,
can suddenly surround Proposition, and discover the infirm and se^ ble parts;
and so is not to be imposed upon by such slight Sophisms as captivate who^
herds of the vulgar. This Advantage, it apparent he has, and it is his duty to
man use of it, to examine cautiously the grou^ of an Opinion, before he give up
his ass^ to it, and not to betray his Reason, either (...) hi^ Slo^h by
neglecting to give it a compet^ discussion; or to his Interest, by electi^
Tenants rather by their profitableness then their truth. This certainly is the
least that is supposeable to be required of them in this particular, and sure
it is so moderate an injunction, as the most mutinous humor can have no
temptation to quarrel at; For who could think him a severe imposer, who having
furnished a man with a light to direct him through some dark passage, should
only require him not to blow it out?

6. And as he has this Advantage in respect of his Understanding, so has he
in the second place, in relation to his Will; which though it be a free
faculty, and consequently cannot be forcibly determined to any thing, yet it is
capable of persuasions and inducements, and is usually bended and inclined by
them; it must therefore be a fair step toward the rectifying of the Will, when
the intellect is stored with Arguments and Incentives to goodness: And this
Learning must be supposed to provide for, unless we will exclude out of the
Scheme, both Morality and Divinity; for each of those will yield variety of
such Arguments: Morality will present Virtue as perfectly amiable in it self,
and so fit to be embraced for its own sake, and not only so, but also as
highly profitable and advantageous to us, as being that which gives the
sublimest perfection to our Natures, the sweetest rest and tranquillity to our
Minds; and in a word, a full satisfaction to all our Rational Appetites:
Divinity confirms all this, and superadds what infinitely transcends it, the
assurance of those eternal and glorious rewards in another world; and these
surely are such tempting allectives, as are very proper to attract the will to
choose what appears thus excellent, thus desirable, provided they be justly
represented to it. And the doing that, the pressing these motives home upon the
will, and that in refutation of all the contrary deceiveable pretensions of
vice, is the first part of their obligation. But then there is also a second,
and that is, that they permit themselves to be persuaded by such efficacious
arguments, and actually conform their wills to these dictates of their
understanding, that is, that they really and effectively be such men, as their
education directs and requires them to be: Which being the work of their wills,
'twill be absurd to plead impossibility or infirmity, since it is manifest they
may if they will; which is such a degree of liberty, as serves in all other
instances to denominate a man a free agent, and such as all punishments and
rewards both divine and humane are founded on

7. A third advantage is in relation to his Affections; which being the
inferior and more brutish part of the man, are yet so impetuous and assuming,
that they are very apt to usurp the dominion over the nobler faculties; and
where they gain it, the event is answerable to what we see in States where the
Commonpeople have wrested the Scepter, all is put into confusion. Now that
which may prevent these civil broils in the soul, and secure the government to
the proper Sovereign, may well be reputed an advantage And to this, nothing
merely humane is more conducing then Education. For first, that early
discipline which we presumed, one part of it puts a bridle in the mouths of
these headstrong passions, which by many repeated acts of restraint at last
forget their native feritie, and become more calm and tractable. But then
Erudition compleats this conquest, backs this unruly beast, and by a dextrous
managerie not only restrains, but guides him, and makes him serve to many
useful purposes, renders these mutinous Rebels not only captived Slaves, but
good Subjects, obedient to the laws of Reason All this Education is of it self
aptly disposed to do, if men will not take the Beasts part against it,
encourage him to plunge, till he have thrown the Rider. And all that is in this
particular required of them, is but to hold fast those reins that are thus put
into their hands, to keep their Affections in such a just subjection, that they
may receive, not give laws. Thus we see the influence which Education has on
all the essential parts of a man's mind: And were it here so immured and closed
up, that it could make no sallies at all thence; did the soul, like Gedeon's
fleece, ingross all this precious dew; yet whilst that received such liberal
infusions, it would irrefragably evince this to be no mean inconsiderable
advantage. But it is indeed impossible it should be so confined; for if it be
permitted to make these impressions within, as heat in the center fails not to
diffuse it self to the circumference, so certainly will it extend and manifest
it self in the more visible effects, all the products and emanations of a mind
thus regulated will own their original, bear the image of the^r parent.

8. And first his Behavior will be affable and civil, not insolent and
imperious; as one that knows humanity and gentleness is a common debt to
mankind, and therefore will not think fit to contract or dam up his civility
into so narrow a compass, that it shall swell into complement, and mean
flattery toward those above, and not suffer one drop to descend on those
beneath him; but disperse its streams so, that all channels may be filled with
it. It Is true, the depth of some will require a greater proportion to that
filling, then others; and there it is not to be doubted but he may be more
liberal; only in the mean time the shallower are not to remain dry: Let the
inequality be such as proceeds only from the capacities of the Subjects, not
from the partiality of the Agent, and he prevaricates no part of his duty in
this matter.

9. S^condly, his Words will be temperate and decent, the product of judgment,
not of rage: For he that has calmed his passions has nothing to betray him to
rash, angry, or rude language; this is a foam which is cast up only by the
billows of a turbulent tempestuous mind, and can never be the issues of a
serene composed temper. To this it is but proportionable, that they be also
weighty and material. A wise man's words, says the Son of Sirach, are weighed
in the balance; and therefore he that has improved his Education to that
pitch of proficiencie, will surely look his discourse be such, as may answer
that character, which must at the least suppose it to have something of
solidity, no man ever attempting to put froth and bubbles into the scales: And
not only so, but it must also presume it to have something of use and value;
for, who ever takes pains to weigh what for its uselesness and meanness he
intends to cast out as refuse? And both these qualifications are very essential
parts of a Gentleman's dialect, the one opposed to light and foolish, the other
to unseasonable discourse: For as the one has nothing of weight (unless it be
that of a burden to the hearers) so the other can have nothing of use, nor
consequently of worth, that being to be measured by the aptness of it to the
persons to whom it is addressed. It should be the endeavor of those whom God
has endued with knowledge, to convey as much of benefit and instruction to
others, as they can; in order whereunto it is necessary they adapt their speech
to the capacities of those they treat with, otherwise let them discourse never
so elaboratly, they will rather confound then edify, and appear to affect more
to boast, then communicate their knowledge.

10. Lastly, his Employments will be worthy and ingenuous. A Man that has this
inward Nobility of Mind superadded to that of his Birth, will abhor to busy
himself viciously or impertinently; he has those qualifications, which render
him useful, and he must give himself those Exercises, whereby he may become the
most eminently so. If by just authority he be assigned to any public charge,
he is to embrace it cheerfully; not as a prize either to Ambition or
Covetousness, but as an opportunity of Virtue; a sphere wherein he may move the
most vigorously in the service of God, and his Country. But this happening but
to few, it is necessary he have some other reserve of action, and such surely,
he that industriously designs it, cannot want, wherein though perhaps his
influence will not be so general as in that, yet it may fall very auspiciously
on many; and when all those occasions are exhausted too, when all direct
operations are at a stand, he may yet betake him to the reflex'd, employ his
activity upon himself, which will always remain a proper object of his
Industry, he being, though a rich, yet still such an improveable soil, as will
encourage and reward his Husbandry, though never so often repeated. And now I
shall presume it apparent, That Education is a most estimable Treasure, a
precious Mine that contains so many rich veins. O, why should any that possess
it, suffer themselves to be poor, merely for want of diligence in digging out
the Ore!

11. And would to God that were an impertinent complaint, such as none were
concerned in: But they that look on the Manners of many that have had this
happy Institution, will find too great cause to wonder and bewail, that so
hopeful a Seeds-time should produce so slender, nay, so degenerate a Crop: As
if Jobs curse were here exemplified, Job 31. 40. Thistles to grow in stead of
Wheat, and Cockle in stead of Barley. Plutarch tells us of a voice frozen in
the midst of a River, that became audible by the thaw, and applies it to Moral
Precepts taught in youth, but actuated by age. The Simile speaks him to have
lived in better times; for in these, the voice dissolves with the Ice, leaves
not so much as an e^ho behind it. Men now make it the business of their riper
years, to unravel not the follies, but the learning of their youth; no sooner
are they got from under the Discipline of others, but the first act of it they
exercise, is upon those notions which have been instilled into them: And here
they are such severe Lictors, that the mildest infliction is to gag and bind
them, deprive them both of voice and motion; nor are they ordinarily satisfied
with this, but as if they feared they would, like impatient Captives, watch
some advantage to break loose again, their final doom is Ostracism, they and
their Lineage; all sober Counsels derived from them, are utterly expulst, so
totally rased out of their minds, that not the least footsteps of them remain;
and all this under the name of Pedantry, a title, which it is probable their
great aversion to their Teachers, suggests to them, as the most pathetick
reproach, as if they meant now to be revenged on Learning and Tutor together,
for attempting to make them wise against their wills.

12. And now when the Root is thus stockt up, there is little expectation of
Fruit; and therefore he that shall here look for those forementioned effects of
Education, will be more disappointed, then Christ seemed to be by the Fig Tree,
That, though fruitless, yet afforded leaves; but here we are not to hope for so
much, no sign that ever there was such a plant in the soil: Let us briefly
review those severals, and see what of them is ordinarily to be met with.

13. And first for the resisting of Errors, we usually find Gentlemen, no
Heroes in this point, their Understandings are as pliant, as seducible, as
those who never had their means of fortifying them; and if they do indeed
reject Errors, it is commonly by the same Engine, wherewith they cast off
Truth, viz. Their inconsideration of both, as not being able to endure so much
seriousness and intention of mind, as may serve to enter them of any opinion:
They have transplanted their discerning faculty from their Intellect to their
Senses, and find it there so full, so incessant employment, that it can never
be at leisure to revert to Scholastic disquisitions. They can discern exactly
the most minute error in their garment, hold their Artificer most rigidly to
the Laws of the Mode, are most exquisite Judges in all that relates to vanity
or pleasure, and can they ever think fit to trouble their heads (whose least
Lock must not for a world be disturbed) with abstruser speculations, who have
found out so much a more easy exercise of their faculties; if any shall think
this character partakes of the Satyr, I shall beseech him to compare it with
the true state of our young Gallants in this point, and then upon the same
account that cold and scanty praises go for detraction, I shall expect this
very imperfect and partial accusation may pass for Panegyric.

14. Next for the regulation of their Wills, that advantage depends so much on
the former, that of their Understandings, that what evacuates that, must
necessarily be supposed to do the same for this also. It is not imaginable
that he who has defaced all his principles, whether moral or divine, or at
least never revolves or considers them, should receive any influence from them,
since they operate not but by a distinct application. And here should I ask
many Gentlemen, when they ever so much as attempted any thing of this sort, I
fear they would be forced to quarrel at the incivility o^ the question, to
evade the necessity of answering it; But God knows their actions speak too
loud, that their business is to obey, no^ prescribe; to fulfill, not regulate
their wills, Nay indeed it is too frequent, that instead o^ conforming their
wills to their principles, they model and transform their principles to their
wills, herein verifying Aristotle's observation that Pleasures are corruptive of
Principles and so by this one art of inversion, the face o^ things is quite
changed; Virtue which their books represented to them as lovely and honorable,
is now thought to have gained that luster only by the flattery and varnish of
the painters, and so is decryed as the most unamiable, despicable creature; and
on the other side, all the contrary vices are taken from under that black
veil, Philosophers or Divine^ have put upon them, and are furbished and trimmed
up, set to open view, as the most splendid, glorious things, the most adorning
accomplishments of a Gentleman.

15. And to secure this transmutation, even God himself must have his part in
it, be concluded to have bin all this while misrepresented in those characters
of Purity and Justice, his word has made of him, and to have laid no such
severe restraints upon men, as that tell^ us of. That Temperance, Chastity,
Self-denial Mortification, etc. were but the creations of some melancholy
Recluses, who would then enviously impose those bands upon others, wherewith
they had foolishly fettered themselves, that God is more indulgent to Men's
appetites, which they may satiate here, as they please, without those future
dangers Preachers fright them with. That this is the new Gentile Divinity, we
need not appeal to Men's lives, their words openly proclaiming it, not without
much scorn and contempt of their easy simplicity, who govern themselves by the
other; yet as if this would not sufficiently provide for impiety, as if they
were conscious of that absurdity, which indeed there is in defining God an
abettor and favorer of vice, many have advanced a step higher, taking a more
compendious course, and since they cannot bring God over to their party, make
him such as will serve their turn, will unmake him, by becoming flat Atheists;
Of this there are too too many instances, and it is to be feared will be many
more, whilst to all other sensual alurements that opinion makes to its
Proselites, this is added, that it is become a creditable thing, the badge and
signature of a modern Wit, thus to be one of David's fools, in saying there is
no God.

16. In the next place, let us descend to the Affections, and see what effects
of their education is discernible there. And truly tha^ seems to be no other,
then what is observable^ of a dam, put to intercept the course of some rapid
stream, which so soon as it is either removed or borne down, the torrent
gushes with so much the greater violence for having had that opposition; so
here when the restraints, which bridled their minority, are taken off, their
passions swell to a higher degree of impetuosity, they cease to be boys and
men together, the Man is dismounted, looses the reins, and is dragged whither
the fury of the beast directs; A sad change, yet daily too visible in many, for
alas what is more ordinary then to see Gentlemen, under the dominion of these
brutish appetites; sometimes transported by a Rage to the greatest Undecencies,
nay Dangers; sometimes hurried by a Lust like the possessed person. Mar. 9, 22,
through fire and water, the most desperate distructive attempts, and have
nothing but rottenness and disease as the final prize of all those difficult
adventures; sometimes drowned in swinish Intemperance; and sometimes again
intombed in the Earth, buried as it were alive by fordid covetuousness, as if
they meant to transcribe though not the innocence, yet the sufferings of the
Primitive Christians, in being torn in pieces by wild Beasts. Oh, that they
might once be brought to relinquish this absurd fortitude, that those who
laugh at the precept of turning the other cheek, Mat. 5. 39 would not here
infinitely over-act it; and give up themselves to be ^uffeted, yea slaughtered
by these their cruellest Enemies, nor be such Platonic lovers of Martyrdom, as
to choose only this, whereto there is no Crown annexed, but what is worn in the
Kingdom of darkness

17. And now since we are thus to seek of these inward effects, we can with no
reason hope for any of those outward, which are the results and consequences of
these. And then 'twill be no wonder to observe Gentlemen behave themselves
disdainfully and imperiously, as if they could not set a just value on
themselves, without the unjust contempt of others. It Is true indeed, this is
commonly a Wind that blows but one way, down the hill, only upon those below
them, upwards they breathe gentle gales; it being one of their most studied
faculties, to perform all acts of the most supererogating Civility to those
above them; but when that Civility is thoroughly scanned, it will prove a
greater injury then the contrary Rudeness; it is made up of such hollow
prosessions, such gross flatteries, as are much worse then reproaches, nay
seldom fail to be actually seconded with them; there being nothing more usual,
then to revile and deride those at a distance, whom, when present, they admire
and adore. And these now become such essential indispensable parts of good
breeding, that the want of either inevitably betraies a man to the title of a
silly Rustic; Flatteries and Despisings being the two contrary elements,
whereof he whom they call a Fine Gentleman, is to be compounded.

18. This gives an account also of some part of his Dialect, which thus far
answers little to those requisite qualifications, Weight and Usefulness; there
being nothing more trivial or useless, then these two parts of conversation,
and 'twere well if no worse epithers belonged to them. But if we look also into
the rest, they will ordinarily appear to carry proportion with these: It Is
every man's observation, that no spring will rise higher then its first head;
And then words being but the issues of the Mind, where that wants the ballast
of sober and virtuous Notions, it is no wonder if the discourse be light and
aerie. 'Twere easy to exemplify in the several sorts of it adapted to the
several humors of men; but it is also so needless, that the copy would be too
exact by transcribing the impertinence too. But what such frothy discourse is
naturally, the most serious may become by accident: And thus we see it the
infirmity of some, who so far retain their Education, as to have their Minds
better replenished, to vent their plenty so unseasonably or affectedly, that it
produces nothing of benefit to the hearers, but rebounds injuriously with the
aspersion of vanity upon themselves.

19. But such is the misery of this Age, that it were a fair composition, if
Gentlemen could be persuaded to reduce their Discourse only to a privative sort
of Illness; 'twere somewhat tolerable, if as on the one side they did not
minister grace, Ephesians. 429. so on the other they did not breathe infection on the
hearers. But alas, what are all those profane scoffings at Piety, so frequent
among them, but as so many blasts and malevolent vapors to nip and destroy the
practice of it; and so we see it too commonly does among those whose greener
resolutions set them not above their malignant influence. How does their
immodest and obscene talk disperse and scatter their own impure fires, to the
inflaming of others! and whilst they inscribe upon these Poisons the inviting
names of Ingenuitie and Esprit, they do not only tempt men greedily to imbibe
them, but even defame and prostitute that Wit they pretend to, render it a
Wilderness for all savage rudeness to range in, and make as many Candidates for
that reputation, as there are impious and bestial men in the world. And to this
sort of Wit they have found out a very proportionable Rhetoric, I mean that of
their Oaths, that hellish piece of Oratory, which so overspreads their
language, that (like a prosuse Embroidery that even quite hides the Stuff) it
becomes the most remarkable part of it. It Is not a little strange how this
foulest deformity has gotten to pass for an embellishment and ornament of
Style; but that it does so, is very visible not only from the no pretense of
other temptation to it, but also from that affected and studied variety
observable among them, as if they had the same concernment for their Discourse,
which they have for themselves, viz. that it may every Year appear in some new
piece of Dress, have some Oaths fresh minted to set it off.

20. To all these we may add their vain Boastings and Assumings, which are
often so deplorably ridiculous, that it is doubtful whether more of pity or
contempt belongs to them. Thus oftentimes, he that has but crossed the Seas to
fetch a Feather and fantastic Mien, brags more of his Travels, then if he had
passed the Line, and felt the scorchings of the Torrid Zone; and upon the
strength of this he takes authority to impose on others the most absurd and
incredible Relations; yet still imposing more perniciously on himself, i. e. a
belief that he appears very illustrious and glorious in all this, and on that
confidence the smiles which his auditors mean in scorn, shall be taken in
applause of him, and so encourage those follies they deride.

21. Indeed where this vain humor dwells, it will betray it self in innumerable
indecencies of speech; but never does it give it self a fuller or worse
character, then when it lets loose to anger and rage, one of the most genuine
and fruitful branches of this bitter root. And this we frequently see overflow
in all the invenomed reproachful language imaginable, such as one would wonder
should fall from the mouth of any, whose education had not been wholly
barbarous; An inverted kind of Eloquence, whereto some who have been taught the
rules of better Rhetoric, have a great fluencie.

22. If now we should proceed to take a view of their Imploiments, there is
little doubt but that Tekel Dan. 5. 27. might be a proper inscription on them,
yea a mild one too, Lightness and Vanity being many times the most innocent
ingredient in them: And this is but a natural inference from the former; for
since the Principles of Actions as well as Words is within, it will certainly
operate alike in both; as water sent from one fountain through several pipes,
is the same, and has equal virtues or faults in each. It were too easy to
give as particular an account of these as the former; but foreseeing an
occasion to do that in another place, I shall transfer it thither, as not
desiring to iterate the importunity on so ungrateful a subject.

23. And now he that shall consider, that all this is the but partial image and
representation of those, who have had that Education we so much magnified, will
sure be tempted to ask Judas's question, Ad quid perditio haec? Why was all
this waste of Discipline and Literature? to what purpose was so costly a
foundation laid, when the superstructure is in the Apostles phrase 1 Cor. 3.
12. nothing but hay and stubble? And I doubt many defeated Parents have cause
to make this complaint; but I fear also diverse of them may with justice accuse
themselves as Accessories to their own disappointments, who by an overhasty
desire of seeing their Sons men, do at once anticipate and frustrate their
hopes, evacuate the benefit of many years Education, by taking them too soon
from under its benign influence; which though it usually spring from
immoderate indulgence, is yet really the greatest severity: For what can be
more so, then to tie them to all the labor and toil of the Seeds time, force
their Childhood to that Study and Intention of which that giddy age is most
impatient, and then snatch them away at the Harvest; suffer them to converse no
more with Learning, when once they grow capable of receiving either delight or
profit by it? Thus of late it has been the method of Breeding, to post them
with an inconvenient speed from one Stage to another, many times bringing them
too soon to the University, but much oftener taking them too early from it,
before they have near gained what they came thither to furnish themselves with;
and from thence the next step is over the Sea, which soon washes away those
Notions, which lie crude in their brains, but have wanted maturity of years to
digest into their manners. Indeed it is not imaginable how they should retein
them, they being at their coming abroad solemnly put in a direct course of
forgetting speedily what they formerly learnt, their whole time being then by
order to be taken up in other unspeculative Exercises, wherein if they do
happen to attain to some eminency, yet it is sure but a dry exchange for what
they quit for it: But then it is not one in twenty, that arrives to that; the
negligence of Governors, or their own headiness, when they find the rein thus
slackned, often makes their progress little in any thing they are appointed to;
but in stead of that, they run a full carere in all debauch Pleasures, advance
there in an instant to the highest proficiencie. I say not this to decry
Traveling in general, but only the unseasonable time that is chosen for it: He
that would really improve his Son by that means, should send him at such a
mature age, when by the help of his foregoing education his Judgment is settled,
and qualified to make useful observations, his Manners well weighed and fixed,
that so he may be capable of all the good Foreign climes can afford, and
secured from the infection of the ill; like a Loadstone, attract things of
weight only, and not, like Jet, draw nothing but chaff and straws. But I
confess this a digression, and therefore return to those who have thus embezled
this precious Advantage, (and who have too much of their own wills in it, to be
able to transfer the guilt upon any error of their Parents) beseeching them
seriously to lay to heart this their so ruinous ill husbandry, and to let at
last some better fruits of that seed appear; Not to suffer a Piece of Plate,
left to the School or College, to be the only Testimonials that ever they
were there, and so bring those societies under the reproach of extortion, or
fraud, of professing learning, but imparting none, of having taken some thing
from them without giving them any valuable consideration, making them any
proportionable returns. But that they would at last take up this Talent thus
long buried in the napkin, and yet fall a trading with it; and though the time
they have lost should render them desperate of the reward of the Ten Cities,
it is yet motive enough to industry, to rescue themselves from the sentence of
the Slothful servant, and yet that will not be all, for there being no middle
state be^ween reward and punishment, he that delivers himself from the one,
puts himself likewise into a certain capacity of the other. But besides all, he
is to expect hereafter, he is sure at the time of a very fair Antepast of
pleasure here which he will immediately reap from it, as the first fruits of the
future rich harvest, which though the Law commanded to be sacrificed, yet such
is the indulgence of the Gospel, that it exacts nothing, but that men would
themselves enjoy them.

24. For such is the admirable goodness of God, that he is generally pleased to
adapt his commands not only to our Eternal, but Temporal concernments, for
knowing the impatience of our nature, that we love not to depend wholly upon
reversions, he has bin pleased to put somewhat of present gust and relish upon
every part of duty This might be evi^enced distinctly through the whole Codex
of Christian Precepts, his Yoke is an easy, nay ^racious Yoke; his burden, a
light burden, Mat. ^1. 28. and from this general ground, I may have Warrant
sufficient to affirm the like of ^his particular I am now upon. But it may be
yet more clearly evinced, by reflecting on the ^everal improvements of this
Talent, which have bin mentioned, as the Duty of all those that possess it.

25. And first, for that of an acute and elevated Understanding, I need appeal
no further then to common Vote, to have that pronounced a very desirable thing,
it being hard ^o pick out a man of such an avowed bruta^ity, that will own the
despising it; even those who will be at no pains to acquire, will yet profess
to esteem it, and we may believe them ^n earnest, if from no other argument,
yet from this, that every man affects the reputation of being Wise, is pleased
when he succeeds in that aim, and on the contrary is not more troubled and
discomfited at any thing, then to be taxed of Ignorance or Error. If any shall
deny this, (...) shall suspend his confutation, till some body reproach him
with folly, and then from the displeasure he finds in himself, leave him to
conclude his own value of Wisdom; and indeed why do good men look upon a fool
with so much pity, and ill men with so much scorn, if knowledge be not both a
Felicity and a Credit. Nor is this the sentence only of the vulgar who usually
admire those things most, from which they stand at the greatest distance, b^
especially of the more discerning sort of me^ who from every taste they have had
of it, have had their appetites so raised, that they have insatiably thirsted
after the fuller draughts, the made so many of the old Philosophers renounce
the enjoyment of those sensual Pleasures, the offered themselves, to go in
quest after this on^ transcendent delight, and Solomon to prese^ this in his
election before Riches and Honor the two principal parts of worldly splendo^ to
the rectitude of which choice God himself bears Testimony. And now if this be
in ^self so valuable, so ravishing a thing, shall its being here connected with
duty, prove such an allay, as to deprive it of all the gust; certainly if it
do, it must argue the palate ver^ perverse and distempered; for to all other,
tha^ one consideration would give a relish and fla^vor to the dryest, the most
unpleasant undertaking: The conscience that I am now imploy^ed as I ought is
such a refreshment as is able to sweeten the severest labor, yea the greate^
suffering; shame is a thing to which human^ nature has an innate abhorrence,
yet the Apostles made it matter of joy, when it befe^ them for Christ's sake.
Acts 5. 41. and shall this blessed Copy of theirs be transformed instead of
transcribed; shall those who have no^ so much Christian patience, as to bear
the^ slightest reproach for him, have yet so much unchristian stupidity, as to
endure the greatest ^n opposition to him; choose rather to be ignorant, when
it is both their sin and shame, ^hen wise, when it is their duty and reward,
^vert St. Paul's choice, and be fools against Christ, as he owns to be for him:
If there be any such Antipodes in our clime, their unha^iness will yet serve to
illustrate what they ^fuse to partake of, viz. the felicity of having performed
this part of duty in the improvement of the understanding.

26. In the next place the regularitie of the ^ill is extremely both amiable
and profitable, for that being an uncontrollable faculty, ^f it be wrong set,
what torrents of mischief and confusion does it let in; if in all its
con^eptions it permit the sensual appetite to lay, ^ke Jacob, its pilled rods
before it, all its births will be ring-straked, speckled and spotted. The
^uinousness of a perverse will is so generally understood, that there is
nothing renders a man ^ven in common account more miserable and ^eplored; he
whose Will runs counter to his Reason, every man is Astrologer enough to ^ead
his destiny, and presage his destruction. And by the undecent and pernicious
effects of (...) disordered, we may make an estimate of the beauty and
advantage of a rectified Will; the ^ormer, like a vicious improvident Governor,
exposes his Territories to a deluge, first of luxury, and then of ruin, but
this latter like a virtuous and prudent Prince, at once secures the innocence,
and felicity of his Subjects. Indeed it is this alone, that really and
effectively gives us the pre-eminence above beasts, they have choices as well
as we, and they have affections, but wanting the higher principle of reason,
their choices are necessarily determined by their affections; now if we who
have both, are guided only by the latter, wherein does our state differ from
theirs, save only that our liberty makes us guilty, whereas their necessity
leaves them innocent. I presume I need say no more, to evince the happiness of
a well ordered will, since none can contest it, but he must tacitly confess
himself weary of his humane nature, and emulous, not of a greater dignity, but
of a degradation to tha^ of the Bruits.

27. And as much may be said concerning the Affections, which if they be not
curbe^ and held in by the understanding, will have as free and uncontrolled a
sway in men, as they have in mere animals, but with worse effects, by how much
we have more objects to incite them; more instruments to actuate them then
these have. If any man can b^ tempted to think this no unpleasant condition,
let him yet further consider, that thi^ metamorphosis is not like the fancied
transmigration of the soul, wherein it was supposed to assume the nature, and
consequently the passions but of one beast alone, no, here is the whole
Wilderness let loose upon a man, with all their contrary appetites perpetually
combating one with another. He that has the rapaciousness of a Wolf, may yet
have the ^imorousness of an Hare, and so is racked between the desire of
having, and the fear of suffering: He that has the lust of a Goat, may yet
have the intemperance of a Swine, and be distracted to which of the appetites
to give up himself. He that has the cruelty of a Tiger, may yet have the
wiliness of the Fox, which will give him the pain of many irksom delays, in
attending an advantageous opportunity; and so proportionably in others: And
what can be more unsupportably uneasy, then to have these continual tumults
within, to be in a state of hostility not only with other men, but with
himself? or what can there need beyond this consideration, to recommend the
contrary condition to us? The subduing these brutish Inclinations, is the
introducing Peace into a Land, harrass'd and wasted with intestine War; and
sure none need be told (at least in this Age) that that is a most ravishing
pleasure: And I may with the same confidence appeal to the verdict of any who
has tried these two contrary states, and doubt not but he will from his
experience confirm the most profuse and even Poetique declamation that can be
made on this Theme.

28. All I shall add is, in a joint relation to this and the two former, by
observing that illuminated Understandings, regulated Wills and Affections, make
up a great part of the celestial happiness. The Angels of light would no longer
have right to that title, without these, The spirits of just men made perfect,
were improperly so styled, Heb. 12. 22. had they not received this
accomplishment of their nature: And the greater degrees hereof we arrive to
here, so much the more sensible anticipation have we of those divine joys. And
sure thus to partake with Angels and Saints, is to be happy, and will be
acknowledged so by all, whose value and wishes of a Mohammedan Paradise render
them not uncompetent to estimate these purer and refined pleasures.

29. If from hence we proceed to those outward effects, which are the results
of these inward, we shall find they are all full of delight and satisfaction.
Courtesy and friendliness of Behavior does not only cast a glorious luster
round about, attract the eyes and hearts of others, but it also reflects with
cheerful and comfortable gleams upon our selves: For, Man being designed by God
for a sociable creature, has such propensions and Inclinations put into him,
as are proper to that end; and these are gratified and pleased, when we so
demean our selves, as may answer that intention, toward which nothing can be
more necessary then this debonnaire and gentle carriage, for that allures
people to our conversation, whereas the contrary roughness frights and deters
them, (the churlishness of a Nabal makes men they cannot speak to him, 1 Samuel
25. 17.) it gives a man part of Nebuchadnezar's fate, separates him from among
men, by forcing them to withdraw from him; and that the worst part of it too;
the hairs like Eagles feathers, and the nails like birds claws, being much the
lighter degree of the infliction, fit to pass for dress and ornament, compared
with that more deforming disguise this rugged temper puts upon a man. And as on
the one side, this morosity and sourness of humor is very uneasy, so on the
other is that form of fawning and flattering compliance, which some call
Civility: It obliges men in many circumstances to renounce their ease, their
health, yea their understandings too, and keeps them in such constraint, that
one may truly say, a less measure of self-denial would serve to constitute a
man a good Christian, then an exact Courtier; whereas he that keeps himself in
a just mean, neither drives away one sort of company, nor buys the other so
dear: He has a standardmeasure, by which to dispense his Civilities, viz. The
quality and worth of the persons; and confounds not himself with those more
unjust and mutable rules of their expectations. So in the first of the
instances he keeps himself a Man, whilst the other is in some respect a Beast;
in the second he preserves himself a Freeman, whilst the other is a Slave: And
sure I may refer it to any man's decision, which is the pleasanter state.

30. Next for the Words, it is not to be doubted but that calm and temperate
Language has the advantage of that which is passionate and rageful; and that
not only in respect of decency, but ease too; of which there needs no other
testimony, then that visible perturbation and uneasiness observable in all who
are under such a transportation. So in like manner, when the words are
pertinent and weighty, they give not only more satisfaction to the hearer, but
to the speaker also: This may be judged by the contrary displacencie men have
at themselves, when they are conscious to have spoken impertinently or
undecently. By satisfaction I mean not that vanity, which men too often affect
of showing their parts, but a just and sober complacencie, arising from the
conscience of having regulated their discourse by the measures of a Wise man
and a Christian, the having said that which may be of benefit, but cannot be of
mischief to his auditors; And this surely is a much more real pleasure then any
can be had in the contrary kind of dialect. If to this it be objected, that
generally none are so much delighted with their own discourses, as they who
talk the most vainly and absurdly: I answer, that even these are not pleased
with the vanity and absurdity; their pleasure results from a mistake, supposing
it to be the quite contrary. And this helps to evince, that solid and prudent
speaking gives satisfaction, since even the shadow and fiction of it can be
made to yield it.

31. Lastly, for the Imploiments, they surely must afford most of contentment,
when they are most noble and excellent: They do so at the time, in the direct
line, they having more of agreeableness to the nature and dignity of a man; but
they do yet more so in the reflection, when a man looks back upon his day or
week spent, and finds his business has been worthy of him, it exhilerates and
revives him, enables him to pass his own, approbation on himself, and as it
were to anticipate the Euge he shall one day receive from his great Master. But
he that gives himself only the idle divertisements of a Child or sets to the
baser drudgeries of Vice, cannot reflect without confusion: which is so well
understood by such persons, that they are fain to take sanctuary in a total
Inconsideration, never daring to ask themselves. What have I done? Which bears
full testimony to the excellency and felicity of ingenuous Imploiments, since
they that decline those, are forced also to decline themselves, grow out of
their own acquaintance and knowledge.

32. And now what Objection can there lie against this duty, which is in all
the parts of it so advantageous and eligible, that it becomes duty not only to
God, but even to themselves, their own present interests and satisfaction.
Shall Pleasure it self lose its nature, adopt the properties of its direct
contrary, and become irksom and abhorred, only because it is twisted with
Obedience? Is there so perfect an antipathy between God and them, that it is
impossible they should have the same objects of delight? or can no Joys have
any taste with them, that are not the causes and forerunners of eternal
sorrows? This were such a degree of perverseness, as common charity bids me no^
to expect; and I see not what else can evacuate^ the pleasure that attends the
improvement of this talent of Education.

33. After all this, I foresee it not impossible that some may plead an
exemption from the Obligation, by affirming they want the ground of it, that
they never had this Education. I am not willing to fancy there have been so
many unjust and un^ind Parents as may qualify any considerable number of
Gentlemen for this plea: But to those few that can really make it, I shall not
thick the foregoing Discourse wholly impertinent; for^ by showing them the
advantages of what they say they thus want, it may incite them (not to murmur^
at the negligence of their Parents, but) to attempt the repairing of it by
becoming the^ own Guardians, putting themselves into Discipline, and by the
strict Laws of Reason governing and restraining th^se Passions, which by the
liberty of their Breeding have got hea^ by this means supplying to themselves
the first part of Education: And the like may certainly ^e done for the latter
also, if they will but deposit that common error, of thinking it more manly to
be ignorant then to learn, and be content to put themselves in a course of
Erudition, which a man may do for himself in his Closer, as well as a Tutor may
do for his Disciple in a School; and though he want many of those advantages
the other has, yet it is possible they may be in a good degree supplied by that
industry and desire, which all those are supposed to have, who are thus their
own Pupils; And there want not instances of the success of them who have thus
attempted, but I confess there are too few examples of the attempt, men being
too apt to sit down contentedly under this want; whereas let the same persons
have an entailed Estate alienated from them by any act of their Fathers, they
are not then so came, but will struggle to the (...) ^o recover their rights;
Yet certainly an Ingenuous Education is as properly the Birthright of a
Gentleman, as any the most firmly settled Inheritance can be: Why should they
then acquiesce in that so injurious an Alienation, and not seek by all
endeavors of their own to retrieve this so precious a Possession?

SECT. V. Of the second Advantage, Wealth.
1. THe second advantage we are to consider is that of Wealth, which that it is
a blessing will I know readily be assented to by all, men's desires and earnest
pursuits after it sufficiently evidencing the general esteem is had of it. Yet
though the Conclusion be right, it is to be doubted many infer it not upon due
Premises. It Is not Riches simply considered, that are the felicity, much less
those luxuries, to which they are often made to minister; but they are like to
a fertile ground, which if left without culture, none bears so rank weeds, but
if rightly husbanded yields abundant profit; and thus to manage and improve
them is not only the Interest, but the Duty of all those to whom God has
committed them, this being the one designed advantage, for which they were
entrusted to them.

2. Several improvements there are, of which they are capable; but before I
proceed to them, I must mention one part of duty, as fundamental to all the
rest. And that is the well husbanding of them, not in a figurative, but real
sense, the having such a provident care of those goods, and possessions,
wherewith God has blessed a Man, as may secure them from that Consumption, to
which carelessness and sloth will infallibly betray them. This surely is
obligatory in many respects. First, in Thankfulness (I had almost said
civility) to God, who having dispensed them as a liberality it is ingratitude,
yea affront to give them no regard. Secondly, in Justice to a man's posterity:
He that has received a fair Inheritance from his Ancestors, if he suffer his
supine negligence to cut off the Entaile, he defrauds those that were to have
succeeded him in it, and becomes that troubler of his own house, to whom
Solomon, Prove. 11. 29. assigns no other Inheritance but the Wind, which is
indeed all such a person is like to derive upon his issue, the common air
being oftentimes their only patrimony. Thirdly, in order to all those ends to
which Wealth was designed by God, which depend on this, as accidents on their
subjects, and so are all at once evacuated and nulled by the dissipating of
that wherein they are founded* All which considerations, do naturally enforce
upon men the necessiy of a prudent managery.

3. This being supposed, and the person having, as in our Law-forms is usual,
covenanted to stand seized of the Estate, let us now see what are the proper
uses, to which it is to be limited. In the first place, we may rank that of
Contentedness in his portion; which though to one that is set to wrestle with
want it might seem a hard precept, yet to him that flows with abundance it
might be thought rather a needless then difficult injunction, if experience did
not testify, that contentment is oftentimes as great a stranger in Palaces as
Cottages.

4. Of this excellent both virtue and felicity, there are two parts, the one a
cheerful enjoyment of so much of his Wealth, as may decently (I say not
vainly) support him in that quality wherein he is placed: God does not make
Rich men such mere Conduit-pipes of Wealth, that they must pass all, without
retaining any thing themselves; but rather like the Earth, which though she
conveys the springs through her veins, yet is allowed to suck in so much, as
may give her a competent refreshment; and he that does this moderately, and
with a thankful reflection on that liberal Providence, which thus gives him
all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17* falsifies no part of his trust, nor
abuses his stewardship, this being as it were the allowed sees of his place, a
pension allotted him by the bounty of his Lord.

5. The other part of contentment is that, by which the desires are terminated
within the bounds of his own possessions; and not suffered to range wildly into
other men's, like Ahabs, into Naboths vineyard, using their Wealth, as Anglers
do their Fish, to bait hooks for more, by making it an Instrument of extorting
from others; which is so great a guilt, that it nearly concerns them to secure
themselves against it, by a perfect satisfaction in what is properly their own.
Nay even in what is said, there is caution to be had, that there be not too
eager and vehement endeavors of multiplying it, and that not only by an
unlawful commixture with other men's, which is the sin either of oppression or
fraud, but even from its own stock, for that may be covetousness, and is surely
a direct opposition to the divine dispensation. For when God has given a man a
full fortune, and by that manumitted him from those carkings and sollicitudes
to which needier persons are exposed, for him to make it his grand business to
project how he may add to that heap, or in the Prophets phrase lade himself
with thick clay, Hab. 2. 6. what is it but the degrading and ^ulling himself
from that Sphere wherein God has placed him, a voluntary sale of himself to
the Galleys or Mines? In this respect therefore I may not unaptly apply that
exhortation which the Apostle makes in another, ^al. 5. 1. Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. Let not him whom God has by a
gracious and peculiar providence exempted from this meaner servitude; and
vassalage to the world, relinquish that so valuable a privilege, give up his
ear to be bored by Mamm^n, when God proclaims (...) Jubily. Yet it is possible
the quality of some men's estates may be such, that they may be capable of
advancement by a moderate an^ easy Industry, such as may no way diver^ them
from more excellent Imploiments, b^ may rather be a recreation then a toil: An^
in that case I know no obligation lies on the^ so to defy an Improvement, as
not to choose (...) profitable, before an expensive divertisement to spend those
vacant hours upon that, which remain by way of overplus from more worthy
designs and entertainments. But the perpetua^ follicitous pursuit after more
wealth, is certainly a culpable inordinacie, as being inconsistent with that
contentment and acquiescence which is the duty of every man for whom God has
thus liberally provided, and such as wi^ besides be likely to undermine another
main part of his obligation.

6. Such in the next place we are to account the Charitable dispensing of his
store, to supply the indigencies of wanting persons; which surely is to be
looked on as the grand and mo^ considerable end of his receipts. God, who (...)
the common Friend, as well as Father of (...) men, is not to be imagined so
partial, as (...) provide pomps and luxuries for some, and (...) the mean time
leave others destitute of the necessary supports of life; yet if we look (...)
deeper then the visible portions of Poor and Rich, there is no evidence of the
contrary. But when we examine upon what Conditions and Proviso's that Abundance
is conveyed, we shall have no temptation so to asperse or charge God foolishly:
For though he have not dispensed so immediately to the Poor, yet he gives them
as it were Bills of Assignment upon the plenty of the Rich, a right to be
supplied by them: so that the difference seems to be only that of an elder, and
younger brethren; the Elder usually carries the bulk of the Estate, but then
that is charged with provisions for the younger; and if the quantity of those
be not distinctly expressed, but left indefinitely, that act of Trust in the
Father lays the greater obligation on him, not to deceive it by too mean and
scanty a distribution; for now himself is become a Father to them, and
therefore should proportion his bounty by the tenderness and bowels of that
most affectionate relation. And this may not improperly be deemed one reason,
why among such multitudes of commands of Charity in the Gospel, there is yet
none that expressly allots the proportion of our Alms, that by this act of
confidence, as it were, men might be obliged to the higher liberality: And he
that shall make this incentive to it, a pretense to excuse the want of it, is
sure a most criminous perverter of the Divine intention, treacherously
countermining Gods sacred arts, as if 'twere not enough to rebel, unless in a
further contempt he assaulted him with his own weapons. Certainly God never
designed Lazarus's portion should be made up only of the Crumbs from the table;
For though indeed Dives is taxed that he gave him not them yet if he had, such
a dole would sure never have rescued him from the place of torment. He who
rests in a Rich man's bosom in Heaven, is to have some proportionable treatment
from those on Earth, some more hospitable reception then a lying at the gate
some better Chyrurgions then Dogs to cure his sores; and those that refuse it
him, must be presumed to contemn not only the Lazarus, but the Abraham, yea the
Heaven too that receives him, since that which qualifies him for an admittance
there, is not able to recommend him to their least regard.

7. I shall not attempt to proportion men's Charities, since God has not; yet
there are some general measures to be made to bound them on the sinking side,
that they fall not to too scandalous a lowness; which having been done already
by a Dr. Ham^nd's Practical Catechism.
better Pen, I shall refer the Reader thither. But those yet leave men's
Compassions full scope to grow up to what greater height Gods grace and men's
exigencies shall advance them: And surely the latter may sometimes be such,
that it will become every Rich man not only to rifle his coffers, pour out
whatsoever his superfluites have there ammassed, but also to defalk much of his
own accustomed enjoyments, cause the Rasor to pass even upon his whole
Equipage, to cut off all excrescencies, all exuberant expenses, that so the
stream may run the fuller in that one channel which Gods providence thus cuts
out for it. Whether this may not be a proper season for it, I leave every
considering person to judge At the present I shall beseech every man to whom
God has given wealth, sadly to ponder how scandalous a thing it will be for
him who has been the Object of so great Bounty, to decline the being an Agent
in any; to discover himself to have sucked in nothing of the virtue, amidst such
an affluence of the commodities; and to defy the example of that Liberality,
by whose effects he lives. But withal let him consider the danger of it also,
how dreadful a guilt (and consequently vengeance) he draws upon himself, if he
shall defeat this so main end of his receipts. It is indeed a complication of
many crimes not only against man, but God also: I shall instance only in two,
most generally decried, and yet most eminently contained in it, Unthankfulness,
and Falsness.

8. God in his wisdom discerning that Equality of Conditions would breed
confusion in the world, has ordered several states, designed some to Poverty,
others to Riches; only annexing to the rich the care of the poor; yet that
rather as an advantage, then a burden, a seed of more wealth both temporal and
eternal. Now in this division of men, those on whom he has caused the better
lot to fall, can owe it to nothing but his gracious disposal; and therefore had
bin certainly obliged to submit to any the most difficult tasks he should have
dispensed with it. But now that in his great indulgence he has so tempered the
command, as to render it not an allay, but an enhancement of the mercy, he that
gives it only a bare tastless compliance, betraies himself to want a just sense
of it, but he that flatly resists it, is in the most transcendent degree,
barbarously ingrate. Nay I think I might have laid the charge higher, and
called it malice; for what beneath that can provoke a man thus to resist his
duty and interest together?

9. Nor is this all, it is also the greatest Perfidiousness: Every rich man is,
as I said before, Gods Steward, and particularly entrusted to provide for the
indigent parts of his family, such are the poor and needy. Now if he leave them
destitute, and suffer either his riot or covetousness to feed upon their
Portions, what more detestable falseness can be committed, not only in respect
of them, whose right he thus invades, but of God also, whose trust he abuses?
Many other enormities there are in Uncharitableness, which as so many misshapen
limbs concur to the making up this deformed Monster; but I shall suppose it
sufficient to have pointed out these two, which being the most profestly
contrary to ingenuity, I must hope will carry a very averting appearance ^o
those who so especially pretend to that quality.

10. To this positive part of duty, the being ^ich in good works, we find the
Apostle connects (...) negative. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that ^e rich in this
world that they be not high-minded, ^or trust in uncertain riches: And we need
not resort to implicit faith in the Author, to persuade us of the great
propriety and fitness of these cautions; it is too evident that Pride and
Confidence are diseases, that usually breed in ^ull and opulent fortunes, and
as they spring from the same root, so do they, like neighboring branches,
mutually shelter, and support one another. He that is high-minded, abhorres the
submission of any foreign dependence, and therefore gladly anchors on any thing
he ^an call his own; and thinking his wealth most properly so, he has as great
an aptness, as holy Job expresses an aversion, to make gold his ^pe, and to say
to the fine gold, thou art my confidence, Job. 31. 24. On the other side, he
that trusts in his Wealth, is by that fortified in his pride. It is Aristotle's
observation, that wealth makes contumelious and insolent; which I presume lie
inferrs not only from experience, but reason also; for the groundwork of
humility being the sense of impotence and defect, he that assumes a self
sufficiency, undermines that foundation, and in stead of it lays the Basis of
the quite contrary temper, all haughtiness and elation of mind. A memorable,
example of this we have in the insolent reflections of Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.
30. which had withal so dismal a consequent, as me thinks should like Lots
wife remain a perpetual monument to deter others from all approaches toward
the like vanity.

11. And certainly it is a most important concernment of rich men, to fence
themselves against this double temptation; to which purpose they can hardly
find a more complete armor, then what they may borrow from one short sentence
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. What have the that thou have not received? Let
them look on themselves as mere receivers, and then with what pretense can they
pride themselves in that wherein they are barely passive; Nay indeed if it be
thoroughly scanned, these receipts imply cause rather of shame then boasting; the
being filled from another hand, is a sure argument (and tacit reproach) of a
natural and original emptiness; and if God have dealt, so liberally with them,
they may collect it is in compliance not with their merits, but infirmities; his
having made them rich is a strong presumption, he saw them not prepared to be
innocently poor: And sure Pride must be a subtle Alchimist, that can hence
extract matter of vanity, and might with equal logic have persuaded the Jews
to glory in those indulgences, which were granted them only for the hardness of
their hearts.

12. In like manner if they reflect on their riches as received, it renders
them also a most unfit object of trust; for if they were given, they may also
be taken away. We hold all by that old tenure, which the Lawyers style Alodium,
because it is from none but God; and his gifts (of this kind at least) are
never so absolute, as to exclude power of revocation. He then that enjoys a
thing not upon right but bounty, must ask his benefactor how far he is to
presume on it: And if they would do so in this case, they would soon be
resolved how little confidence were to be reposed in Wealth. They may hear God
the great Patron tell them by Solomon, that riches make themselves wings and
fly away as an eagle, Pro. 23. 5. by Christ, that the Treasures which they lay
up here are liable to the Moth and r^st, and Thieves; and by the Apostle, that
they are uncertain riches. Nay indeed if they would but ask themselves their
own daily experience and observation, that would bear the same testimony;
Every day almost gives some renewed instance of it. What multitudes of
accidents are there to which men's goods are liable? a rough Wind, a
tempestuous Sea sinks at once the Merchant and his ship; an ill season, a
hungry soil eats out the Husbandman; and they who run not either of these
hazards, those whom neither the water nor the earth swallow up, a fire may yet
consume. And can there any security be fancied in that wealth, which is thus a
prey to each element single, and yet more often to them united in man, to whose
frauds or violences more have owed their impoverishing, then to any of the
former accidents. And now what greater infatuation can there be, then to place
a trust on that which is so fleeting and unsteady, to lean on a broken reed, or
in Solemons phrase to set ones eyes upon that which is not?

13. But if by an impossible supposition, we should imagine Riches to be as
Permanent, as they are indeed transitory, yet unless they had as well Strength
as constancy, they could with no reason be depended on. He that stays by his
friend to the last minute, if he have no power to assist him, is only a
spectator, not a reliever of his sufferings: And alas, how many miseries are
men subject to, in which wealth can give them no aid! Is a man afflicted in his
body with pain, the Indies are not a competent price for a minutes ease, an
hours sleep; Is he persecuted in his Name with reproach, it is not whole Ingots
of gold that will stop the mouth of Fame, nay oftentimes the obloquy is it self
merely the progeny of his wealth, that breeding envy, and envy detraction. But
if the sore lie yet deeper. if it be the Soul that suffers, that is yet
farther removed from possibility of relief this way; If it suffer as a slave
under the dominion of sin, no treasure can redeem from that vassalage: Wealth
does indeed too often by administering temptations strengthen those chains, but
it cannot break them, as appears too evidently by the number of such rich
bondmen. If it groan under the guilt of sin, labor under the terrors of an
accusing Conscience, alas gold is no balm to a wounded spirit: the luxuries
which that has supported may help to pierce, but it has no power to heal. Or
lastly, if the soul fall finally under the punishment of sin, there is no
commuting that penance, buying off that smart; Riches abused may indeed swell
the account, and multiply the stripes, but they can never bribe the remission
of any. The Wiseman has assured us this, Pro. II. 4. Riches profit not in the
day of wrath. Nor does this carry any opposition to the council of our Savior
Luke 16. 9. of making friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness; for he refers
not there to any natural or inherent property of riches, but only to that
extrinsick and accidental advantage may be made of them, proportionably to what
was said before of the unjust Steward whose dexterous managery was it that
rendered his Lords debts so useful to him, not that they had any proper innate
virtue to secure him from the necessity either of begging or diging; and
therefore we see Christ's words run not in an Annunciative, but an exhortatory
style, He tells us not that Mammon shall make us friends, but excites us to make
that our own care, and by a prudent disposure to make it subservient to an end
above its native efficacy; But all this is sure very reconcilable with that
natural impotency we have observed in it: wealth charitably disposed may have
excellent effects, but yet those are to be ascribed to the charity, not the
wealth, which still remains in its own essence the same unactive lump in the
Chest that it was in the Mine, like the heathen Deities unable to protect its
most zealous Idolaters; as a further instance whereof I may add that which will
Sound very like riddle, That riches cannot deliver even from present Want;
which yet is demonstrably true in all those rich Misers, whose bellies are
lank, while their coffers are full, a sort of Tantalized creatures, not
peculiar only to this latter age, for we find them described by Solomon,
Eclesiastes 6. 2. A man to whom God has given riches, wealth and honor, so
that he wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives
him not power to eat thereof. So unsignificant a thing is wealth, that without
the addition of a new power it enables him not to receive the least benefit
from it.

14. When all this is considered, what is there in wealth that can invite the
least confidence, since it appears so utterly unable to secure men in their
most important interests, nay to do that which it most immediately and most
colourably pretends to, the keeping them from want. And therefore he that will
not run himself upon that sad defeat of being disappointed in his trusts,
failed in his greatest exigents, must look out for some firmer ground whereon
to build. But alas, our soil affords it not: Al here below was long since
pronounced by one that wanted neither wisdom nor experience, to be Vanity; such
mutations and vicissitudes attend all sublunary things, that he that attempts
to erect any durable satisfaction on them, outdoes the folly of that absurd
architect Christ mentions, and builds not on the sand, but water; and in this
sense the world is still under a deluge, not so much dry ground, as where a
dove may rest her foot.

15. We are then driven by way of necessary refuge, to that which should be our
voluntary choice, to come home to the Ark to shelter our selves under his
wings, where alone we may securely rest, and according to the advice which the
Apostle subjoins to these cautions, to trust in the living God. And to do this
amidst all the seducements of Wealth, to see through all those mists which the
fumes of Plenty raise, and whilst they enjoy the gift, to confide only in the
Giver, is indispensably the duty, and should be the care of every one, to whom
S. Paul directs this charge, All that are rich in this world.

16. And such in the last place are to take notice of another branch of their
obligation, and that is to use that advantage which their Wealth gives them,
toward the exercise of Temperance; which indeed can never be known to be truly
such, but when there are opportunities and temptations to the contrary. He that
has nothing wherewith to maintain a Riot, leaves it doubtful both to others
and himself, whether his Abstinences be the effects of Poverty or Temper; but
he that has all the suel for Luxury, and yet permits it not to kindle, he
approves his Sobriety to be indeed his Choice, not his fate. And this is a most
excellent privilege of Wealth; and though it is to be doubted it scarce finds
room in most of our Catalogues, yet certainly it merits a principal place, as
being much the greatest of all those, which reflect only upon the Person
himself. This resisting of Temptations, is truly that Heroique courage worthy
of those that pretend to Honor, fit to denominate^a Gallant man: I wish those
who seek that reputation by many rash and unwarrantable Adventures, would here
entertain their youthful Ardors, this being a Field where they may be assured
never to want Combatants. One while Gluttony presents it self, armed with the
allurements of a full and delicate Table; and though one would think him but a
despicable Assailant, that has only the Kitchen for his armory, yet experience
shows us, those edgless weapons may vie with the keenest, for the mortalness of
their effects. At another time Drunkenness sends a Challenge by delicious
Liquor, cheerful and diverting Company, and that not without menace of infamy
to him, who shall own so much religious cowardice, as to fear to hazard his
Sobriety in the encounter. Sometimes again Lust attaques him with the piercing
darts, the killing glances of a prostitute Beauty. In the mean time Pride, the
most fly and treacherous of all the rest, is perpetually laying ambushes for
him in the adorations of his Flatterers, the vanity of his Attire, and
innumerable kinds of Excesses. And now what Knight Errant would wish for more
Encounters? or why should men range abroad to invite Quarrels, whilst they
tamely suffer such Troops of enemies to bid them daily defiance? It Is, they
say, a Maxim among the Swordmen, That he that has once been baffled, is ever
after an incompetent Challenger: I wish it might have this one sober
application, That men would suspend all other Duels, till they have righted
themselves on their Vices, and by some signal Conquests redeemed themselves
from that obloquy and defamation, which these mean, yet insulting Adversaries
have exposed them to.

17. Having showed what uses are duly to be made of Wealth, let us now look
back, and consider whether any of them be ordinarily discernible in Practice.
And here we shall meet with one sort of men, who stumble at the very threshold,
that fail in that first part of duty, on which all the rest depend: I mean
those who by a supine negligence suffer their Estates to moulder and consume
insensibly, for want of an easy inspection and oversight. Of such as these
former Ages have afforded instances, and doubtless the present also, though the
number of the luxurious wasters do now so overwhelm them, that they are the
less discernible. And though this seem to be the effect only of sloth, yet
certainly there are other concurrents to it, generally these two: First such an
overweening of their wealth, that they think it Inexhaustible; And secondly an
opinion that it is a mean and peasantly thing for a Gentleman to give himself
the trouble of looking after his fortune. The motives are too ridiculous to
deserve a confutation; but in the mean time it cannot but extort pity, to see
Families ruined by such vain whimsies: And what tolerable account can such a
Parent give to his beggered Offspring, to whom it is very likely he may
propagate the pride and sloth which made the mere managery of an Estate too
hard for him, and yet withal bequeaths them the sadder toil of getting one?
Nay, what account can he give to God, from whom he received it, in order to
several ends, if he thus at once defeat them all? 'Twas a Command to the Jews,
that they should not cut down Fruit Trees, though it were for so necessary a
use as to advance a Siege, Deuteronomy. 20: 19. But this is the hewing down that
Stock, from which so much good Fruit should spring, and that without any
pretense either of necessity or reason.

18 Our next view will present us with another sort of person, who as much
transgresses the duty of Contentedness in both the parts of it. It Is no
prodigy to see men, whom God has afforded the portion of the rich, scarce to
allow themselves that of the poor; so letting their eye be evil even to
themselves, because Gods is good. The Egyptians were such jealous Reverers of
those Creatures which they worshipped, that he that violated them was in danger
of stoning, Ex. 8. 26. So these men who have set up their Wealth for their God,
pay it so much veneration, that as they are impatient to have it invaded by
others, so they are afraid to offer the least violence to it themselves; they
have Inshrined it to receive their adorations, and it is now become sacrilege
(indeed the only one they scruple) to debase it to the supply of their
necessities: They are strange austerities which the Votaries of this Deity will
endure, even beyond the mortifications of the most rigid Ascetick, their whole
lives are a perpetual contradiction to all the appetites of Nature; yet alas,
that inferrs here no compliance with those of Grace, but as if they meant to
set up a Third party in the world, they equally oppose these. And now he that
thus oppresses himself, no wonder if he do the like to others, if he extort the
utmost that either power or fraud can wring from any. And that this work may
not be retarded, he is provided of variety of instruments for it. Sometimes
Bribery must give him a legal color to rob his neighbor; or if a Witness prove
a better penniworth then the Judge, Subornation shall do the business.
Sometimes Extortion shall prey upon a needy Creditor, and that not only with
the flower gnawings of the Canker, but with the more ravenous devourings of the
Vulture. Sometimes the Rack is brought out, and a poor Tenant fastened on it,
and there so streined and distorted, that he can never knit again to any
competent subsistence. Sometimes again a poor neighboring Prodigal shall be
spurred on to farther riot, fed with money, that so by a forfeited Mortgage he
may seize on his Estate. In a word, 'twere endless to reckon up all the engines
of rapine which this greedy Invader has in his magazine; and of such a one I
presume every man will pronounce, that he notoriously violates the precept of
Contentedness.

19. But though this be the grossest, yet is he not the only Transgressor;
there is also another more plausible sort, who though they do not thus seek to
increase their wealth at other men's costs, yet do it too much at their own;
whose Brains are mere forges of Projects, perpetually hammering out some new
Contrivance for gain, that continually travel in birth of some fresh
Improvement, suffer all the pangs and throws of a carking solicitude in
pursuit of it. I know this piece of Covetousness has better luck then the
rest, and passes for a creditable thing, under the specius name of Good
husbandry; but sure if it be broughly penetrated, it will appear no less
op^osite to Contentment then the former. Nor ^n that guilt be evaded by those
that say, they ^eek to advance their Fortunes, not out of the ^isers design of
hoarding up, but out of the ^ore generous purpose of living more splen^idly;
for sure he that covets more to spend, (...) as little contented in his
portion, as he that ^ovets more to lay up; he that thinks his Table ^oo scanty,
his equipage too low, is as far from being satisfied, as he that thinks his
land ^oo little, his bag too empty; so that it is apparent these arrows come
out of the same quiver, though they be shot at several marks

20. And between both these motives of gri^ing, no wonder if the duty of Alms
giving ^e crowded into a very narrow compass. That excellent virtue of Charity
has indeed much of the Image and impress of Christ upon it, ^ut the world has
given it a further kind of conformity with him then he ever designed, its
^rucifixion between Covetousness and Luxury, being the counterpart of his
hanging between the Thieves; there wants only one member of the parallel, the
breaking the legs of these Malefactors, which God knows our Soldiers, ^ay many
Armies of them have not bin able to do The many instances these times have
given of the sudden dissipation of men's Idolized ^eaps, have not yet so
disciplined the Worldling, as to persuade him to lay up his trea^ in heaven;
and the loud calls of God to we^ ing and mourning and girding with sackcl^ have
most preposterously been ecchoed b^ with the louder noise of men's revellings,
a^ wild jollities. And then they who thus desp^ the judgments of God, are very
unlikely compassionate the miseries of men, and I do^ there are many who thus
answer the charac^ of the unjust Judge, Luc. 18. that neither fear G^ nor
regard man, nay that far outgo him in inex^ rableness of temper: he was to be
wrought upon by importunity; but so petrified are these me^ bowels, that no
prayers nor tears can dissol^ them. It Is a much easier task to dig Metal o^ of
its native Mine, then to fetch it out of t^ covetous man's Coffer; the Earth,
though s^ hide, yet she guards not her treasure, it is a^ cessible to the
industry of any that will sear^ for it, but he like an Argus stands sentinel
abo^ his, and sounds an alarm upon the remot^ appearance of a poor suppliant;
with wh^ jealousy does he eye any that he can but fan^ to come upon that
ungrateful errand, and the how many arts has he to prevent the assaul^ Or if
by some extraordinary Charm all hi^ eyes have so slept at once, that he happen
to (...) surprised, yet he has so many weapons of d^fence, that the assailant
shall gain little b^ it, but the shame of an open repulse, being sure to find
him impregnable. As for the Voluptuary he has so many expensive lusts to main
tain, that he has difficulty enough how to gra^ie all them in the distribution
of his wealth; ^ey are competitors to each other, yet join (...) keep out that
which would be a common one (...) them all. He that grudges not the wildest
^ofusions on his wealth, yet thinks an Alms ^ill undo him; it is the grand
business of his ^e to contrive ways of expense, yet when ^y object of charity
presents one, he becomes ^rifty on the sudden, like the Sensitive plant ^rinks
at that touch, and that open hand of ^is clutches as fast, as if some
convulsion had ^ontracted it. Thus totally have men forgot upon what terms
their wealth was given them, and thereby like miserable Chemists, extract
^oyson out of Cordials, a Curse out of a Blessing. Riches were designed by God
to ^e subservient to that Compassion which he ^as implanted in humane nature,
but now ^hey are become the means of suppressing and ^radicating it; Rich men
look upon poor, ^s if they were creatures of another species, things wherein
they were perfectly unconcer^ed. It Is Strada's fancy, that there is such a
sympathy raised between two Needles touched by the same Loadstone, that persons
at the greatest distance may by the consent of their motion maintain a
correspondency: I shall not undertake for the truth of the Experiment, but
however methinks it is matter of reproach to us, that these inanimate creatures
should have so much observable accord, as to give pretense for such a
conjecture, whilst men who have so many undoubted principles of union both from
nature and grace, have quite extinguisted all effects of them. That too many
have so, there needs no other evidence then the many unsuccour'd extremities of
the Poor: For how else can it become possible, that one rank of men should
gluttonize, and another starve? that he that thinks it death to endure either
the want or moderation of a Meal, should never consider what are the gripings
of the still empty stomach; that he should without all regret see his own
humane nature pining and languishing in the person of his poor brother, whilst
in himself it is oppressed with the quite contrary excesses, and might be relieved
in both by a more equal distribution?

21. And now who can sufficiently deplore, the wants of the Poor, shall I say,
or rather the inhumanity of the Rich! This surely is the sadder spectacle of
the two; the one only suffers, the other sins; and that suffering too may end
in eternal refreshment, whereas the other in endless torment. Lazarus rests in
Abraham's bosom, when the uncharitable Glutton frie^ in perpetual flames: And oh
that this were thoroughly weighed, that they would consider that every degree of
unmercifulness they show to others, reverts with a rebounded force upon
themselves! Alas, it is not so much the poor man's body, as their own souls, that
sue for their alms; And whenever they shut up their ^owels of compassion from
the one, what do ^hey but (...), seal up Gods store^uses and treasuries from
the other? when ^hey deny the ^rumbs from their table, they ^eny themselves a
drop of water to cool their ^ngues.

22. But I fear this of Illiberality may pass ^or a moderate crime in this Age,
when so ^any are guilty of another so far transcending (...). For do we not see
diverse, who instead of ^bating their Excesses to relieve the Poor, do ^aintain
their Riot upon them? If the despe^ate Debts of poor Tradesmen were examined,
(...) doubt not this would appear a sad truth; it is become so fashionable a
thing to run into ^cores, and so unfashionable to pay them, that ^e is scarce
thought well bred, that has not bankrupted one at least of each Trade he deals
with: Their only care is to get credulous Merchants, who so long as they trust
stoutly shall have fair words, but if once their faith ^ail, then, as if the
Solifidian doctrine had stretched it self into Traffic as well as Divinity,
they are pronounced Reprobates, and as sollicitously avoided as the Separatist
shuns (...) person whom he is pleased to call carnal: Posterns and obscure
passages are contrived, ^on purpose to escape them; so that a poor Creditor
must give many days, nay months attendances, before he can so surprise a
Gentleman, as to come but to ask his own; and then the best return he usually
meets with, is some empty Promises, to bribe a delay; but sometimes he fares
much worse, and as if 'twere a crime not to starve silently, he is reviled and
reproached, and harsh and contumelious language become his only payment It has
been received as a Maxim, That we are all kind to our own creatures: But this
case shows it is no universal rule; for those who thus make poor men, are of all
others the most barbarous to them in their poverty. But let those who thus
shuffle off their Reckonings with men, remember that there will come a day,
when they shall not be able to decline their Account to God; And with what
horror and confusion must they appear at that Audit, when they shall be charged
not only with the mispending their own estates, but other men's, the having
added Robbery to unmercifulness?

23. If in the next place we shall reflect on the Apostles caution of not being
high-minded or trusting in uncertain riches, we must turn to our Bibles to be
satisfied there was ever any such charge given, there is so little of it to be
read in men's practices. Humility is a plant, that is carefully weeded out of
all rich grounds, accounted a mean degenerous quality, that like Treason
attaints the blood, and sorfeits Nobility. Gentlemen, though they are for the
most part very guiltless of the Pharisees abstinence, the fasting twice a week,
do yet transcribe the worse part of his copy, the thinking they are not like
other men; and believe it a justice they owe their birth to do so: They have
mounted themselves aloft, and looking down from those pinacles of Honor, all
below seem little and contemptible, creeping things of the earth, worms and no
men. I am not so for confounding of Qualities, as to exact they should choose
their Intimates and Companions out of the lowest rank; I know prudence as well
as pride has drawn a Partition Wall between them (though perhaps the later has
raised it to an unncessary height) but I wish it might be remembered, that as
the precept of Not eating Blood was designed not for its self, but as a hedge
against Murder, so that just distance which order recommends between the Noble
and the mean, is valuable only as a fence against base and ignoble practices,
true greatness consisting in despising not the persons, but the vices of the
vulgar; Yet here alas the sense is quite changed, and many who look the most
fastidiously on the one, will yet mix freely with the other; and while they so
are the highest in the opinion of their superiority, do yet stoop to the sordid
bestialities of the most abject of men, Nay, indeed this lure does sometimes
make many of them descend even from their punctilioes, and those who at another
meeting must have looked for no other treatment but what St. James describes,
Ia. 2. 3. stand thou there or fit here under my footstool, shall in the
rounds of good fellowship be equal with the best, such a Leveller is
debauchery, that it takes off all distinctions. But in the mean time how great
a shame is it, that such vicious motives shall have force enough to make them
thus degrade themselves, when all the Engagements of Christianity are not able
to do that which is much less to abate any thing of those tumors those swelling
conceits of their own greatness, or (in the Psalmist^ phrase) to make them know
themselves to be but Men.

24. Nor has the other branch of the caution any better success among them;
It Is in many of them too discernible, that they place that trust in uncertain
^iches, which they should repose only in the living God, so making his gifts
his rivals, and raising him a competitor even of his own bounty, For this we
need no other ways of probation, then only to examine, whither it is, that in
any case of difficulty or distress they make their earliest and most
importunate addresses, for there we may conclude them to fix the greatest
confidence. And I fear it is too apparent, that where wealth makes but any the
slightest pretenses, promises the least aid, though but remote, and at the
second hand, it has most of their applications. Thus in case of Disease, they
whose plenty enables them for the costlier methods of cure, is not their first
resort thither, do not their Fees fly faster then their Prayers? and are they
not much hastier to invite the Physician, then the Divine! Nay, indeed the
latter is scarce ever admitted, till the former have forsaken them, a shrewd
indication, where their prime hopes are built; so again in any disastrous
event, the first essay is whither money will heal the wound; He that is under
the displeasure of a Superior, seeks to appease by presents or buys the
friendship of a Blastus, Acts. 12. 20. to mediate for him; He that is brought
before a Tribunal, endeavors with the same golden Engine to draw off his
Prosecutor, to bend and incline his Judge; He whose Wealth makes him pursued as
a desirable prey, expects his safety even from that which is the original of
his danger; and as if like a Scorpion it alone could cure its own sting, tries
whether a part will secure the whole. And in the mean time no attempt is made
to call in God to their rescue, as if he were an idle unconcerned spectator of
humane affairs, or so inconsiderable an Ally, as not to be worth the care of
engaging him on their side. Nay even in their last and dreadfullest danger,
many seem not to quit their dependence on their wealth, some Testamentary
charities must then do wonders for them, and pass for all those fruits of
repentance, which should secure them from the wrath to come; Even those that
have drunk the blood of the poor, suffered the most of it to incorporate into
their Estates, think by disgorging some small part of it (which perhaps lies
crude, not yet so digested) in a Legacy to ease their consciences, so adapting
their restitutions to their rapines, only in this one respect, that those as
well as these are of another man's goods; they never commencing, till death has
disseized them of all propriety, as if the iniquity of the Fathers were in this
sense to be visited upon the Children. Thus their Wills become their only
passport, to convey them to Abraham's bosom, and by thus cajoling the poor at
parting, they trust to extinguish the clamors of all former oppressions, and in
spite of Solomon will hope, that Riches shall profit in the day of wrath. It
will not here be pertinent to inquire how many other objects of trust they
have, which divert them from that one, to which the Apostle directs them. It
may suffice in general to say, that none can be supposed indeed to trust on the
living God, but those who by sincere piety qualify themselves for his
protection; according to which measure it is to be feared many even of the
fairest pretenders will be excluded.

25. If now we proceed to the last part of the Rich man's Duty, the exercise of
Temperance, we may without an Augur divine the return of that Inquest; For it
having formerly appeared, that they turn that stream which should flow in
Charity, to make the fuller current for their Luxury, it is visible they are far
from designing any self-denial. But if that inference were not proof enough of
it, they daily give us ocular demonstrations: What studious provisions do they
make for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof? Romans 13. 14. Nature affords
not Meat delicate enough for their palats, it must be adulterated with the
costly mixtures of Art, before it can become Gentile nourishment; and in this
they are arrived to such a niceness, that Cookery is become a very mysterious
trade, the Kitchen has almost as many intricacies as the Schools. And the
quantity of their meat is not less extravagant then the kind; One that did but
examine their Bills of fare, would think the Dogs appetite were the epidemick
disease among them, if he did not consider they had Eyes to be fed as well as
bellies. Nor will they be so Ununiform, as not to have their Drink bear a full
proportion with their Meat; and 'twere well if it did no more, that their
Drinking had but those set hours of their Meals, that so there might be at
least some intervals and pauses in their Debauches, whereas now many persons
allow themselves no longer intermissions then may just qualify them for a new
Excess; recover their wits only so far, as may put them in capacity of losing
them again.

26. But besides these, there is another sort of provision for the flesh, of
which they are no less sollicitous, and which many buy in at very dear rates:
The embraces of a Wife are as nauseous to them, as Manna to the Israelites;
it is Variety they hunt after; and so they might have the Turks Sevaglio, they
would not stick to take his Mahomitanism withal; Nay if that were as agreeable
to their reason to believe, as to their inclinations to embrace, they would
certainly reckon it a considerable part of the prise, as that which to the
present possession superadds a liberal reversion of those brutish delights, and
would think they had made a very commodious bargain, to have so exchanged the
Christians present purity, and future heaven.

27. To all these excesses, that of their Apparel does perfectly correspond; so
much cost, so much business goes to it, that one may almost as cheaply and
easily rig out a Ship, as set out a Gentleman in his complete Equipage. How
many Artificers go there to the peecing him up! He that should assign him one
to each Limb, would much contract the number, which is indeed so great, that if
it were computed 'twould be found it constituted most of the Trades in a
Commonwealth. A strange disproportion, that the Little world should so much
outvie the Greater; and a lively instance it is of the multiplying faculty of
Vanity, that can improve Natures simple necessity of covering, to such an
exorbitant excess, and has nursed up the first Fig Leaves to such a luxuriant
growth, that the Hercynian Oaks which Mela tells such wonders of, are but a
kind of Pigmyplant to them that thus overspread the world, and from covering of
Shame, are grown to shadow and darken Reason it self, so creating a Moral
nakedness, whilst they hide a Natural.

28. To all the rest we may add their Sports and Recreations, the expensiveness
whereof is no way inferior to all the former: Gaming, like a Quicksand,
swallows up a man in a moment; and how many such Wrecks have these latter Ages
produced? Hawks, and Hounds, and Horses, etc. are somewhat slower devourers, yet
as they are managed by some, tend much to the same end: So that methinks such
men seem to make the same menace to their Estates, which Goliath did to David, 1 Samuel 17 44. I will give thee to the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the
field. Such vast numbers of them they have and those kept with such niceness
and curiosity, as if they had a design to debauch the poor animals, and infect
them with their luxury. It Is now no news in the literal sense, to have the
Childrens bread given to Dogs; and it may within a while be as ^ittle, to have
not only their children, but themselves want it: For Prodigality is of the
nature of the Viper, and eats out the bowels of that Wealth which gave it
birth; and Actaeon's fate was both Emblem and Story, to be eaten up with his
Dogs

29. We have seen now how much their Practice swerves from their Duty: Let us
next a little consider, whether they might not be happier, if they were
regulated by it. And first, a prudent oversight of their Estates is sure far
from being such an oppressing burden as some are willing to fancy it: For if it
be moderate, and such only I recommend, it is supposed to exclude all painful
and disquieting sollicitudes, and then it becomes only of the nature of a
Divertisement, helps them off with some of those spare hours, whose emptiness
becomes their load, and which they would else be in pain, and probably at no
small cost to dispose of. And I see not why it should not be full as pleasant
at the instant, to talk of their own affairs, as of other men's, (which yet are
the usual entertainment of those that neglect their own;) to take up Accounts
at home, as Reckonings at the Tavern: And I am sure it is much more so in the
consequences of it, as much as peace is above discord and tumult, plenty above
indigence and necessity.

30. Next for Contentment, universal consent superadds the labor of proving
that a happiness, it being unanimously accorded to be the Elixar and
quintessence of all that pretends to that title; to be to all these outward
things, as the soul is to the body, that which animates and inspirits them,
without which they are but dead, yea noisome carcasses, pressures instead of
enjoyments. This is the true Philosophers stone, that turns all it touches into
gold; the poor man is Rich with it, and the Richest poor without it. Whoever
therefore desires to improve his estate, let him begin his culture or husbandry
upon his mind, plant there this Tree of life, the shade whereof will yield him
a perpetual refreshment, 'twill make him always as Rich as he desires to be;
and he certainly knows not what he asks, that demands more.

31. The next duty, that of Liberality, may perhaps be thought not to have so
amiable an aspect; but it is only by those who look upon it through false
Glasses: men generally consider it as a piece of spiritual rapine, an Engine
framed by Divines to force open their Coffers, and plunder them without a War:
but if they would but turn the right end of the perspective, 'twould then have
a quite contrary appearance, they would discern that it is the means to
multiply, not diminish their store, a more profitable way of usury, then any
the greediest extortioner has ever found out. It Is a lending to the Lord.
Prove. 19. 17. who surely is the most solvent Debtor any can deal with, and one
who never makes scanty retributions. This I am confident might be attested
eventually true by all those who have attempted to make the experiment; the
only prejudice that can lie against their Testimony is the paucity of those
that have so attempted (and would to God men would conspire to solve that
objection) for were all charitable persons summoned to give in their accounts,
I doubt not it would appear their bounty had enriched not impoverished them I
am sure I have met with several remarkable instances of it, but never yet with
one to the contrary, and therefore if either reason or president may have
force, he that considers but rightly his own temporal Interest, cannot but have
appetite to this Duty, in respect of himself. And yet where there are any
bowels, this is but a faint inducement compared with that which arises from the
calamities of the persons to be relieved, The wants of the Poor are loud and
passionate Orators, such as cannot miss to work upon any, on whom covetousness
has not first wrought the unhappy Metamorphisis, of turning them into stone;
and these having once conveyed into a man's mind a compassionate regret, himself
groans under that pressure, which he sees crushing the other, and then what
can be more pleasant then by a seasonable charity to ease both. None doubts of
the Receivers delight, but sure that is short of the Givers, by how much the
interior sense is more subtle and acute then the exterior; would God those who
make it their trade to hunt after pleasures, would try but this One piece of
Epicurisme, and then I doubt not, they would acknowledge that all meat is
insipid, compared with that, which they eat with the poor man's mouth; the most
splendid apparel sordid and inglorious, in respect of that they were upon his
back; and all pleasures and recreations joyless and uneasy, balanced with
those transcendent delights, which attend the exercise of Christian liberality.

32. Nor have they in the next place any reason to suspect the Apostle
treacherous to their present interest, when he seeks to dispoyle them of that
either Pride, or confidence, which their riches are apt to create. For the
former it is certain all haughty persons may very properly interrogate
themselves in that form, we find Wis. 5. 8. What has Pride pr^fited us, or
what good has riches with our vaunting brought us? It would surely puzle the
most experienced man to define what there is in Pride, that can afford any
felicity; The utmost that can be pretended is that it is a lively cheerful
thing to have good thoughts of ones self, but he that can in earnest make this
plea for Pride, does in justice owe as fair an encomium to Bedlam, for
according to this measure that contains the happiest people, there being those,
that are the most highly rapt in the opinion of their own excellencies Yet sure
we should judge him in good Election for the place, that should look upon it
with appetite. But admit this might indeed pass for a pleasure, yet it is the
parent of a far greater uneasiness, and like a carcass breeds a worm, that
devours it self; For he that looks on himself with such reverence, exacts that
all others should do so too, and when he fails in that aim (as none so
frequently does, as the proud) what disquiets and impatiencies is he under,
such as infinitely overwhelm all the pleasure of his vain complacencies; A
little disrespect from Mordecai is able to evacuate all Hamans prosperity; such
a cheat and impostor is Pride, that whilst it pretends to exalt, it debases
whilst it elevates a man above others, it really subjects him to them, puts him
in their power to torment and cruciate, and whilst it makes show of advancing,
it is but in the same manner that the Rack extends the stature by dislocating
the joints. And then I hope 'twill be no unfriendly office to persuade men, to
keep themselves from that engine of pain, or to recommend to them such an
humility of mind, as may preserve them in that security and composedness, which
is fundamentally necessary to all true happiness.

33. The very same judgment is to be made of the other branch of the caution,
the not trusting in uncertain riches, but in the living God, which is most
visibly every man's present concernment, he that can entertain a doubt of it,
let him but fall into the hands of some treacherous or but impotent person,
that shall in some important affairs betray his trust, or deceive his hopes,
and then let him tell me whether it be not a man's immediate and most pressing
interest, to build his confidences on the rock, not on the sand. Nothing but
the amazing exigencies of a sinking man, can excuse the folly of catching at
reeds; but he that should deliberately elect such supporters, would be thought
as mad, as he is sure to be miserable. Yet this is but the faint and imperfect
emblem of him who rests upon his wealth, whereas on the other side he that
shelters himself under the shadow of the Almighty, is possessed of a most
inexpugnable fortress; for how can he fail of security, that has Omnipotence
for his guard, or be deluded in his trusts, that depends on Truth it self? Let
these so distant states be compared, and then sure I shall not need to
anticipate any man's judgment, but may leave him to pronounce on which side his
Interest, as well as Duty lies in this particular.

34. Lastly, Temperance also puts in her claim to Pleasure, which I presume
those will be sure to resist, who place that wholly in the satisfaction of the
sensual appetite; yet I believe one might take even these men in such a
season, when they should be forced to give up their verdict for it. Come to the
Glutton when he is laboring under the load of an overcharged stomach; to the
Drunkard when his mornings qualm is revenging on him his last nights debauch;
to the lustful person, when the torment of his bones admonish him of the sins
of his flesh, and then ask them whether Temperance be not more pleasant then
its contrary. I can scarce think the Devil has any such stout Confessors, but
will then betray his cause. But this virtue is in it self too amiable to need
any of these foyles to illustrate it; the pleasure of subduing a lust, of
denying an appetite, is not only nobler, but greater then any is to be had in
the most transporting moment of satisfing them. Every man will call him a
bruit, that when an Enemy is in the field loses the opportunity of a glorious
victory, and exposes himself to certain Captivity, rather then forsake his
liquor, or other sordid pleasure. And this is just the decision of the present
case, our lusts are our mortallest Enemies, and every time they assault us,
it is in our choice either by resisting them to gain a signal conquest, or else
by stooping to those despicable cures they hold out to us, to be vanquished by
them He that chooses the last, if he have any shadow of pleasure, it is only that
of a Beast, (like a horse who though he has indeed the satisfaction of
receiving meat, yet he also takes the bridle, yea the whip too from the same
hand) It Is the former only, that is the pleasure of a man, which I suppose
sufficient to evince to which the difference belongs, for sure none can think
God has been so unkind to his own image in humane nature; as in the
dispensation of felicity to assign the larger share to the Bruits. And
therefore in this particular as well as the rest we may conclude, that he is
not only the most pious but the most happy person, that makes the right uses of
his wealth.

SECT. VI. Of the third Advantage, that of Time.
1. LEt us now proceed to the third advantage, that of Time, which though men
do often so industriously wast, as if it were rather a burden then an
advantage, yet the differing estimates they make of it, when it is near
expiring, the passionate Deathbed wishes of a few days reprieve, witness that
it has a real value; For were it an empty useless thing, it would not then
begin to appear considerable, when all other vanities grow in contempt with us.
The unhappiness of it is, that men learn to prize it, as they do most other
good things, rather by the want, then the enjoying, buy the skill of trading
with the loss of the Talent, which should maintain the traffic, and then only
come to account it a treasure, when they can no longer dispose it to any
benefit; and that disposing alone is it that can render it truly valuable. It
is therefore a most necessary providence to learn this art of improvement, this
piece of spiritual husbandry, without which a man's self becomes that accursed
soil, the Apostle mentions, Heb. 6. 8. whose end is to be burned. Let us
therefore a while examine what are those employments of our Time, which may
render it most fertile to our present comfort, and future account.

2. Every man says (though perhaps few consider) that our time here is but a
prologue to Eternity else where, and that the condition of that eternity,
whether happy or miserable, depends upon the well husbanding of this time; That
therefore and that only can be the right managery of it, which tends to make
our future estate as happy, as it is sure to be lasting. To this purpose God
has chalked us out some great lines of Duty, from whence so many lesser do
arise, as will, if we will permit them, twist and wind themselves with every
hour of our lives. And though these duties are in the kind of them obligatory
to all conditions of men, yet frequenter Acts of them are expected from those,
whose Qualities and fortunes gives them more vacancy from secular toils.

3. For certainly it is not to be fancied, that God who has put an active
principle into our nature, should industriously provide for the suppressing its
operations in any, devote such a Select number of men, as an Hecatombe to be
offered up to Idleness; and yet much less can it be thought, that he should so
promote that iniquity, which he professes to hate, as to design them to the
pursuits of that, Manumit them from labor, to leave them freer for vice. And if
neither of these can be supposed, if their leisure were not indulged them
either that they might do nothing, or do ill, there remains only a third end
imaginable, and that is the doing good; (For as for Sports and Pastimes, the
best of them come so near to Idleness, and the worst of them to Vice, as the
one is not to be allowed any, so the other no considerable part of their time.)
Now because none is good but one, that is God, Mar. 10. 18. we can take our
measures of good actions only from his prescription; and so those which he has
commended as such to Mankind in general, point out to this particular rank of
men the nature of their Exercises, as their especial Vacancie and leisure does
the higher degrees of them.

4. And first those of Piety toward God justly challenge a great share of
their Time: For whereas God may seem to have limited and confined the poor man's
zeal, by that rule of preferring mercy to themselves before sacrifice to him,
he does by exempting the rich from those necessities tacitly require their
devotion to swell up to some proportion with his bounty to them, who being
freed from those weights wherewith others are clogged and encumbered, even
nature it self suggests the expectation of their soaring higher; He has put
them at a distance from the meaner cares and sollicitudes of life, as if he
were jealous those might prove his rivals, and keep them from growing into a
closer intimacie with himself. And shall this design of love be defeated? and
when he has thus secured himself from one sort of Competitor, shall more and
baser be sought out, every the triflingest and vilest Entertainment be courted
to come and supplant him? This were indeed to answer that odious character of
the Adulteress, Ezekiel. 16. 34. which was not solicited, but did solicit. And
those that can make such unworthy and provoking returns to so endearing a
kindness, evince themselves destitute not only of grace, but of all degrees of
common good nature: For when he so projects for their familiarity and converse,
what can be more inhumane and ingrate, then thus scornfully to decline it? Yet
under this charge all those will certainly fall, who do not employ (nay devote)
every day some considerable part of this their vacant time to the keeping up
their intercourse with God, by Reading, Prayer, and Meditation.

5. In the next place, Themselves put in for a part: But here I mean not those
brutish sensual selves, which have in many (like Pharaoh's lean kine) devoured
the nobler and more excellent; but it is the more divine and sublimated part of
them, on which their time is to be laid out; and here they can never want
business, that being in several respects a very proper object of their
diligence. For first, their Understandings, how clear and vigorous soever,
attain not their height at once, are not like Adam created in a state of
maturity and perfection, but like his degraded posterity make gradual motions
toward it, advance by several steps and degrees of proficiencie; nor can we in
this life ascend to such a Non ultra, as excludes a possibility of growth. So
that no advantage of Education can supersede the use of After-industry, that
being still able to make farther improvements, bring in new accessions to their
Knowledge: And this is so inviting an entertainment, as may very reasonably
expect their companies some hours of the day in their Studies.

6. But though this be a considerable, yet is it not the weightiest part of
that care they owe themselves. For as the Soul considered in its Intellect, may
thus become their Pupil, so in its Morals it has often need to be their
Patient: For though in its Original institution it was perfectly pure and
healthy, yet by inhabiting in this pesthouse the Flesh, it has contracted much
of its contagion; and by how much the more delicate and refined its composition
is, so much the more mortal are the diseases to which it is subject; It will
therefore require a close and wary attendance. A Physician that has a nice and
tender Patient, must be very assiduous in his care, observant of all symptoms,
watchful against all accidents. And so certainly should men be here; they
should make daily observations how their ghostly strength increases or decaies,
what Humor most predominates, whether Choler boil up into rage, Phlegm freeze
into sloth; whether the Sanguineness of their temper make them lustful, or the
Melancholy revengeful, and accordingly apply their spiritual Purgatives, the
Baths, or the Palaestra, prescribe rules of of Diet and Exercise: and doubtless
whoever makes these daily strict inspections into himself, will by the
inestimable benefit he receives from it, be taught how great a blessing his
Time is, and how much a greater to have grace thus to employ it.

7. But though a Man's self be a Province wide enough to take up a good part of
his time, yet must he not so ingross it, as to defraud his Neighbor, who has
also a right to share in it. God having made man after his own Image has (as
part of that) stamped upon him the Bounty and Communicativeness of his nature:
And therefore when we live wholly to our selves, we raze and deface that
Impress; and when it is remembered that the heinousness even of Murder is by God
pronounced to arise from the violation of His Image, Genesis 9. 6. parity of
reason must conclude this no light guilt. Nor is it only our Goods we are to
impart (for that were a very partial Transcript of that Bounty we are to
imitate, which gives us so much besides) but in general whatever other Ability
we have by which our neighbor may receive advantage; and so a man has as many
imploiments of his time, as he either finds or can make opportunities of doing
good to others. I say make; for sure since God has constituted Love to our
neighbor one of the fundamental laws to Mankind, we are not to look upon it
only as an accident or casualty, but as a main and diliberate business of our
lives; not refer it wholly to chance whether ever we shall do an act of this
kind, or no, but industriously seek out and improve occasions. Thus we find the
Liberality of our Blessed Lord represented to us in the parable of the great
Supper, Luke 14. 16. where there was not only liberal provisions made for such
as would come in, but importunity used to draw them, particular invitations
made to the poor and the maimed, the halt and the blind; and when that brought
not in Guests enough, the Highways and Hedges were to be ransacked, and a
general Press, as it were, made of men, to receive not the Earnest-penny of
Death, (which is usually the signification of our Pressmoney) but the Antepast
of Eternal Life. Oh that all those who pretend to Greatness of Mind, would
copy out this Munificence, that they would prevent men's desires, and invite
them to come and be obliged by them. For want of this, many occasions of doing
benefits are lost; the modesty of some, perhaps the pride of others, averts
them from requesting those assistances they most need: It were therefore the
noblest Study a Gentleman could entertain himself with, to search the various
Wants of those within his sphere; but then he must be sure to do it with a
candid design, the more opportunely to apply himself to their aid; he must not
treacherously inquire, who wants knowledge, to deride, but instruct them; not
hunt out a debauched person, to make him his Companion, but his Convert; not
find out quarrels to foment, but compose them; in a word, not pry into other
men's concernments, like a busie-body, but a Friend; not to comply with his own
curiosity, but their need. And now he that pays a just Tribute of his Time to
these three grand Duties, will (when the other dues to Nature, temporal
Affairs, and necessary Civilities are deducted) not have much to sacrifice
either to Idleness or Vice, but will rather think he wants Time then Business.

8. But alas, the full leisure they generally find for the direct contrary
employments, witnesses too irrefragably that they are not thus taken up. It is
true indeed, we find God often in their Mouths, but it is rather in Oaths,
then Prayers; as if they meant their profanations should be the only testimony
that they believed a Deity. How many are there such professed Votaries to
Bacchus, That their Knees are reserved only for him, never to be bent but in
drinking of Healths; that seem to have enacted to themselves the prophaner part
of Darius's Law, Dan. 6. 7. that of asking no P^tition of God, only herein
out-vying him; that their's is for an indefinite, not limited time, who reckon
saying of Prayers among those pedantick tasks of their childhood, which expire
with the Rod and Ferula, and can never think fit to debase their more Manly
state to it, unless perhaps a restless night may force them to call it in to
supply the place of a more usual and pleasing Anodyne. Whether this be not the
pitch of many Gentlemen's Devotion, I appeal to any that observes their practice.

9. Nor have they much more to do in the Library, then the Oratory, unless it
be stored with Romances: Any deeper sort of reading is as formidable to them,
as the Mines or Galleys; nor do they without wonder look at those who can
voluntarily set themselves to tug at those Oars: But Divinity is beyond all
others under prejudice with them, decryed not only as a crabbed, but ungentile
study; so that upon pain of Reproach, none are to know more of it, then may
just qualify them to deride it; or read the Bible to any other purpose, then
to enable them to blaspheme God in his own style. If these men may be said at
all to converse with God, it is in the same manner, that the Pharisees did with
our Savior, with the insidious design of entangling him in his talk, Matthew.
22. And sure the more time is thus spent, the worse.

10. Proportionably to this they acquit themselves of the other parts of this
Duty; that time which they should bestow either in preventing or curing their
spiritual Maladies, they lay out wholly in contracting or increasing them; they
have made a most strict league with the Flesh, and like faithful Confederates
they omit no endeavor to strengthen its Party, to supply it with fresh forces,
the expense of their whole day is managed wholly in order to that end. Thus
that they may be sure to keep their Lust high and vigorous, they give it a
nourishing breakfast of Sloth in the morning, a full meal of Gluttony at noon,
besides multitudes of collations in obscene Discourse and Fancies, all the day:
And with these Auxiliaries, it need not doubt to maintain the Field against
poor macerated Chastity. So again, lest Sobriety should happen to surprise
them, and gain but the honor of one Day, how vigilant are they to give it the
first assault? scarce a day that they draw not up in Battalia against it, and
seldom miss giving it a total Rout; and if Sleep like a Mist befriend it to
steal upon them in the morning again, yet that little Success is but a
preparation to a more signal Defeat in the afternoon, which is with many, a
time allotted wholly to these skirmishes; perhaps the chase followed all night,
nay* pursued so far by some, till an habitual Sottishness save them the labor
of these Quotidian Combats. Nor is their Pride so affronted, as to be forgot in
the distribution of their time, a good scantling of it is cut out to its use;
some in contriving and designing their Clothes, and some in putting them on;
some in admiring themselves, and some in projecting to be admired by others;
some in hearing flatteries, and more in reflecting and ruminating upon them.

11. As for those broken parcels of Time, which are not thus devoted to these
or some other set and solemn Sensualities, they are gleaned up by Sports and
unsignificant pastimes; nay, even some who abstain from the former, do yet so
wholly abandon themselves to the latter, that their lives become utterly
unprofitable. Under this number I have no intention to include all who allow
themselves Recreations; I know some divertisement is so necessary both to the
Body and Mind of a man, that if it keep within moderate bounds, it is but a
just debt to himself, and cannot fall under any ill character; but that which
is reprehensible in this matter is the excess and inordinacy of it, the making
that a business, which should be but a diversion: And this we see too usual
with many, who absurdly stretch this privilege of their Gentility, even till
it break; pursue their sports of Hawking and Hunting, etc. so vehemently and
assiduously, that ere they are aware, they adopt these their Callings; never
considering that a Faulconer or Huntsman is indeed as mean a Vocation, as those
they most despise. But whatever other pastimes of this nature any man suffers
to usurp his time, he does in it extremely reproach himself, tacitly
confesses, That he is unfit for generous and manly employments, and calls
himself Child, while he thus trifles and plays away his days.

12. I know not whether I may rank the great and deep Gamesters in this File;
for though the nature of their employment belong to it, yet there are such
considerable ruinous effects of it, as seem to place it in the number of more
serious Ills And indeed, though Custom has called it Play, yet the many
anxious fears and uneasy Commotions which usually attend it, evince the great
impropriety of the Title, and would more reasonably have given it a name of the
direct contrary importance. But as feigned names are commonly an art of
concealing persons, so this Trade assumes the style of Divertisement, indeed to
disguise its true original, which undoubtedly is Covetousness: For what
imaginable cause can there be assigned, besides the desire of Winning, that
should make men venture what they are so unwilling to loose? It is certain, he
that plays for a Piece, has as much of the divertive part, as he that stakes a
thousand; and were that all were designed, men need not, and certainly would
not so profusely overbuy what offers it self at so much a cheaper rate. I know
this is a motion men think too sordid to own, but would God they would once
learn (in this better sense) to revere themselves as well as others, and
despise to be prevailed on by what they are ashamed to avow: But the event
ordinarily speaks it as great a Folly, as Meanness, of which there are too many
sad instances in the shipwrackt Fortunes of these Adventurers; and indeed there
is nothing wonderful in it, but that men will be so mad as to run the hazard:
For that being supposed, it is not at all strange to see them sink under it;
for a man has here to deal not with Chance alone (which yet were but a tickle
bottom to imbark in) but with such combinations of Deceit, that even good
Fortune it self will not secure him; so that he that has not learnt to Plough
with the same Heifer, is like to make but sad Husbandry of it; and even those
that have, if they happen to get some few good Crops, yet they quite wear out
the soil with them, forfeit that Reputation with all considering men, which
should let them in to farther opportunities, and leave themselves to live not
so much upon their own Wits, as other men's Follies. It is true indeed, that
has in these latter days proved a pretty large Common to graze on, and some
have seemed to thrive well upon it; but generally such Cattle meet at last with
a pinching Winter, which leaves them as bare and meagre, as ever. In short,
Cheating has usually a reflexed efficacy, and deceives none more then those
that use it; yet such a stroke has it now got in Gaming, that in most
Companies it leaves men only this miserable choice, Whether they will be
active or passive in it, which methinks should be enough to awake men, as
immoderate Tyrannies use to do, to vindicate their Liberties, and reduce Gaming
from this exorbitancy to its Primitive use, make it cease to be a Trade, and
become a Recreation; and that too bounded within such just limits, that it may
not incroach on those hours which should be destined to greater concernments.
But as it is, between this and the rest, either Impertinencies or Vices, all
their time is so pre-ingaged and fore-stalled, that their most important
interest is left forlorn and neglected; they have as little leisure as Will to
consider the poor Soul, or scarce to remember that they carry any such trifle
about them.

13. And now they that thus forget God and themselves, no wonder if they afford
little consideration to their brethren; they will not be guilty of such an
Indecorum, or deny the Body of Sin its exact symmetry, by making this part
unproportionable to the rest, and therefore they either allow no part of their
time to others, or do it to such inverted perverse purposes, as makes the
payment worse then robbery. Thus many bestow Visits on others not out of any
purpose of kindness, but either to trifle away their own time, or to make
observations, what they can spy of ridiculous to entertain their laughter. A
mystery the London-visitants are generally well read in, who have put this
business long since into a settled course; so that the discoveries of one Visit
sets them in a stock of defaming, backbiting discourse for the next, and so
successively ad infinitum. So again, many who call themselves Gentlemen* much
to the reproach of that title, if they can find out a young Heir of much wealth
and little prudence, how officious, how diligent are they in attending him?
watching him as gladly as a Vulture does the fall of a Carcass, till they find
an advantage to rook him at Play, entangle him in Suretiship, or perhaps betray
him to some mean and unequal Match. So if they hear but of a beautiful Woman,
what contrivances, what designs do they lay, first to see, and then to corrupt
her; make it a business to themselves, as well as a trade to their agents and
factors, to spring such game? And upon such occasions as these can liberally
sacrifice their Time, of which when any Charitable office would borrow from
them but some few minutes, they are then such busy persons, they can by no
means afford it: A Nabals blunt and churlish refusal, or at best a Felix's
put-off to a convenient season, are the usual returns to such motions. But to
anticipate the Proposal, to go in quest of such Opportunities, looks with them
like a piece of Knight-errantry, has so little of their practice, that it
scarce escapes their scorn.

14. And now what a heavy Bill of Indictment is like one day to be brought in
against them, when God, their Souls, and their Neighbors shall all join in the
Charge! Oh that they would seasonably consider how sadly obnoxious they are to
it, and that condemnation which will inevitably follow it; that so they may,
according to Christ's council, Mat. 5. 25. agree with these adversaries while
they are in the way, and by yielding to each of them for the future a just
portion of their Time, compound the business, stop the Process against them.
That they would remember, that of all their prodigalities, this of their Time
is the most desperate, such as is most impossible to redeem, and yet that
wherein they are of all others the deepliest concerned. And this they would
certainly be convinced of, if their Aerie fancies could but so condense into
Earth, as to bring them into any acquaintance with their Beds of dust, give
them some foretaste of their Dying terrors: For let them but sadly think what
they would then give for some few of those Days they now study to fling away,
and they cannot choose but infer the necessity of being better Husbands. We
read in Scripture of the Demoniacks dwelling among the Tombs; but the Devil has
sure changed that habitation; for, those whom he now Possesses he permits not
to converse at all there, as knowing it is the properest preparative to his
dispossession: And doubtless it would be the most powerful Exorcism, as of all
others, so of this Evil spirit (this filching Devil, that thus steals from men
their precious hours) often to descend into the Vault or Charnelhouse, and by
serious consideration how short their Time is, to enforce upon themselves a
care of redeeming it.

15. Nor need they fear, that to redeem their Time, they must sell their
Pleasures, give up themselves to a joyless state of life; for though it is true
they must resign their counterfeit, they shall have real Delights in exchange;
they must part with their Glass, but shall have Gold in stead of it; and as
none but a rude Indian will repine at that bargain in the Literal, so none but
a ruder Christian can dislike it in the Moral sense. For in the first place, he
that imploys his time in conversing with God, is not only more honorably and
more profitably, but also more pleasantly busied then he can possibly be any
other way. We all say, That God is the center of Felicity; but he gives himself
the lie, that does not withal confess, that the closer acquaintance we have
with him, the nearer approach we make to happiness: For who ever believed the
Sun to be the Fountain of heat, and yet feared to freeze by drawing near its
Rays? Indeed none but the downright Atheist can with any tolerable Logic*
dispute the pleasantness of this Duty: For can any whose Faith has set up a
God, suffer their fancies to dress him like a Fiend? Put on him such unlovely
shapes, as may beget aversion, defer them from approaching to him? Can they
call him a Deity, to whom they will not attribute so much as they will to every
ingenuous man, the honor of being good Company? This is to be not only
profane, but absurd; and if there be any of so short Discourse, I suppose him
incapable of conviction by Argument; the common Proverb has assigned him his
Teacher, viz. Experience; let him by frequent, yet reverent Addresses to God,
grow into some familiarity with him, bring himself within distance of receiving
his refreshing Influences, and then he will discover how very unkind he has
been to himself in thus long holding off. In Humane Conversations we use not to
find the gust and relish of them, till we arive to some degree of freedom;
they that converse as strangers, are under constraints and uneasiness; and
certainly the main cause of that disgust men have to this Spiritual
intercourse, is their unaccustomedness to it: They address to God perfectly as
strangers, now and then pay him a slight Visit, as it were by way of formality
and Complement; and then no wonder if it be neither satisfactory to God nor
themselves: But then it is sure great injustice to defame that as unpleasant,
which becomes so only by their own ill managery; To say there is no water in
the Well, only because they neglect to provide a Bucket for the drawing of it
up.

16. In the next place it is sure, their Souls mean them no malice, in exacting
part of their Time. For first, what they bestow in improving and exalting their
Understandings, does not only bring them in vast advantages in the end, but
affords them also very fair accommodations by the way: Learning yields such
variety of agreeable entertainments, that like the Manna in the Wilderness it
adapts it self to every man's taste, he that likes not one sort may fit himself
with another; and sure he must have a strangely vitiated palate, to whom none
of them will relish. I can scarce think Nature has produced any thing so
distempered; but men take up general and implicit prejudices, and will look on
Books in no other notion but as Taskmasters, whereas if they would but consider
them as Companions, they could not miss of one kind or other, to find a
pleasant conversation among them.

17. As for that portion of their Time which is spent in attendance on the yet
more spiritual part of them, it is rather a gift then a robbery, to help them to
such a way of expense. Ingenuous men think it a prize, when they meet an
opportunity to rescue from the sullage of time any thing that carries the stamp
of ancient worth and Nobility: But this is a piece of the greatest antiquity,
of the noblest, yea divinest Impress; how can men's hours be better laid out,
then in restoring it to its primitive luster, in wiping off that soil wherewith
the steam of boiling passions has obscured it, and by disburdening it of those
loads of noxious humors under which it labors, like good Physicians recover it
from a languishing, infirm, to a vigorous athletique habit: And sure the
satisfaction of this must far exceed all other entertainments. Indeed that
which is usually taken up in stead of it, can with no justice pretend to any
tolerable complacencie: No man envies his felicity, but contemns his sordid and
abject spirit, that picks out the basest and unworthiest company; And shall it
here pass for pleasure to consort only with the plebeian part of himself, those
sensual Appetites, which are the Common people of this Little world, to spend
all his time in treating and Caressing of these, and in the interim let the
Soul, which is of so noble an extraction, so excellent endowments, stand by
neglected, nay be trodden to death in the crowd of this vulgar rabble,
Certainly this is a Tragedy, that no man could see upon the Stage without
indignation; yet God knows, this is it men daily act over with applause to
themselves. Would God they would once shift the Scene, and let the oppressed Soul
have its season of triumphing; doubtless they would find it more pleasant to
share in its conquests then in its ruin. We read indeed of some Nations, that
have by the rites of a barbarous religion been forced to make Humane
sacrifices; yet we find not that they had so slaughtered Humanity it self, as
to make it matter of delight: And has our Civility so far outdone their
Barbarism, that it shall be pleasure to do that in spite of our Religion,
which they did in obedience to theirs? To butcher the Man within us, and leave
nothing but our outward Form and inward Guilt to difference us from Beasts? He
that disclaims this, must necessarily confess the pleasure lies on the other
side, in rescuing the Spirit from the usurpations, yea tyranny of the Flesh;
and consequently, that the Time he thus bestows is not lost, but improved to
his own greatest present, as well as future advantages.

18. The like may (in the last place) be said of that part of it which is laid
out to the benefit of others, which is that which brings us to taste the most
delicious of humane delights, the pleasure of Obliging being of all those the
most ravishing and transporting: And for this we need not the verdict of
Christianity, the Philosopher attests it as well as the Divine, nay it is so
received a truth, that scarce any man will avow so much ill nature as to resist
it in discourse, how much soever his practice disowns it. Indeed this is a
pleasure of so exalted, so quintessential a kind, that what Herod's auditors
said in flattery of his Oration, we may say in truth of this, It Is the delight
rather of a God then a man. That Sovereign Being, though he were eternally
happy in himself, yet as if he had wanted of his complete felicity, whilst he
enjoyed it alone, was pleased rather to create, then want objects of his
goodness: And a pleasure to which God himself has given such an attestation, as
to make a World in order to it, sure cannot, without the most impious
contradiction of his choice, be despised by man. And certainly it is none of the
least of those benefits he has vouchsafed our nature, that he has given us a
capacity of it, by affording us those powers by which we may advantage and
oblige one another; so pointing us out a course, whereby we may not only
innocently, but successfully entertain Lucifers design, of being like the most
High: It really makes Men what the Heathens vainly fancied their Heroes, even
Demy-gods. O that those who think it Noble to be aspiring, would thus verify
the opinion, by terminating all their wishes and endeavors in this one Generous
Ambition; and then it is sure they would not need to be told the happiness of
this so Deifying an employment!

SECT. VII. Of the fourth advantage, that of his Authority.
1. IN the fourth place we are to consider the Gentleman's advantage, in respect
of his Authority over those that relate to, or depend on him: And this, if
rightly managed, is of excellent use, though as capable of being perverted, as
any of the former. He who has secular ties upon men, may often, by those cords
which bind their worldly interest, draw them to a consideration of their
spiritual. A Tenant who thinks his livelihood concerned in the good Will of his
Landlord, a Pensioner whose subsistence rests upon the bounty of his Patron,
will strive to model themselves to such a form, as may best suit the
inclinations of the person they desire to endear; they are usually Wax to him,
that are Flint to others: But then, as variety of Seals make differing
Impressions, so this flexibleness of theirs may be either abused to ill, or
improved to good; this Wax may receive the image of a Beast or an Angel. It is
therefore the duty of those who are possessed of this advantage, to use it to the
impressing not of Vice, but Virtue; to contrive how they may most effectually
discountenance the one, and encourage the other; and this they may doubtless
have frequent opportunities of toward either of those relations forementioned.

2. But to none so often as to their Domestics and Menial servants; these are
always so much in their road, that they seem to be marked out by God as their
most peculiar Province: Every Master has so much of the Prophet, that he is set
as a Watchman, Ezekiel. 3. 17. over his Family, and ought as jealously to observe
the approach of any Vice toward it, as a Sentinel does that of an Enemy. It Is
a very pernicious error for men to think themselves no otherways concerned in
their Servants, then they are in their Horses or Oxen, to look upon them only
as another species of Working-cattel, and so they do their business, care not
how errant Brutes they be: whereas they should remember, that they with
themselves are Common servants to the one Great Master, and that the
subordination of the one to the other is but the wise Oeconomie of their Lord,
who has (as in great Families we see it usual) constituted the one as Stewards
or Supervisors, to regulate the rest; and then 'twill appear a piece of
enormous unfaithfulness, to neglect this charge. To avoid which guilt, it will
concern Gentlemen to have a sedulous care over those that are thus entrusted to
them, to make strict inspections into the manners of their servants, and
accordingly to apply instructions, and admonitions, reproofs, or
encouragements. And that they may not transcribe Pharoahs Tyranny of exacting
brick without straw, require the superstructure of Christian lives, where there
wants the necessary foundation of Christian knowledge, they must provide that
none under their charge be destitute of the means of laying that groundwork, of
knowing so much of Religion as may bring them into an acquaintance with their
duty. But to give life to all these endeavors it is indispensably necessary for
them to avow such a Love to piety and virtue, and such a Detestation of the
contrary, that their servants may see that there is but one way of approving
themselves both to their earthly, and heavenly Master.

3. If it be here objected, That it is but a counterfeit virtue, which derives
it self from the care of pleasing men, and so that this is but to teach them to
convert profaneness to hypocrisy: I must yield so far as to confess, that
where that continues the final motive, it will never avail any man. But as
God often uses temporal and outward occurrencies, to produce inward and
spiritual effects, so it may here happen, that those whose first approches to
Goodness were mercenary, and out of compliance to others, may by coming within
view of it discern it so amiable, that they may after love it for its self, and
indeed considering the rude ignorance usual among the vulgar, it is scarce
imaginable they should embrace it upon the bare strength of speculation, and
therefore must be allowed secular invitations, as baits to allure them. As for
those that never advance higher then the mere Form of Godliness, what weight
soever it may add to their own doom, yet perhaps that may justly be accounted
less mischievious to the world, then the contrary extreme, Hypocrisy being a
sin that cannot well set up for Proselites, because it never ownes it self of a
distinct party from true Piety; and it is not impossible, that the example of a
feigned Christian, may teach others to surmount their copy, and be that in
sincerity, which he is but in appearance: whereas open Vice pretends to no such
possibility, breaths nothing but contagion, and like a pest infects
communities. We have therefore reason to conclude, that if this care were
generally taken, 'twere a service not only to God, but the Commonwealth, which
has not more unprofitable, nay noxious burdens lying on her from any rank of
men, then from lewd and idle Servants, who using their places only as a shelter
for their sloth and licentiousness, when that Gourd withers, know not whither
to retire, but usually either live Beggars, or die Thieves: whereas if
Gentlemen's families were so ordered, as to become Seminaries of Industry and
Sobriety, the number of them is so great, that they might be able to send out
many Colonies of useful and civil persons.

4. There is also another sort of relative, viz a Friend, over whom though they
have not that Authority, which springs from this servile stock of hopes and
fears, yet they have one of a much more noble descent, and more vigorous
efficacy; Friendship has a key to the heart, which it may use not only to let
it self into its secrets, but also to introduce its own conceptions,
Sentiments, and inclinations, it so mixes with the mind, that it may insensibly
convey into it any Idea. Now to use this intimacy to the bringing in any thing
base and unworthy, is the vilest treachery, such as is but imperfectly
represented by the treason of him, who requites his friends Hospitality by
bringing in Thieves or Murderers upon him: A guilt so vehemently to be
abhorred, that none is to think himself at a sufficient and just distance from
it, but he that industriously pursues the direct contrary. He therefore that
has a Friend, ought studiously to contrive how he may most promote his
advantages, and those not only his outward and secular, but also (yea
principally) his inward and spiritual. This is the only sense wherein it is
lawful to have designs upon him, and in this he is not only licensed, but
obliged to have so; he must here use all friendly stratagems, to recommend and
endear virtue to him, make his kindness the Vehicle, wherein the more
gratefully to administer whatever is most wholesome, even reproofs, when they
appear so; and yet by taking his own turn in being the Patient, evince, that
it is no assuming humor, that creates him a Physician. If friendships were thus
managed, it would be indeed a most sacred relation, such as would be above the
violations of those petty trivial distastes, which now adays dissolve them,
Hearts that are tied together with these consecrated bands, are like man and
wife joined together inseparably by God, and much for the same end of
propagation; only herein as far superior to their pattern, as the mind is to the
body, the divine excellencies of a Saint to the natural composition of a man.
We may reasonably believe they were Friendships of this making, that first
brought that name into so much veneration, and were they again reduced to this,
no Encomiums could be too lavish for them: such a reducement were a work well
worthy the spirit and ingenuity of Gentlemen, who since they generally profess
much reverence to the Word, it is pity they should cast away their adorations on
an empty shrine. The Heathens had Incantations to recall their displeased
Deities into their forsaken Images; I wish they would also try some holy magic
to bring back somewhat of the primitive divine spirit, to animate this now
liveless trunk; that they who justly think it an ungentile reproachful thing,
not to have some body whom they call Friend, may think it much more so, not to
pay all the real kindness due to that appellation.

5. Having thus far given an account what are the proper and just employments
of this Authority over their several Relations, our method now requires us to
reflect a little on their Practice, and that in the most we shall find as far
swerving from the rule in this particular, as any of the former. So far, alas,
are Gentlemen from making their Power instrumental to the infusing good, that
there is nothing more ordinary then to see them dispose it to the direct
contrary. The scorn and contempt they publicly cast upon all piety and virtue,
teaches their Dependants, how dead a trade that is like to prove to them; and
then it is very improbable that Godliness shall with them cast the scales
against Gain; he that aims to get an Exhibition, or any thing proportionable
will soon discern his way lies in a quite opposite road, he must find out what
Vice of the Gentleman he may be most serviceable to, sometimes he must purvey
for his Lust, sometimes for his Intemperance; and even when he has cloyed those
grosser appetites, yet his Pride will always remain insatiable; he must still
provide* air for that Camelion, lay out his whole breath in flatteries (a more
hellish wind then any the Laplanders sell;) it is this enshrining his Diana
which is the craft by which he expects his wealth, and therefore whatever other
office he execute by starts, a Parasite is to be his constant trade.

6. In like manner their Servants are disciplined to be the Ministers of their
Luxuries, and not only to serve but transcribe them; the Master's Vices seldom
miss to be taken up by the whole House, as if they were to be the Cognisances
and Badges, to witness to whom they retained: And though for this they might
very well trust to the efficacy of their bare Example, yet as if they could
never be secure enough of corrupting their Families, they too often add to it
Precepts and Rules of Institution. Thus it is one of the Fundamental Laws of
their Hospitality, That no stranger be sent Sober away; so that their Houses
may well pass for enchanted Castles, no Man scarce that comes into them, being
able to guide himself out: They keep, as it were, solemn Justs and Turnement of
Debauchery, to challenge all comers, and have variety of Champions to deal with
Combatants of all ranks. In short, Gentlemen's Families are become such perfect
Academies of Licentiousness, that the most innocent Puny will there in a very
short time become proficient. And this God knows is the ordinary improvement
they make of their Authority; As if they affected to outbid the tyranny of the
Turk, in sending a Halter to his Vassals, and making them their own
Executioners; or thought it a disparagement to their Qualities, to go to Hell
without an honorable Retinue.

7. As for the other sort of Power, that which they have over their Friends and
Intimates, it is not discernible that they manage that better; Who almost is
there, that seems at all to advert to the Essential part of Friendship? What a
Rarity, I had almost said a Prodigy is it, to find (even amongst those that
profess the greatest dearness) any that has either the Courage to give, or the
Humility to receive an Admonition? But in stead of those wounds of a Friend,
Prove. 27. 6. there is nothing more common among them, then the kisses of an
Enemy, such mutual soothing in ill, as renders it inveterate and incureable;
and like Joab to Amasa, 2 Samuel 20. 10. sheds out the bowels, when it pretends
to kiss; nay, as if it were not sufficient for them to nourish those Vices they
find already planted, they sow new Seeds, communicate their personal ones to
each other, as if the community of Friendship obliged them mutually to diffuse
their poisons. Were many of the closest intimacies now adays ransacked to the
bottom, it is to be feared this would be found the basis and groundwork of
them. He that has advanced above the beaten road, arived to the more elevated
mysterious parts of wickedness, (The depths of Satan, as they speak, Revel. 2.
24.) would loose much of the gust, if he should not get some Confident, to whom
at once to boast, and propagate his Proficiency. Thus sacrilegiously is this
venerable relation of Friendship profaned, by being prostituted to the vilest
and most detestable purposes; and by this accursed abuse suffers the saddest
Metamorphosis, becomes only a Confederacy in sin, a Combination and League
against what they account the common Enemies, God and Virtue.

8. These are such wretched perversions of their power, that one would guess it
were some great and very considerable weight of present Interest, that should
thus bias and distort them. But when that is examined, 'twill be found to lie
wholly on the other side. The former Section gave us occasion to discern how
transporting a delight it is, to be the Instruments of any good to others: But
as there is no good can bear proportion with that which is done to the Soul, so
certainly to be an Agent in that, must far transcend the pleasure of all other
Benefactions. He that so dispences his Bounty, as to engage Men to Virtue by
it, is indeed the magnificent Person, outvies the most profuse Donations of the
greatest Potentates; They can give but some little parcels of Earth, he gives
Heaven, and like a mighty Monarch has Kings to do him homage: So he that by
well ordering his Family, makes his Servants to be God's, does not only oblige
the Commonwealth, but is as it were a Patriot even to Heaven it self; provides
it with Inhabitants, and helps to secure it from that emptiness and
depopulation, wherewith the general wickedness of men seem to threaten it; and
then in relation to such his Servants, he is of all other Masters the most
bountiful and obliging; they provide perhaps some petty Annuities, he gives a
state of Inheritance, nay of Eternity.

9. This is a vast Munificence, yet that which the arrantest Worldling can have
no temptation to grudge. A Man may thus without a Riddle give much, yet part
with nothing, nay, acquire that very thing to himself, which he dispenses to
others; so that here is no place for the usual (though unjust) Objection of
impoverishing ones self, which is that alone which often deads the relish, or
diverts the attempt of other Liberalities; and therefore this sort which is
rescued from that one possible allay, must certainly yield the most vigorous
and unmixt Pleasure, it being sure, that Bounty has in it self so much of
agreement with Humane Nature, as will inevitably produce Complacence and
Delight, where it is not so interrupted or allayed.

10. I might here add ex abundanti, that there is likewise a secular Profit
attending it: For if Gentlemen had their Dependents truly conscientious, they
would be of very much more use to them, they might employ them securely, and
need no other Spies upon them but their own Consciences; 'twould not then be so
many Servants, so many Thieves and Harpies, but so many Factors and Traffickers
for the Masters advantages: So that here again their own Interest engages them
to this Care, though I confess it is to be wished, that the former more
ingenuous Motive may be so prevalent, as to supersede all use of this, it being
very unreasonable that God should need Auxiliaries from Mammon. Yet as once the
Israelites borrowed of the Egyptians, so it may not be amiss to make this
Inferior consideration a step to the other more Noble, that even they who have
yet no gust of that more Heroic Pleasure, may on the intuition of this Worldly
advantage, endeavor to improve their Authority to the Spiritual good of all
that belong to them.

11. But from no part of this Performance may they reap so rich a satisfaction,
as from that which is exercised toward a Friend; for as their Concernment is
nearer in him, then in the former more distant Relations, so the Pleasure of
doing good to him, must proportionably increase, as that heat is most intense
which is conveyed by the nearest Reflection. He who so maintains his Vital
station in the great Body, as to sympathize with every Member of it, must yet
necessarily have the most acute sense of what befalls those parts, to which he
is most immediately conjoined: But there is no stricter Union upon Earth, then
that of a Virtuous Friendship; and then what can be more satisfactory, then to
preserve or advance the Health of that, whose Maladies himself is sure to feel,
to improve and benefit that person, who is thus become a part of him. Persons
of quality love to deck and imbellish the place where they inhabit, abhor to
dwell in a Stie or Dungeon, but Friends dwell in each other; and therefore
cannot but be delightful in beautifying and adorning those Minds they have
thus chosen to live in, in purging them from all foulness and pollutions, and
rendering them as pure and immaculate; nay, as splendid and illustrious, as is
possible. Certainly, there is nothing upon Earth more ravishing, then a
Friendship thus entertained, it is some Anticipation of Heaven, where those
lines of Love which stretch themselves to every part of the Circumference, do
all meet in God as their Center. It is indeed that which surmounts the
possibility of an exact description, and reserves its full discovery to be the
prize of Experience. Let it be tried, and then I doubt not, but he that has
made the Experiment, will readily attest the Pleasure of thus employing this
part also of his Authority.

SECT. VIII. Of the last advantage, that of Reputation.
1. THe last advantage is that of Reputation and Esteem, which is generally
presumed the due of Persons of Quality, unless where some personal unworthiness
has cut off the Entail, and forfeited that right. And though these days have
taught the Vulgar to defalk much of that respect which former Ages paid to
Superiors of all sorts, yet I cannot think the Levelling principle has so
universally diffused it self, as totally to raze out all impressions of
reverence toward them; so that there still remains somewhat of this Talent for
them to negotiate with. It will be their part so to manage and dispose it, as
to bring in profit to their Lord, by making it also an engine to draw men to
piety and virtue.

2. This they may sometime do by Council; to the success whereof there is
nothing more contributive then an esteem of the Adviser, most men being rather
apt to consider who speaks, then what is spoken: And therefore persons, whose
Quality and Education have prepossest them with an opinion of their Wisdom,
have a great advantage toward the working on them. And this it will befit them
to make diligent use of, by seasonable advices and exhortations to those whom
they shall discern thus prepared for the entertaining of them, to take all
prudent occasions to recommend Christian-Practice to them, and by pulling off
those disguises which the false measures of the world have put upon Vice and
Virtue, to represent them in their true and native shapes, the one the object
of horror and detestation, the other of love and delight. It Is the want of this
discovery, that has given Impiety so free a range, it has dressed it self up in a
counterfeit splendour, false Gemms and Tinsel-gaudery; and in this glittering
appearance it marches on triumphantly, receives acclamations, yea and Obeisance
too, nay commands not only the knees (as every prosperous Usurper can do) but
even the hearts of men. And will none have so much charity, so much zeal for
public Concern, as to uncloak this Impostor, and show the dazzled world what it
is it thus bows to? Perhaps this is looked on only as the business of Divines;
but certainly would Gentlemen also set to it, they were like to prove the more
prosperous undertakers: What comes only out of the Pulpit, passes for the
foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1: 21. or for the discourses of those whose
trade it is to inveigh against sin; All their Thrusts being of course, and
expected, their Wards are as well known too, and we daily see Vice approve it
self an expert Fencer against them. But the endeavors of these would not be
liable to those prejudices; a Blow from them would come (like the Revolt of a
Confederate) with the advantage of a Surprise; and there is little doubt, but
by friendly and familiar Conferences they might many times insinuate that into
men's breasts, which the more solemn and Authoritative Exhortations of Ministers
often fail of.

3. But Council will be of little efficacy, if it be not seconded by Example;
they must therefore look their Lives be such, as may show they believe
themselves, whilst they go about to persuade others. He that shall with never
so pressing Arguments dehort a man from that Sin, which himself at the next
opportunity commits; will never be supposed to have any real ill opinion of it,
but rather so passionate a love, that he is jealous any but himself should have
its embraces: And then surely this will be so far from averting, that it will
excite the appetite of the other to taste of that which he sees is thought so
desirable as to be Monopolized.

4. Indeed there is nothing by which they have so universal an influence, as
their Example: Things that are set in some high and eminent place, do naturally
attract men's eyes to them; so that eminency of condition wherein Gentlemen are
placed, renders their actions more observable. They are like the City our
Savior speaks of, set on an hill, and have by that advantageous situation the
means of making their light shine further then other men's. And therefore it
ought to be their constant care, by the bright luster of their exact and
exemplary Conversations, to inlighten the whole sphere wherein they move. Would
Gentlemen make this their united design, what a happy Constellation of
auspicious Stars would they prove, by whose benign Aspect the sterility of
Vulgar minds might be cured, and even those Clods be inspirited, and rendered
capable of excellent productions.

5. For what can be more persuasive to those of the lower Ranks to embrace
Virtue, then to see it made the election of those whom they suppose to have
most judgment to discern its value, and so fall not on it blindfold, and who
have also all the contrary pleasures of Sin within their reach, nay prostrate
at their feet, suing for entertainment, and so are not cast on it by impotence.
What a blur and infamy would it cast upon Vice, if it were once banished out of
Gentile company, and how fair a step would it be toward its exclusion out of
all? We see what a natural aspiring the lower sort have to approach to the
condition of their Betters; and though that being ^ow aimed only at their Pomps
and Greatness, be no commendable temper, yet sure it were much in the power of
those emulated persons to make it so: For would they so order the matter, that
their Virtue should outshine all their outward splendors, that it should become
the character and distinctive note of a Gentleman, to be eminently good, this
were a way to consecrate even Ambition it self, by making it an engine not to
rack and torture men, as common ambitions do, but to advance them to all
virtuous industry.

6. He that desired to ennoble his Family, would then begin at his Mind, cast
out thence all base and degenerous Inclinations, and make himself a Gentleman
without help of Heraldry. Thus hapily might they deceive men into Piety, and
make those Emulations, whose first rise was merely from Earth, a ladder
wherewith to scale^ Heaven. And how noble, how excellent a^ charity is this,
and yet of all others the cheapest, it having that Proverbial property of
Charity, To begin at home: The being good, is primarily a kindness to
themselves, and to other^ only by way of result, and propagation, and easy
consequence? How unchristian, unmanly, yea unskilful too will it then be, to
den^ this benefaction, which has that very argume^ on its side, which is
opposed to other kinds o^ Liberalities; that fear of lessening a man's sel^
which in those contracts and shuts up the bowels, is here in all reason to
enlarge and dila^ them; for in this case men cannot deny, with out their own
greatest injury, and diminution: And sure 'twould justly pass for a prodigy
both of malice and folly, for one so to avert the benefiting another, as to
incur the greatest damage to himself in avoiding it.

7. But alas, it is not only Charity either to others or themselves, which
exacts of them thus to promote Piety among men: They have brought themselves
under another more constraining obligation, I mean that of Justice, parcularly
the justice of Restitution, for it is too visible they have been deeply
accessory to its decay: so far have they been from advising and exciting men to
good, that I fear their persuasive faculties have generally been employed ^o a
quite distant purpose. There are few or none, that by their own pious endeavors
do at all abate the need of the Priests exhortations; but many that do evacuate
their efficacy, by decrying it as the greatest folly, the most unmanly
submission, to yield them any consideration: As for their own Councels, they
are too often in earnest, what Solomon's was by way of irony, Eccl. 11. 9 Walk
in the ways of thine heart and in the sight of thine eyes, encouraging and
animating men to all Sensuality; and if they discern any begin to startle at
the course, to entertain but a sober thought of that dismal end to which it
leads, he is to be ^aught out of that Hypocondriack fit, taught ^o look upon it
as a spice of Frenzy, the loud noise of roaring Mirth is reinforced to drown
that poor whisper of Conscience, and by the sound as it were of those Trumpets
he is incited to turn to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle, Jer.
8. 6. all arts of encouragement used to imbolden him to run fearlesly on to
Damnation. This is their one known Recipe -- for all pangs and gripes of Soul;
And if it be not of every days practice, it is not that they have any better
method of Cure, but such arts of prevention, such means of stupefaction and
obduration, that the disease seldom occurrs among them.

8. Nor do they omit to back and fortify this with proportionable Examples,
which God knows are so many and so efficacious, that like a dismal Cloud they
overspread our whole Horison. They who are by God designed as lights to
illuminate all aboutthem, have been the instruments of introducing a more then
Egyptian darkness, thereby exemplifying that Aphorism of our Saviors, Mat. 6.
23. If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?

9. What a deluge of Profaneness and Impiety at this day overflows this poor
Nation, is too visible not only by the direct, but the reflexed beams, those
sad Judgments they have brought down upon it; and though there be too many
springs which feed this Ocean, ye^ there will scare any be found to have more
liberally contributed, then the open and scandalous viciousness of the Gentry.
They who are placed as Stars in our Firmament, if they dart nothing but
malignant Influences, what wonder is it, if an universal Pest ensue? It Is they
that have brought Vice into countenance, made it the Mode and fashion of the
times, so that people dread the singularity of being innocent, and a man may
with less peril of scorn appear in the most superannuated dress, then own the
Obsolete qualities of Meekness, Purity, Sobriety, etc. How great and fatal a
snare this creditableness of sin has proved: I fear there are too many
thousands of entangled Souls can witness; and on whom can they more properly
charge their ruin, then on those who have advanced it to this repute in the
world? Men's natural pravity gives them propension more then enough to ill, and
therefore it has been the business of Laws both humane and divine to put a
bridle upon those inclinations, by fear and shame to restrain their
inordinacy; but this converts the bridle into a spur when those that should
discountenance Vice, thus animate and encourage it.

10. For what a Temptation is it to the vulgar to run to all excess of Riot,
when they see their superiors have beaten the path before them, and are
themselves immerst in the most brutish sensualities? which of them will endure
to be sober, when Drunkenness shall be accounted so dignifying a quality, that
it may make a Peasant company for a Lord? when Gentlemen are Atheistical,
Clowns will think themselves very modestly wicked, if they be but profane; and
when they hear their Betters discharge loud Volleys of Oaths, they will so on
find they are as well qualified for that part of greatness as the best, their
Tongues are as much their own, Psa. 12 4. and will be glad that by such an
easy employment of them they can be Gentlemen so good cheap. 'Twere as endless
as unnecessary to enumerate the several sorts of infection, which the ill
examples of great men have diffused; it is too obvious in the mortal effects to
need any other way of discovery; and I am sure it ought to be matter of the
saddest reflection to all who are involved in that guilt, it being a most
direful account, which they will one day have to make, who have been the
Authors of such miserable vastations, turned Communities of Men, of Christians,
into Herds of Beasts, nay into Legions of Devils.

11. Every sin even of the privatest obscurest person carries much of contempt
and affront to the Divine Majesty, but Great men's vices are of a yet more
Giantly frame, they proclaim solemn War with Heaven, levy forces, and draw in
multitudes of abettors and confederates in their hostilities; and God knows
this kind of Unevangelical violence the kingdom of Heaven daily suffers. Oh
that the Chieftaines and leaders of these unhappy troops, would at last think
fit to sound a retreat; that they would, in pity if not to themselves, yet to
their seduced followers, cease thus desperately to rush on upon the mouth of
the Canon the Jaws of Hell. And not only so, but that they would also endeavor
to bring them into some terms of accord with that omnipotent Enemy they have
provoked, by their own penitent and reformed lives teach them the postures of
humility and submission, as they have formerly done that of defiance. This
certainly is that to which common equity obliges them, reparation of injuries
being confessedly an indispensable part of justice; and certainly there can no
injury exceed, nay equal this of betraying men to eternal ruin, and
consequently nothing less then the utmost industry to repair it, can be any
competent expiation. God grant all those, whose guilt gives them a peculiar
title to this admonition, may own their right to it by a particular and serious
application, such as may for the future engage them to the most zealous
endeavor of reforming not only themselves, but others, for rescuing their
reputation from that foulest blot, of being an agent for Satan, and advancing
it to that highest dignity of being serviceable to God.

12. But there is little hope they will rightly consider the use, who are so
utterly mistaken in the nature of true reputation; A man of Honor is now
understood only to be one that can start and maintain a Quarrel, that for
every the triflingest injury expects like Lamech, Genesis 4. 24. to be avenged
seventy and seven fold; that despises the Christian precepts of Meekness long
suffering, and Forgiveness, as rudiments of cowardice and unmanly
pusillanimity, and has no other measure of courage and gallantry, but by an
utter opposition to all those; and whilst reputation is thus hung only at the
point of the sword, it is a very fit instrument to destroy bodies, but sure not
to save Souls. We find daily many occasions to complain of the Tyranny of
Custom and Opinion, but scarce any where so much as in those unjust and absurd
Laws they have imposed in this matter, which were they consideringly weighed
would surely evince them such contemptible Legislators, as would be enough to
dethrone and depose them from that usurped Empire they now maintain in the
world.

13. To take only a short and cursory view of them, we shall in the first
place find them to be horribly impious; for what can be more so, then thus to
tear off those signatures of Honor, which God himself has impressed, and
vilify those whom he has dignified? God has pronounced that it is the
discretion of a man that deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over
a transgression* Prove. 19. 11. and again he that is slow to anger is better
then the mighty, and he that rules his spirit, then he that takes a City.
Pro. 16. 32. But this new notion of Honor proclaims the quite contrary; he
passes for a Phlegmatic fool, whose blood boyles not at the first glimpse of
an Affront; and it is Gallantry to offer many Injuries, but ignominious Tameness
to bear one. It has always been the indisputable prerogative of Kings to be the
Fountains of Honor; what an impious daring is it then to divest him of that
privilege, by whom Kings reign? to cancel his Patents, and mark them out as
the objects of scorn, to whom God gives so glorious a testimony? Yet thus is it
daily done to the men, whom the King of Kings will honor; these are all the
Triumphs these Mordecai's must expect; An evidence how much worse they are then
Haman, that allot them. Certainly there cannot be an act of greater defiance
against the Divine Majesty, then thus to reverse his Decrees; And upon this
hostility and opposition against Heaven it is, that all the private Quarrels
and Combats on Earth are (as on their foundation) superstructed; so that to
initiate a Duellist, his first Challenge must be directed against God himself.

14. Nor are these false measures of Honor more opposite to Religion, then
Prudence: The glosses the Swordmen have put upon the one fundamental Law of
Not bearing an Injury, have introduced such a multitude of ridiculous
Punctilio's, that the next Age will be in danger of receiving the Fable of Don
Quixot for Authentic History; and I see not with what justice this can laugh
at them in him and his Squire Sancho, and yet think them serious enough to
govern men in their most real and weighty concernments. It would indeed
astonish any sober person to consider, what Chimera's they are to which men
sacrifice all that ought to be dear to them; How many Duels have been fought,
how many men killed, (when neither of the Combatants were so implacable but
that they could willingly have compounded the matter) only because they thought
Point of Honor exacted it, and the declining it would be inglorious? Certainly
the Galleys is a state of perfect liberty, compared with this bondage; And were
the Release from those necessarily to infer a subjection to this, were those
Slaves obliged thus to become Gentlemen; I should cease my wonder why so many
of them have despised a manumission: For, thus to have a man's Estate, his Life,
yea Soul too, at the mercy of Popular breath, (not only to be lost, but lost by
his own act) is a Slavery beyond all that the most abject creature ever groaned
under. And yet so prodigiously absurd is the World, as to cut this out for the
Benjamins portion, make it the especial and peculiar privilege of Gentlemen;
they are set upon a Theater, and as the Gladiators of old must kill one
another, only to entertain Spectators. And who would not think Bedlam the only
Seminary to breed men up for such a Trade? Yet so universal is this Lunacie,
that one may suspect the Institution of that Hospital is perverted, that that
incloses only the Sober persons, whilst the Frantic run loose about the world.

15. But perhaps the more Malicious Duellers will think themselves exempt from
this number, because it is their own satisfaction which they design in it;
their Enemies blood will make so delicious a draught for their revenge, that
they gasp after it, and think it a pleasure well worthy their pursuit. But sure
these differ from the former, not as Wise men from Fools, but as a worse
Natured Fool from a better. He that would justify the rationalness of any
Adventure, must prove the Prize at least to equal the worth of that he hazards
for it: But who that considers he has a Soul, can seriously set it at so
contemptible a rate? or what man in his wits, that believes a Hell, will say
the pleasure of a Revenge can countervail those pains? Nay indeed, none can
with any pretense put it in balance with the mere loss of Life; for he that is
killed (as every man may be that fights) can have no sense of that pleasure,
and so becomes incapable of the compensation, if that were able to make it. Nay
I shall descend yet lower, and with some confidence affirm, that the uneasy
consequences even of the Victory do quite overwhelm the satisfaction. For this
I dare refer my self to any of those who have had the unhappy Triumph of a
Murderer, and doubt not that if they will speak their experiences, they will
tell us that the cry of their Adversaries blood in their Conscience, did
utterly extinguish the relish of it in their Fancy; or if they were persons
who were hardened against all sense of Divine vengeance yet the fear of Humane
was abundantly enough to defeat them of that pleasure they expected; so
impossible is it to gather grapes of these thorns, to reap any contentment from
so unchristian an Attempt: Their Revenge is not completed without Blood; and
if they have it, it proves a Torrent to carry away that imaginary Delight they
projected from it: And then what color of reason can any man bring, why he
should thus sell his soul for naught, and become a Platonic to Damnation?

16. But Revenge has two ill-matcht qualities, Blindness and Impetuosity; and
so all its darts, though they carry force and venom enough to destroy all about
them, yet by being ill aimed revert mortally on the breast whence they were
shot. Certainly there is not in the world a more prodigious Infatuation, then
that which rules in this Affair: What can be more senseless, then for me, when
a man has done me an Injury, to think to wipe off that by exposing my self to
more? when he has given me the Lie, to invite him to give me the Stab too? Did
ever any man attempt to make up a breach, by widening it? to close his wound,
by tearing it further? The Physicians indeed talk of a method of curing some
Diseases by Majoration; but sure Injuries are not in the number of those
maladies, nor capable of that way of remedy: The greater may, it is possible,
overwhelm, but not cure the less, as the more moderate Pains become insensible
by the superveniencie of the more acute; yet I presume none would applaud his
choice, that should call for the Rack to drown the pain of a Cut finger, which
yet is no hyperbolical emblem of this sort of Revenge.

17. But besides all this our modern Gallantry is treacherous to its self,
confutes its own pretension, and whilst it vainly assumes the Monopoly of
Courage, is indeed the meanest Cowardice in the world. That by which we use to
discriminate base Fear from just Caution, is the formidableness of the object
feared: No man is reproached for not standing the inundation of the Sea; but to
quake at stepping over a Gutter, would be a ridiculous timorousness: 'Twould be
neither wonder nor shame to run from the pursuit of a Lion; but to be chased by
a barking Whelp, is the property of an Hare, not of a Man. And according to
this measure, what wretched Cowards are our greatest Hectors? For what can be
more contemptible then those unjust Scorns of men they so tremble at? which if
they were sure to be universal, yet what real ill can they do a man, who does
not by his own fan^y lend them an edge wherewith to wound him? But neither can
this be the Case, till all both Christianity and Sobriety be quite worn out of
the world: For to a Christian, it is certain the irreligion of Fighting a Duel
would be the most infamous thing, and even to a sober Heathen the folly of it
would be so too; so that he can be in no danger of either of their reproaches,
for declining it: And when these are set aside, who is there whose censure can
be at all considerable? Yet this so pitiful despicable thing is it, which so
terrifies and amazes them; And how shall we define Cowardice, if this be not it?

18. And as it has the nature, so has it the Fate of it too, which usually is
by fleeing an imaginary danger, to fall into a real: Men fight, that they may
not be thought Cowards; and by fighting they do not only become indeed so, but
also rush themselves upon other far more formidable mischiefs, run from a
Scarcrow into a Precipice. And now what a riddle is this thing they call
Gallantry, which so startles at the weakest noise, yet stands undauntedly the
stroke of a Thunderbolt? They who so dread the reproach of vain impotent men,
do yet confidently encounter the anger of the omnipotent God; and if Valor and
Fool-hardiness were not very distant things, would confute my whole argument by
making it evident, that they dare be damned. Thus by a strange kind of inverted
operation their Fear makes them bold; would God that Antiperistasis might go on
to work, till that Boldness have again brought them to a fear, I mean that
penitential Fear, proper to those who thus deliberately provoke the Divine
Majesty.

19. And that very Deliberation is a circumstance of so great an enhancement,
as unmeasurably heightens the sin: Sudden acts may be capable of some
alleviations by the surprise they make on a man's spirit; but contrived and
premeditated Crimes can have no milder appearance then of obstinate Rebellion.
And this aggravation can scarce ever be wanting to a Duel, many hours, if not
days intervening between the designment and the execution; and in that interval
it is not possible for all the Opiate Receipts in Satan's Dispensatory to keep
the Conscience so drowsy, that it shall not startle, but it will undoubtedly
represent to a man the horror of that he is going about, which is no less then
the engaging himself in a double Murder, his own, and his Adversaries, (for the
wilful hazard of both fastens on him the guilt, though both happen to survive
the Combat;) but if it be his own fate to fall (as he has much reason to
expect, who thus puts himself out of Gods protection, nay dares his vengeance)
what possible hope can remain for him, who thus dies in that very act of the
greatest sin? We are generally apt to think but uncomfortably of those who make
away themselves; but certainly many of those deserve to be Canonized, in
comparison with a man that dies in Duel; the principle of that being often an
excessive Fear of God, which sure is less culpable, then a profane contempt
of him Besides the temptation in that case is usually more violent and
impetuous, it being (if not begot, yet) cherisht and fomented by melancholy,
the most untractable and obstinate of all humors, whereas the suggestion to
this has no such Auxiliary to aid it, the original of quarrel^ being
frequently from too free a jollity. And lastly, that, of how heinous a kind
soever, is yet but a single sin, whereas this, as I said before, involves a
twofold guilt; And of how crimson a color must that soul appear before Gods
Tribunal, that is thus double-died in blood!

20. And now who can choose but cry out in the Prophet Esay's style, Hear O
Heavens, and hearken O Earth! What strain of wonder and amazement can bear
proportion with the desperate madness of men, that can thus knowingly and
consideringly rush themselves upon such unspeakable mischiefs; especially since
here they want even that miserable reserve, which serves to embolden them to
other sins, viz. the hope of a future repentance: for those that make but the
slightest measures of that, can scarce fancy any opportunities of it in this
case, since to him that dies there seldom remains any space of interval between
his sin and his death, no time for those clouds to gather, those penitential
showers to descend, which should wash away his blood-guiltiness; or if there
did, yet what expectation is there he should employ it to any effect? such
Presumptuous considerate sins naturally work an obduration in the heart, which
nothing but an extraordinary grace can remove, and after such a high and daring
provocation it is very reasonable to expect God should withdraw even the lowest
degrees, but sure not that he should add higher.

21. These Considerations are all of them so obvious, that they naturally
suggest themselves, and certainly they are so weighty and pressing that it is a
Prodigy to see they should be so universally ineffectual, which can proceed
from nothing but the want of close and serious application. Would men dare but
to meet single with their own sober thoughts, 'twould certainly supersede all
other Duels, there remains therefore nothing more for me to add but to invite
them to this one encounter, to beseech them to grapple a while but with the
force of Reason, a combat of all others the securest, where to be subdued is
more glorious then to conquer in any other; and when it has despoyled them of
that false courage, which exposes them to such dismal ruins, to permit it to
reinspirit them with a true one, such as may give them daring enough to stand
up against this so more then Barbarous a custom, to endeavor to banish it out
of Christendom, and so take of that reproach which our profession lies under
from so impious a practice, which having no other Tenure but Prescription,
there needs nothing but Desuetude to destroy it. Let every man for his own part
strictly abstain from it, and avow the doing so, and then by ceasing to be a
fashion, it will cease to be at all.

22. But the misery of it is, no man will assume to be leader in this so noble
an enterprise, to begin this so necessary a reformation; which though it have
so much more of compliance even to carnal Interests, then its contrary, that I
doubt not many wish it were universal, yet till it be so, they think 'twill be
uncreditable to any particular person; But were that the certain event of it,
it is sure that reproach ought to be despised, when it comes in competition with
Duty; In this case the resolution of David (as great a Swordman as any of them)
is most proper; I will yet be more vile then thus. 2 Samuel 6 22. and certainly a
man cannot pass a more glorious Martyrdom, then to suffer ignominy upon such an
account. I am sure it is a real shame to see that men can offer violence to all
their dearest complicated Interests, to comply with that unchristian custom,
yet cannot cross a single imaginary one, to suppress it.

23. Nay the truth is, they create Punctilioes in this case, by which
themselves will not be governed in any other. In a common Fire does any man
suspend his own endeavors, till he see the whole Town running to quench the
flame? or if one of these popular persons had been of the Philistims company,
when the house began to fall, Iud. 16. 30. would he have so dreaded the
singularity of a solitary escape, as not to have attempted it, till sholes of
others had led the way? We have had some experience, under what prejudice a
public Act falls, that is by its makers precluded from being a president, and
sure these men do tacitly (yet very intelligibly) accuse the unreasonableness
of this fear, whilst they confine it to this single instance; and me thinks
'twere but just, they should be required to be consentaneous to themselves, and
act in other things by the same measures; which would prove so sharp a penance,
as were more likely to reduce them to sobriety, then all the force of Argument.

24. But besides this severe remedy, there is sure an antidote against this
malady, a way to separate the duty from the Contempt which their fancies have
so closely annexed to it, and that is by making their lives so uniformly
Christian, that it may be evident, it is Conscience, not fear that works with
them. Without this I know indeed no security from reproach: For to see a man
who tramples upon all other commands of God, catch up this, as a buckler
against a Challenger, who can be so blindly charitable, as to impute this to
any thing but Cowardice but when the whole tract of a man's Life is one
continued course of Obedience, no man will expect he should violate that upon
this occasion. To this may be added a cheerful and free exposing himself to
all warrantable dangers, when any public occasion of hazard is offered; if he
then show himself daring, 'twill be apparent, that it is not the fear of Death,
but Sin, which locks up his sword from private Duels. Or when there is no
opportunity of this active valor, let him approve his passive by a contented,
nay joyful submission to any suffering that attends the discharge of a go^d
conscience; and of this there is little fear (in these days especially) to
want occasions. He that does this, will be in no danger to be defamed for
declining Duels, but on the contrary such an aequable piety will extort
reverence from all, there being such a venerable amiaebility in it, that the
most profane do, even against their wills, bear it some inward respect.

25. Let not men therefore pretend the fear of reproach, as an excuse, since
here is so ready a Salvo to that objection, but let them by an assiduous
practice of all other Christian virtues, render this also secure to them, and
qualify themselves for the propagating it to others. And Oh, that we could
once see all other quarrels amongst Gentlemen converted into this one holy
contention, who should be forwardest in this Heroic attempt. It Is the false
notion of Honor, that is one of Satan's principal Citadels, like Zion to the
Jebusites, and the assaulting of that, would be an atchivement of so much glory
that he that could prosper in it, might justly challenge the dignity which
David there promises, 2 Samuel 5. 8. of being Chief and Captain. Here then they
may lawfully quench their thirst of Honor, yea and that of Revenge too, by
wrecking their utmost malice on this their so grand Enemy: Let it be remembered
how long it has befooled and cheated the world, and be exposed to all the
shames and detestation of a discovered Impostor; nay let it be brought to a
solemn arraignment, those innumerable murders of which it has been guilty,
charged on it, and prosecuted to death, so utterly extinguished, that it may
never again appear in the world, whilst all good men applaud the justice, and
say, So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord.

26. Having thus reflected on the common abuses of Reputation, all that remains
is to consider how injurious men are to themselves in their ill managery of
this Talent, which might be improved not only to their final account, but even
their present pleasure. For first, he that by seasonable advice rescues any man
from a course of sin, will infallibly feel so unutterable a complacencie in
having done so, that he will find he was kind to himself, as well as the other
and will have no temptation to think himself unprofitably employed, though that
were to be his only reward. This bringing sinners to repentance is so noble,
so tempting a design, that it drew even God himself from Heaven to prosecute
it; and that not by cheap and easy means, but by all those Sufferings, which
humane nature most trembles at: yet such was the joy of Man's salvation* which
was set before him, as enabled him to endure the cross, and despise the shame,
Heb. 12. 2. How rich a bargain will it then be to a man to partake with him in
that joy, to share with him in that prize, upon so much easier terms, to pay
but a little breath for that, which exhausted his blood, and to become (in a
lower inferior sense) a Savior without a Cross?

27. In like manner, he that by a strict and exemplary conversation sets
himself up a landmark to direct men in this turbulent and dangerous Sea* his
light, it is true go^s forth to others, but the warmth and cherishing heat of it
remains within his own breast. What cheerful what exulting reflections may he
make upon himself, that can make good St Paul's protestation, Acts. 20. 26. that
he is pure from the blood of all men; that he has not by any scandalous
example ensnared any soul; but on the contrary has by positive illustrious
acts of Virtue endeavored so to adorn his Christian profession, as to draw in
Proselytes not to the name, but the obedience of Christ; That has made it his
business to stand in the gap, not only by his Intercessions with God against
the Plagues, but by his endeavors with Men against the sins of the Nation, and
by a steady opposing himself against the inundation of profaneness and
licentiousness, has invited others to give some stop to those impure torrents?
It has always been accounted so glorious a thing to redeem ones Country from
slavery, that men have thought their greatest hazards amply paid with the Title
of a Patriot: but there is no vassalage so ignoble, no servitude so miserable,
as that of Vice, and consequently no attempt so worthy, so ingenuous, so
satisfactory to the undertaker, as to break that yoke. He that aspires to no
more then a private Innocence* is only on the defensive part, stands upon his
guard against Satan; but he that aims at this sort of public reformations,
maintains an invasive War against him, and so more shakes his kingdom; The
reducing of any sinner is the dispossessing him of so much of his usurpt
territory, and weakens his Empire in the world. This is indeed the true Public
Spirit, which though many have pretended to from whom we discern nothing of
these effects, yet those very pretensions bear witness to the excellency of the
thing, and ought to animate men to be indeed, what so many have coveted to be
thought.

28. I suppose I need not go on to the other instance; every man's sense,
without consulting either his Reason or Religion, will be able to pronounce
that it is better to be in Peace then Hostility, to have a whole then a wounded
body, to keep securely his own station, then to be hunted like a Partridge on
the Mountains by the Avenger of blood. The greater is the miracle, that men who
in all other instances devote themselves wholly to their sensuality. should
here only abjure it; that when body and soul come in competition, live as if
they had no soul, yet upon this occasion can dare, as if they had no bodies.
Oh that men should be such ill husbands of their sufferings, and thus enhance
Satan's markets! Alas, Hell is a purchase will never be taken out of their
hands, how many chapmen soever they see about it, they may secure their Estate
there firm enough by those sins they have more gust of; why should they be thus
madly prodigal to outbid the common rate? Must Gentlemen buy Damnation, as they
usually do Wares, dearer then other men? How is perdition become so amiable,
that like Rachel a double servitude is judged light for it; whilst Heaven in
the mean time, like Leah, is so much despised, that it is thought an injury to
have that obtruded on them, though upon the easiest terms? Certainly they are
strange transforming Optick's which these men make use of; would God they could
be but persuaded, if not to break yet at least for a while to lay by those
false Glasses, and behold things in their genuine and proper shapes, and then I
doubt not they will discern That Honor to be infamy, which sets men at defiance
with God; and that Reputation then alone becomes estimable, when like a River
it paies its Tribute to the Ocean, promotes His Glory, at whose feet Kings
(without diminution) cast both themselves and Crowns.

SECT. IX. The Conclusion.
1. WE have now according to our proposed Method, surveyed distinctly those
several Advantages which Gentlemen enjoy, and may surely give the same
Testimony, which Caleb and Joshua did of Canaan, Number. 14. The Land which we
passed through to search it, is an exceeding good Land. It Is a rich and fertile
soil wherein these men are planted, such as has a natural aptitude and vigor
to produce the most excellent fruits. But Paradise it self required dressing,
and therefore we find Adam had that work assigned him in his Innocence; and
surely these his Sons may well submit to the same task, by the faithful
discharge whereof they may make some approaches toward that his pristine state.

2. It need not be again inculcated, that all these their Receipts have their
special and particular ends in Gods assignment; 'twill be more useful to
remember them, how nearly they are concerned not to pervert the Council of God
against themselves, by neglecting to give them their due expected improvements:
For though he be a most liberal, yet is he not a negligent Master, but keeps an
exact and punctual account of whatever he thus delivers out, and will not fail
severely to avenge the embezeling of his goods; Indeed such an abuse has so
Fatal an Efficacy, that it quite changes their nature, converts them from
Blessings to the heaviest Curses: would God too many men had not thus
exemplified their own destructive power, and by a kind of Anti-creation brought
darkness out of light.

3. But it is pity they should be permitted to sleep in that darkness, which
themselves have made; and therefore if this little Tract shall fall into any
such hands, it must avow to come upon that uncivil, yet friendly Errand, to
disturb their rest, to awake them to some Consideration, and as Philips Monitor
was to remember him, that he was but a man, so to put them in mind, that in the
midst of their freest enjoyments they are still but Stewards and know not how
soon their Lord may summon them to their Accounts. And with what confusion and
consternation must they appear at the great Audit, who have so unfaithfully
managed their trust; It Is therefore now no longer time to dally, but by an
assiduous care and diligence to endeavor to Redeem their past ill husbandry,
lest they run the Fate of that Evil-servant mentioned, Mat. 24. be surprised in
the midst of their Inordinacies, and have their portion assigned them in
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

4. And now what Objection can they possibly make against this so necessary a
Caution, which is founded upon such Motives, as should me thinks infallible
prevail upon all sorts of tempers? If they have any sense of Fear, here are
those Terrors of the Lord, which are amazing enough to set even a Belshazz^
(though with the Cup at his mouth, his Concubines by his side) a trembling.
Certainly he must not be only frozen but petrified in desperate impiety, whom
even a glimpse of those eternal flames will not be able to dissolve.

5. But if Fear (though of God) be too degenerous a Passion for a Gentleman to
own, this advice can upon as good grounds Address it self to their Hope; there
is as well the Joy of the Lord for the Faithful, as the outter darkness for the
unprofitable servant. For though God have Right of absolute Dominion, and might
exact obedience on his bare command, yet he is more pleased to show himself a
Benefactor then a Lord, and therefore descends to treat with men by the more
gentle, and inviting methods of Promises and Rewards. Nay, indeed the end of
his Commands is only to make us capable Subjects of those Eternal Felicities
he desires to bestow. And this surely is enough to excite men to a diligent
negotiating with those Talents they have received, since it is indeed
themselves they are trading for. The stock it is true is Gods, but all the
increase of it will by his bounty certainly devolve on them. And therefore as
Naamans Servants thought the cure he was in pursuit of, deserved a submission
to the severest Prescriptions, If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
would thou not have done it? 2 Kings 5. 3. So surely we may conclude those
endless joys proposed by God, are cheaply earned even by the most exhausting
Labors, the most vigorous Tasks.

6. But such is the Tenderness and Indulgence of our gracious Master, so
earnest his desire of dispensing his Rewards, that he will not trust men's sloth
and folly with such a pretense of defeating themselves; and therefore has
annexed no such condition. We have seen, through all the several parts of Duty,
which constitute the Gentleman's Calling, that they are of a quite distant
frame, not Toils but Refreshments, not Yokes but Crowns, such as differ only
in size from those Celestial ones to which they tend; so that here is bait even
to the greatest voluptuary. And who that observes how many such there be, would
expect this Fruit of Paradise should still hang untouched; yet such a
preposterous Temperance have they put on, that they are proof against all these
alurements. Good God! what contradictions are men made up of? It is the
business of their lives to pursue pleasures, and yet when those of the most
resined and exquisite sort would run into their embraces, they grow coy, and
cannot be courted to receive them. We daily see the Devil has his Martyrs, it
seems he has his Asceticks too; and so witty is the World grown in creating
sins, that they have found out a sin of self-denial. Would God these absurd
Mortifiers might be persuaded to remit somewhat of their severity, the most
rigid Orders in Religion have still indulged some relaxation, some times of
Festivity; why should Satan's Votaries be so much more zealous, then Gods, as to
make their abstinences so perpetual?

7. It speaks indeed the Cruelty of that Master they serve, but so it does his
Policy also, he well knows that if these Divine Lights should but insinuate
themselves, they would soon undermine his whole Foundation; so ravishing and
attractive are they, that nothing but a perfect Ignorance of them can be Amulet
sufficient against their Charms; and therefore it is his necessary concern to
keep men from ever tasting of them, the least relish whereof would be sure to
make them despise all his adulterated delicacies. So we see he can give some
rational account of his part of the matter. But what can Men say for
themselves, who play his game for him, even when their own souls are at the
stake, that at once renounce that Eternal interest, and Present pleasure? This
is indeed in David's phrase, 2 Samuel 3. 33. to die as a fool dies. Their hands
are not bound, nor their feet put into fetters; no extrinsick hindrance lies on
them, why they may not stretch forth their hand to this Tree of life, and cat
and live happily here, and gloriously sor ever. And yet like Solomon's Sluggard,
they hide their hands in their bosom, and will not so much as bring them to
their mouths, Pro. 19. 24.

8. This is so stupid a Folly, as none that pretends to common sense, would in
any worldly concernment be guilty of, Will any man renounce a rich unchargeable
Reversion, when he is not only wooed, but bribed by a considerable sum in hand
not to disclaim it? I fear there are few so mortified to Wealth, as to do it
upon the score of Self-denial; and sure no man would be thought in his wits,
that should do it upon any other; for what jealousies soever he had entertained
of the Security, or Value of that future Estate, yet the present visible profit
would deserve his consideration: There is but one circumstance imaginable, that
could reasonably avert him, and that is the suspicion of Deceit, that the Coin
which is offered him is false and adulterate. And that I may not be under a
necessity of pronouncing so many men mad, I shall suppose it not unlikely that
this scruple may occur to them in the present Case: They have so long brought
all their Bullion to Satan's Mint, suffered him to stamp their Pleasures, that
none will now pass for current with them, which has not his Impress; and upon
this account it is too probable they may distrust the validity of the present
Payment, disbelieve the pleasantness of those Duties I have here recommended to
their Enjoyment, as well as Practice. Nor shall I desire to impose on their
belief, but shall very willingly wave their Faith, and appeal to their Sense.
But then they must remember, that that is incapable of judging by any other
means but Experience; and therefore if all that has been addressed to their
Reason be ineffectual, that remains as the last reserve for their convincement.
Let every one of them seriously and conscientiously set to the Practice, (and
allow only for so much of difficulty, as naturally attends the interrupting a
contrary Custom) and then let him, if he can, doubt of the Pleasure: Let him
allow himself but this one Medium to infer it, and I shall defy his dissent to
the Conclusion. Let him sow with me this handful of seed in the tears of true
contrition for remembering his Duty and Interests so late, and I shall rest
confident he will reap in joy in this world, and carry the news of it to
another, even thither also bring his sheaves with him, abundance of fruit to
his account, be blessed here, and crowned eternally.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Pref. Sect. 17. l. 8 r. recommend. p. 17. l. 30. for soul r. speech, p. 35. l.
14. r. gentler, p. 57. l. 9. for said r. so, p. 88. l. 23 r. supersedes, p. 94.
l. 21. r. deference, p. 96. l. 7. after vice add that, p. 98 l. 2. after of add
his* p. 99. l. 19. r. constitution, p. 106. l. 28. r. motive, p. 111. l. 32. r.
deterr, p. 129. l. 7. r delighted, p. 192. l. 18. r, amiability.

PRIVATE DEVOTIONS.

LONDON: Printed for Timothy Garthwait at the Little North door of St. Paul's.
1660.

A Confession.
O Blessed Lord, I thy wretched Creature, thy not only unprofitable, and
slothful, but wicked Servant, do here. prostrate my self at thy Feet, humbly
acknowledging that I have most perversely and most treacherously mis-imployed
those many precious Talents wherewith thou have entrusted me. I have, O Lord,
unworthily abused those common Mercies which thou have afforded me as a Man,
and a Christian, my whole life having been a continued resistance to the
dictates both of Reason and Religion. But I have yet farther perverted those
more special Liberalities of thine, whereby thou have essayed to vanquish and
melt an ungrateful heart. My Knowledge has had no influence on my Choices, but
I have obstinately pursued those ways, which I knew led to the Chambers of
Death, and by advancing my Sins from Ignorances to Presumptions, has served
only to render me liable to the greater number of stripes. That Wealth whereby
I should have glorified Thee, and succored my Brethren, I have converted into
fuel to maintain and accend my Covetousness, Pride, and Luxury, so levying war
against Thee with thine own Treasure. Thus unfaithful, O Lord, have I been in
the unrighteous Mammon; and who then shall commit to my trust the true Riches?
I have wasted that Time thou have given me to work out my own Salvation, vainly
and impertinently, nay often so viciously and impiously, that Idleness, though
a Crying sin of Sodom, has been the silentest of my guilts, the greater
portion of my Days having been devoted either to the pursuit or enjoyment of my
brutish Pleasures, so making it my business to provide for the Flesh to fulfill
the Lusts thereof; and of those many Days and Years thou have afforded me, how
few minutes are there of which I can give any tolerable account to Thee, or my
own Soul? Nay, O Lord, as if my single and personal Impieties had been too
little, I have propagated them to Others, and have made that Authority and
Esteem, which thou gave me for better purposes* the means of ensnaring all
whom my Interest or Example could seduce. And now, O Lord, how unknown
astonishing a weight of guilt do I lie under, that am to answer for so many
Sins of Other men, as well as my self, that have thus been a Snare on Miz^ah,
and a Net spread on Mount Tabor, the Instrument of entangling and betraying so
many Souls? O merciful Lord; who delightest not in the death of a sinner, look
with pity both on them, and me; Give me a sincere and earnest Repentance for
my own offenses, and if it be thy blessed will, make me some way instrumental
to the begetting the like in them, that I may be as contributive to their
Recovery, as I have been to their Fall: And let the consciousness of my great
Sloth and Unfaithfulness in all the parts of my Stewardship, excite me to a
more diligent and industrious improvement of all those advantages thou have put
into my hands, for thy glory, the benefit of my Brethren, and the eternal joy
of my own Soul. Grant this, O gracious Lord, for his sake who came to Call
sinners to Repentance, Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Thanksgiving.
O Most gracious and most bountiful Lord, who do good unto all, but have in
an extraordinary measure abounded to me thy unworthiest Servant, I desire with
all exuberant thankfulness of heart, to confess and celebrate this thy great
goodness. Lord, Thou have not been to me a Wilderness, a Land of Darkness, but
have caused my Lot to fall in a fair ground. Thou have not only given me a
Natural, and a capacity of a Spiritual life, but have also enriched me with
many Advantages for the comfortable support of the one, and the happy
improvement of the other, above what thou affordest to multitudes of others.
Thou have liberally given me of the Dew of Heaven, and fatness of the Earth, an
Assurance of all those good things which may both oblige and assist me
cheerfully to serve Thee. O let not my Heart like Gideons Fleece remain dry,
whilst all about it is thus plentifully watered from Heaven; but give me, I
beseech thee, such a sense of thy Mercy, as may express it self in a constant
and zealous Obedience. Thou have done so much for this meanest Plant in thy
Vineyard, dressed it and fenced it about with Thy Grace and Providence; and
having built a Wine Press, may most reasonably expect some Clusters to be
brought to it at the Vintage. O let not so gracious, so equitable a demand be
frustrated, when thou look it should bring forth Grapes, let it not bring
forth wild Grapes; let not those Advantages I enjoy above others, tempt me to
exalt my self, or despise them, but grant me always to remember that it is Thou
only that make me differ from another. Lord, let thy Methods be my
Documents, thy Dispensations of Indulgence toward me, the Engagements and
Bands of the closest and most inviolable Duty, that that Eminency of Condition
wherein Thou have placed me in this World, may be an effectual Admonition to me
to be eminent in Virtue that Men seeing my good Works, may glorisie Thee my
Heavenly Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Blessed Savior.

A Prayer.
O Thou most Righteous and Impartial Judge, who despisest not the mean, nor
acceptest the persons of the Mighty, Make me always to remember and seriously
to consider, that none of those outward privileges I enjoy among men, can
exempt me from thy severe Tribunal, but that I shall one day be brought to
Judgment, as for all that I have done in the flesh, so particularly for those
special and peculiar Advantages, whereby thou have discriminated me from my
meaner brethren: And oh let these Terrors of the Lord timely persuade, yea
constrain me to a careful employing of all I have received, to those ends for
which thou have bestowed them. Lord, grant that the Knowledge thou have given
me may have such an efficacy on my Practice, that it may always guide, never
upbraid me. And as thou have opened thy hand wide to me in temporal Plenty, so
enlarge my heart in Thankfulness toward thee, and in Compassion and bounty
toward thy poor members: I am not straightened by thee, O let me not be straightened
in my own bowels; let neither Covetousness nor Riot make me poor in the midst
of Riches, but grant me that true Enjoyment which consists in a Charitable
dispencing of them, that forsaking all the unsatisfying nauseated pleasures of
Luxury, I may purchase to my self that more solid transcending delight of
succoring the distresses of my fellow Christians. Lord, suffer not my Wealth to
be only a lading with thick clay, nor the rust of it to bear witness against
me, but rather make me of the number of those that need relief, then of those
who want hearts to give it. And since in thy gracious Providence thou have
placed me in a condition of ease and vacancie, O let me not pervert it into a
life of Idleness and Sensuality, let me not be less, but better busied then
other men. O never suffer me to incur the guilt or reproach of being more
remiss or indifferent in my intercourse with Thee, then others are of their
traffic with the World, of having less care of my own and other men's immortal
souls, then they have of their corruptible bodies; but make me so industriously
to husband every minute of that precious Time thou lendest me here, as may be
in order to a blessed Eternity both of my self, and as many more as thou shall
put within my reach. O let not any persons ever have cause to accuse their
Relation to me, for betraying them to Sin here, or Misery hereafter; but grant
that all that are under my care or power, may receive such wholesome influence
from me, as may nourish all Christian Practice among them; And, Lord, grant
that my Example may be such to all, that I never prove to any an occasion of
Falling: Let me never contribute to that power and empire which Vice has gotten
in the world, but with a steady courage oppose all Impiety, how customary or
successful soever; Let me think nothing Honorable, but what bears Thy stamp and
impress on it, but engage, and animate, and inflame my benumbed breast, to the
most eager and vigorous endeavor of recovering discountenanced Virtue to some
esteem and reputation among men. And, O Lord, grant that by an assiduous
Practice of all Duty, I may arrive to such a gust and relish of it, as may
utterly supplant any sensual delights in my own heart, and may also qualify me
experimentally to assure others how sweet the Lord is, that I may be an
effectual (though unworthy) Instrument in thy hand of drawing many to the
Obedience of Christ, and that renouncing all the vain torturing Ambitions of
this world, I may aspire to no other honor but that of being approved by Thee
as a good and faithful Servant; That by thy mercy having my Infirmities
covered, and my Sincerity accepted, I may at last be admitted into the Joy of
my Lord, through the merits of Jesus Christ my blessed Savior and Mediator.

Amen.
For more particular Concernments, the Reader may be referred to the Devotions
at the end of [The Whole Duty of Man.]
A Table of the Contents OF THE TREATISE.
Section Page I. OF Business and Callings in general. 1. II. Of Varieties of
Callings. 8. III. The Particulars of the Gentleman's Advantages above others.
12. IV. The Branches of His Calling founded in the first Advantage, that of
Education. 20. V. Of the Second Advantage, Wealth. 54. VI. Of the Third
Advantage, that of Time. 95. VII. Of the Fourth Advantage, that of Authority.
117. VIII. The Last Advantage, that of Reputation. 130. IX. The Conclusion.
158.
The Devotions:
A Confession. 167 A Thanksgiving. 169 A Prayer. 171
FINIS.

