The Absolute NECESSITY Of Standing by the Present Government: OR A VIEW Of
what both CHURCHMEN AND DISSENTERS, Must Expect; If by their unhappy Divisions
Popery and Tyranny should Return again.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black-Bull in the Old Bailey.
MDCLXXXIX.

THE PREFACE.
IT is a strange thing, That after all that has been so often repeated and
inculcated, concerning the Implacable and Inveterate Hatred of the Papists in
general, having given up their Consciences to the Management of Priests and
Jesuits, against all that make any Profession of the Protestant Religion,
there should be yet a sort of People, That suffer themselves to be so far
intoxicated with the Sweet Draughts of the Whore's Cup in the Revelation, that
nothing can retrieve them from that Phrensical Intoxication, but that they will
still be hankering after the Flesh Pots of Popish Slavery and Arbitrary Power,
these People are still distempered and infected with the Monstrous
Excrescencies of Arbitrary Power in one single Member, above all the Laws of
the whole Infallibility, Divine Right, etc. started by Knaves and Sycophants,
believed by Fools, so credulous and good-natured, as not to believe Matter of
Fact; being the strongest Proof and a far better Rule to steer Mankind by, than
all the empty Notions of the Schools invented, only to perplex and confound our
Racionations. Once more therefore let them take a short Account of Public
Promises, Oaths and solemn Contracts so scandalously violated, not only with
the Heretics, but even among themselves,

In a Word, to come to our own Home, the Plots and Conspiracies which have bin
promoted by the Roman Catholics in England, since the Reformation, are of that
Nature, and have caused such dreadful Convulsions both in Church and State,
that it is a great Argument of the Goodness and Providence of God, that this
Kingdom has bin able to bear so many Brunts, and to avoid so many deep Designs
as has brought us to the very Brink of Ruin.

Since then the Almighty, more out of the Goodness of his Providence than our
own Deservings, has bin pleased by this our late Deliverance, to free us from
the Treachery and Infidelity of our Antichristian Adversaries, by defeating the
Hopes, and totally overthrowing the Contrivances of that restless, Implacable,
and perfideous Faction; certainly they must be very impious or very Ungrateful,
who instead of adoring the boundless Favor of Heaven toward them, will still
be hankering after the Abominations of Rome, and seeking to close again with
Idolatry. Nor must they be less stupid, who finding themselves at Liberty from
Tryanny and Superstition, would be again submitting their Necks under the Yoke
of Arbitrary Oppression.

Rather it would become them to pay their most thankful Acknowledgments to God
in the first Place: And-in the next to the Instrument of their Happy
Deliverance, and with all grateful Loyalty and Obedience, so to behave
themselves toward his present Majesty, as not to disturb him by their own
Froward Murmurings and Discontents, and by their own idle Heats and
Animosities, in carrying on and bringing to Perfection the Great Work which he
has so magnanimously and piously begun: Which till they do, they must be looked
upon no otherwise, than as such who seek their own Destruction, Troublers of
Israel, that will neither be at Quiet themselves, nor suffer others to enjoy
the Benefit of the Public Tranquillity.

THE TRUE SPIRIT OF POPERY.
CRuelty is a Crime so detested and abominated of all Mankind, and so contrary
and so destructive even to Nature it self; and withal so diametrically opposite
to the Sacred Precepts and Example of Man's Propitiator, and the heavenly
Founder of his Religion, that it may well be looked upon as one of the greatest
Wonders of the World, That the Church of Rome should be so daring, as to
pretend establishment from Heaven, and to be the only Rule and Infallible
Standard of Divine Worship among Men, that places her chiefest Safety and
Protection, and has nothing more to trust to then the boisterous Arm of
Inhumanity and Oppression. And then, again, it is no less to be admired, That
Men endued with Reason should be so infatuated, as in opposition to Reason, and
the innate Light and Law of Reason, to surrender up all their common Sense to
Doctrins that uphold a more savage Tyranny than is exercised even among the
most Savage Beasts themselves, as it were in open Hostility with God and Man.
For it is a Defiance of the Eternal to exercise all acts of inexorable Cruelty,
unlimited Pride and tyrannical Dominion, where he commands Compassion, Mercy
and Humility. And it is no less a mark of irreconcilable Enmity against
Mankind, upon all occasions to labor nothing more then the Destruction and
utter extirpation of Mankind, because they refuse to bow down and adore the
Idol of Papal Authority. One would think that the Church of Rome had bin
founded, not by S. Peter, but by Maximinus the Elder, one of the most cruel
Persons upon Earth; whose Maxim it was, That no Dominion could be supported but
by Cruelty, or that she had bin a Disciple of those Apostles of Inhumanity that
set up the ten Persecutions. And indeed where can we better fix that Character
which Scripture gives to Antichrist, of being always drunk with the Blood of
the Saints, then upon the Sea of Rome? She, that is never well, but when she is
carousing in full Bowls the Blood of Heretics; comprehending under that false
and scandalous Name all People in the World that make a sincere and true
Profession of Religion, the most conformable to the Word of God. Agreeable to
which, is the Barbarity and Cruelty of her Doctrine, against all that refuse to
submit to her Opinions; which maintains that Heretics are to be delivered over
to the Secular Princes, whose Duty it is to burn them without Mercy, upon Pain
of being anathematized, and deprived of their Kingdoms and Dominions, if they
deny to be the Instruments of her Inhumanity. To which we may add her Violation
of the Public Faith, which was decreed by one of her General Councils, at
Constance: Insomuch, that notwithstanding the Safe Conduct which Sigismund had
granted to John Huss and Jerome of Prague, care was taken to have them both
burnt: So that indeed it behooves all mankind besides, that are not of her
Persuasion, to stand upon their Guard, and to defend themselves against her, as
if they were in the midst of the Libyan Deserts, or among Cannibals, hourly in
danger of their Lives.

For Proof of which there might be produced from the Records of all Ages, all
along, ever since the first Extravagances and Usurpations of Popery, Instances
^now to convince her most bigoted Idolaters of the Truth of what is here
alleged, and of what has bin so often inculcated into the Minds of Men, were
since the first beginning of the Reformation; but not to insist upon the more
remote Barbarities and Butcheries perpetrated upon the Albigenses, under
Innocent III, (a Name ill suiting with the Cruelties which he commanded and
encouraged his Minion of equal Piety and Humility, S. Dominic) to the utter
desolation of a Populous Country, and extirpation of the Inhabitants; of whom
the small remainder that escaped the Slaughter, were constrained to fly for
Refuge into Bohemia: And the succeeding Slaughter of the Valdenses in the City
of Merindoll and Villages adjoining, under the reign of Paul III, and carried
on by the Cardinal of Tournon, and the Bishop of Cavaellon, the Pope's
Vice-Legate, with that fury, that not contented with the bloody Executions of
the naked and harmless Inhabitants, they said their very Habitations in Ashes,
and levelled them with the Earth. And therefore so much the more is the Power
of Rome to be feared and prevented in a Nation that values it is own welfare and
security, by how much it appears the most Cruel and Destructive Religion in the
World; as not deeming any People worthy to live upon the Earth, but the Slaves
of Papal Jurisdiction; and for that Reason not content with petty Cruelties,
but still clearing her way to Absolute Dominion, by General Massacres, entire
Desolations, and utter Extirpations. And therefore, though it argue Folly, and a
womanish Fear, to be scared with Rabble-Reports, on purpose raised to amuse the
Minds of the Vulgar Herd; yet it is but common Prudence to have a watchful Eye
over those that we see so frequently guilty of Impieties of the same nature,
and to be wary of being surpised by such as are easily induced to act what has
bin by their Predecessors so dreadfully committed already.

For that it still runs in their Blood, and that they are the same People
still, unalterable in their Sanguinary Principles, there is no need of going
any farther, then to begin with Queen Mary's Reign. At what time England was
become such a Theater of Fire and Faggot, as if Rome had designed to have
changed her imaginary, into a real Purgatory over all this Land, for the
refining the Bodies of the Protestants (a very uncharitable piece of Charity)
tho with this difference, That the Sufferers could neither by Prayers nor Money
obtain deliverance from this, as her Adherents could both Pray and buy
themselves out of their own.

So soon as Edward VI, was dead, the Lady Jane, Daughter to the Duke of
Suffolk, whose Mother, then alive, was Daughter to Mary, second Sister of Henry
VIII, was proclaimed Queen of England, and the Lady Mary, King Henry's eldest
Daughter put by the Succession; the Nobility, who then sat at the Helm, being
not a little apprehensive that she might entangle the Crown by marrying with a
Stranger, and more certainly assured, well knowing her obstinate Bigottrie to
the Romish Tenants, in the time of her Brother's reign, that she would alter
the Religion which had bin used as well during the Life of her Father, King
Henry, as in the Days of her Brother, King Edward, and so bring in the Pope
again, to the utter destruction of the Realm.

Upon this Mary retires into the Quarters of Norfolk and Suffolk, and with such
of the Commons as she could get together, kept her self close for a while in
Framingham Castle; thither the Suffolk Men resorted to her, and promised her
their utmost Assistance, provided she would not attempt the alteration of the
Religion, which her Brother, King Edward had established by Laws and Orders
publicly enacted and received, by consent of the whole Realm. To which
Condition she readily agreed, with Promises so solemnly made, That there should
be no change of the settled Religion, that no Man then could well have
misdoubted her. Thus gulled by her feigned Assurances, the Suffolk Men stood by
her, and that so faithfully, that with little or no Resistance she obtained the
Crown. But no sooner was she in Possession of the Sovereign Power, but
forgetting all her Promises, and joining Ingratitude to Treachery, she forgot
the Covenants made in Hebron, and displacing the Orthodox and Learned Bishops
which her Brother had advanced, preferred in their rooms her own Popish
Creatures; and above all the rest, those two Blood-suckers and mortal Enemies
of the Reformed Religion, Gardner and Bonner, forbid Preaching and reading of
the Scripture: And when the Suffolk Men afterward petitioned her to perform
her Promise, she returned them for Answer, That seeing they who were but only
Members, sought to rule their Head, they should one day know, that she would
make the Members obey the Head; and to strike the more Terror into others,
pillory'd a Norfolk Gentleman for presuming in most humble manner to put her in
mind of her Promise.

With no less Ingratitude did she prosecute Sir James Hales, one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, who had ventured his Life in her Cause, as being
the only Judge that had refused to set his Hand for her being disinherited by
the Kings Will; yet because he gave a Charge at the Quarter Sessions,
conformable to the Statutes in Henry VIII's time, against the Supremacy of the
Pope, and concerning Religion, she imprisoned him in the Counter, Marshalsea
and Fleet, where, by the continual Discourses of the Warden, of the Torments
that were preparing for Heretics, he was driven to that Despair, as at last to
lay violent Hands upon himself.

Queen Mary, besides that she had bin bred up from her Infancy in the Maxims
and Tenants of the Romish Church, was naturally of a morose and sour
Disposition, and being so bigoted as he was to the Church of Rome, there was
little Ground for the Protestants to expect any Favor, but what they might
hope for upon her Promises made to the Men of Suffolk. But when she had broken
those Promises, and withal, had advanced to the highest degrees of her Favor
Gardner and Bonner; then too late they were too well assured of what they had
to trust to.

Gardner was a Man of a haughty and imperious Spirit, crafty and subtle, to his
Superiors flattering and fair spoken; to his Inferiors fierce and disdainful,
and against his Equals sturdy and envious, so that his Emulation of Cromwell's
Greatness, especially for favoring Bonner, (for whom Gardner had no kindness
at that time) made him an utter enemy both of him and his Religion; from which,
after the fall of Somerset, he became so averse, finding which way the Tide was
like to turn, that he continued a cruel Persecutor of it to his dying day. For
as for Divinity, he had no more then to serve his turn, as having always
addicted himself to those Arts and Studies that fitted him rather to be Great
then Good. So that finding himself now at the highest Pinnacle of Authority, to
which his Ambition could aspire, he abandoned himself to those Maxims of
Cruelty, which he thought most proper to secure his Grandeur. And therefore
finding he must stand or fall by Popery, he resolved to gratify that
Profession which had raised him. No wonder then he were so severely Cruel, for
Cruelty and Popery are inseparable. Nay, there seems to be that deep Infection
in Popery, that the more strongly a Man embraces it, the more it renders him
Savage and Inhuman. For proof of which there is one remarkable Instance to be
produced from the Behavior of this Bloody and Tyrannical Bishop. The same Day
that Bishop Ridley and Mr. Latimer suffered at Oxford, it happened that the
Duke of Norfolk, an aged Gentleman, came to dine with Gardner, who
notwithstanding that he found the Ancient Duke uneasy for his Dinner, at the
usual Hour, still put him off, till four a Clock in the afternoon. But then one
of the Bishop's Servants, having rid Post from Oxford, and bringing him certain
Word that those two famous Lights of the Church were extinguished, out he comes
to the Duke, and in an exulting Tone; Now, my Lord, cried he, we will go to
Dinner: As if the Bishop could not dine until he had washed his Hands in the
Blood of those Martyrs.

Bonner was a Man of the fame Metal, fierce and barbarous beyond measure; only
as he was somewhat in a lower Station, so his Cruelties were more sordid and
pedantic, even to the scourging with Rods, and exercising his brutish Fists
upon the Faces of the miserable Creatures that were under his Captivity. He
made a Goal of his own House, such was his inveterate Malice against the
Evangelics, where the poor Creatures lay in the Stocks, and under other
Torments whole Days and Nights together. And if we may judge of the Heart of a
Man by his Words, certainly nothing could more evidently declare the inveterate
Malice of the Man then his own Expressions; nor could any thing be more
unchristian-like, then what he said to one that was brought before him: They
call me bloody Bonner, said he, a vengeance on you all; I would fain be rid of
you, but ye delight in burning. But if I might have my Will, I would sow up
your Mouths, and put ye in Sacks, and drown ye. No less bitter and inhuman was
that other Saying of the Bishop, to another in his Custody: Thou art a vile
Heretic, and I will burn thee, or I will spend all I have to my Gown.

These being the two great Master-Wheels that moved the Persecution in Queen
Mary's days, with full Power and Authority in their hands, had their inferior
Instruments you may be sure, their Harpsfeilds and their Thorntons, their
Promoters, Apparitors and Sumners in all corners of the Kingdom, and all acting
you may be sure with all the double diligence imaginable, there being no step
so probable to Church-Preferment, as to be thought a good Hangman and
Executioner; no Man so Praiseworthy, as the most sedulous and treacherous
Informer.

And now began those blazing Bonfires of Human Flesh in all Towns and Cities of
the Nation; such horrid roastings, toastings, and broylings of Mankind, which
if so terrible to the ear, of necessity must have bin dreadful to the sight of
the Beholders, Young and Old, Men and Women, faggoted together four, five,
seven, and ten in a cluster, and committed to the devouring Flames, to rejoice
the hearts of the merciless Papists, for being again restored to their ancient
Authority: And doubtless such again would now have bin the Bonfires for the
recovery of lost England, so soon as they had fixed their Power. And why all
this infernal execution of Fire, for the confusion of Heretics, unless it be to
let us understand, that if the Devil be of any Religion at all, he must be a
Papist, by his making such a terrible use of the same Element? Thus much in
General; let us now descend to Particulars.

And because it is the business of these few sheets, to set forth the Cruelties
of the Papists, in their malicious Prosecution of the Protestants, and to show
what dangerous Masters they are like to prove wherever they get the upper
hand, we shall begin with Bloody Bonner (for that was the glorious Epitaph
which he had acquired to himself, by his inhuman way of endeavoring, as he
pretended, to Convert the Misguided Protestants) whose Rage and Malice was so
exorbitant toward those innocent Creatures, that he laid aside the Function of
Bishop, and rather chose to take upon him the Office of a Hangman and
Tormentor, then to be out of Employment. To which purpose he had in his own
House his Prisons and Dungeons, of which two were more particularly remarkable;
the one called his Cole-House, where he kept his Prisoners without Meat or
Drink, allowing them only an Halfpenny a day for Bread, and a Farthing a day
for Drink: Adjoining to which Cole-house was another close Dungeon, where the
poor Prisoners were kept with their Hands and Feet all at once in the Stocks,
not without great torment and misery. In this Dungeon Thomas Whittle, a
Minister of Essex, who through the extremity of his Imprisonment, was
constrained by Writing to yield to the Bishop of London his Jailer, upon which
he was set at liberty; but soon after repenting of what he had done, he came to
the Bishop's Register, and asking for his Bill of Recantation, tore it with his
own hands. With which the Bloody Bishop being acquainted, sent for the Minister
again, fell upon him with a Lyon-like fury, cuft and box'd him till his Face
was black and blew, and at last plucked away a great part of his Beard.

Besides this Cole-house, he had another Prison within his House, which was
called Mondays-hole, which Dungeon was within a Court where the Prebends
Chambers were, being a Vault under Ground, having a Window enclosed with a
Pale, about four Foot and an half high, and about three Foot distant from the
same; so that the Prisoners looking from beneath, could only see such as stood
at the Pale. In this Prison, among others, was Alice Binden, first imprisoned
by the Bishop with so much rigor, that for nine Weeks together she was forced
to lie upon a little short Straw, between a pair of Stocks and a Stone-wall,
with a short Allowance of Three Farthings a day for Bread and Water; during all
which time she never had the liberty to change her Apparel, whereby she became
a most miserable and loathsome Spectacle to behold: After which Cruelty in
Mondays-hole, they were at length so merciful to her, as to burn her in
Smithfield.

He had also another loathsome Prison under his own Jurisdiction, called the
Lollards Tower, within the Cathedral of St. Paul's it self, which as it had bin
formerly made use of for the Imprisonment of Heretics, and particularly for the
murdering of one Richard Hunn, a Merchant-Taylor of London in the time of Fitz
James, Bishop of the same Diocese, so Bloody Bonner continued for the same use
during his own time. This Hunn being cited into the Spiritual Court by one
Thomas Dryfeild, Parson of the Parish of St. Mary Matsilon, for a Mortuary
which he unjustly claimed of the said Hunn, upon the Burial of a Son of his
that died at Nurse in the said Parish. Upon which Hunn, by the advice of his
Counsel, pursued a Writ of Praemunire against the said Dayfield; which so
incensed the Priestly Order, that they forged Articles of Heresy against him,
and got him committed to the Lollards Tower, where he was murdered by Dr.
Horsey the Bishop's Chancellor, who to color the Murder, gave out that he had
Hanged himself. But the Citizens not so satisfied, demanded that the Coroner
might sit upon him. Which startling the Bishop and his Chaplains, it was
resolved that the Bishop should proceed Ex Officio, against the Dead Body,
supposing that if the Party were once condemned of Heresy, the Inquest durst
not then but find him guilty of his own Death: But notwithstanding the terrible
Condemnation of the dead Body, Dr. Horsey and his Accomplices were found Guilty
of the Murder. So that had not the Bishop labored with Cardinal Woolsey in
the Doctor's behalf, to take away the Scandal from the rest of the Clergy, he
had had his deserts the next Sessions.

In this Lollards Tower it was, that Bloody Bonner imprisoned several of his
Captives, where they were enforced not only to a single but a double Captivity;
not only enclosed within the Walls of the said Tower, but forced to sit with
their Hands and Feet in Stocks on purpose provided within the said Prison. With
which inhuman dealing, and for want of Food, no less then three at once were
famished to Death, and by the Tyrannical Bishop commanded to be cast like Dogs
into the Fields: For such is the Mercy of Popish Charity, that they will not
allow so much as Christian Burial to Heretics. His very Parlour, and his
Orchard at Fulham did the enraged Bishop turn into Places of Execution.

For the Bishop being enraged at the Constancy of one Thomas Thomkins, a
Weaver, who was his Prisoner at Fulham, sent for him one day into his Parlour,
in the presence of Dr. Harpsfeild, Pendleton, and Chadsey. At what time the
poor Man standing stiffly in defense of his Faith, the cruel Bishop having a
Wax-Candle of three wicks standing by him upon his Table, took him by the
Fingers, and held his Hand directly over the Flame, till the Veins shrunk, and
the Sinews burst, insomuch that the Water spurted forth in Harpsfeild's Face.

In the like manner did the Bishop serve a poor pitiful blind Harper; who being
brought before him for a Heretic, presently cried the insulting Prelate, Such
blind Abjects as thou will be following Heretical Preachers; but when they come
once to feel the Fire, will be the first that fly from it. To whom when the
poor Man replied, That though every Joint of him were burnt, yet he trusted in
God he should not fly, the Bishop ordered a burning Coal to be brought him, and
then thrusting it into the hollow of his Hand, commanded his Servant to clutch
it again, till the poor Man's Hand was miserably burnt to the Bone.

And because the Bishop knew it was as much the Office of an Executioner, to
Scourge as well as Burn, he resolved to be no less remarkable for the one then
the other. Among the Sufferers at his cruel Hands, of this nature, was one
Thomas Hinshaw, a young Lad of about Nineteen or Twenty years of Age, who
because he adventured to dispute the Case with the Bishop and his Archdeacon
Harpsfeild, was adjudg'd a Heretic; and by Bonner, then being at Fulham,
carried into his Garden, and there in an Arbor, being commanded to kneel down
against a Bench, was forced to endure the fury of Bonner, who laid on with a
Rod of Willows till he was quite out of Breath. Of the same number was also
another, whose Name was John Wills, who because he refused to recant as the
Bishop would have had him, was immediately carried into his Arbor in the
Orchard, where the enraged Prelate belabour'd the poor Young Man first with
Willow, then with Birchen Rods, till his strength, though not his fury, fayl'd
him.

But the most Tragical Act, (which if not committed by him, yet was no less
permitted by him in his own House, which was the same thing, while he had
knowledge of the Fact,) was the barbarous Whipping of a Child of about Eight or
Nine years of age, that came to the Palace for leave to see his Father in
Lollards Tower. This Child being told by one of the Chaplains that first met
him, That his Father was a Heretic; made Answer, That his Father was no
Heretic, but that He, meaning the Chaplain, was a Heretic, as having Balaam's
Mark. For which the Chaplain carried him into the Bishop's House, where among
them they so cruelly handled the poor Child, that he died within fourteen days.
However it were, Bonner fearing the Detection of a Crime so horrid, released
the Father, in hopes his Mercy to the Father might atone for the Death of the
Child.

These Barbarities thus acted by Bonner, and perpetrated within his own Walls,
were committed by the rest of the Gang with equal virulency and inveteracy.
Particularly by one Sir Edward Tyrrel, a Justice of the Peace at that time in
Essex, who coming to Colchester to apprehend an old Man and his Wife that were
accused of Heresy: After he had seized the Father and Mother, not liking the
Replies which the Daughter gave him to certain Questions which he put to her,
took the Candle out of her hand, and holding the Maid by the Wrist, held the
flaming Candle under her hand so long, till the very Sinews cracked asunder; all
the while he exercised this Cruelty, reviling the Maid, and bidding her, Cry
Whore, why ye young Whore wont ye cry? And in the end, after the Sinews burst,
that all the house heard them, he thrust the Maid violently from him, calling
her, strong Whore, shameless Beast, and beastly Whore, to show how well he
could follow the Examples of his Superiors.

Mr. Robert Samuel, Minister of Barfold in Suffolk, was most inhumanly handled
by Dr. Hopton the Bishop of the Diocese, and his Chancellor Dr. Downing. Who
after they had got him in their clutches, kept him in a close Dungeon, chained
bolt upright to a great Post, in such a manner, that standing only on tiptoc,
he was forced to stay the whole weight of his Body upon his Toes. And to make
amends for the pain which he suffered by that means, they kept him without Meat
or Drink, so that he was most unmercifully tormented with hunger and thirst;
only that they allowed him two or three mouthfuls of Bread aday, and three
spoonfuls of Water, to keep Life and Soul together; insomuch that his burning,
which afterward ensued, was but a trifle in comparison which he had suffered
in tedious Imprisonment; while the quick mercy of the Fire delivered him from
the more severe Cruelties of the Bishop and Chancellor.

At Chester, one George Marsh, a Priest, being condemned by Doctor Coats, then
Bishop of that Diocese, was carried to the Stake, where to the usual cruelty of
Burning, they added a new Invention, of pouring melted Pitch upon his Head.

In the Town of St. Peter's Port, in the Island of Guernsey, three Women, a
Mother and her two Daughters, being first imprisoned upon Suspicion of Buying
Stolen Goods, after they were acquitted of that, were again remanded to Goal,
for not going to Mass. Of which the Magistrates gave notice to Jacques Amy, and
to other of the Clergy, whose officious zeal for the Popish Cause was so
enormously extraordinary, that upon the bare Letter of the Magistrates, they
returned the three Women for Heretics, though they had never bin so much as
Examined before them, or had had any particular Information against them. But
the Magistrates understanding that the Women had not been Examined by the Dean,
would not sit upon them in Judgment, until they had been first carried before
the Dean and Curate to be Examined of their Faith. Which being done, after a
short Examination severally and apart, they were returned to Prison again.
After which the Dean sent a Sentence under his own Seal and the Curate's Sign,
whereby the Women were Condemned as Heretics, and delivered over to the
Magistrate to do Execution. The Women being sent for to receive their
Sentences, desired to know their Accusers, and what was laid to their Charge,
for that they knew not that they had at any time offended the Queen or the
Church, being ready to obey the Ordinances of both, as good Subjects ought to
do. But notwithstanding their Reasons and Allegations, the three Women were all
condemned and adjudged to be Burnt. And now these three Innocent People (only
for the Name of Heretics) being brought to the Stake, the Mother was fastened to
the middle Post, the Eldest Daughter on the Right Hand, and the Youngest on the
Left. They were first strangled; but the Rope breaking before they were dead,
the poor Women fell in the Fire. At what time happened a doleful sight, that
would have drawn Compassion from the most barbarous of Infidels. For one of the
Daughters, who was Big with Child, falling on her side, as her Belly burst with
the vehemence of the Flame, the Infant being a lusty Man-Child, fell in the
Fire, and was presently snatched out of the Fire, and laid upon the Grass, by
one that stood by. Immediately the Child was carried to the Magistrate. But the
Bailiff, neither regarding the miraculous Acts of Providence, nor moved with
common Humanity, upon an Infant so wonderfully preserved, either out of stupid
Ignorance or wilful Blindness, ordered it to be carried back again and thrown
into the Fire. And thus the Infant, baptized in his own Blood, was both born
and died a Martyr, leaving behind him, to the World, which it scarcely ever
saw, a miserable Spectacle of the Herodian Cruelty of Popish Tormentors.

In like manner Eliz. Pepper, being one of thirteen, that were burnt together
at Stratford Le Bow, being about thirty Years of Age, though they well knew that
she was far gone with Child, was hurried with the rest to the Stake, and
consumed to Ashes, with the Fruit of her Womb; such is the difference between
Popish and Protestant Mercy, which never denies a Reprieve, even to the worst
of Fellons, though but upon the bare Suggestion of a great Belly. Nor did this
Inhumanity extend to the Living, but their Barbarity still persecuted the
Bodies of the Dead; for after they had tormented several in their loathsome
Dungeons to Death, with Hunger and Thirst, they were so inhuman as to deny them
the common Favor of Christian Burial. Thus Edw. Burton, Esquire; dying in the
Diocese of Chester, and desiring to be buried in his Parish Church of S. Chadds
in Shrewsbury, the Curate of the Parish, John Marshal, would not suffer the
Interment of the Corpse. Upon which, one of the Friends of the Deceased making
answer, That God would judge him at the last day: The Curate replied, Judge God
or Devil, he should not be buried there: So that they were forced to bury the
Gentleman in his own Garden. Thus William Glover, dying a pretended Heretic,
and his Friends desirous to have buried him in the Parish Church of Weme in
Shropshire, the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, sent forth a Mandate, not
only to command the Curate, that he should not be buried in Christian Burial,
but that no Man should procure, help or speak to have him buried in Holy
Ground. And whereas his Brother John Glover, dying in the same Condition at
Coventry, was buried by stealth in the Churchyard, without Priest or Clerk;
yet when Dr. Drant, the Chancellor, came to hear of it, he ordered him to be
taken up again, and cast over the Wall into the Highway. To which, when the
Parson answered, That he had lain six Weeks, and smelt so that it was
impossible to endure the Stench. Well then, said Drant, take this Bill and
pronounce him in the Pulpit a damned Soul, and a twelvemoth hence cast his
Carcass over the Wall for Carts and Horses to go over, and then I will come and
consecrate again that place of the Churchyard, where he lay.

In the Castle of Canterbury, no less then five being famished to death, they
were all buried in the Highway, by order of Thornton, the Suffragan of Dover,
otherwise called Dick of Dover. For indeed such was the extreme severity of
Thornton and Harpsfield, that the Goalers of Canterbury, whether of their own
rugged Natures, or called out of purpose, either would not or durst not admit
of the Relief which was sent or brought the half-famish'd Prisoners; but they
either turned it back, or kept it for their own use.

After all this, what may be thought of the detestable and execrable piece of
continued Malice and Violation of the Sepulchers of the Dead, exercised at
Cambridge toward the Bones of Bucer and Phagius; Persons that while they
lived, so far transcending in Learning and Piety, the whole Rabble of
Illiterate and Ungodly Bishops and Priests, who so violently prosecuted their
Sacred Relicts, that they were not to be named in the same day with those two
Great and Famous Men? This was a piece of Pageantry, performed with so much
Pomp and Solemnity, that nothing more detected the Rancour and Hatred of the
Papists against all Men of Piety and Virtue: Nevertheless it proceeded so high,
that the deceased Bucer and Phagius were formally cited to appear before
certain Commissioners appointed for their Judges, and for default of
Appearance, not only their Persons, but their Books and their Bones were
condemned as Heretical, after a ridiculous Examination of Witnesses against the
Dead, the Churches where they lay buried were excommunicated, and after all,
their Cossins were taken up, and being chained to their several Stakes, and
burnt, together with their Bones, not with out the Indignation and Laughter of
the People that beheld the hateful Spectacle; who as they derided the Folly, so
likewise they abominated the ridiculous Cruelty of the Actors. Nor did their
barbarous Fury end here, for they pursued the very Bones of Peter Martyr's Wife
to Oxford; where, without any consideration of her Sex or her Religion (which
had never been made known, by reason her Language was not understood) her Corpse
was dug up, and buried under a Dunghill. But at length, after the Death of
Queen Mary, this Persecution ceased, after the burning of two hundred eighty
four; though Grindal, who lived in that time, reports, That in two Years eight
hundred were burnt, besides sixty, who after most Severe and Cruel Usage died
in Prison. And to show that it was not the Conversion but the utter extirpation
of the Heretics, which those mischievous Papists aimed, and still do aim at,
may readily appear, by the story of Bembridge, who was burnt near Winchester:
This Man feeling the Violence of the Fire, cried out, That he recanted;
whereupon the Sheriff caused his People to put out the Fire; in hopes, that
since the Popish Clergy desired the Conversion and not the Destruction of
Heretics, such an act of Mercy would not displease them. But the Council sent
him Orders in Writing, To go on and execute the Sentence, and to take care that
the Prisoner died a good Catholic; for it was said, if he recanted sincerely he
was fit to dye, if he did it not sincerely, he was not fit to live: And after
all was done, the Sheriff was committed to the Fleet for his Presumption. But
Harpsfield was not of the Sheriff's mind, he understood the Sense of the Roman
Catholics better; for he having several condemned Prisoners under his Custody
in Canterbury, and being at London, at the time when Queen Mary lay dangerously
sick, made have home, for fear the miserable Creatures should escape by her
death; and was so speedy, that five were burnt before the News of her Death
could arrive.

After all this, what difference between the Religion of these Cruel Papists,
and the Religion of the Ancient Druids in France, which Suetonius calls
Religionem dirae immanitatis? The Druids were always besmearing their Altars
with the Blood of their Slain Captives; and Popish Cruelty is never satisfied,
but when they are fumigating their Host with the Blood of Heretic Holocausts;
so that the same Reason which moved Claudius, a Heathen Emperor, to abolish
the one, may justify a Christian Prince, in at least exterminating the other
out of his Dominions.

But now to trace them into other Countries; we find this cruel Generation of
Men still perpetrating the same or worse Acts of Inhumanity, if worse can be,
wherever they get footing and Power, and either by the Fury and exorbitant
Tyranny of their Inquisition, or by the Arms of bigoted Zealots, whole
Country's wasted and depopulated, and the Natives cut off from the Face of the
Earth by Rapine and tormenting Murder.

In the Persecution of the Waldenses of Provence, such was the merciless
Cruelty of Miniers, at the Instigation of the Pope and his Legates, that he
invaded their Territories with an armed Force, by the Permission of Francis I,
at what time the People were slain without resistance, Women and their
Daughters ravished, the Breasts of many Women with Child cut off, many that
were with Child murdered, after which their Infants were famished to Death.
All their Habitations were pillaged, sacked and burnt, and Proclamation made,
That no Man should give any Relief to those that remained alive. Upon the
taking of Cabrieres, Miniers caused all the Men to be brought into a Field, and
to be cut in Pieces, the Soldiers striving who should show the best of their
Manhood in cutting off Heads, Legs and Arms. And as for the Women, he caused
them to be locked in a Barn, with a great quantity of Straw, and so set sire to
it, so that many Women with Children were burnt: Upon which a Soldier moved
with Compassion, opened a Hole in the Wall for some of them to escape; but
Miniers caused them to be beaten back again with Pikes and Halberts. Some of
them also that came forth, he slew with his own Hands, ripping open their
Bellies, so that their Children came forth, which he trod under his Feet. Many
fled into Cellars and Caves, which he caused to be dragged out, driven into the
Field, stuipp'd stark naked, and then slain. After this Miniers sent one of his
Captains to the Church, whither several Women and Children were fled for
Sanctuary; whom he put all to the Sword, sparing neither Young nor old.

Then marching to a Place called Costa, where his Men committed the same
Outrages and Slaughters, ravishing Women and Virgins to that beastly degree,
that the Women with Child and young Maids dyed presently after. Such as hid
themselves in Rocks and Caves were either famished to Death, or else choked
with Fire and Smoke put to the Mouths of the Caves.

In the beginning of this Persecution, there was one John de Roma, a Monk, who
had got a Commission to examine those whom he suspected to be Heretics, and
which he exercised with all sorts of Cruelties upon those that fell into his
Clutches; among the rest, this was one. He filled Boots full of boiling Grease,
and put them upon their Legs, tying them backwards over a Form with their Legs
hanging down over a Fire, after which manner he most cruelly tormented several,
and then as Cruelty put them to Death.

No less was their Rage against the Heretics in Bohemia, where they made
nothing to pistol the Reformed Pastors in their Pulpits; and shot one Aged
Minister, among the rest, as he lay sick in his Bed.

In the Town of Minion the Commissioners demanded of the People a positive
Answer, Whether they would turn Catholics or no? And when one, in the name of
the rest replied, That Conscience neither would nor could be forced, he was
presently laid upon the Ground and beaten; and still denying to turn Catholic,
when he could hardly speak, was torn in pieces.

At another Place the Senators refusing to turn Apostates, the chiefest of them
was made to ride the Wooden-Horse in the Marketplace for six Hours together,
though he were very Ancient; so that he was lame and half dead when he was taken
off.

In some Places they shut up the People in the Church, and forced them to
receive in one kind; and if they would not kneel before the Host, they used to
beat their Legs with Clubs till they fell down; others they gagged, and when
they had propt their Mouths wide open, they thrust the Host down their Throats.
Others were detained in Prisons and Bonds so long till they died, and
particularly one was kept in a loathsome Dungeon so long till his Feet rotted
off.

If any, to avoid this Tyranny fled to the Woods or other Private Places for
Shelter, Edicts were published forbidding all to entertain them, upon Pain of
forfeiting great Sums of Money for every Nights Entertainment. The Country
People were fetched out of their Houses; nay, out of their very Beds, by Troops
of Soldiers, who drove them before them like Beasts in the sharpest of cold and
bitter Weather. And with these poor Creatures they filled the common Prisons,
Towers, Cellars, Stables; nay, and Hog-sties too, where they were killed with
Hunger, Cold and Thirst. Marriage, Burial and Baptism were forbidden to the
Protestants, and if they did it privately, they were imprisoned, or else put to
great Fines. Among others, a Heretic Surgeon, for refusing to recant, was
thrown into a Place full of Snakes. In some Places the Heretics were shut up in
Privies, to the end they might be poisoned with the Stench. And these were the
Charitable ways, by which the Bohemian Catholics endeavored to reclaim such as
were revolted from the Tyranny of the Pope.

The Inquisition was the true Pattern of Treachery, Perfidiousness, Tyranny
and Cruelty, erected at first by the Advice of the Dominican Friars, against
the Jews and Moors in Spain, but afterward turned to the Ruin and Destruction
of all that made true Profession of the Gospel.

To this Office belong two sorts of Vermin, which are called Familiars and
Flies: The Familiars are to keep Company with all People, to creep into their
Companies and grope their Bosoms; and under the color of Friendship to give
them daily Visits, to have an Eye upon all their Actions, and to observe what
Company they keep, and with whom they converse: And when these Familiars have
picked up sufficient Matter for Information, they presently accuse them to the
Inquisitors. Now, so soon as any one is Arrested by any of these Familiars,
they take from him all the Keys of his Studies, Cabinets, Chests and Trunks
whatsoever, and they take an Inventory of his Goods; in the doing of which, the
Familiars, who are generally Bawds, Thieves, Shoplifts, and the scum of the
People, will be sure to pilfer a good share.

The Flies are a sort of Miscreants, which the Inquisitors commit to Prison,
under a Color. These Flies will cunningly, in two or three Days insinuate
themselves into the Bosoms of the other Prisoners; and then pretending a great
deal of Religion, will profer to discourse them, and by degrees get out of
their Mouths matter of Accusation against them. Which done, they move for a Day
of Hearing, and by that means being brought before the Inquisitors, they
impeach the Prisoners, who shall be sure to hear of it afterward to their
Sorrow. These Flies, as soon as they are out of one Prison, for lucre of Money,
will be content to be put into another, and so into a third and a fourth, where
they will lie in Chains, as the other Prisoners do, enduring Hunger, and Cold,
and the Stench and Loathsomness of the Prison, and all to betray others.

If a Keeper of any of the Prisons belonging to the Inquisition happen to be of
a Gentle and Courteous Nature, and use his Prisoners favorably, the Offense is
so heinous, if it come to the Inquisitors Ears, that he is sure to be whipped
about the City, and to be condemned to the Galleys for six Years.

If any of the Prisoners sing a Psalm, or recite any Portion of the Scripture,
the Inquisitors take it for a very great Offense, and presently send an Officer
to him, requiring him to be silent, upon Pain of Excommunication; and if he do
not take that for a Warning, they order a Bit to be put upon his Tongue to
teach him Obedience.

As for the Torments which the Inquisitors make use of to extort Confessions
from their Prisoners, they are of two sorts: The first is that of the Gibbet or
Pulley; with which, when a Miserable Creature is to be tormented, first comes
one behind him, and binds his Hands with a Cord, eight or ten times about, the
Inquisitors calling upon him to strain each Binding harder then other. Then
they cause the Prisoner's Thumbs to be bound extreme hard, with a small Line,
and so both Hands and Thumbs are fastened to a Pully which hangs on the Gibbet;
then they put heavy Bolts on his Feet, and hang upon those Bolts, between his
Feet, certain Weights of Iron, and so hoise him or her (for they are never
curious of the Sex) from the Ground; and while the poor Wretch hangs in this
Plight, the Inquisitors exhort him to accuse himself, and as many others as he
knows of, (excellent Popish Christianity) and if they can screw nothing out of
him, then they command the Prisoner to be hois'd higher to the very Beam, till
his Head touch the Pully. After he has hung thus a good while, and that nothing
comes from him, the Inquisitors (who are both Spectators and Judges of the
Torment all this while) command him to be let down, and twice as much Weight to
be fastened to his Heels, and so to be hois'd up again. Then they command the
Executioner to let him up and down, that the Weights of Iron hanging at his
Heels may have the greater Force, to rend every Joint of his Body asunder: With
which insufferable Pains, if the Party cries out, then the Inquisitors roar out
as loud to him again, To confess the Truth, or else he must come down with a
Vengeance. And then they order the Executioner suddenly to slip the Rope, that
the Party under Torture may fall with a Sway; and then stopping in the mid way,
they give him the Strappado; which being as soon done, it rends all his Body
out of Joint, Arms, Shoulders, Back, Legs, etc. by reason of the sudden Jerk,
and the Weights hanging at his Legs.

They have another sort of Torture, which is called the Aselli, which is after
this manner. There is a Piece of Timber somewhat hollowed at the top, like a
Trough, about the middle whereof there is a sharp Bar, going cross, whereon a
Man's Back rests, that it cannot go to the Bottom: It is also so placed that
his Heels shall lie higher then his Head. Then is the Party, naked, laid
thereon, his Arms, Thighs and Legs, being bound with strong small Cords,
wrested with short Truncheons, till the Cords pierce almost to the very Bone:
Then they take a thick Piece of fine Lawn Cloth, and Jay it over the Parties
Mouth, as he lies upright upon his Back, so that it may stop his Nostrils also,
then taking a good Quantity of Water, they pour it in a long Stream, like a
Thread, which falling from on high, drives the Cloth down into his Throat;
which puts the miserable Wretch into as great an Agony, as any Man endures at
the Point of Death: for in this Torture he has not Liberty to draw his Breath,
while the Water stops his Breath, and the Cloth his Nostrils; so that when the
Cloth is drawn out of the bottom of his Throat, it draws out Blood with it, and
a Man would think it tore out his very Bowels. And this Torment is iterated as
often as the Inquisitors please.

There is yet another sort of Torture, which is much pactis'd by these
Inquisitors, not inferior to the former: For they take a Pan of burning
Charcoal, and set it just over against the Soles of the Parties Feet, just
before he goes to the Rack; and that the Fire may have the more Force upon
them, they bast them with Lard.

When a Heretic is brought forth upon the Stage to be disgraced, or to the
Stake to be burnt, he is attired in a Sambenito, or long Garment, painted all
over with ugly Devils, having a high-crown'd Hat, upon which a Man is painted
burning in the Fire, with several Devils plying him with Fire and Faggot. Their
Tongues are also put between a cleft Piece of Wood, which nips and pinches
their Tongues, so that they cannot speak, and their Hands are moreover fast
bound behind them. And yet, such is the Wicked Hypocrisy of these Inquisitors,
that when they bequeath any person to the Secular Power, to be burnt, they do
it with this humble request, To show the Prisoner as much Favor as may be, and
neither to break any Bone, nor pierce the Skin of his Body. A strange piece of
Impudence, to pretend to so much Mercy and Clemency toward those, to whom
themselves have bin all along so extremely Barbarous and Cruel.

These Inquisitors, one time among the rest, apprehended a Noble Lady in Sevil,
because that a Sister of hers, a virtuous Virgin, confessed in the Extremity of
her Torments, that she had sometime had Conference with this Sister of hers
about matters of Religion. This Lady they shut up in close Prison, and used her
in all things, as they did their other Prisoners, and at length, so terribly
tormented her in the Trough, that by reason of the strait straitning of the
Strings, cutting to the very Bones of her Arms, Thighs and Shins, she was
brought back half dead to the Prison, the Blood gushing out at her Mouth in
great abundance, so that she died within eight days.

In the same manner was a whole Congregation of Faithful and Religious People
cut off at Sevil, the most of whom the Inquisitors consumed with Fire, as they
could discover and apprehend them.

By what has bin said, it may be easily seen how great and exorbitant is the
rage and cruelty of these bloody and merciless Inquisitors to all that profess
the Truth of Scripture; and how slight a thing they make of murdering and
torturing the Bodies of all that come under their tyranny; making no
distinction either of Age or Sex. And hence it may be as easy for all true
Englishmen to judge how fatal the Consequences might have bin, had the Liberty
of this Nation bin subdued under the heavy weight of Inquisition and Slavery.

In Germany, after the Victories of Charles V, against the Lutherans, there
ensued a very bitter Persecution in many places, Authority armed with Laws and
vigorous Malice, striving against simple Verity. Both Ministers and People,
some were tossed from place to place; some exiled out of their native
Countries, others driven into the Woods, and forced to live in Caves; some
tormented upon the Rack, and others burnt with Fire and Faggot.

Henry Sutphen, a laborious Minister, was by his merciless Adversaries the
Monks and Priests in Meldorp, haled out of his Bed naked, in the depth of
Winter, and driven barefoot over the Ice, till his Feet were cut to the Bone;
then bound in Chains, and set in the Stocks; after that removed to another
place, and shut up in a Cupboard; the next day bound Hands and Feet and Neck
together, and hurried away to be burnt. At what time a certain Woman proffering
herself to suffer Two thousand Stripes, and give them a considerable Sum of
Money, but to respit his Life till he could have a public Hearing, they threw
her under foot, and trod upon her; and not content to burn the poor Martyr
inhumanly and barbarously, cut and mangled him before they threw him in the
Fire.

Another of the same Function was thrown into Prison, where, among other
Cruelties, he was hoisted up with a Cord, and a great Stoue hanging at his
Heels, so that the Sweat which dropped from his Body through pain and anguish,
looked like Blood, and they let him down with such an extraordinary swing, that
the violence of the fall laid him almost for dead; then they let him down into
a deep Dungeon, where they kept him eighteen days, and then burnt him. And all
this while, none but the Monks and Friars both his Accusers, Judges, and
Hangmen.

With the same cruelty was one Nicholas apprehended at Antwerp, bound up in a
Sack, and thrown into the River.

In the Year 1543, notice being given that certain Lutherans met privately
together at Lovaine, an Inquisitor coming from Brussels with a Band of
Soldiers, brake into their Houses, and haled away the Men and Women out of
their Beds from their Children. Two were burnt alive in the Fire; an Aged Man
was beheaded, and two old Women burnt quick. Which leads us to the bloody
Persecution in the Netherlands.

Where the Light of the Gospel being much spread abroad, King Philip of Spain
sent the Duke of Alva with a great Army to root out the Professors of it; who
exercised unparalleled Cruelties and Butcheries against all sorts of Persons
both of the Nobility and Commons, permitting his Soldiers to Ravish Matrons and
Virgins, while their Husbands and Parents were forced to stand by and behold it.

The Duke himself also boasted, that he had bin a diligent Rooter out of
Heresy; for that besides those which he had slain in War, in the space of six
yeras he had put into the Hands of the common Hangman above eighteen thousand
Persons.

His Son Don Frederic being sent by him to Zurphen, was received by the
Burghers without any Opposition; yet was he no sooner entered the Town but he
fell to murder, hang and drown a number of Inhabitants, with infinite
Cruelties showed upon Wives and Virgins, not sparing the very Infants. From
thence marching to Naerden, the Inhabitants made an agreement with him, and he
entered the Town upon Conditions consented to, and the Faith of a Soldier. But
never did Canibals or Scythians, or the most barbarous People in the World,
commit more abominable Outrages then Duke Frederic sufferd in this Town. For
after he had assembled the Burghers into the Chapel of the Hospital, under
pretense of giving them Instructions for the future government of their City,
he commanded his Soldiers to murder them all, without sparing any one. Thus
the Men were Massacred, the Women were first Ravished, and then most cruelly
Murdered, the Inhabitants and Children had their Throats cut; and in some
Houses they tied the Inhabitants to the Posts, and then set fire to their
Houses, and burnt them alive. So that in the whole Town, neither Man, Wife,
Maid nor Child, Young nor Old, werespar'd.

After this, the Town of Harlem was, after a long Siege, surrendered to the same
Don Frederic upon a Composition, by which they were to pay Two hundred and
forty thousand Florins to redeem themselves and the Town from Spoil. But Don
Frederic having thus got into the Town, commanded that at the Toll of the Great
Bell, all the Burghers and Soldiers should carry their Arms into the
Stat-house; that the Townsmen should go into the Cloister of Ziel, the Women
into the Cathedral Church, and the Soldiers into another Church; and while the
poor Burghers were guarded in the Church, the perfidious Spaniards plundered
their Houses. The next day, the bloody Don Frederic caused Three hundred
Walloons to be Hanged and Beheaded; and the next day, Captain Riperdon and his
Lieutenant, together with one Stemback a Minister, were hanged, and Two hundred
forty seven Soldiers drowned in the Sea of Harlem. The next day, a great number
were executed, and the next day Three hundred more Soldiers and Burghers lost
their Heads, together with one Simon Simonson another Minister. Presently
after, three of the principal Magistrates lost their Heads; and to fill up this
Sea of Blood, all the Sick and Wounded were beheaded before the Hospital-Gate.

Not long before, the Town of Valenciennes, in Hainault, having the free
Exercise of the Reformed Religion among them, was surrendered to the Lord of
Noircarmes, upon good Conditions. Nevertheless the said Noircarmes being
entered, kept the City-Gates shut for diverse days, and most perfidiously and
barbarously hanged up all the French Soldiers, with all the Ministers and
Protestant Merchants. So little safety is there to be expected from the
Treachery and Perfidy of Roman Catholics, whom no Considerations of Conscience
or Honor are sufficient to oblige to keep Faith with Heretics.

At the same time, the bloody Inquisition was no less active in the Spanish
Netherlands, where multitudes of People were murdered without any Pity or
Compassion, and their dead Bodies thrown into the public Highways, to be gazed
upon by all that past by. Numbers of Believers, both Men and Women, were thrown
into Prison, where they languish'd and died, the greatest part of them for want
of Food.

John de Boscane was apprehended at Antwerp, and for his Constancy in his
Religion condemned to Death; but because the Magistrates durst not put him to
death publicly, they resolved to drown him secretly in the Prison: For which
purpose a Tub of Water was provided, and an Executioner sent to drown him; but
the Water was so shallow, and the Prisoner so tall, that the Executioner seeing
he could not dispatch him that way, gave him several wounds and stabs with his
Dagger, and so did his work. And thus go where you will, you shall find Fire,
and Faggots, Massacres, Racks and Gibbets, the only method by which the
Romanists support their Cause, and propagate their Faith.

And indeed the Popish Priests and Friars had a fine time of it to exercise
their Cruelties in Flanders, being under a Popish King so bigoted to the Pope,
and such an Upholder of the Inquisition, that by their Advice he poisoned his
own Son, for which he was applauded by Pius V. And if the Head be so barbarous,
no wonder the Members are so blood-thirsty. With these Inquisitors it was that
Philip the Second consulted what he should do with his Heretic Subjects (as he
called them in the Netherlands) who answered, That all the People of the Belgic
Netherlands, and all the States of those Countries, except such as were
otherwise noted in their Probation-Books, were Sectaries, Apostates and Rebels,
and not only those who were openly revolted from God and the holy Church, but
also those who dissembling themselves to be Papists, had bin neglecting to
suppress the Sectaries and Heretics at the beginning. As also, That all those
Noblemen and others who had preferred and published Petitions, against the holy
Inquisition, and so had underhand encouraged the Sectaries and Heretics to
Sedition, were all guilty of high Treason both against God and Man. Upon these
Instigations it was that Philip the Second sent his Orders to Alva, by which he
was commanded, according to the Decree of the Inquisition, to rack and torture
all Revolters and Sectaries according to that rigorous method which was
prescribed him. For which reason Articles were propounded in his Council,
commonly called the Council of Blood, according to which the Judges were
commanded to determine and settle the Punishments, that there might be no
difference among them in the variation of Sentences; which comprehending
altogether Nocent and Innocent, left no hole for any Man to creep out of, and
exempt himself from the Sanction of the general Decree. Heavens! what an
inhuman thing it was to see the Country People harras'd with the Demoniacal
Decrees of the Inquisitors; and the Cities filled with Butcheries and
Exilements of those that tarry, and with the Sequestrations and Plunderings of
those that were fled. In one day no less then eighteen Persons of chiefest
Remark and Quality, were publicly put to death at Brussels by Alva and his
Council of Blood. The next day three more of great Note, together with a
Minister of extraordinary Worth and Learning, were executed in the said City;
where also soon after Count Horn and Count Egmond lost their Heads, being
brought with a strong Guard from Brussels. And all these Murders did Alva,
together with his Bloody Council, bring to pass out of a mortal hatred of all
that favored or abetted the Reformed Religion.

With no less fury and despite did Philip the Second pursue the Prince of
Orange himself, whom because he could not get into his hands by fair and open
hostility, he endeavored to destroy by the treacherous hands of unsanctify'd
Desperado's. For William of Nassaw being General of the United Provinces, after
they had shaken off the Popish Yoke, presently the King of Spain proscribed
him, and in his Proscription promised a large Sum of Money, and large
Preferments, to any one that should bring him into Spain alive or dead. Which
soon encouraged several to make the attempt: Among the rest, one Javeregny was
pitched upon by a knot of Confederate Papists to do the Fact, of which they
intended to share the Profit. For which purpose he was directed to charge a
Pistol with two Bullets, and to shoot the Prince behind in the Head. And the
Eighteenth of March was the day appointed for the Execution: Upon which day the
Prince was to be at a great Feast at the Duke of Anjon's Court. But the Press
being too great there, the Assassin rather chose to do it at the Prince of
Orange's own House, as he sat at Dinner. The Villain thus desperately
resolved, a Jacobin Friar came to him and Confessed him, gave him the Popish
Communion, and fortified him in his Resolution with many sweet words,
persuading him that he should go invisible, to which end he gave him certain
Characters in Paper, and little Frogs Bones, with other petty pieces of
Conjuration.

After this he drank a draught of strong Wine, and so accompanied with his
ghostly Father, he went to the Prince's Court, where at the Stair-foot the
Friar gave him his Blessig (a hopeful Blessing) and so left him. Nor did the
Villain faint in his design, for he shot the Prince; but neither the Fryer's
Blessing nor his Conjuration proved effectual as was intended: For neither did
the Wound prove Mortal, nor the Assassin escape with his Life, being
immediately run through by the Prince's Followers. And the Juggling Friar was
also apprehended and executed.

The Papists having mist their blow, but still believing they had no greater
Opposer in the World then the Prince of Orange, and that if he were dead, they
should quickly attain their desire in the Netherlands, found out a fit
Instrument, one Balthazar Gerrard, who was more successful, and watched his
opportunity so well, that as the Prince was going out of the Hall after Dinner,
the Murderer stood behind a Pillar, and as the Prince was going by, shot him
from the Left Side to the Right, through the Stomach and Vitals. So hard a
thing it is to escape the never sleeping Argus's of Popish Malice and Revenge.
And so far different are the Papists from all other Men that have any thing of
common Morality, not to mention Christianity, that whereas all other Men
detested the Fact, they alone rejoiced and gloried in it. Nor was it at all for
the honor of the Spanish Monarch to countenance such an inglorious and
treacherous Act of Assassination as this was. Nevertheless it cannot be said to
be the only President, which shows that the Contagion of Romes bloody Maxims
spreads it self as well into the Courts of Princes, as into the Cloisters of
Rabble Monks and Jesuits. For let us but step into the neighboring Kingdom of
France, and there we shall see Popish Treachery and Dissimulation in the
highest degree, designing not only the Massacre of single Persons, but of
thousands in Clusters, and all upon that unchristian Pretense of rooting out of
Heretics. A strange blindness in Princes, not to discover themselves to be only
the Pope's Instruments to destroy their own Subjects, and dispeople their own
Dominions, merely to pleasure the Tyranny and Usurpation of an Antichrist.

After a tedious Contest of ten years, in all which time the Popish Party made
but little progress in their Designs, being headed by the Prince of Conde, the
old Admiral Coligny, and several other great Lords their Kindred and Adherents,
Charles IX, who was but young, the Queen Mother, and the Duke of Guise began to
think of laying Force aside, and to betake themselves to Craft and
Dissimulation. To which purpose the King was advised to set on foot a Treaty of
Peace with the Protestants, not so much out of a design to quiet Affairs by a
happy Settlement, as to bring the Protestants into a fatal Snare, in which
being once intrapp'd, they might be the more securely and easily destroyed. For
it was believed that the Extirpation of Heresy might be done at a much cheaper
rate then by a Civil War, if the Protestants had granted them what Conditions
they desired, and were treated with all imaginable Kindness; by which means
their Jealousies being once extinguished, and they lulled into a Confidence,
the chief Heads of the Party might be drawn to the Court, and then they were
sure of them. To this effect the first bait to be offered, was the Marriage of
the King's Sister to the King of Navar: Which not succeeding, new means might
be thought upon, till they found out one that would do their business. Nor
would it signify any thing if the King of Spain and the Pope were offended to
see the young King so highly favor Heretics, in regard that when they had
effected their Design, he would come off at last with so much the more Honor,
and receive applause from both.

The Plot being thus laid, the Queen Mother by her Emissaries assured the
Protestants, that she mortally hated the Spaniards, which for several good
Reasons was then easily believed. On the other side, the King dissembled an
Inclination to undertake the Protection of the Netherlands, then under the
Tyranny of the Duke of Alva. He also seemed to be weary of the Greatness of the
Duke of Guise and his Party. Moreover the Queen of Navarr was promised an Army
for the recovery of her Country. And as for the Constable, he was weary of the
Civil Wars, and believing he should be the Person employed in the Conquest of
the Netherlands, began to listen to these Lures. So that upon these and some
other Conditions, a Peace was concluded between the King and the Protestants,
and some cautionary Towns put into their hands till a full settlement of
Matters. In all which things the King acted his part with all the subtilty
imaginable: He showed himself much kinder to the Mont morency's, and the rest
of the Admiral's Friends; seemed to neglect those of Lorain; threatened the
Parliament of Paris, for making some difficulty in passing the Edicts in favor
of the Protestants; treated privately with Lewis Count of Nassaw about the Wars
of the Netherlands, entered into a Confederacy with Queen Elizabeth, and
employed the Cardinal of Chastillon to treat of a Match between Her and the
Duke of Anjou. And when the Spanish Ambassador and the Pope's Legate dissuaded
him from the Peace and the Marriage with the Queen of Navar, the King desired
the Legate to assure the Pope, that his design in the Marriage was only to be
revenged on those that were Enemies to God and himself; and that he would
either cut them all to pieces, or lose his Crown.

Upon such Demonstrations as these it was no wonder if Persons of so much
candor as the Queen of Navarr and the Admiral were deluded. The Admiral went
first to Court, where he was received by the King with all the show of Respect
and Kindness imaginable. He embraced him three times, laid his Cheek so his,
squeezed his Hands, called him Father, and left nothing omitted to possess him
with a deep opinion of his Friendship. Nor was the Queen less officious in her
Carriage to him. He was allowed a Guard of Fifty armed Gentlemen; a Hundred
thousand Franks were sent him to refurnish his Houses that had bin spoiled
during the Wars. And when he carried any Complaints to the King of any
Violation of the Edicts, the King ordered the Offenders to be forthwith
severely punished. With all, the King told him, That since he had got him so
near his Person, he would never permit him to forsake him as long as he lived.

The Admiral being thus successfully brought into the Toil, the Proposal of the
Marriage was vigorously carried on, and the Queen of Navarr was next inveigled
to Court; but soon after died (as is generally presumed) of Poison, which was
given her in a Pair of perfumed Gloves. To conceal which, the Chyrurgeon that
opend'd her (according to his Instructions) would not open her Head, but
pretended she died of an Impostume in her Side. The Cardinal of Chastillon was
poisoned also at the same time; which though confessed by him that did it, was
hushed up without any further Enquiry made into the business.

However, to color these Miscarriages, the King of France seemed to be wholly
bent upon the War in Flanders; to which purpose he sent into the Low Countries
and Germany to consult about the Preparations. He also furnished the Count of
Nassaw with Money, and sent some of his best Commanders with him, who acted
their part so dext'rously, that Mons was surpised by the Count of Nassaw, and
Valenciennes by Lanoue. Upon which all Men believed that the King was now
engaged, and the War begun. Upon which the King of Navarr and the Prince of
Conde were brought to Court, and received with all the Marks of assured
Friendship. A Dispensation was also obtained from the new Pope for the
Marriage; which the Pope was easily induced to grant upon the Information which
he had received from the Cardinal's Legate of the King's treacherous Design in
Marriage, which it behooved the Pope neither to obstruct nor delay. So that the
Bull being sent to the Cardinal of Bourbon, the day was appointed, and the
chief Heads of the Protestants were all drawn into Paris, partly to be present
at the Solemnities, partly to get Employments in the Army, which all Men
believed would be commanded by the Admiral.

And now the Design being ripe, the Duke of Guise, who was privy to the
Conspiracy, was ordered to gather as many Desperado's and Bravado's about him,
as might be fit for any sort of Mischief. By which means the Plot getting into
more hands, took wind, so that the Rochellers being informed of some suspicious
Passages, wrote to the Admiral to leave the Court, and not to trust the gilded
Appearances which he saw there. But the Admiral was so infatuated, that he
wrote them back a long Answer, wherein he assured them, That the King's Heart
was wholly changed, That there was never a better Prince in the World, and that
for his part, he would rather die a thousand deaths, then suspect him capable
of so base a Design. So easy a thing it is for Treachery in Youth to deceive
hoary Generosity and Candor.

On the Seventeenth of August the King of Navarr was married, and four days
were spent in all the magnificent Divertisements which are usual upon such
Occasions.

But now it was time for the Mine to play, that had bin so long working under
Ground. As for the Protestants, there was nothing to be blamed but too much
Candor and Confidence. They designed nothing but the Tranquillity of their
Country, and the Grandeur of the Crown.

On the other side, in the Papists, nothing but deep Dissimulation and
villainous Design. While the Protestants were cajoled with the most engaging
Tokens of Friendship that ever could be showed, they took the King to be
sincere, and being then but just coming to be of Age, that he was going about
to take new Methods of Government. And he had so artificially covered the
Cruelty of his Temper with a show of Good Nature, that the Protestants expected
nothing but happiness under him. And as for the Queen Mother, though they knew
her too well to put any Confidence in her, yet her passionate Affection for her
Daughter, and her Revenge against the King of Spain, for poisoning her
Daughter, made them believe themselves now assured of her. And perhaps so deep
and so refined a piece of Dissimulation was hardly ever known in the World
before. So that there was but one part of the King's Deportment which could
give any Ground for Jealousy, and that was his continual using most horrid and
blasphemous Oaths and Imprecations to make the Protestants believe the Reality
of his Intentions; a sort of Persuasion which always raises Suspicion among
sober and wary Persons.

However the Protestants beginning at length to apprehend some danger, the
Papists thought it necessary to execute their Design with all speed. For they
saw the King resolved to let those who had surpised the Towns in Flanders,
perish without sending them any relief. The Admiral also was resolved to take
his leave in few days; besides that, his Friend Montmorency saw the Storm
coming, and was retired to his House, together with several other little
Circumstances, which gave them all just Cause of Fear: So that the Popish Party
had no time to Iose. Therefore on the Twenty second of August, about Noon, as
the Admiral was going home from the Court, reading a Paper which he had in his
hand, Maurenel the Assassin, whom the Duke of Guise had made choice of to do
the Feat, shot him from a a House where the Duke had placed him, with a
Harquebuz charged with three Bullets thought to be poisoned. Of which one
carried away a part of the Forefinger of the Admiral's Right Hand, the other
stook in his Left Arm, and the third missed him. The King being in the
Tennis-Court when the News was brought him, counterfeited a deep Resentment,
and seemingly full of Affliction, and with a terrible Oath cried out, Shall I
never have quiet? and so throwing away his Racket, went out in a rage.

Afterward the King of Navarr, and the Prince of Conde coming to the King to
complain, and desiring leave to go out of Town, since there was no safety so
near the Court. The King seemed to resent it more then they, and with the
horriblest Oaths he could think of, swore he would execute such a Revenge on
all that were found guilty of it, whoever they were, that it should never be
forgotten, desiring them to stay and be Witnesses of it. The Queen Mother also
seemed to inflame his Rage with most vehement Expressions, by which means they
were persuaded to stay.

The next day, the King, with the Queen Mother and his two Brothers, went to
visit the Admiral, and coming to his Bedside, expressed the greatest
Tenderness imaginable, and in his Looks, and by the tone of his Voice,
dissembled the most profound Sorrow that could be, saying to the Admiral, You,
my Father, have received the Wound, but I feel the Smart, and will punish it in
so severe a manner that the like was never known.

The next day, the Duke of Guise, and his Uncle the Duke of Aumale, coming to
the King, and desiring leave to go out of Town, the King by his Looks and
Carriage seemed to abhor them; telling them that they might go whether they
would, but that he would find them out, if they appeared to be guilty of the
Fact. Upon which they took Horse, as if they had intended to go out of Town,
but came back to Guise House, and presently began to raise Commotions in Paris,
sending their Agents up and down the City, and Arms to several Parts. Upon
which the Admiral sending to the King to desire a Guard, about Fifty were sent
him, under the Command of Cossoius, one of his most implacable Enemies; only
some of the King of Navar's Swisses were sent to keep Guard within the Doors.
The King also ordered all the Papists that lay near his House, to remove their
Lodgings, that the Protestants might have the more convenience to be about him.

All which seemed not only very sincere, but very kind; and by such Arts as
these were the Protestants not only secured from Fears, but also had great
hopes raised in them of future Advantages. Only the Vidame of Chartres saw
through this Disguise, and in a Council of the Protestant Party held in the
Admiral's Chamber, spoke his mind freely, and proposed, That the Admiral, ill
as he was, might be carried to Chastillon, in which there would be less danger
then to stay in a place where they and all their Friends would be suddenly
destroyed; and so the next day left the City.

This was carried to the Queen Mother by a persidious Person in the Assembly,
one Bouchavannes. Upon which both she and her Party being pressed for time,
they resolved to delay the Execution of their Design no longer then the next
night. So that the Cabinet Council being met, it was resolved, That not only
the Persons of Quality of the Religion should be Killed, but that every one, of
what Condition soever, that were of that Profession, should be Massacred.

There was a long Debate, whether the King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde
should perish among the rest. But as for the King of Navar, it was thought
contrary to the Laws of Hospitality and of Nature to murder a Prince, that was
now so nearly allied to the King. But for the Prince of Conde, the Duke of
Nevers, who had married his Wife's Sister, interposed so vigorously for him,
that at length he prevailed for the sparing of his Life. But for the rest, it
was agreed on to raise the City of Paris, and set then on upon the Party.

The Conduct of which was committed to the Duke of Guise, who first imparted
his Design to the Guards, and ordered them to keep a strict Watch, both about
the Loure, and the Places where the Admiral and his Friends were lodged, that
none might escape. Then assembling the Chief Magistrates and Officers of the
City at Midnight in the Town house, he gave them to un^^^stand, that the King
was resolved to destroy the Heretics, that had so long distracted the Kingdom:
That therefore they should repair every one to his Quarter, and have all People
in readiness with the greatest secrecy that might be; and that they should
provide Torches and Flambeaus in a readiness, to light out at their Windows:
That the Sign should be a white Linen Sleeve on the Left Arm, and a white
Cross in their Caps; and upon tolling the great Bell of the Palace, which
should be done near the break of day, they should light their Torches and march.

In the mean time the King was under great Irresolutions: The Horror of the
Fact, the Infamy that would attend it, and the Danger he might be in, if it
either miscarried or were not fully executed, filled him with great Confusion.
But the Queen, who had overcome all the Persuasions of Tenderness and Pity
which are natural to her Sex, so soon as she heard of it, hastened to him, and
wrought him so effectually, that in the end she prevailed, and caused the King
to swear bloodily that he would go through with it. Which done, the Queen being
impatient, and fearing a turn in the King's Mind, caused the Bell of St.
Germans forthwith to be tolled; which was the Warning for tolling that of the
Loure.

This Fatal Sign was given upon the morning of the twenty fourth day of August,
being Sunday, and St. Bartholmews day. Upon which in a short time (with so much
Diligence, the Blood-suckers had hastened their Preparations) above three score
thousand Men were in Arms. The Duke of Guise with his Uncle Aumale, hastened
with the first (such was their eager desire of Revenge) to the Admirals Gate;
which upon call was soon opened by Cosseius, who kept Guard there on purpose,
the more easily to betray him; and then the Murderers killed the Porter, and
broke into the Court, where the King of Navars Switzers being overpowr'd by
number after some Resistance, the Murderers to the number of seven, all in
Armor, broke into the Admirals Chamber, and finding him up, and in his
Nightgown, Besme, that had bin one of the Duke of Guises Grooms, advanced
toward him; and having first thrust him into the Belly, cut him over the face,
upon which he fell, and then the rest pierced him with their Swords, till he
was quite dead. The Duke of Guise being below in the Courtyard, and hearing
the noise, called to the Murderers to throw him out at the window; which Besme
and another did. At what time, when he was down, the Duke or Angoulesme wiped
his face disfigured with blood, to see if it were he indeed, and perceiving it
was he, trampled upon his Belly, and so went away: An Italian cut off his Head,
and carried it first to the Queen Mother, then Embalmed it, and sent it to
Rome. After this, all the Ignominy and Barbarity imaginable was exercised about
the dead Carcass. His hands and fingers were cut off, his Body dragged about
the Streets, thrown in the Sein, and hanged up in Chains, his feet uppermost.
But some days after Montmorancy caused it to be taken down secretly, and buried
in his Chapel at Chantilly.

This done, the Duke of Guise ran out into the Streets, crying aloud, that it
was the Kings command they should go on, and finish what they had begun. And
then it was, that the Multitude was let loose to murder all that were of the
Religion; for which the Plunder of their Houses was to be their own. After
which, ensued the most enraged and cruel Massacre that ever was heard of: It
exceeded all that either the Heathen had done, or all their Poets had faign'd,
while every Man seemed a Fury; and as if they had bin transformed into Wolves
and Tigres, out did the cruelty of Beasts: Twenty Lords of Note, Twelve hundred
Gentlemen, and Ten thousand others were all killed. No Age or Sex was spared,
Husbands and Wives were Murdered in one another Arms, after they had seen
their Children killed at their feet. One of these Miscreants butchered an
Innocent Babe, as it was playing with his Beard. Men of Four-score were not
permitted the small Remainder of their Lives; but hewn down before their time:
Nor did a single death satisfy their brutish Rage; but they made the poor
Creatures dye many deaths before death releived them. Those that fled to the
Tops of their Houses, were made to leap down into the Streets, where they were
knocked on the head like Dogs; Such as thought to escape through dark Passages,
were either immediately killed, or driven into the Seine, where the blood-thirsty
Papists took pleasure in killing and drowning them according to Art. The
Streets ran Blood; and the Loure it self was full of Blood and the dead
Carcasses of those whom the King of Navar and Prince Conde had brought along
with them for their security; But where they expected a Sanctuary, they found a
Massacre.

Thus were the Protestants destroyed in Paris, with a Treachery and Cruelty,
which the most Barbarous of Nations had never showed one to another: Nor had
the Heathen bin ever guilty of any like it, toward the Christians. The
President which the Church of Rome had shown in the Massacre of the Albigenses,
was the likest thing to it in History for Barbarity: But never had Treachery
and Cruelty met together in such a manner, till this Execrable day.

Soon after a Jubilee was granted to all who had been in that Massakcre, and
they were eommanded to go every where to Church, and bless God for the success
of that abominable Action. So little did they relent, after all these black and
bloody Crimes, that they believed they had done God good Service. And to that
hight did their Impudenoe rise, that they presumed to Address themselves to
that Merciful Being, who abhors cruel and Blood-thirsty Men, and that with
hands not only polluted with Blood, but boasting of it as a Sacrifice offered
to God, which had bin a fitter Oblation to him that was a Liar and a Murderer
from the beginning.

But these bloody Facts were not confined to Paris only; there being a
Prosecution of the same Cruelties in many other Parts of France. For at Meaux,
a little Town not far from Paris, they began about the twenty fifth of August,
and spent the whole week in shedding Blood: They killed above two hundred, many
of which were Women, whom they deflowered before they Murdered. At Troy in
Champaigne about the same number was killed: At Orleans a thousand; six or
seven hundred at Roan. At Bourges, Nevers and La Charity, all they could find
were killed: At Tholouze, two hundred were slaughtered. At Bourdeaux they were
for some time restrained through fear of the Rochellers, but the Priests did so
inflame the Multitude, that at length they Massacred all they could find. At
Lions the Governor had a mind to have saved the Protestants, and to that end
having got together about six or seven hundred, lodged them in several prisons
to preserve them. But the people were so heated by the Clergy, that they broke
open the Prisons, and Murdered them all; dragged their Bodies through the
Streets, and cut up the bellies of the fattest of them to sell their Grease to
the Apothecaries: So that all over France, as it is reported by a credible
Author, there were no less then a hundred thousand Butchered; besides a hundred
thousand more that were sent a begging, the most of them Widows and Orphans.

When the News of this Massacre was brought to Rome, which was upon the sixth
of September following, a Consistory of the Cardinals was presently called, at
what time the Legates Letter, which contained the Relation of the Massacre,
being read, they went immediately in a Procession to St. Marks Church, where
they offered up their solemn Thanks to God for so great a Blessing to the Sea
of Rome and the Catholic Church. And on the Monday following, there was another
Procession made by the Pope and Cardinals to the Minerva, where they had High
Mass, and then the Pope granted a Jubilee to all Christendom, of which this was
one of the Reasons, that they should thank God for the Slaughter of the Enemies
of the Church, lately Executed in France.

Two days after this, the Cardinal of Lorrain had another great Procession of
all the Clergy, Ambassadors, Cardinals and the Pope himself, who came to St.
Lewis's Chapel, where the Cardinal said Mass in Person, and in the King of
France's name, thanked the Pope and the Cardinals for their good Counsels, the
help they had given him, and the Assistance which he had received from their
Prayers.

Soon after, the Pope sent Cardinal Ursin, in his Name, to congratulate the
King of France, who in his Journey through the Cities, highly commended the
Faith of those Citizens who had a hand in the Massacres, and distributed his
Holiness's Blessings among them.

Moreover the best Picture-drawers and Tapestry-weavers were put to work to set
off this Action with all the Glory and Splendour that Art could invent, and a
Suit of these Hangings is to this day in the Pope's Chapel.

By all which we may easily gather what is to be expected from the True Spirit
of Popery, and what we are to look for, whenever we come to lie at the Mercy of
Priests and Jesuits, whose Religion and Tenets will not only bear them out,
but embolden and encourage them to commit such treacherous and bloody Acts.

From hence to proceed, and show that more Arts of Cruelty have bin found by
the Romish Clergy, for the Propagation of their Religion, then ever the Heathen
Persecutors reached to, let us take a short view of the Irish Rebellion.

For most certain it is, that the first Principles of that inhuman Conspiracy
were roughly drawn and hammered out at the Roman Forge, powerfully somented by
the Treachery and Animosities of some of the Chief Irish Natives; and being
once hatched and set on foot by that Vicar of the Devil, the Pope, was carried
on by those vigilant and industrious Emissaries of his, who are sent
continually abroad by the Power of that abominable See, with full Commission,
per fas and nefas, to make way for the reestablishment of the Popish Religion
in all Parts where it has bin suppressed; and by their venomous Infusions work
so powerfully upon the blind, ignorant and superstitions People, as to make
them easily ready for Change, the Great ones mischievously to Plot and
Contrive, the Inferior sort treacherously to rise up and execute whatever they
command. By the Examinations also of several Persons to whom the most eminent
and active of the Irish Priests has confessed it, it appeared that the Priests,
Jesuits and Friars of England, Ireland and Spain, and other Countries beyond
the Seas, were the Plotters, Contrivers and Projectors of that Insurrection,
and that they had bin busied above six years in preparing and bringing it to
pass. And by Letters from Rome to Sir Phelim Oneale and the Lord Macguire,
which were intercepted, it was no less apparent that the Pope and his Cardinal
Nephews rejoiced when they heard that Sir Phelim had taken Arms, and assured
him all Assistance from Rome. The Jesuits, Priests, Friars, and all the rest
of the viperous Fraternity belonging to their Holy Orders, were well assured of
that, and therefore during the six years, lost no time, but most dext'rously
applied themselves to accomplish their Design. So that when the Plot was so
surely (as they thought) laid, that it could not fail, and that the Day was
once prefixed for Execution, they were so impudent as publicly to solicit
Heaven, by their Prayers, for the good Success of a great Design much tending
to the Good of the Kingdom, and the Advancement of the Catholic Cause. And to
facilitate the Work, and incense the Zeal and Fury of the People, they loudly
declaimed in all places against the Protestants, telling the People they were
Heretics, and not to be suffered any longer to live among them: That it was no
more a Sin to kill a Protestant, then to kill a Dog; and that it was a mortal
and unpardonable Sin to relieve or protect any of them.

According to this Doctrine, one of the Irish Priests being asked, whether it
were not lawful to kill an English Minister, because he would not go to Mass,
made Answer, That it was as lawful to kill him, as to kill a Sheep or a Dog.
And several of the Irish Rebels after the Cessation, confessed, That their
Priests had given them the Sacrament, upon condition they should spare neither
Man, Woman nor Child that were Protestants. Nor did those Caitif Priests and
Friars stick to stir up the Multitude, by promising them Celestial Wages for
the Reward of Slaughter and Massacres. Insomuch that one Ocullan a Priest told
his Auditors, That the Bodies of such as died in the Quarrel, should not be
cold before their Souls should ascend up into Heaven, and that they should be
free from all the Pains of Purgatory. But the most comfortable Encouragement
was the License which their hellish Priests gave them, under the Assurances of
its being Lawful and Meritorious, to Strip, Rob and Dispoil the Protestants,
there being no greater Incentive to provoke the Multitude to Wickedness and
Villainy, then Plunder and Rapine.

The Rabble being thus let loose, and prepossessed by their Priests with a
belief, that it was lawful for them to rise up and destroy all the Protestants,
as being worse then Dogs, or rather Devils, and such as served the Devil, and
assuring them, that the Killing of such was a Meritorious Act, and a rare
Preservative against the Pains of Purgatory, presently fell to work, and having
partly by Force, and partly by Treachery, possessed themselves of the Chief
Places of Strength in several Provinces, disarmed the Protestants, robbed them
of their Goods, stripped them to the Skins, and gotten their Persons into their
Power, could no longer contain from acting in all Places where they became
Masters, those horrid Massacres and execrable Murders which Canibals
themselves would be ashamed to own. Then the True Spirit of Popery began to
appear in her own Colors, and with delight to satiate her ancient implacable
Malice, in her long wished for, and often plotted Destruction of the
Inhabitants.

At the Castle of Lisgool, in the County of Fermanagh, the said Castle being
set on Fire, an Hundred and fifty Men, Women and Children were either burnt or
smothered to death, not above two or three escaping.

The same bloody Company being admitted into the Castle of Tullah, though it were
delivered into the hands Rorie Mac ^uire upon Composition, and faithful
Promises of fair Quarter; yet the Protestants having surrendered their Arms,
were first all stripped by the Rebels, and them most cruelly murdered, to the
number of an hundred: For they massacred still by Wholesale.

In the same County of Fermanagh, seventeen Protestants were half hanged in the
Church of Clownish, and so buried. For should we number single Murders, we
should never have done, and therefore we pick out the choicest of their
Cruelties. And thus they were not content to Murder a Child of one Thomas
Stratton of Newton, but Boiled it to Death in a Caldron.

In the Parish of Kilmore, they thrust two and twenty Protestants into a
thatched House, and then burnt them alive. In another place, they compelled a
Woman to hang her own Husband. One John Greg was quartered alive in the Church
of Loghgall, and his Quarters thrown in his Father's Face. Lieutenant James
Maxwell, by Order of Sir Phelim Oneale, was dragged out of his Bed raving in the
height of a Fever, driven two Miles, and murdered; and his Wife great with
Child, stripped stark naked and drowned in the Black-water, the Child halfborn.

At Leighlin Bridge, a Woman was delivered of two Children, of which one had
the Brains dashed out against the Stones, the other was more mercifully
murdered.

A Dyar's Wife of Ross-Trevor, being great with Child of two Children, had her
Belly ripp'd up by the Rebels, and was thrown both she and her Children in a
Ditch.

In the County of Roscommon, one William Stewart had Collops of Flesh cut off
from his Body while he was alive, Fire-coals put into his Mouth, and his Belly
ripp'd up, and his Entrails wrapped about his Neck and Wrists.

Near Temple-House in Slego, ten Men, Women and Children were buried alive. And
in the same County the Rebels forced one Lewis the Younger to kill his Father,
and then hanged the Son.

In the County of Tyrone they hanged up eight Scoth Infants upon a Cloather's
Tenter-hooks; and having ripp'd up the Belly of a Scotchman, they tied the end
of his small Guts to a Tree, and then wound him round and round the Tree, that
they might try (as they said) whether a Dog's or a Scotchman's Guts were
longest.

With such an inhuman Violence, and unsatiable Thirst of Innocent Blood; with
such Savage Butcheries of Men, Women and Children, without respect either of
Age, Sex or Quality, unparalleled in Story, did this barbarous and cruel
Rebellion overflow the whole Kingdom of Ireland. And all this by the
Contrivance, and at the Instigation of the most immortal and bloody Generation
of Men, the Jesuits, Popish Priests and Sacrilegious Friars; a sort of People
so wickedly inhuman, and so inhumanly cruel, that the Damned may look for more
Mercy in Hell, then Protestants at their hands, wherever they come under
their tyrannical and destructive Power.

For not only by the recited Examples, but by a cloud of other Proofs it
appears, that the Execrable Rage of the Irish Murderers, inflamed by those
Infernal Incendiaries, was not satisfied with the variety of Tortures and cruel
Deaths of the Living, by Stripping, Starving, Burning, Strangling, burying
alive; and by many Exquisite Torments putting Men, Women and Children to death
(insomuch that a quick dispatch was a great Mercy, so cruel are the Mercies of
the wicked) but their Hellish Rage and Fury extended also to the Babes unborn,
ripping them out of their Mothers Womb, and destroying those Innocent
Creatures, to glut their Savage Inhumanity. Nor stopped it there; but extended
also to the Ransacking of the Graves of the dead, while they dragged the dead
Carkases of the Protestants out of their Graves, that they might not rest in
hallowed ground.

Neither did their Execrable Malice stay here, but became boundless, not only
to the Destruction and Devastation of the Houses, Castles, and whole substance
of the Protestants, but even to the utter Extirpation of the English Nation,
and the Protestant Religion out of the Kingdom. All which they acted with that
brutish fury, as if the wild Beasts of the Deserts, Wolves, Bears and Tigres,
nay Finds and Furies had bin let loofe from Hell upon the Land.

In short, words are not sufficient to declare, how those horrid Rebels,
actuated by their bloody Priests and Jesuits, violated all Laws of God and
Man, all Bonds of Charity and Human Society, and how persidious and treacherous
they were; yet how true in the Observation of that Maxim of Rome, That there is
no Faith to be kept with Heretics.

From hence it is now time to waft over into France, which brings up the Scene
of these Tragical Relations, or rather terrible Lessons to warn all that are
free from the Slavery of Rome, how they supinely suffer themselves to be
reduced under the Oppressions of her Cruelty. Hitherto the Jesuits, Priests and
Friars have bin all for Massacre and Extirpation, the Torments and Tortures of
which are but like Storms and Hurricanes, that last only for a time, from
whence at length Death gives release. But the French are generally accounted a
more witty and Inventive sort of people then their Neighbors; and therefore
the Virulent Popish Clergy of that Kingdom, tho no less malicious and wicked
then their Brethren, would be thought more ingenious then to go the common Road
of Massacre and Extirpation, finding themselves perhaps so infamous for that
already. For which reason they have found out a new way to keep Men alive in
their Torments; and make use of their Tortures, not so much to kill the Body,
as the Soul. They find they cannot by their own Arguments convert the
Protestants, and therefore they send Profligate Dragoons and vilanous Soldiers,
to try what they can do by the rude Arguments of Rapine and Violence. And
because they cannot find that ever Christ or his Apostles ever made use of any
such means of Conversion, therefore they punish the Protestants not for their
Religion, but for being Rebeland Disobedient to their Sovereign, and make their
rejecting Popish trash and Ceremony to be disloyalty.

Perfidiousness and Ingratitude generally go together; and both meeting in the
Popish Clergy of France, have bin the Ruin of so many hundred thousand of
French Protestants, some in their Bodies and Estates, some in Estates Bodies
and Souls altogether. But it is well known, that soon after the present King of
France came to the Crown, there arose a Civil War in the Kingdom so sharp and
desperate, that it brought the State within a hairs breadth of Ruin. In the
midst of which Troubles, those of the reformed Religion kept their Loyaltic in
so inviolable a manner, and gave each proofs of their Eminent Services, that
the King found himself obliged to give public Marks of it by a Declaration made
at St. Germans, in the year 1652. So far were they from being at that time
accounted Rebels or Disobedient. But the Romish Clergy of France more then
Diabolically Malicious, and envying the Prosperity of the Protestants, and
believing a Toleration of their Religion would be an Eclipse or Diminution of
their Authority, orderd it so that their chiefest Glory, proved the principal
and most essential part of their Ruin. For the Jesuits and their Party made it
their business to envenome all those Impotent Services in the King, and his
Ministers minds: Reasoning by the Instinct of the Devil, that if the Party of
the Protestants were so considerable, that they could preserve the State, they
were able as well to overthrow it, if a fair occasion should offer it self: For
which reasons grounded upon Antichristian Politics, a Resolution was taken to
suppress all the Protestant Party, and to bury in Oblivion all the good
Services they had done. To which purpose, in the first place, they took from
them the use of their Churches, and denied them the benefit of Law and Justice,
and overwhelmed them with an Inundation of Criminal Processes that fastened on
their Reputations, their Liberties and their Lives. The Curates and other
Officers of Parishes were empowered to enquire exactly into whatever the
Reformists might have done or said for some years past, either upon the score
of Religion or otherwise, and to make Information thereof before the
Magistrates of the Places, who were to punish them without Remission. So that
in short time, in all places, the Prisons were filled with these kind of
Criminals, neither were false witnesses lacking; and that which was most
horrible was, that tho the Judges were convinced that the Witnesses were all
Knights of the Post; yet they maintained them and upheld them in their false
Testimony. And thus the most Innocent and Virtuous persons were Condemned, some
to the Galleys, others to Exilement, and public penances: And this sort of
Persecution fell chiefly on the Ministers, who could never preach without
having for their Spies and Observators, a Troop of Monks, Priests and
Missionaries, who made no scruple to charge them with things which they never
so much as thought of, and to pervert others into a contrary Sense; and these
false Interpretations of the Preachers thoughts, were looked upon by the chief
Ministers of State, as evident Proofs. Then as for the Secular Protestants;
Their Estates were weakened, and by expensive Suits in maintenance of their own
Rights, which were always given against them, the better sort were deprived of
all Offices and Employments, both Military and Civil; and the meaner sort of
all ways of Subsistence.

They rendered all Arts and Trades almost inaccessible to the Protestants, by
the difficulties of arriving to the Mastership of them, and by the excessive
Expenses they must be at to be admitted therein, which they could not be
without a Lawsuit, under the weight of which most commonly they sunk, as not
being able to hold out. They were made incapable of being Magistrates of Towns
or Cities, and they were so narrowly looked after, that they were not suffered
to be so much as Messengers, Coachmen or Waggoners, or any thing of that
nature. Nay, they proceeded to that excess of Cruelty, that they would not
suffer any Midwives of the Reformed Religion to do their Office; by which
unheard of Methods it is not to be expressed how many particular Persons and
Families were reduced to Ruin and Misery. And thus we see how severe the Usages
showed to the French Protestants were, before they came to the utmost Violence.
But now they come to open Force, to accomplish the Ruin of the Protestants, and
Dragooners must be the Sorbon Doctors to confute them of their Errors. The
manner of which was this, in all the Protestant Towns, Cities and Villages of
France, the Inhabitants were assembled together, and told, That it was the
King's pleasure they should immediately turn Catholics; and that if they would
not do it freely, he would make them do it by Force. To which the People
answered, That they were ready to sacrifice their Lives and Estates to the
King, but their Consciences being God's, they could not in any manner dispose
of them. This being the general Proposal, and the general Reply, presently the
Dragoons that lay not far off were all sent for, and quartered in the
Reformists Houses at discretion, with a strict Charge, That none should stir
out of their Houses, nor conceal any of their Goods or Effects, on great
Penalties. Then the first Arguments they used for the Conversion of the Souls
committed to their Charge, was to consume all the Provisions the House
afforded; then to plunder what they could find, whether Money, Rings or Jewels,
and in general what ever was of value: afterward they pilladg'd the Houses,
and sold the Goods before the owners faces. Lastly, they fell upon their
persons, and there is no Wickedness or Act of Horror which they did not put in
practice to force them to change their Religion. Amidst a thousand hideous
cries, and a thousand Blasphemies, they hung up Women by the hair and feet on
the Roof of the Chamber or Chimney Hooks, and smoakt them with wisps of wet
hay, till they were no longer able to bear it; and when they Had taken them
down, if they would not sign a Recantation, they hung them up in the same
manner again. They threw them into great fires kindled on purpose, and never
pulled them out till they were half roasted: They tied ropes under their Arms,
and plunged them up and down in Wells, till they promised to change their
Religion. They tied their hands behind them, and then with a funnel poured Wine
down their Throats so long, till being deprived of their reason, they consented
to be Catholics. They stripped Women naked, and after they had offered them a
thousand Indignities, they stuck them with pins from the top to the bottom:
They cut them with penknives, and sometimes with red hot pincers dragged them
about the room till they promised to turn. They kept others from sleeping seven
or eight days and nights together, releiving one another, to keep them waking;
If they found any sick, and that kept their Beds, they had the Cruelty to beat
twelve Drums together about their Ears without Intercession, for whole weeks
together. They tied Fathers and Husbands to the Bedposts, and Ravished their
Wives and Daughters before their faces. They plucked off the Nails from the
hands and toes of others: They blew up Men and Women with bellows, till they
were ready to burst: Pretending to shave Men's Beards, and cut their Hair, they
flead off Skin and Hair from both Parts. Where they found wine and glasses good
store, they broke their glasses at every Health; and then having trod or broken
the Glass very small, caused the obstinate Heretic as they called him, to
dance upon the broken Glass till he was able to stand no longer; then
stripping him, they rolled him from one end of the room to the other upon sharp
glass, till the Skin was stuck full of the little Fragments; and then sent for
a Surgeon to cut them out of his Body.

By these Inhuman and more then Barbarous Arguments, do the wicked Crew of
Jesuits and Monks in France endeavor to vanquish the most resolved Patiences;
and by such devilish inventions as these to drive the distressed Protestants to
despair, and faint-heartedness. They refuse to give them Death, which they
desire, and only keep them alive to torment them.

This then being the true Spirit of Popery, so generally Reigning in all Ages
and Countries where they have the power in their hands, the Inference is this,
that if we have any love of our Religion, any Abhorrence of Superstition and
Idolatry, any Care of our Laws or Estates, and Concernment for the Strength and
Wealth of the Nation, and desire to hold the Freedom of our Consciences, the
Virtue and Honor of our Families, or any care of self-preservation, to escape
Massacres, and the Tormenting Rage of Persecution, it will behove us to beware
how we suffer this Diabolical Sect to prevail, in whose successes we can expect
no other then to forfeit all the foregoing Interests, perish our selves, and
bequeath Idolatry, Slavery and Beggary to our Posterity.

FINIS.

