The Ladies calling


THE LADIES CALLING.

IN TWO PARTS.

By the Author of the whole Duty of Man, The Causes of the Decay of Christian
Piety, and The Gentleman's Calling.

Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain: but a Woman that fears the Lord, she
shall be praised. Prove. 31. 33.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER.

M. DC. LXXIII.



The Editor to the Reader.
IT is a popular reproach usually cast upon writers in morality, and persuaders
to devotion, that while they with pompous words represent virtue as a sufficient
reward to ^er self, and exhort to the contemt of Glory; they prefix their names
to their labors, and make the Title Page a confutation of the Book that follows
it.

Our Author has effectually averted this objection, having bin so far from
seeking a name from others, as not to have left a possibility for the discovery
of his own: but like the river Nilus that gives fertility and blessing
wheresoever he passes, hides his head; and permits himself to be only known in
the benefits which he dispenses.

By what methods the other most useful works of this excellent Author have
st^ln themselves into the world, I am not enabled to relate; but having been
made a party to the publication of this present, it may be expected that I
render some account thereof. For although the curiosity of inquiring into that
which is industriously conceled, be such a rudeness, and injustice also, as by
no means deserves to be encouraged; yet where a benefit has bin received, for
those who are obliged, to desire to acquaint themselves with the Person unto
whom they stand endebted, that they may pay a respect at least, if they can
reach at no more equal retribution; this has such a pretense to gratitude, as
may justly demand to be considered. And it will be some satisfaction to the
ingenuous enquirer, that tho he have not enform'd himself in the particulars
which he desires, he has not been deficient in the inquest, and knows as much
as is possible.

The Reader therefore may please to understand, that somewhat more then two
months since, I received a Letter, accompanied with a roll of Papers; opening
the which, I found it was written by a hand which I was utterly a stranger to,
and that had no name subscribed; the purport thereof was as follows.

SIR,
THe general report of your candor persuades me you will not reject an address,
tho from an unknown hand, which encourages me to the sending these Papers to
you, with a desire you would please to peruse them, and commit them either to
the Press, or the Fire as you find them worthy. I shall not need to tell you
who I am, for if my suit be accepted, I have what I desire without it if it b^
not, it is my interest you should not know who it is that has thus importuned
you. Your Charity I assure my self will at a venture pardon,

SIR, Your humble Servant.


'Twill be superfluous to say how much I was surpised with this so unusual
address, how much affected with the singular modesty and humility which it
ex^rest: and after all how much transported upon viewing the Treasure, which
was thus ^s from the Clouds dropped into my hands* Nor was I long to determine
which of the two ways of disposal proposed unto me, was to be made use of: and
indeed I should much so^ner have performed my trust, and taken care that this
excellent Tract ^ad immediately seen the light, had it not bin needful to
transcribe the whole, before it could safely be committed to the Press.

This I mention not only to excuse the delay of the Edition, but more
especially to beg a pardon for the misadventu^es of it. It being not easy in a
written Copy where a recourse is not to be had unto the Author, to do him
justice; and avoid faileurs and mistakes: which in the present instance was the
more hazardous, in that every departure from the Authors i^itable pattern,
would certainly be for the worse.

But Excuse and complement are any where a very insipid foolish thing, and most
intolerable in a serious concern: I shall not therefore say ought that looks
that way; only offer a short request* which I suppose will be equally in-the
behalf of the* Author of this Tract* the Editor* and the Readers of it, Which
is, that whoever takes this book in hand would seriously consider it; and doing
so, receive the infinite benefits of uniform virtue, and sincere pie^y; the
documents whereof, are herewith all possible advantages proposed: and thereby
give the Author, that greatest of blessings, the being an instrument to the
eternal happiness of souls: and as to us who deal in the affair of Printing*
afford some share in this most desirable event* absolving us from the Charge of
having don mischief, instead of service to the world. For, to say the truth, no
book is so fatally destructive as that which convinces of duty* but fails of
persuading to it. And if the best books can do harm, 'twill certainly be
difficult to make a plea for the mul^tudes of a contrary kind* which now
especially (...) upon the Age*

THE PREFACE
THo the smalness of this Tract will scarce justify the solemnity of a
Preface; yet remembering it is designed for those who are accustomed to
Ceremonious Addresses, I think it not best to approach them too abruptly. And
indeed besides the Civility, there seems some use of it in order to my design.
To advise, or reprove, is so ungrateful an Office, that he that undertakes it,
had neee^ use all previous arts to vindicate the sincerity of his purpose, and
to convince the person admonished, that it is neither spleen no^ prejudice, but
the most real exuberant kindness which promts him to inflict those wounds of a
friend, Prove. 27. 6. and that he is never less an enemy, then when he thus
tells them the truth, Gal. 4. 16: Therefore, tho they may in the ensuing leaves
meet with some things which may have a show of severity, yet let me assure my
Reader, they have indeed a design of the greatest service, by correcting the
extravagance of some, to rescu the whole Sex, as from the contagion of the
example, so from the community of the blame. For such is either the
inadvertence, or malice of a great part of mankind, that (against all Rules of
Discourse) they deduce Generals from Particulars, make every woman so far an
Eve, that her depravation shall forfeit her whole kind; and because there are
foolish and scandalous women, will scarce allow there are any other.

The truth is, the Error seems in many men to be affected; they propose to
themselves unworthy ends on women, and make all their observations wholly in
order to those. He that is upon a base pursuit, takes particular notice of all
that he thinks for his turn; the rest fall not within his Sphere: and it is too
probable he is so abundantly supplied for that absolute consideration, that he
never descends to the comparative. Nay, perhaps there may be a yet deeper
original of the scandal: the world is much governed by estimation; and as
applause encourages and exalts, so a universal contemt debases and dejects the
Spirit. If it can once pass into a Maxim, that women are such silly or vicious
creatures, it may put fair for the making them so indeed. Themselves may imbibe
the common opinion, charge all their personal faults on their Sex, think-that
they do but their kind, when indeed they most contradict it, and no more aspire
to any thing worthy, then a man can pretend to the excellencies of an Angel.
And indeed this seems to be the practical inference of some women, who could
hardly have descended to such dishonors, had they not before bin as vile in
their own eyes, as they have afterward rendered themselves in others.

It may therefore upon this account be a necessary Charity to the Sex, to
acquaint them with their own valu, animate them to some higher thoughts of
themselves; not to yield their suffrage to those injurious estimates the World
has made of them, and from a supposed incapacity of nobler things to neglect
the pursuit of them; from which God and Nature have no more precluded the
Feminine, then the Masculine part of mankind.

In reference to secular Considerations, their advantages are most important;
Women have a very powerful Influence upon all sorts of Transactions in the
World: the engaging of the Delilah, and plowing with the Heifer, Judge: 14. and
16. being ever the surest way to undermine the Counsels, and master the force
of the Stoutest Samson. And accordingly, Hictories of all kinds assure us, that
Gyneceum has still had a Rival suffrage with the Senate. I might urge the more
regular Powers which appertain unto that Sex; that all mankind is the Pupil and
Disciple of Female Institution: the Daughters till they write women, and the
Sons till the first seven years be past; the time when the mind is most
ductile, and prepared to receive impression, being wholly in the Care and
Conduct of the Mother. And whereas 'is observed by Aristotle in his Politics,
(and is a proof of his being as wise, as he was a learned man) that the Estate
of Republics entirely hangs on private families, the little Monarchies both
composing and giving law unto the great; it is evident that the disposal of
Families and all Domestic concerns therein lies chiefly on the Wife; whence the
same Aristotle declares, that the Spartans notwithstanding their ready address
to Empire by their great frugality, industry, and military virtue, could have
but half a happiness, as failing on the part of their Wives. But waving these
reflections I shall fix only on the personal accomplishments of the Sex, and
peculiarly that which is the most principal endowment of the rational nature, I
mean their understanding. Where* first it will be a little hard to pronounce,
that they are naturally inferior to men; when it is considered how much of
extrinsic weight is put in the balance to turn it on the men's side. Men have
their parts cultivated and improved by Education, refined and subtilized by
Learning and Arts, are like an enclosed piece of a Common, which by industry
and husbandry becomes a different thing from the rest, tho the natural turf
owned no such inequality. And truly had women the same advantage, I dare not
say but they would make as good returns of it; some of those few that have bin
tried, have bin eminent in several parts of Learning. To omit the modern
instances, Theano after the death of Pythagoras kept up his School; Socrates
confesses himself to have bin instructed not only in Rhetoric by Aspatia, but
even in the highest Points of Philosophy by Diotime: the Roman Story enforms us
of the deep wisdom of Tanaquil, Cornelia, Livia, to pass by others. And were we
sure they would have ballast to their sails, have humility enough to poize them
against the vanity of Learning, I see not why they might not more frequently be
entrusted with it; for if they could be secured against this weed, doubtless
the soil is rich enough to bear a good crop. But not to oppose a received
opinion, let it be admitted, that in respect of their intellects they are below
men; yet sure in the sublimest part of humanity, they are their equals: they
have souls of as divine an Original, as endless a Duration, and as capable of
infinite Beatitude. That spiritual Essence, that ray of Divinity owns no
distinction of Sexes; so that in this sense also that Aphorism of the Apostle
holds good; there is neither Male nor Female, but all are one, Gal. 3. 28. And
sure this is the one transcendent Excellency of Human Nature. For alas, what
valu can comparatively be s^t upon all other Qualifications, which will
finally-leave us but like the Beasts that perish. And this as it is the highest
pitch of their worth, so it is the safest subject of their Contemplations:
other Knowledge, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 8. 1. may puff-up, this only will
edify.

As therefore when we would pride our selves, we use not to boast our meaner,
but our best'qualities: so let me solicit Ladies to be so just to themselves,
as not to take their own mesures by any thing below this. Why should they take
so low a level of Greatness, as to valu themselves upon a title which is but a
bigger blast of air, when they may derive their descent from above the Stars,
claim cognation with Divinity? Why should they dote on the fictitious image, of
a perhaps more fictitious beauty, which their glass presents them, when they
need but look inward to see an infinitely fairer Idea, an emanation of the
eternal Brightness? Indeed did they make a just estimate of themselves in this
respect, it would overwhelm the vanity of those inferior things wherein they
now have such complacency, nor would they suffer their nobler part to be
affronted by the unequal competition of their meaner.

But there is also another consequent which would flow from that esteem; they
would solicitously preserve what they so highly prize, it being natural for us
to proportion our care to our valu. They would be jealously vigilant against
every thing, that might eclipse the radiancy or contaminate the purity of their
souls. 'Twas the advice of a Heathen moralist, Revere thy self; and 'twas very
wholesome counsel: for next our due veneration to God, a reverence to our selves
is the most severe controller of all exorbitancies. How can a soul that
remembers its celestial extraction, wallow it self in the mire, sto^p to any
sordid degenerus practices? It Is said of Themistocles, that seeing once a rich
booty about the dead corpses of his enemies, he touch^ it not, but pointing to
another, said, Take thou that, for thou art not Themistocles. If then a little
military fame could so elevate his thoughts, it is a shame that any who carry an
immortal spirit about them, should not be raised above all the contemtible
baits of this sublunary World. Why should they not with the like disdain turn
over all sensual inordinacies to mere Animals, and creatures that have no
higher principle then that of Sense, whilst themselves soar up to those more
sublimated plesures, which are at God's Right Hand for evermore, Psalm. 16. 12.

We may therefore conclude, that what ever vicious impotence Women are under,
it is acquired, not natural; nor derived from any illiberality of God's, but
from the managery of his bounty. He has placed within them a pillar of Cloud
and Fire, sufficient to shelter and conduct them through all the storms, all
the intricacies that can occur in their journey to Canaan; if they will forget
that more intrinsic part of their being, live as if they were all body, reject
the Manna, and rave after the Quails, that destruction which will thereby be
induced they must own to spring from themselves. Let them not charge God
foolishly, or think that by making them women, he necessitated them to be
proud, or wanton, vain, or peevish; since it is manifest he made them to better
purposes, was not partial to the other Sex, but that having, as the Prophet
speaks, abundance of spirit, Mal. 2. he equally dispensed it, and gave the
feeblest woman as large and capacious a soul as that of the Greatest Hero.

Nay give me leave to say farther, that as to an Eternal well being, he seems
to have placed them in more advantageous circumstances then he has don men. He
has implanted in them some native propensions, which (as i shall hereafter have
occasion to observe) do much facilitate the operations of Grace upon them.
Besides, there are many temtations to which men are exposed that are out of
their road. How hard is it for a man to converse in the World, but he shall be
importuned to debauchery and excess, must forfeit his sobriety to maintain the
reputation of a sociable Person? Again, how liable are they by a promiscuous
conversation among variety of humors, to meet with affronts, which the Maxims
of Honor will tell them, must (in spite of all Christ's interdicts) be
revenged? And this engages them in Quarrels, sometimes in Murders. Now none of
these are incident to women: they must in these and some other instances attaque
temtation, violently ravish guilt, and abandon their Sex, the whole Economy of
their state, e're they can divest themselves of their innocence. So that God
seems in many particulars to have closelier fenced them in, and not left them
to those wilder excursions, for which the customary liberties of the other Sex
afford a more open way. In short, they have so many advantages toward Virtue,
that tho the Philosopher made it one of his solemn acknowledgments to God, that
he had made him a man, and not a woman: yet I think Christian women have now
reason enough to invert that form, and to thank God that he made them women,
and not men.

But we know advantages which are only in speculation, are looked on with some
diffidence, till there have bin some practical experiment made of them; I shall
therefore evidence the problem by demonstration, and instance; desiring my
Readers to mesure the possibilities of their arriving to eminent degrees of
Virtue and Piety, by what others have attained to. I shall not fetch examples of
Morality from Heathen Women, because I am now upon a higher strain; (yet many
such might be brought to the reproach of many Women, who pretending to more,
fall infinitely short of that:) it is Christian Virtue that I am now recommending,
and which has bin eminently exemplified in many of their Sex. How ^any Women do
we read of in the Gospel, who in all the duties of assiduous attendance on
Christ, liberalities of love and respect, nay even in zeal and courage,
surpassed even the Apostles themselves? We find his Cross surrounded, his
Passion celebrated by the avowed tears and lamentations of devout Women, when
the most sanguine of his Disciples had denied, yea forswore, and all had
forsaken him. Nay, even Death it self could not extinguish their love; we find
the devout Mary's designing a laborious, chargeable, and perhaps hazardous
respect to his Corpse. And accordingly it is a memorable attestation Christ gives
to their Piety, by making them the first Witnesses of his Resurrection, the
prime Evangelists to Proclaim those glad Tidings; and as a Learned man speaks,
Apostles to the Apostles. Nor is the devotion of that Sex to be found only in
the sacred Records; the Primitive times have left us many Memorials of the
like, and the Martyrologies are full of Female sufferers of all Ages and
conditions, who by the fervor of their Zeal had overcome the timorousness of
their Nature, and wearied the cruelty of their Persecutors. And as Women help
to augment the number of Martyrs, so did they of Confessors also, in a stout
owning, and diligent practice of Christianity. Queens and Empresses knew then
no Title so Glorious as that of a nursing Mother to the Church, have often
exchanged their Palaces for little Cells and Oratories, and valued not their
own Diadems in comparison with their Savior's Crown of Thorns. And tho by a
perpetual declination from that pristine Zeal, the instances have in every Age
grown less numerous, yet none has wanted some very illustrious Examples. Nay
even in our dregs of time, in this common decay of all good, there are, I doubt
not, many who (according to their opportunities) transcribe the former Copies,
live like People that know they must live hereafter, and present us yet with
some specimen of ancient Virtue. Nay, to speak an impartial Truth, it is not to
be denied, but the reputation of Religion is more kept up by women then men;
many of the one countenancing it by their Practice, whereas more of the other
do not only neglect, but decry it. And now since Women are compassed about with
so great a cloud of Witnesses, who by doing the thing, give the surest evidence
that it is not unfeasible, why should any plead an impossibility? In matters of
Vanity and Pomp they they are not so easily disheartened, no pattern of that
kind can be ^et which will not be industriously imitated; nay in ^he greatest
inequality of materials for it. Why ^hen should their emulation leave them
where only it could do them good? How comes it, that of those who have equal
Principles of a spiritual Being, some live according to the Dignity of it; and
others who see them do so, do yet live as if they assented to that Philosophers
Paradox, who said, Women had no souls; or at least were of the Pythagorian
Sect, and looked upon themselves only as the Jails and Prisons of former
offending Spirits, which they resolved to fit for a yet viler transmigration;
give them the appetites of Beasts before they assume the Bodies? This is indeed
an unlucky Humility, that those who in all other instances are apt to overween,
should here sink so much below themselves. And I hope 'twill not appear an
uncivil address, to persuade them to a juster estimate of their own worth. And
if what has bin said to that end may have any effect, I shall not desire a
better Preparative to the ensuing Tract; since she that duly considers her own
capacity of Eternal Bliss, and withal, the possibility of as Endless a Misery,
according as she performs or neglects the several Parts of Duty, will sure need
no other incentive to the diligent Pursuit of it.

THE LADIES CALLING
Part I.
Sect. I. Of Modesty.
1. IT is now many years since an Address was made to the Gentry of this
Nation, to persuade them to that Virtue, which would be both their Pleasure and
Reward. I cannot, I confess, boast any such Effect of that, as should much
inspirit the hopes of a new Attemt; yet since we see in our proper secular
Concerns, Defeats do may times animate no less then Success, I know not why in
this more charitable Design I should sit down discouraged. Men usually raise
not a siege upon the first repulse, but reinforce their Batteries, observe more
curiously which are the most assailable accessible parts, and accordingly
dispose their assault: It will then be no unreasonable imitation in the present
case, if, after a succesless Attemt upon the more impregnable Masculine part of
the Gentry, I now essay the Feminine, whose native Softness and Gentleness may
render them less apt for that resistance of good Counsel, wherein too many Men
place their Gallantry.

2. I presume those to whom that little Tract was at first designed, will be so
willing to relinquish their Title, that I might without imputation of robbery,
exchange my Patrons, and by a new Dedication supersede the labor of a new Book.
And indeed, since what was there said was founded more on the distinction of
Qualities than of Sex, there would not need many razures to render it as proper
for the one as the other; and I shall take so much advantage of it, as to
assure the female Gentry, that they may there find much of the Duty incumbent
on them, in respect of that Rank and Condition they hold in the World: and
therefore, tho I shall sometimes make some reflections on it; yet, as to the
main, I shall think it the easiest course, as well for them as my self, to
direct them thither.

3. But it may seem to have too much of the Pedant, to entertain new Scholars
only with the cast or nauseated learning of the old; and when I remember I
write to Ladies, who use to think the newness of any thing a considerable
Addition to its valu; I conceiv my self obliged as well in civility to their
humor, as charity to their needs, to give them something which they may own as
their peculiar. And to render it the more unalienable, I shall affix it to
their Sex; and make it the Subject of my present inquisition, what in respect
of that, are the proper and distinct Obligations, under which, by the
assignment of God and Nature, they are placed.

4. That the Obligation to Moral and Christian Virtues is in it self universal,
and not confined to any Sex or Person, is not to be denied: yet, as in human
Constitutions there are often Precepts, which (tho not exclusive of any, do
yet) more peculiarly and eminently level at some particular rank or order of
Men; so in the laws of God and Nature, there appears the like distinction. That
all-wise Creator, who has put peculiar proprieties and inclinations into his
Creatures, has accordingly designed their actuating and improving them: and
although in mankind, which differs nor in species but in gender, the variety may
seem less; yet there is still enough to found some diversity, either in the kind
or degree of duty. This sure is shadowed to us in that particular caution given
to the Jews, not to confound the habit of the several Sexes, Deuteronomy. 22. 5. and
yet more clearly evinced in the Precept which the Apostles address to women, 1 Timothy 2. and 1. Pet. 3. Nay, this is so granted a truth, that all Ages and
Nations have made some distinction between masculine and feminine Virtues,
Nature having not only given a distinction as to the beauties of their outward
form, but also in their very mold and constitution implanted peculiar aptnesses
and proprieties of mind, which accordingly vary the mesure of decency; that
being comely for the one Sex, which often is not (at least in the same degree)
for the other. It will therefore be no absurd attemt to decipher those
excellencies, which are the genuine and proper ornaments of Women: which tho in
some instances they may perhaps prove coincident with those of Men; yet even
those which are equally inclusive of both, by the divine command may have some
additional weight on the female side, in respect of decency, fame, or some other
(not despisable) consideration.

5. For the better directing our present inquisition, it will be most regular,
first to inquire what those Virtues are which are universally necessary to
Women in all Ages and circumstances of their lives: such which, like the first
matter, are prerequir'd for all forms; which, like a firm and solid Basis, must
support all various events, all changes of their condition or relations. And
secondly, we shall consider them in those changes, track them through the
several stages and periods of life, through those several states which create
the most considerable mutations to them; and in each of those consider, what
are the new and proportionate accessions of duty.

6. As in the outward accommodations of life* the things of most daily and
indispensible use deserve the greatest valu; so in moral or divine Endowments,
the benefit of possessing is best mesured by the misery of wanting them. This
first rank therefore of female Virtues which we are to treat of, will have that
to recommend them; they being so strictly necessary, that their absence is not
only a privative ill, but also exposes to a deluge of all positive mischiefs
consequent to that privation.

7. This will be found true in all the severals we are to pass through, but in
none more eminently then in that we shall choose to begin with, the Virtue of
Modesty; which may be considered in a double notion, the one as it is opposed
to boldness and indecency, the other to leightness and wantonness. In the first
acception, Zeno has not ill defined it, to be the Science of decent motion, it
being that which guides and regulates the whole behavior, checks and controles
all rude exorbitancies, and is the great civilizer of conversations, It is
indeed a virtue of a general influence; does not only ballast the mind with
sober and humble thoughts of ones self, but also steers every part of the
outward frame. It appears in the face in calm and meek looks, where it so
impresses it self, that it seems thence to have acquired the name of
shamefacedness. Certainly, (whatever the modern opinion is) there is nothing
gives a greater luster to a feminine beauty: so that St. Paul seems, not ill to
have consulted their concerns in that point, when he substitutes that as a
suppletory ornament to the deckings of Gold and Pearl and costly Array, 1 Timothy
2. But I fear this now will be thought too antiquated a dress, and an Apostle
be esteemed no competent Judge in this Science; which is now become so solemn a
thing, that certainly no Academy in the World can vie numbers with the Students
of this Mystery. Yet when they have strein'd their art to the highest pitch; an
innocent modesty, and native simplicity of Look, shall eclipse their glaring
splendour, and triumph over their artificial handsomness: on the other side, let
a Woman be decked with all the embellishments of Art, nay and care of Nature
too, yet if boldness be to be read in her face, it blots all the lines of
beauty, is like a cloud over the Sun, intercepts the view of all that was
otherwise amiable, and renders its blackness the more observable, by being
placed near somewhat that was apt to attract the eyes.

8. But Modesty confines not its self to the face, she is there only in shadow
and effigy; but is in life and motion in the words, whence she banishes all
indecency and rudeness, all insolent vauntings and supercilious disdains, and
what ever else may render a person troublesome, or ridiculous to the company.
Nor does she only refine the language, but she tunes it too, modulates the tone
and accent, admits no unhandsome earnestness or loudness of Discourse, the
latter whereof was thought so undecent in Carneades (tho in his public
Lectures) that the Gymnasiarch reproved him for it: and sure, if 'twere not
allowable in a Philosopher in his School, 'twill less become a woman in
ordinary converse; and if we consult Prove. 7. 11. and 9. we shall find loudness
and clamor in women coupled with such other epithets, as will surely not much
recommend it. A woman's tongue should indeed be like the imaginary Music of the
sphers, sweet and charming, but not to be heard at distance.

9. And as Modesty prescribes the manner, so it does also the mesure of
speaking; restrains all excessive talkativeness, a fault incident to none but
the bold; the monopolizing of discourse being one of the greatest assumings
imaginable, and so rude an imposing upon the company, that there can scarce be
a greater indecency in conversation. This is ingeniously expressed by our divine
Poet Herbert,

A civil guest,
Will no more talk all, then eat all the Feast.
He that engrosses the talk, enforces silence upon the rest, and so is presumed
to look on them only as his auditors and Pupils, whilst he magisteriously
dictates to them: which gave occasion to Socrates to say, It is arrogance to
speak all, and to be willing to hear nothing. It is indeed universally an
insolent unbecoming thing, but most peculiarly so in a woman.

10. The ancient Romans thought it so, much so* that they allowed not that sex
to speak publicly, tho it were in their own necessary defense; insomuch that
when Amesia stood forth to plead her own cause in the Senate, they looked on it
as so prodigious a thing; that they sent to consult the Oracle what it
portended to the State: and tho these first severities were soon lost in the
successes of that Empire, Valerius Maximus could find but two more, whose
either necessity or impudence, persuaded them to repete this unhandsom attemt*

11. And this great indecency of Loquacity in Women, I am willing to hope is
the reason why that Sex is so generally charged with it; not that they are all
guilty, but that when they are, it appears so unhandsom, as makes it the more
eminent and remarkable. Whether it were from that ungracefulness of the thing,
or from the propension Women have to it, I shall not determine; but we find the
Apostle very earnest in his cautions against it; 1 Cor. 14. 35. he expressly
enjoins Women to keep silence in the Church, where he affirms it a shame for
them to speak: and tho this seems only restrained to the Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, yet even so it reaches home to the gifted Women of our age, who
take upon them to be Teachers; whereas he allowed them not to speak in the
Church, no not in order to learning, tho a more modest design then that of
teaching. But besides this, he has a more indefinit prescription of silence to
Women, 1 Timothy 2. 11. Let Women learn in silence; and again, v. 12. to be in
silence. The Apostle seems to ground the Phrase, not only on the ^feriority of
the woman in regard of the crea^ion and first sin, v. 13, 14. but also on the
presumtion that they needed instruction; toward which, silence has always bin
reckoned an indispensible qualification, the introductory precept in all
Schools, as that wherein all attention is founded. If some women of our age
think they have outgon that novice state the Apostle supposes, and want no
teaching; I must crave leave to believe, they want that very first Principle
which should set them to learn, viz. the knowledge of their own ignorance: a
science which so grows with study and consideration, that Socrates after a long
life spent in pursuit of Wisdom, gave this as the sum of his learning, This
only I know, that I know nothing. This proficiency seems much wanting to our
female Talker, who, in this, seem to confute the common maxim, and give what
they have not, by making their ignorance visible to others, tho it be
undiscernable to themselves: and to such we may not unfitly apply the Sarcasin
of Zeno to a talkative Youth; their ears are fallen into their tongue.

12. But besides this assuming sort of talkativeness, there is another usually
charged upon the Sex, a mere chatting, prattling humor, which maintains it self
at the cost of their neighbors, and can never want supplies as long as there is
any body within the reach of their observation. This I would fain hope is most
the vice of the vulgar sort of Women; the education of the Nobler setting them
above those mean entertainments. Yet when it is remembered that St. Paul* 1 Timothy
5. 13. makes Tatling the effect of Idleness, it may not unreasonably be feared,
that where there is most of the Cause, there will be some of the Effect. And
indeed, it would puzzle one to conjecture, how that round of formal Visits
among Persons of Quality should be kept up without this: That their Visits
should be only a dumb Show, none will suspect among women; and when the
unfashionable themes of Houswifery, Piety, etc. are excluded, there will not
remain many Topics of Discourse, unless this be called into supply. And this
indeed is a most inexhaustible reserve, it having so many springs to feed it,
that it is scarce possible it should fail. And when it is farther considered, how
apt a minister it is to Envy, Spleen, Revenge, and other feminine Passions, we
cannot suppose it can be unacceptable where any of those bear sway. But I
believe it is not more frequently introduced by any thing then the vanity of
Wit, which has no where a more free and exorbitant range than in censuring and
deriding; nay, finds not only Exercise but Triumph too, vain Persons seldom
considering the Infirmities or Follies of others, without some Complacencies,
and assuming reflections on themselves; which how unagreeable it renders this
liberty of talking to that Modesty we recommend, is obvious enough, and would
God 'twere only oppo^t to that; but it is no less so to all the obligations of
Justice and Charity also, which are scarce so frequently violated by any thing,
as by this licen^iousness of the tongue.

13. There yet another vice of it, for which ^he female Sex has bin generally
accused, and that ^s reveling of secrets; an infirmity presumed so ^cident to
them, that Aristotle issaid tohave made ^t one of the three things he solemnly
repented of, that he had ever trusted a Secret with a Woman. But by how much
the greater prejudice ^hey lie under in this respect, the greater ought to be
their caution to vindicate not only their Persons, but their Sex, from the
imputation, which is indeed extremely reprochful: this blasting humor being a
symptom of a loose, impotent soul, a kind of incontinence of the mind, that can
retain nothing committed to it; but as if that also had its Diabetic passion,
perpetually and almost insensibly evacuating all. And indeed however we are
willing to appropriate this to the Sex, yet the fault is owing only to this ill
constitution of the mind, which is oft-times no less visible in men; as on the
contrary, those women who by reason and virtue have acquired a Solidity and
Firmness of mind, are as sure repositories of a Secret, as the most masculine
confident: and such I have no intent to involve in this charge, but rather, by
proposing their example to the rest, show that nature has put them under no
fatal necessity of being thus impotent. A secret is no such unruly thing, but
it may be kept in: they may take the Wise man's word for it, Ecclus. 19. 10. If
thou have heard a wordlet it die with thee, and be bold, it will not burst thee.

14. This is a piece of daring manliness, which they may affect without breach
of Modesty; would God they would take it in exchange for that virile Boldness,
which is now too common among many even of the best Rank. Such a degenerous age
do we now live in, that every thing seems inverted, even Sexes; whilst men fall
to the Effeminacy and Niceness of women, and women take up the Confidence, the
Boldness of men, and this too under the notion of good Breeding. A blush (tho
formerly reputed the color of Virtue) is accounted worse manners then those
things which ought to occasion it, and such as nothing but the simplicity of a
Country Girl can excuse. But the infirmity for the most part proves very
corrigible; a few weeks of the Town Discipine wears off that piece of
Rusticity, and advances them to a modish Assurance. Nor is that designed to
terminate in it self, but it is to carry them on, till they arise to a perfect
Metamorphosis, their Gesture, their Language, nay sometimes their Habit too
being affectedly masculine; so that what Tacitus speaks of Vitellius in
relation to his being a Prince, we may apply to them and say, that If others
did not remember them to be women, themselves could easily forget it.

15. Yet, were this affectation confined only to the more innocent indifferent
things, 'twere more tolerable; but alas it extends farther, and there are women
who think they have not made a sufficient escape from their sex, 'till they
have assumed the Vices of men too. A sober modest dialect is too effeminate for
them: a blustering ranting style is taken up, and (to show them proficients in
it) adorned with all the Oaths and Imprecations their memory or invention can
supply; as if they meant to vindicate their sex from the imputation of
Timerousness by daring God Almighty. It Is true indeed, an Oath sounds gratingly
out of whatever mouth, but out of a woman's it has such an uncouth harshness,
that there is no noise on this side Hell can be more amazingly odious; yet this
is a music this discordant age has introduced, no former having I think ever
heard it in places at all civilized: so that the female swearers want that poor
shadow of excuse the men pretend to, it having bin so far from customary, that
the unwontedness could not but force them to some industry and pains, ere they
could acquire the habit, and set up for female Hectors; an essay, wherein they
have been very kind to the masculine, by showing the world there can be
something worse.

16. It Is said there want not some who complete the demonstration by the other
parallel quality of Drinking also; a vice detestable in all, but prodigious in
women, who put a double violence upon their nature, the one in the
intemperance, the other in the immodesty; and tho they may take their immediate
copy from men, yet (to the praise of their proficiency) they outdo their
Exemplar and draw near the original: nothing human being so much beast as a
drunken woman. This is evident enough if we look only on the mere surface of
the crime; but if we dive farther into its inferences and adherencies, the
assirmation is yet more irrefragable. She who is first a prostitute to Wine,
will soon be to Lust also; she has dismissed her Guards, discarded all the
suggestions of reason, as well as Grace, and is at the mercy of any, of every
assailant. And when we consider how much fuller the world is of Amnons then
Joseph's, it will not be hard to guess the fate of that woman's Chastity, which
has no other bottom then that of men's. So that unless her vice secure her
virtue, and the loathsomness of the one prevent attemts on the other; it is
scarce imaginable a woman that loses her Sobriety should keep her honesty: so
that indeed I might more properly have made this reflection when I come to
speak of Modesty in the second notion of it, as it is opposed to Lightness and
Wantonness, but it falls not much amiss now, to be the introduction to it.

17. And if we consider Modesty in this sense, we shall find it the most
indispensible requisite of a woman; a thing so essential and natural to the
sex, that every the least declination from it, is a proportionable receding
from Womanhood, bu^ the total abandoning it ranks them among Brutes, nay sets
them as far beneath those, as an acquired vileness is below a native. I need
make no collection of the verdicts either of the Philosophers or Divines in the
case, it being so much an instinct of nature, that tho too many make a shift to
suppress it in themselves, yet they cannot so darken the notion in others, but
that an Impudent woman is looked on as a kind of Monster; a thing diverted and
distorted from its proper form. That there is indeed a strange repugnancy to
nature, needs no other evidence then the struggling, and difficulty in the first
violations of Modesty, which always begin with regrets and blushes, and require
a great deal of Self-denial, much of vicious Fortitude, to encounter with the
recoilings and upbraidings of their own minds.

18. I make no doubt but this age has arrived to as compendious arts of this
kind, as industrious vice can suggest, and we have but too many instances of
early proficients in this learning; yet I dare appeal even to the forwardest of
them, whether at first they could not with more ease have kept their virtue then
lost it. Certainly such are the Horrors and Shames that precede those first
Guilts, that they must commit a rape upon themselves (force their own
reluctancies and aversions) before they can become willing prostitutes to
others. This their Seducers seem well to understand, and upon that score are at
the pains of so many preparatory courtings, such expense of presents too; as if
this were so uncouth a crime, that there were no hope to introduce it but by a
confederacy of some more familiar vices, their Pride or Covetousness.

19. The best way therefore to countermine those Stratagems of men, is for
women to be suspiciously vigilant even of the first approches. He that means to
defend a Fort, must not abandon the Outworks, and she that will secure her
Chastity, must never let it come to too close a siege, but repass the very
first and most remote insinuations of a temter. Therefore when we speak of
modesty in our present notion of it, we are not to oppose it only to the
grosser act of Incontinentcy, but to all those misbehaviors, which either
discover or may create an inclination to it; of which sort is all lightness of
carriage, wanton glances, obscene discourse; things that show a woman so weary
of her honor, that the next comer may reasonably expect a surrender, and
consequently be invited to the Assault. Indeed they are such, that one would
rather think them the result of many acts, then merely the Prologue to one, and
yet nothing but a custom of private sin, could supply impudence enough to do
what is so publicly scandalous; and where this is found in those of any
considerable age, charity it self can scarce pass a milder censure. Yet
possibly in those of the youngest sort, they may at first be taken up (as their
dress is) merely in imitation of others, embraced implicitly upon the authority
of those, whose examples govern the modes. When a poor girl, who has still so
much of the child as to admire every thing that glitters, sees these things
used by the gay people of the world, it is no wonder if she take these as part
of their accomplishments, and, upon peril of that formidable calamity of being
unfashionable, conform to them: Which yet does not so much extenuate the guilt
of those few seduced persons, as it aggravats that of the Seducers, and attests
the strange corruption of the age, that those things which the less hardened
sort of prostitutes were formerly ashamed of, should now pass into the
frequency and avowedness of a fashion, become a part of Discipline and
Institution of youth; as if vice now disdained to have any punies in its
school, and therefore by a preposterous anticipation, makes its pupils begin
where they were wont to end, initiates them at first into that shamelesness,
which was wont to be the product only of a long habit: what the end will be of
these Piqueerers in impudence, who thus put their virtue on the forlorn hope, is
easy to divine. Yet is not this the only state of danger: they who keep their
ranks, and tho they do not provoke assaults, yet stay to receive them, may be
far enough from safety. She that lends a patient ear to the praises of her Wit
or Beauty, intends at first perhaps only to gratify her vanity; but when she is
once charmed with that Sirens song, bewitched with that Flattery, she insensibly
declines to a kindnefs for that person that values her so much* and when that
spark shall be blowed up by perpetual remonstrances of Passion, and perhaps
little Romantique artifices of pretending to dye for her, with a thousand other
tricks, which lust can suggest, 'twill like the Naptha Naturalists speak of, in
a moment grow to an unquenchable flame, to the ruin both of her virtue and
honor.

20. Let no woman therefore presume upon the innocence of her first intentions;
she may as well upon confidence of a sound constitution, enter a pesthouse and
converse with the plague, whose contagion does not more subtily insinuate it
self, then this sort of temtation. And as in that case she would not stay to
define what were the critical distance, at which she might approach with safty,
but would run as far from it as she could; so in this, it no less concerns her,
to remove her self from the possibility of danger, and (how unfashionable
soever it be) to put on such a severe Modesty, that her very looks should guard
her, and discourage the most impudent assailant. It Is said of Philopemen, that
the Lacedaemonians finding it their interest to corrupt him with money, they were
yet so possessed with the reverence of his virtues, that none durst undertake to
attaque him; and sure 'twere not impossible for women to arrive at the same
security: such an authority there is in Virtue, that where it is eminent, it is apt
to control all loose desires, and he must not be only lustful but
sacrilegious, that attemts to violate such a Sanctuary.

21. But perhaps that sex may fear, that by putting on such a Strictness, they
shall lose the glory of their Beauty, which is now chiefly estimated by the
number of those who court and adore them. To this in the first place I must
say, that they are miserable Trophies to Beauty that must be built on the ruins
of virtue and honor; and she that to boast the length of her hair should hang
her self in it, would but act the same folly in a lower instance.

22. But then secondly, it is a great mistake to think their Beauty shall be the
less prized, since it is incident to man's nature to esteem those things most
that are at distance, whereas an easy and cheap descent begets contemt. So
long as they govern themselves by the exact rules of Prudence and Modesty,
their luster is like the Meridian Sun in its clearness, which tho less
approchable, is counted more glorious; but when they decline fromthose, they
are like thatSun in a cloud, which tho safelier gazed on, is not half so
bright. But besides these collateral advantages, it is certain that Modesty
gives an immediate and direct improvement to Beauty; for tho men for their own
vicious ends wish them severed, yet they cannot but think they are the most
amiable when united, and you shall hear them often commend the aspect of that
Modesty, which they would fain circumvent.

23. But in the 3d. place, there is nothing but such a Reservedness that can
indeed make their Beauty triumphant. Parley and conquest are the most distant
things; and she that descends to treat with an assailant, whatever he may tell
her of his being her captive, it is but in order to the making her his; which
when she once is, there is no state of servitude half so wretched, nothing in
the world being so slavishly abject as a prostitute woman. For besides all the
interest of another life which she basely resigns, the sacrifices all that is
valuable in this: her reputation she puts wholly in his power that has debauched
her, and which is worse her reformation too. If she should have a mind to
return to virtue, she dares not for fear he should divulge her former strayings
from it: so that, like Catiline, she is engaged to future evils to secure the
past. Yea she subjects her self not only to his lust, but to all his humors and
fancies, nay even to all those who have bin instrumental to their privacies,
none of them all being to be displeased for fear of blabbing: and when it is
remembered, what a sort of cattle they are, which are the engines in such
affairs, There can fearce be any thing more deplorable then to be within their
lash. It Is true indeed, some have found a way to cure this uneasiness by being
their own delators, not only confessing but boasting their crime, and by an
impudent owning prevent all accusations: yet even this serves but to attest the
intolerableness of the former condition, when this worst of mischiefs is chose
as a rescue. Their impatience of being always in awe, makes them take up that
resolution for infamy, which Caesar did for death, who said 'twas better to dye
once then to be always in fear. And tho this desperate remedy may cure the
fear, yet it ascertains the reproach; for whereas in the impeachment of others
there is place for doubt, and charity may promt some to disbelieve it, yet when
the fact is justified by the offender, the evidence is uncontrolable, and
withal doubles the infamy. For, besides that which adheres to the crime there
is a distinct portion due to the impudence; yet like the Scorpion it must cure
its own sting, and tho it increases the obloquy, yet it deadens the sense of it.

24. But when they have thus steeled their forheads against all impressions of
Shame, they are still liable to many other painful effects of their sin. What
fears of being abandoned, what jealousies of rivals, do often torture them? And
indeed not without ground: for they cannot but know, that the same humor of
variety which engaged their Paramors in their love, may do the same for
another, and another, and so on; it being as possible to grasp the air, as to
confine a wandering lust. Besides, what anxious apprehensions have they of the
approach of age, which they are sure will render them loathed and despicable, as
also of all intermedial decaies of Beauty? How critically do they examine their
glass? and every wrinkle that it represents in their face, becomes a deep gash
in the heart. But if they have at any time the lesure (or indeed the courage)
to look inward the view is yet more dreadful, a deformed foul, spoild of its
innocence, and rendered almost as brutish as the sin it has consented to. But
tho it be in some respects like the beast that perishes, it is not, it cannot
be, in that which would most avail it; an endless being it cannot lose, nor can
it expect any thing from that preeminence of its nature, but an infinity of
misery. This is such an amazing contemplation, as, methinks, were it insisted
on, should allay the hottest blood; no impure flames being so fierce as to
contest with those of unquenchable fire. It is therefore tho a very impious,
yet no unskilful artifice of those, who would vitiate women in their manners,
to corrupt them in their Principles, and by extinguishing all hopes or fears of
another World, persuade them to immerse boldly into all the abominations of
this. It Is said, this is now an art of wooing, the modern preludium to the
basest proposals: it seems this age dares not trust only to the former ways of
seducement, fears there will not be women enough that will forget the interests
of another World; and therefore is fain to set up a new party of others to
disbelieve it. And I fear that design has bin too prosperous; many women are so
much more concerned for their bodies then their souls, that they are contented
the one should be elevated upon the depression and debasement of the other; and
whilst with a vain transport, they can hear their outward form applauded as
Angelical, or Divine, they can very tamely endure to have their better part
vilified and despised, defined to be only a puff of air in their nostrils,
which will scatter with their expiring breath, or, in the Atheist's phrase,
Wisd-6. 6. vanish as the soft air. Whereas they should consider, that they who
preach this doctrine to them, design it only to infer a pernicious use. It Is a
maxim in Politics, that those counsels are suspiciously to be scanned, which
carry in their front the advisers interest; which certainly is never more
visible then in this case, he that once gains this point, never needing to
contest for all the rest. For he that can persuade a woman out of her soul,
will soon command her body, and then what was at first his interest, becomes
hers at last; and her wishes of the mortality of her soul, are much stronger
then it is possible her belief of it could be: which confirms abundantly my
affirmation of the servile, wretched condition of such a person. For if we judge
that a very severe slavery, which makes people desirous to resign a temporal
being, what shall we think of that which provokes them to renounce an eternal?

25. And now by this gradation of mischiefs we may judge of the deplorable state
of those who have abandoned their Virtue; wherein I doubt not the consciences of
many cannot only attest, but much improve the description; and all I shall say
to such, is, only to consult that bosom monitor, which till they do all
Homilies will be insignificant. My design was not therefore to tell them what
they too well feel, but only to point out their wracks as warnings others.

26. Let those therefore who are yet untainted, and by being so, have their
judgments clear and unbiast, consider soberly the misery of the other
condition, and that not only to applaud, but secure their own; and when ever
the outward pomps and gaudy splendors of a vitiated woman seem, like that of
Cresus, to boast their happiness, let them look through that Fallacy, and
answer with Solon, that those only are happy who are so at their end. Their
most exquisit deckings are but like the garlands on a beast designed for
Sacrifice; their richest gems are but the chains, not of their ornament but
slavery; and their gorgeous apparel, like that of Herod, covers perhaps a
putrid body, (for even that does not seldom prove their fate) or however, a
more putrid soul. They who can thus consider them, will avoid one great snare;
for it is not always so much the lust of the flesh, as that of the eyes which
betrays a woman. It Is the known infirmity of the Sex, to love gaiety, and a
splendid appearance, which renders all temtations of that sort so connatural to
them, that those who are not arrived to a more sober estimate of things, will
scarce be secure. It will therefore be necessary for them to regulate their
opinions, and reduce all such things to their just valu, and then they will
appear so trifling, that they can never maintain any competition with the more
solid interests of Virtue and Honor. For tho those terms seem in this loose age
to be exploded; yet where the things are visible they extort a secret
veneration, even from those who think it their concern publicly to deride them:
whereas on the other side a defection from them exposes to all the contemt
imaginable, renders them despised even by those who betrayed them to it, leaves
a perpetual blot upon their Names, and their Family. For in the character of a
woman, let Wit and Beauty, and all female accomplishments stand in the front;
yet if wantonness bring up the rear, the Satyr soon devours the Panegyric, and
(as in an Echo) the last words only will reverberate, and her vice will be
remembered when all the rest will be forgot. But I need not declame upon this
theme; the Son of Syraeh has don ittomy hand, in many passages, but especially
Ecclus. 23. to which I refer the reader.

32, What has bin already said, is I suppose, sufficient to convince every
woman how much it is her concern to keep her self strictly within the bounds of
Modesty and Virtue. In order to which, there is nothing more important then a
judicious choice of their Company; I mean not only for men, but women also:
vice is contagious, and this especially has that worst quality of the Plague,
that it is malicious, and would infect others. A woman that knows her self
scandalous, thinks she is reprocht by the virtue of another, looks on her as one
that is made to reprove her ways, as it is, Wisd. 2. 14. and therefore in her
own defense strives to level the inequality, not by reforming her felf, (that
she thinks too hard a task) but by corrupting the other. To this end, such are
willing to screw themselves into an acquaintance, will be officiously kind, and
by all arts of condescension and obliging, endeavor to ensnare a woman of
reputation into their intimacy. And if they succeed, if they can but once
entangle her into that cobweb-friendship; they then, spider-like, infuse their
venom, never leave their vile insinuations till they have poisoned and ruined
her. But and if on the other side they meet with one of too much sagacity to be
so entrapped; if they cannot taint her Innocence, they will endeavor to blast
her Fame; represent her to the World to be what they would have made her; that
is in the Psalmists phrase; such a one as themselves, Psalm. 50. 24. so that
there is no conversing with them, but with a manifest peril either of Virtue or
Honor, which should methinks be a sufficient disswasive. It Is true, it is not
always in ones power to shun the meeting with such persons, they are too
numerous, and too intruding to be totally avoided; unless, as St. Paul says, 1
Cor. 5. 10. one should go out of the World. But all voluntary converse supposes
a choice, and therefore every body that will may refrain that, may keep on the
utmost frontiers of civility, without ever suffering any approach toward
intimacy and familiarity.

33. And sure were this distance duly observed, it might be of excellentuse, a
kind of lay Excommunication, which might come very seasonably to supply the
want of the Ecclesiastic now out-dated. And this seems very well to agree with
the sense of Solon, the wise Athenian Lawgiver, who, besides that he shut the
Temple-doors against them, interdicted them the sacred Assemblies; made it one
of his laws, that an Adulteress should not be permitted to wear any ornaments,
that so they might in their dress carry the note of their infamy. Should we
have the like distinction observed, I sear many of our gaiest birds would be
unplumed, and tho the same be not now an expedient practicable; yet the former
is, and might be of very good use. For beside that already mentioned of
securing the innocent, it might perhaps have a good effect on the guilty, who
could not but reflect with some shame on themselves, if they were thus singled
out and discriminated; whereas whilst they are suffered to mix with the best
Societies, (like hurt Deer in a herd) they flatter themselves they are
undiscernable.

34. But indeed the advantage of this course is yet more extensive, and would
reach the whole Sex, which now seems to lie under a general scandal, for the
fault of particular persons. We know any considerable number of smutty ears
casts a blackness on the whole field, which yet were they apart, would perhaps
not fill a small corner of it; and in this uncharitable age, things are apt to
be denominated not from the greater but worser part: whereas, were the precious
severed from the vile, by some note of distinction, there might then a more
certain estimate be made: and I cannot be so severe to womankind, as not to
believe the scandulous part would then make but a small show which now makes so
great a noise.

35. Besides this I can suggest but one way more for women of honor to
vindicate their Sex, and that is by making their own virtue as illustrious as
they can; and by the bright shine of that draw off men's eyes from the worser
prospect. And to this there is required not only innocence, but prudence; to
abstain, as from all real evil, so from the appearance of it too, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
22. not, by any doubtful or suspicious action, to give any umbrage for censure
but as the Apostle says in another case, 2 Cor. II. 11. to cut off occasion
from them that desire occasion; to deny themselves the most innocent liberties,
when any scandalous inference is like to be deduced from them. And tho perhaps
no caution is enough to secure against the malicious, and the jealous; tho it is
possible some black mouth may asperse them, yet they have still Plato's
reserve, who being told of some who had defamed him, it is no matter said he, I
will live so that none shall believe them. If their lives be but such, that
they may acquit themselves to the sober and unprejudiced, they have all the
security can be aspired to in this world; the more evincing attestation they
must attend from the unerring Tribunal hereafter; where there lies a certain
appeal for all injured persons who can calmly wait for it.

SECT. II. Of Meekness.
1. IN the next place we may rank Meekness as a necessary feminine Virtue; this
even nature seems to teach, which abhors monstrosities and disproportions, and
therefore having allotted to women a more smooth and soft composition of body,
infers thereby her intention, that the mind should correspond with it. For tho
the adulterations of art, can represent in the same Face beauty inone position,
and deformity in another, yet nature is more sincere, and never meant a serene
and clear forhead, should be the frontispiece to a cloudy tempestuous heart.
It Is therefore to be wished they would take the admonition, and whilst they
consult their glasses, whether to applaud or improve their outward form, they
would cast one look inwards, and examine what symmetry is there held with a
fair outside; whether any storm of passion darken and overcast their interior
beauty, and use atleast an equal diligence to rescu that; as they would to
clear their face from any stain or blemish.

2. But it is not nature only which suggests this, but the God of nature too,
Meekness being not only recommended to all as a Christian virtue, but
particularly enjoined to women as a peculiar accomplishment of their Sex, 1
Pet. 3. 4. where after the mention of all the exquisit and costly deckings of
art, this one ornament of a meeek and quiet spirit, is confronted to them, with
this eminent attestation, that it is in the sight of God of great price, and
therefore to all who will not enter dispute with God, and contest his judgment,
it must be so too. Now tho Meekness be in it self a single entire virtue, yet it
is diversifi'd, according to the several faculties of the soul, over which it
has influence; so that there is a Meekness of Understanding, a Meekness of the
Will, and a Meekness of the Affections; all which must concur to make up the
Meek and quiet spirit.

3. And first for the Meekness of the Understanding, it consists in a
pliableness to conviction, and is directly opposite to that sullen adherence
observable in too many; who judge of tenets not by their conformity to truth and
reason, but to their prepossessions and tenaciously retained opinions, only
because they (or some in whom they confide) have once owned them; and certainly
such a temper is of all others the most obstructive to Wisdom. This puts them
upon the chance of a Lottery, and what they first happen to draw, determines
them merely upon the privilege of its precedence, so that had Mahomet first
seized them, his tenure would have bin as indeses^ble, as Christ's now. How
great the force of such prejudices are, we may see by the oppositions it raisd
against Christian doctrine in gross at its first promulgation; the Jews blind
Zeal for the Traditions of their Fathers, engaging them in the murder even of
that very Messiah whom those Traditions had taught them to expect, and after in
the persecution of that doctrine which his Resurrection had so irrefragably
attested. And to justify the propriety of this observation, to those I now
write to, it is expressly affirmed, Acts. 1. 3. 50. That they made use of the
zeal of the female Proselites for that purpose. The Jews stirred up the devout
and honorable women, and raised a persecution against Paul and Barnabas. So
that it is no unseasonable advice to such, to be sure they see well their way
before they run too fierce a carriere in it; otherwise the greatest heat
without light, does but resemble that of the bottomless pit, where flames and
darkness do at once cohabit.

4. But whilst I decry this prejudicate stifness, I intend not to plead for its
contrary extreme, and ^ecommend a too easy flexibility; which is a temper of
equal, if not more ill consequence then the former. The adhering to one opinion
can expose but to one error, but a mind that lies open to the effluxes of all
new tenets, may successively entertain a whole ocean of delusions; and to be
thus yielding, is not a Meekness but Servileness of Understanding. Indeed it is
so great a weakness of mind, that the Apostle sinks it somewhat below the
impotence of women, and resembles it to that of children, Ephesians. 4. 14. yet it
seems the folly of some women had levell^d them with children in this matter,
for the same Apostle takes notice of such, to whom as he gives the Epithet of
silly, so the latter part of the Character speaks them incorrigibly so, ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 3. 6. a
description which if we compare with our times, we must think prophetic. For
how many instances has this age given us of women so led captive; who being
either affected with the novelty, or seduced by the pretended zeal of a new
teacher, have given up their understanding to him: and for a while this strong
man has kept possession, but when a stronger then he has come it has fared as
with him in the Gospel, a louder zeal or a newer doctrine soon divides his
spoils; and that by force of the very same principle, on which he set up, which
within a while undermines the latter also, and so successively; till the poor
Proselite has bin huried through all the mazes of wild error, and at last
perhaps (like a palate distracted by too much variety) she fixes upon that
which at first she most decried. This has bin eventually true in some, who
setting out in the fiercest detestation of Popery, have wandered so long like
the blinded Syrians, 2 King. 6. 20. that they have at last found themselves in
the midst of Samaria; by an insensible circular motion bin brought about to
that Religion, from which alone they designed to fly. So little do itching ears
know whether they may be carried: and indeed the ear when infected with that
prurienthumor* may* vie Mischiefs with the tongue, which St. James tells us,
Chap. 3. 15. is (tho a little member) a world of iniquity.

5. It Is therefore the most important concern of all, to fortify that so
assailable part; but it is especially so of women, not only in respect of that
natural imbecility, which renders them liable to seducement, but also because
the opinion of their being so, makes them particularly aimed at by seducers.
For as he who is to put off adulterated wares, will choose the most unwary
chapmen, so these Sophisticators of Divinity, desire the most undiscerning
Auditors. And truly that so many of that Sex are so, I do not so much impute to
any natural defect, as to the loose notions they have of Religion, of which
they have perhaps some general confused apprehensions, but have so little
penetrated the depth of it, that they know not why they are Christians, rather
then Turks, why of the Church of England, rather then of that of Rome, or
Geneva. And while they are thus unfixt, and have no better principle then
custom and compliance; they have nothing to answer to any the grossest deceit
that can be obtruded upon them, which for ought they know or have considered,
may be as true as any thing they formerly professed. Now when any one in this
condition shall be assaulted, not only by the repeated importunities of false
teachers, but also by ingeminated threatenings of hell and damnation, she is
like one awaked by the out^ry of fire, and in that amaze will be apt to run
wherever the first discoverer of her danger shall lead her.

6. I shall therefore most earnestly recommend it as the best Antidote against
the poison of novel doctrins, to examine well the grounds of the old; for want
of this it is that our Church has bin exposed to so many frivolous cavils, it
being too incident to the perverse Pride ofhumane nature, to speak evil of
things we understand not. And had our she-zealots first consulted some sober
guides, and from them understood upon what grounds the Practice as well as
Doctrine of our Church was founded, they could not so easily have bin carried
away by every wind of doctrine, as the Apostle phrases it, Ephesians. 4. 14.

7. Indeed this is no more then common justice exacts, which forbids the
condemning even the vilest malefactor unheard, (and unheard and not understood,
are in this case terms equivalent) yet sure they owe something more to that
Church from whose ministry themselves must confess to have derived their
Christianity, in whose bosom they have bin cherisht, and consequently may plead
a mothers right in them; so that unless possession, which fortifies Civil
rights, destroy the Ecclesiastic; she may challenge besides that natural
justice, (which is the common due of humanity) a parental respect and
reverence, a debt which is sure very ill answered by those, who cast off her
obedience before they have at all considered what it is she commands. And if
the abdicating a child be a thing so unnatural, as needs some very important
cause to justify it; the renouncing of a Parent must require a reason as far
transcending that, as the guilt does, if it be causless; and such it must
inevitably be in all, who for want of due examination, suffer themselves to be
led intogroundless prejudices and disgusts.

8. To prevent that guilt, and a multitude of others which spring from it; I
must again repeat my Proposal, that women of Quality (who are presumed to want
neither Parts nor lesure for it) would a little look into the inside of the
Religion they profess; if it be a true one, 'twill bear the inspection, truth
never shunning the light; if it be not, the discovery cannot be too early. And
indeed among the many remarkable impresses of truth our Church bears, this is
one, that she does not blindfold her Proselites, leaves them the use of their
discerning Faculty, and does not by obtruding upon them an implicit belief,
force them to lay down their Reason when they take up their Faith. And now why
should not Ladies spend a few of their many idle hours in this inquisition, I
mean not to embark them in a maze of controversies, but only to discern those
plain grounds of Truth on which our Church builds; which if well digested, will
prove a better amulet against delusion then the reading whole Tomes of
Disputations, more apt to distract then fortify their understandings. And had
they thus don, had their minds bin ballasted by sober principles, so many of
them had never made up the triumphs of so many and so various seducers. And tho
to such this advertisement may come too late (like assistance after a defeat)
yet it may be a seasonable caution to others; and to those I offer it, as that
very temper wherein consists that rational Meekness of the understanding I
would recommend to them, which is equally violated by a blind obstinacy, or as
blind a flexibility.

9. A second sort of Meekness is that of the Will, which lies in its just
subordination, and submission to a more supreme Authority, which in Divine
things is the Will of God; in Natural or Moral right Reason; and in human
Constitutions the command of Superiors: and so long as the Will governs it self
by these in their respective Orders, it transgresses not the Meekness required
of it. But experience attests, that the Will is now in its depravation an
imperions Faculty, apt to cast off that subjection to which it was designed;
and act independently from those motives which should influence it. This God
knows is too common in all Ages, all Conditions, and Sexes: but the Feminine
lies more especially under an ill name for it. Whether that have grown from the
low opinion conceived of their Reason, less able to maintain its Empire, or
from the multipli^d habitual instances themselves have given of unruly Wills, I
shall not undertake to determine; but either way it is, I am sure, so great a
reproach, as they should be very industrious to wipe off. And truly I know
nothing more incentive to that endeavor, then the having a right estimate of
the Happiness as well as Virtue of a governable Will. How calmly do those glide
through all (even the roughest) events, that can but master that stubborn
Faculty? A will resigned to God's, how does it enervate and enfeeble any
calamity? Nay indeed it triumphs over it, and by that conjunction with him that
ordains it, may be said to command even what it suffers. 'Twas a Philosophical
Maxim, that a Wise moral man could not be injured, could not be miserable. But
sure it is much more true of him who has that divine Wisdom of Christian
resignation, that twists and inwraps all his choices with God's, and is neither
at the pains nor hazard of his own elections; but is secure, that unless
Omniscience can be deceived, or Omnipotence defeated, he shall have what is
really best for him.

10. Proportionable (tho not equal) to this, is the happiness of a Will
regulated by Reason in things within its Sphere: it is the dignity of humane
Nature, and that which distinguishes it from that of Beasts. Yea, even those
grow more contemtible in their kinds, the farther they are removed from it. The
stupid sturdiness of an Ass has rendered it Proverbial for folly, when the
tractableness of other Animals has temted some to list them among rationals.
Besides, reason affords something of a Basis and Foundation for the Will to
bottom on. He that governs himself by reason (that being still the same) will
act equally and consonant to himself; but he that does a thing this moment,
only because he will, may the next have as weighty an argument to do something
quite contrary; and so may spend his whole time in unravelling his Spiders
webs, as the Prophet rightly calls the vain designs of such brutish men, Isa.
59. 5. Not to speak of those recoilings and upbraidings of the rational
faculties, which are the uneasy attendants of those who resist its more
directadmonitions; there is nothing exposes to more secular ruins. An
ungovernableWill is the most precipitous thing imaginable, and like the Devil
in the Swine, hurries headlong to destruction, and yet deprives one of that
poor reserve, that faint comfort of the miserable, Pity; which will not be so
much invited by the misery, as averted by that wilfulness which caused it. Nay
indeed, so little can such persons expect the compassion of others, that 'twill
be hard for them to afford themselves their own: the consciousness that their
calamities are but the issues of their own perverseness, being apt to dispose
them more to hate then pity. And this is no small accumulation of
wretchedness, when a man suffers not only directly, but at the rebound too;
reinflicts his miseries upon himselfby a grating reflection on his own madness.
Yea, so great an aggravation is it, that even Hell it self is enhaunced and
completed by it; all the torments there being edged and sharpened by the woeful
remembrance, that they might once have bin avoided.

11. In the last place a Will duly submissive to lawful Superiors, is not only
an amiable thing in the eyes of others, but exceedingly happy to ones self;
it is the parent of peace, and order both public and private. A blessing so
considerable, as is very cheaply bought with a little receding from ones own
will or humor, whereas the contrary temper is the spring and original of
infinite confusions, the grand incendiary which sets Kingdoms, Churches,
Families, in combustion; a flat contradiction not only to the word, but even
the works of God; a kind of Anticreative power, which reduces things to that
Chaos from whenceGod drew them. Our age has given us too many and too pregnant
instances of its mischievous effects, which may serve to enhaunce the value of
that governable malleable temper I now recommend. And as a Will thus resigned
to Reason and just Authority, is a felicity all rational natures should aspire
to; so especially the feminine Sex, whose passions being naturally the more
impetuous, ought to be the more strictly guarded and kept under the severe
discipline of Reason; for where it is otherwise, where a woman has no guide but
her Will, and her Will is nothing but her Humor, the event is sure to be fatal
to her self, and often to others also.

12. And the hazard of this renders that other restraint of the will, I mean
that of obedience to Superiors, a very happy imposition, tho perhaps it is not
always thought so, for those who resist the government of Reason, are not very
apt to submit to that of Authority. Yet sure God and nature do attest the
particular expediency of this to women, by having placed that Sex in a degree
of inferiority to the other. Nay farther it is observable, that as there are but
three states of life, through which they can regularly pass, viz. Virginity,
Marriage, and Widowhood, two of them are states of Subjection, the first to the
parent, the second to the husband; and the third, as it is casual, whether ever
they arrive to it or no, so if they do, we find it by God himself reckoned as a
condition the most desolate and deplorable. If I should say this happens upon
that very score that they are left to their own guidance, the sad wracks of
many would too much justify the gloss; but however it evinces, that God sets
not the same valu upon their being masterless, which some of them do, whilst he
reckons them most miserable, when they are most at liberty.

13. And since Gods assignation has thus determined subjection to be the women's
lot, there needs no other argument of its fitness, or for their acquiescence.
Therefore when ever they oppose it, the contumacy flies higher then the
immediate Superior, and reaches God himself. And I am apt to think there would
not many of that timorous Sex dare so far, were it not for some false
punctilioes of honor, which (like those among our Duellists) have imposed
themselves. These represent Meeknes and Submission as a silly sheepish quality
unfit for women of breeding and spirit: whilst an imperious obstinacy passes
for nobleness and greatness of mind. But alas they are woefully mistaken in
their notion of a great spirit, which consists in scorning to do unworthy and
vile things, and courageously encountering the adverse events of life, not in
spurning at duty, or seeking to pull themselves from that Sphere where the
divine Wisdom has placed them. No sure, stubbornness is the mark only of a
great stomac, not of a great mind; and the cruelty of a coward may as well
denominate him valiant, as the ungovernableness of a woman can speak her
generous.

14. In this I presume I speak the common sense of all, for what value soever
they put upon themselves, nothing renders them less acceptable to others; an
imperious woman being a plague to her relatives, and a derision to strangers,
yea and a torment to her self. Every the least contradiction (which a meek
person would pass over insensibly) inflaming such an unruly temper, and
transporting her to such extravagances, as often produce very mischievous
effects. On the other side if she be humor'd and complied with, that serves
only to make her more insolent and intolerable; makes her humors grow to such a
height, that she knows not her self what would please her, and yet expects that
others should^: so that to such a one, we may apply what Hannibal said of
Marcellus, that if he were vanquished; he never gave rest to himself, nor if he
were victorious, to others. Certainly the uneasiness of a perverse spirit is so
great, that could such come but to compare it with the calm and happy serenity
of Meekness and Obedience, there would need no other Lecture to commend them to
their esteem or practice.

15. The last branch of Meekness is that of Affections, and consists in
reducing the passions to a temper and calmness, not suffering them to make
uproars within to disturb ones self, nor without to the disquieting of others,
and to this regulation Meekness is generally subservient. Yet because the
correcting of some particular passions are more immediately assignable to other
virtues, I shall insist only upon that, on which this has a more direct and
peculiar influence, I mean Anger, a two edged passion, which whilst it deals it
blows without, wounds yet more fattally within. The commotion and vexation
which an angry man feels, is far more painful then any thing he can ordinarily
inflict upon another: herein justifying the Epithet usually given to Anger,
that it is a short madness, for who that were in his right wits, would incur a
greater mischief to do a less. It is indeed so great a distemper of the mind,
that he that is possessed with it, is incompetent for any sober undertaking, and
should as much be suspended from acting, as one in a Phrensy or Lunacy. This
was the judgment and practice too of Plato, who going to chastise a servant,
and finding himself grow angry, stopped his correction, a friend coming in and
asking what he was doing, punishing replies he, an angry man, as thinking
himself unfit to discipline another, till he had subdued his own passion.
Another time his slave having offended him, I would beat thee, says he, but
that I am angry. It were endless indeed to recite the black Epithets given by
all Moralists to this vice. It shall suffice to take the suffrage of the wisest
of men, one that had acquainted himself to know madness and folly, Ecl. 1. 17.
and we find it his sentence, that anger rests in the bosom of fools, Ecl. 7. 11.

16. And what is thus universally unbecoming to human nature, cannot sure be
less indecent for the gentler Sex: it is rather more so, every thing contracting
so much more of deformity, by how much it recedes from its proper kind. Now
nature has befriended women with a more cool and temperat constitution, put
less of fire and consequently of choler, in their compositions; so that their
heats of that kind are adventitious and preternatural, raised often by fancy or
pride, and so both look more unhandsomly, and have less of pretense to veil and
cover them. Besides women have a native feebleness, unable to back and assert
their angers with any effective force, which may admonish them it is never
intended they should let loose to that passion, which nature seems by that very
unability to have interdicted them. But when they do it, they render themselves
at once despised and abhorred; nothing being more ridiculously hateful, then an
impotent rage.

17. But as the most feeble insect may sometimes disturb, tho not much hurt us,
so there is one feminine weapon which as it is always ready, so proves often
troublesome, I mean the tongue, which, tho in its loudest clamors can naturally
invade nothing but the ear, yet even that is a molestation. The barking of a
dog, tho we are secure he cannot bite, is a grating unpleasant sound; and while
women seek that way to vent their rage, they are but a sort of speaking brutes,
and should consider whether that do not reflect more contemt upon themselves,
then their most virulent reproaches can fix upon others.

18. But some things have had the luck to acquire a formidableness no body
knows how, and sure there is no greater instance of it, then in this case. A
clamorous woman is looked on, tho not with reverence, yet with much dread, and
we often find things don to prevent or appease her storms, which would be
denied to the calm and rational desires of a meeker person. And perhaps such
successes have not bin a little accessory to the fomenting the humor; yet sure
it gives them little cause of triumph, when they consider how odious it makes
them, how unfit (yea intolerable) for human society; let them take the verdict
of Solomon who declares it better to dwell Pro. 25. 24. in a corner of a house
top, then with a brawling woman in a wide house. Nor does the son of Sirach
speak less sharply tho more ironically, Ecl. 18. 16. A loud crying woman and a
scold, shall be sought out to drive away the enemy. And tho he taxes the
feminine vices impartially enough, yet there is scarce any of them which he
more often and more severely brands then this of unquietness. It seems 'twas a
thing generally looked on, as very insufferable; as appears by Socrates, who
when he designed to discipline himself to perfect patience and tolerance, knew
no better way of exercise, then to get a shrew to his wife, an excellence that
may perhaps again recommend a woman, when we fall to an age of Philosophers;
but at present 'twill be hard for any of our Xantippes to find a Socrates; and
therefore that quality is as destructive to their interests in getting
husbands, (...) it is to the husbands quiet when he is got. (...) I presume I
need not declame farther against this fault, which I suppose cannot be frequent
among that rank of women to whom this tract is intended: for if neither moral
nor divine Considerations have prevented it, yet probably civility and a
gentile education has: a scold being a creature to be looked for only in Stalls
and Markets, not among persons o^ quality. Yet if there be any that have
descended to so sordid a practice, they have so far degraded themselves, that
they are not to wonder if others substract that respect, which upon other
accounts they might demand.

19. And to such I should recommend the usual method of Physic, which is to
cure by revulsion, let that sharp humor which so habitually flows to the
tongue, be taught a little to recoile, and work inward; and instead of reviling
others, discipline and correct themselves: let them upbraid their own madness,
that to gratify an impotent, nay a most painful passion, have degenerated from
what their nature, their qualities, their education, designed them. And if they
can thus reverse their displesures, 'twill not only secure others from all
their indecent assaults, but it will at last extinguish them: for anger is
corrosive, and if it be kept only to feed upon its self, must be its own
devourer; if it be permitted to fetch no forage from without, nor to nourish
it self with suspicions and surmises of others, nor to make any sallies at the
tongue, it cannot long hold out.

20. And how much they will herein consult their interest and their reputation
too, they may be taught by Solomon, who makes it the distinctive sign of a
foolish woman to be clamorous, Prove. 9. 13. whereas when he gives the character
of his Excellent woman, he links Wisdom and Gentleness together, she opens
her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of kindness, Prove. 31. 26.
If this verdict may be admitted (as sure it ought, whether we consider his
wisdom, or dear bought experience in women) it will confute the common plea of
querulous spirits, who think to seem insensible of any the least provocation,
is to appear silly and stupid; tho truly if it were so, 'twould be full as
eligible as to appear mad and raving, as they commonly do in the transport of
their fury.

21. To conclude, Meekness is so amiable, so indearing a quality, and so
peculiarly embellishing to women, that did they but all consider it with half
the attention they do their more trivial exterior ornaments, 'twould certainly
be taken up as the universal mode, in all the several variations of it this
Section has presented.

SECT. III. Of Compassion.
1. OF near Affinity to the Virtue of Meekness, is that of Mercy and Compassion,
which indeed can scarce thrive in any place where the former has not prepared
the soil: Anger and Obstinacy being like that rough East Wind which brought the
Egyptian Locusts, Exodus 10. 13. to eat up every green thing in the Land. A mind
harrassed with its own impatiency, is not at lesure to observe, much less to
condole the calamities of others. But as a calm and clear day befriends us with
a more distinct Prospect of distant Objects; so when all is quiet and serene
within us, we can then look about us, and discern what exigencies of others
invite our pity.

2. I need not say much to raise an estimate of this Virtue, since it is so
essential to our Nature, so interwoven in the composition of Humanity, that we
find in Scripture phrase, compassion is generally seated in the most inward
sensible part of our frame, the bowels, so Col. 3. 12. Put on therefore bowels
of mercy; and Phil. 2. 1. Bowels and mercies. So that a cruel ruthless person
unmans himself, and is by the common vote of mankind to be listed among brutes;
nay, not among the better, but only the more hateful, noxious sort of them.

3. But this is yet more unnatural in the female Sex, which being of softer
mold, is more pliant and yielding to the impressions of pity, and by the
strength of fancy redoubles the horror of any sad object; yea so remarkable is
this tenderness, that God, when he would most magnify his own compassion,
illustrates it by that of women, as the highest human instance. Indeed such a
propension have women to commiseration, that they are usually taxed with an
excess in it; so that any imprudent lenity is Proverbially called, A womanish
Pity, and therefore it may be thought an impertinence to exhort them to that
which they can scarce avoid. But to this I answer; first, that in this
degenerous age, it is no news to see people violate their instincts, as well as
their duties, and be worfe then their nature inclines them; many sins being
committed even against the grain, and with violence to constitution.

4. Yet secondly, it is not a mere melting of the eyes, or yerning of the bowels
I design to recommend: Alas, their tears will not be drink to a thirsty soul,
nor will shivering at his nakedness cloth him, this is such an insignificant
mercy as St. James describes, saying to a brother or sister, be ye warmed, be
ye filled, but not giving them things needful to the body, c. 2. 16. Indeed,
she that weeps over those distresses she will not relieve, might have bin fit
to be entered in the list of the mourning women among the Jews and Heathens,
who were hired to make up the Tragic pomp of Funerals with their mercenary
sorrow, but had no real concern in that loss they seemed to bewail. It Is
therefore a more active sort of Compassion to which I would invite them; and
yet for method sake, I shall consider it under two distinct Heads, Giving, and
Forgiving.

5. By Giving, in this place, I mean not a general liberality, (tho that
prudently bounded, is an Excellence well becoming Persons of Fortune) but only
such a Giving as terminates upon the needy, and is applied to succor their
indigencies. To give to those from whom they may expect returns, may be a
design, but at the best can be but generosity and frankness of humor. It Is only
then mercy (as Christ Himself has defined it) when it is to those from whom
they can hope for nothing again.

6. And in this Virtue women have in forme^ Ages eminently excelled, yea so
essential was it, that we find Solomon thought not their characte^ complete
without it, but numbers it among the properties of his Virtuous Woman, Prove.
31. 20. She stretches forth her hand to the poor, and reaches her hand to the
needy. And it is a little observable, that after he has described her Industry
and Diligence for the acquiring of Wealth, this is se^ in the front of her
disbursments, as the principa^ use she made of it; and precedes her providing
Scarlet for her Household, or fine Linen and Purple for her self, v. 21, 22.
The application is very obvions, and admonishes all that own the same Title of
Virtuous Women, to prefer the necessities of others before their own
superfluities and delicacies. Nay, if they look farther; and consider who it is
that is personated in the poor, that begs in every needy distressed suppliant,
and that will finally own every act of mercy as don to himself: methinks they
should sometimes think fit to sacrifice even their most moderate enjoiments to
their charity; be ashamed to serve themselves before their Savior, or let him
stand naked and hungry, whilst they are solacing with that which would relieve
him.

7. But how then shall they answer it, who suffer him to be supplanted, not by
their needs, but excesses; who have so devoted their hearts and purses to
vanity and luxury, that they have neither will nor power to succor the wants of
others? How unequal and disproportionate is it, that those who study to fling
away money upon themselves, cannot be temted by any opportunity and distress, to
drop an alms to the poor? What a preposterous sight is it to see a Lady, whose
gay Attire gives her the glittering of the Sun, yet have nothing of its other
properties, never to cheer any drooping, languishing creature by her influence?
It Is the counsel of the son of Sirach, not to give the poor any occasion to
curse thee. Ecclus. 4. 5. But sure such persons do it, if the poor happen not
to have more Charity then they exemplify to them. For when they shall find such
hand hearts under such soft raiment, see them bestow so much upon the decking
their own bodies, and do nothing toward the necessary support of theirs; it is
a shrewd trial of their Meekness. Poverty is apt of it self to imbitter the
spirit, and needs not such an additional temtation.

8. Nay farther, when a poor starving wretch shall look upon one of these gay
creatures, and see that any one of the baubles, the loosest appendage of her
dress; a fan, a busk, perhaps a black patch, bears a price that would warm his
emty bowels; will he not have sharp incitations not only to execrate her pride,
and his own poverty, but consequently to repine at the unequal distribution of
Providence, and add sin to his misery? The denial therefore of an alms may be a
double cruelty, to the soul as well as to the body. It Is said of Xenocrates,
that a chased Bird flying to his bosom, he rescued it with much satisfaction,
saying he had not betrayed a suppliant; but this is in that case reverst, and in
an higher instance; for what can be more the betraying of a suppliant, then
instead of supplying his wants, to rob him of his innocence, and be his snare
in lieu of his refuge? This is a consideration I wish more deeply impressed upon
the women of this Age; and truly it is their concern it should be so; for since
at the last day the inquest shall be so particular upon this very thing, it is
but necessary they should examine how they are fitted to pass that test.

9. Let them therefore keep a preparatory audit within their own breast, reflect
upon the expenses of their vanity, what the delicacy of their food, what the
richness and variety of their cloths, nay what the mere hypocrisies of their
dress, in false hair, and complexion has cost them; to which they may also add
the charge of their recreations and divertisements, those costly arts of
chasing away that time, which they will one day wish to recall: let them I say
compute all this, and then confront to it the account of their charity, and I
much fear the latter will with many of them be comparatively as undiscernible,
as Socrates found Alcibiades's lands in the Map of the whole world, be so
perfectly overwhelmed, that it will appear little in their own sight and
nothing in Gods.

10. For if the poor Widows mite acquired a valu merely from her poverty, that
she had no more; by the rule of contraries we may conclude, how despicable the
scanty oblations of the rich are in Gods account. If even their liberality who
gave much, was outvied by a farthing, Mar. 12. 41- to what point of diminution
must their niggardly offerings, who give little, be reduced? especially when
they shall be compared with the numerous and costly sacrifices they make to
pride and luxury; nay I wish some were not guilty of more then the
disproportion, even the total omission of charity, that in a multitude of
Tailors bills cannot produce the account of one Garment for the poor, that
amidst the delicacies of their own diet (nay perhaps of their dogs too) never
order^d so much as the crumbs of their Table to any hungry Lazarus. But let all
such remember, that there will come a time, when one of Tabitha's coats Acts 9.
39. will be of more valu then all their richest Wardrobes, tho they could
number Gowns with Lucullus's Cloaks, which the Roman Story reports to be 5000,
and that when their luxurious fare shall only feast the worms, and render them
passive in that Epicurism they acted before, they will wish they had made the
bellies of the poor their refectory, and by feeding them nurished themselves to
immortality.

11. Let this I say be seriously remembered now, l^st hereafter they fall under
the same exprobrating remembrance with the rich man in the Gospel, Luke 16. 25.
Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus
that which was evil, but now he is comforted and thou a^t tormented. A Text
which St. Gregory professes was ever sounding in his ears, and made him look
with suspicion and dread upon that grandeur to which he was advanced, as
fearing it might be designed as his final reward. With what terror then may
those look upon their present good things, who by ingrossingthem wholly to
themselves, own them as their entire portion, and implicitly disclaim their
share of the future? For to that none must pretend, who receive their
transitory goods under any other notion, then that of a Steward or Factor: as
we may see in the parable of the Talents, where those that had the reward of
the five and ten Cities were not such as had consumed their Talents upon their
own riot and excesses, but suchas had industriouslyemploied them according to
the design of their Lord: and if it there fared so ill with the mere
unprofitable servant, who had horded up his Talent, what shall become of those,
who squander away theirs, and can give no account either of use or principal?

12. Were these considerations duly laid to heart, we might hope to see some of
the primitive charity revive, when women of the highest rank converted their
ornaments and costly deckings into clothing for the poor, and thought no
retinue so desirable, so honorable as a train of Alms-folks: but I speak
improperly, when I make the poor their attendants, for indeed they rather
attended the poor, did not only order the supply of their wants, but were
themselves their ministers, waited about their sick beds, dressed their most
loathsome ulcers, and descended to all the most servile offices about them.

13. But these were such heights, such transcendendies of mercy, as required a
deeper foundation of humility then will now be often met with: yet let me take
the occasion to say, that it may be a good managery of a charity to act (as far
as they can) personally in it. For besides that it prevents some abuses and
frauds, which deputed agents may sometimes be temted to; they pay God a double
tribute in it, of their persons as well as their fortunes; next they* bring
themselves into acquaintance with the poor, and by that means correct those
contemts and nice disdains, which their own prosperity is too apt to create
farther yet, they excite their own compassion, which being a motion of the
sensitive part of the mind, cannot be stirred so effectually by any thing, as
by the presence of the object, the most pathetic tragical description of a
distress, being not able to affect us half so much as one ocular demonstration.
Lastly it is an apt means to increase their thankfulness to Almighty God, whose
bounty to themselves must needs make a deeper impression, when it is compared
with the necessito us condition of others: for things are best illustrated by
their contraries, and it is too observable in our depraved nature, that we valu
not things by their real positive worth, but comparatively as they excel
others, nor ever make a right estimate of what we enjoy, till our own or others
wants instruct us.

14. Upon all these considerations it may be a very becoming useful
circumstance in any charitable ministry to be themselves the actors; and to
that end 'twill be a very commendable industry to qualify themselves to be
helpful to the poor in as many instances as they can; not only opening their
purses, but dispensatories too, providing medecines for such as either by
disease, or casualty want that sort of relief. A charity which I doubt not is
practiced by many, and I wish it were by more, that our nicer Dames who study
only Cosmetics for themselves, would change the Scene, and instead of repairing
or disguising their own complexions, study the restoration of their decrepit
patients limbs. And sure tho it be a less fashionable, it is a much better
sight, to see a Lady binding up a sore, then painting her face; and she will
cast a much sweeter savor in Gods nostrils, with the smell of unguents and
balsoms, then with the most exquisit odors and perfumes. For since God
professes Esaias 1. that that very incense which was designed as a part of his
worship, was an abomination to him, because not accompanied with the acts of
Mercy, we cannot think he will better like of those, which have no higher aim
then delicacy and sensuality.

15. But besides this part of mercy in giving, there is another, that of
forgiving; which may happen to be of a larger extent then the former: for
whereas that was confined to the poor, this has no such limits, but as it is
possible to be injured by persons of all ranks, so this pardoning mercy is to
reach equally with that possibility. This is that part of Charity which we
peculiarly call Clemency, a Virtue which not only Christianity but Morality
recommends. The Ancient Romans had it in such veneration, that they numbered it
not only among Virtues but Deities, and built it a Temple: and they were
somewhat toward the right in it, for it was, tho not God, yet so eminent an
attribute of his, that nothing can more assimilate man unto him.

16. There are many Heroic acts of this kind to be met with among the virtuous
Hethens. Lycurgus not only forgave Alcander who had struck out his eye, but
entertained him in his house, and by his gentle admonitions reclaimed him from
his former vicious life. Aristides being after signal services and without
crime, unjustly banished by his Citizens, was so far from acting or imprecating
against them, that at his departure from Athens he solemnly prayed the Gods,
that they might never by any trouble or distress be forced to recall him. So
Phocion being unjustly condemned, left it as a solemn charge to his son Phocas,
that he should never revenge his death. A multitude of the like examples might
be produced, but we need not borrow light from their faint Tapers, when we have
the Sun beams, I mean the Sun of righteousness our blessed Savior, who as he
has recommended this grace by his precept, so he has signally exemplified it to
us in his practice; the whole design of his descent to earth being only to
rescu his enemies from destruction, and as every part of his life, so the last
Scene of it was particularly adapted to this end, and his expiring breath
expended in mediating for his crucifiers; father forgive them, Luke 23. 34. And
this copy of his was transcribed by his first followers, the Primitive
Christians in their severest Martyrdoms praying for their persecutors.

17. Thus are we in the Apostles phrase compassed about with a cloud of
witnesses, Heb. 12. 1. of eminent examples, which ought to have a forcible
influence upon all, but methinks should not fail to have it on that Sex, whose
native tenderness predisposes them to the Virtue, and who need but swim with the
stream of their own inclinations. How can we think that their melting eyes
should ever sparkle fire, or delight in spectacles of cruelty, that their
flexible tender hearts should turn into Steel or Adamant, be incapable of all
impressions of pity? Yet God knows such changes have too often bin seen: women
have not only put off that softness peculiar to them, but the common instincts
of humanity, and have exceeded not only savage men, but beasts in cruelty.
There have bin too frequent instances of the implacable malice, and insatiable
cruelties of women: I need not call in the aid of Poetique fiction and tell
them of Clytemnestra, Medea, or the Belides, with hundreds of others,
celebrated as instances of Heroic wickedness. There are examples enough in more
authenticStories, The Roman Tullia, the Persian Parysatis; and that we may not
pass by the sacred Annals, Jezebel, and Athalia. I forbear to multiplyexamples
of this kind, of which all ages have produced some so eminent, as have rendered
it a common observation, that no cruelty exceeds that of an exasperated woman:
and it is not much to be wondered at, since nothing can be so ill in its
pristine state as that which degenerates from a better. No enmity we know so
bitter, as that of alienated friends; no such persecution as that of Apostats,
and proportionably no such ferity as that of a perverted mildness. So that the
Poets were not much out, who as they represented the Graces under the figures
of women, so the Furies too: and since it is in their election which part they
will act, they ought to be very jealous over themselves. The declinations to
any vice are gradual, sometimes at first scarce discernable; and probably the
greatest monsters of cruelty, would at the beginning have detested those
inhumanities which afterward they acted with greediness.

18. It concerns them therefore to ward those beginnings whose end may be so
fatal. She that is quick in apprehending an affront perhaps will not be so
quick in dismissing that apprehension; and if it be permitted to stay, 'twill
quickly improve, twenty little circumstances shall besuborn'd to foment it with
new suspicions, till at last it grow to a quarrel; from thence to hatred, from
that to malice, and from that to revenge: and when that black passion has
overspread the mind, like an Egyptian darkness it admits no gleam of reason or
Religion, but hurries them blindfold to their own ruin often as well as others.

19. Let none think this only a fancy or scheme of Discourse: there have bin
too many tragical experiments of its truth: how many men have bin mortally
engaged upon no weightier original, then the spleen of a woman? the frantic
notion of honor among our Duellists fitly corresponding with the as frantic
impulses of feminine revenge, and any imaginary injury (or perhaps but just
imputation) to the Lady, obliging her Gallant to rush upon the most real sin
and danger. A madness something beyond that which the Romances describe of
Knight Errantry; for that generally is for the relief of distressed Damsels,
but this is only to humor the too prosperous ones, the insolent and the proud.
Those therefore that have observed the common occasions of Duels, have not
unfitly divided them between Wine and Women; it being hard to say which is the
most intoxicating and besotting. The Son of Sirach couples them together,
Ecclus. 19. 2. Wine and Women will make men of understanding fall away. The
many modern examples of this mischief, as it should strike an extreme terror
into those Women who have bin any way accessory to the death, or but danger of
any man; so it is just matter of caution to all, so to regulate their Passions,
that they never come within distance of implacability; for if once they arrive
there, themselves can give no stop.

20. In order to this, 'twill be well to consider at the first incitation, what
the real ground is; perhaps sometimes they are angry (as the Galatians were at
St. Paul, Gal. 4. 16.) at those that tell them the Truth; some scandalous, or at
least suspicious behavior, may have engaged a friend to admonish them; (an
office that has sometimes proved very fatal; those commonly that have most guilt
having less patience to hear of it.) And if this be the cause, it is the
greatest injustice in the world to make that a quarrel which is really an
obligation: and therefore instead of maligning their Monitor, they ought to
thank and reverence him. Nay, tho the accusation be not with that candi^
design, but be meant as a reproach; yet if it b^ true, it should not excite
anger at their accusers* but remorse, and reformation in themselves.

21. It was the saying of a Wiseman, that h^ profited more by his enemies then
his friends because they would tell him more roundly of hi^ faults: and this is
excellently improved by Plutarch, in his Tract, Of the benefits to be reap'^
from Enemies: so that even a malicious accusation may be a kindness, and
consequently oug^ not to be repaid with an injury. But suppo^ in the last
place, that the aspersion be not onl^ unkind, but untru, it will not even then
be safe t^ let loose to their indignation: first, in respect^ Prudence, an
angry vindication serving the d^ sign of the enemy, and helping to spread the
c^ lumny; whereas a wise neglect and dissembli^ does often stifle and suppress
it. Secondly, respect of duty, for all that own themselves Ch^ stians, must
confess they are under an obligati^ to forgive, and not to revenge. Now if they
i^ tend to pay a real obedience to this Precept, 'tw^ be the more easy, the
sooner they set to it. He the sees his house on fire, will not dally with the
flam^ much less blow, or extend it, resolving to quen^ it at last. And anger is
as little to be truste^ which if once thoroughly kindled, will scarce expire but
with the destruction of the subject it works on.

22. Let therefore the disobliged not look back upon the injury, but forward to
those mischiefs which too sharp a resentment may betray them to: let them
consider, that the boiling of their blood may finally cause the effusion of
another, and wrath may swell into murder. If they would do thus, and instead
of those magnifying optics wherein they view the wrong, make use of the other
end of the perspective, to discern the dismal event at distance; it would sure
fright them from any nearer approach, would keep them within those bounds which
their duty prescribes them; and thereby acquaint them with a much greater, and
more ingenious pleasure then their highest revenge can giv^ them; I mean that of
forgiving injuries, and obliging the injurious. This is a pleasure so pure and
refined, so noble and heroic, that none but rational natures are capable of it;
whereas that of spite and revenge (if it can be called a pleasure) is a mere
bestial one; every the most contemtible animal can be angry when it is molested,
and endevor to return the mischief.

23. It should therefore, methinks, be an easy determination, whether to
embrace that clemency and compassion which we see exemplified in the wisest and
best of men, nay in the Omniscient, Immortal God, or that savage fierceness of
the ignoblest creatures. This is certain, that no woman would be content
toassume the outward form of any of those; why then should they subject their
nobler part, the mind, to such a transformation? For, as there are no monsters
so deformed, as those which are compounded of man and beast: so among them all,
nothing can be more unnatural, more odious, then a woman-Tiger. I conclude all
with the advice of Solomon, Prove. 17. 14. The beginning of strife is as when
one lets out water: therefore leave off contention before it be meddled with.
When once a breach is made upon the spirit by immoderate anger, all the
consequent mischiefs will flow in, like a rapid stream when the banks are
broken down; nor is there any way to prevent it, but by keeping the bounds
entire, preserving that tenderness and compassion which God and Nature do
equally enforce and recommend.

SECT. IV. Of Affability.
1. IN the next place we may reckon Affability and Courtesy, which as it is
amiable in all, so it is singularly so in women of Quality, and more
universally necessary in them then in the other Sex; for men have often charges
and emploiments which do justify, nay perhaps require somewhat of sternness and
austerity; but women ordinarily have few or no occasions of it, and those who
havewell digested the former Lectures of Meekness and Compassion; will not be
apt to put it on unnecessarily. Now Affability may b^ considered either as a
mere human Accomplishment, or as a divine Virtue; in either notion it is
commendable; but it is the latter that gives it the highest Excellence and
Perfection.

2. To begin with the first notion of it, we may take an estimate of its worth
by its Cause, and by its Effects. For its Cause, it derives itself either from
a native candor, and generosity of mind; or from a noble and ingenious
Education, or something jointly from both; and these are as good originals as
any thing merely moral can flow from. And that these are indeed its sources;
common* experience will attest: those of the greatest Minds, and best
Extractions, being usually most condescending and obliging; whereas those of
most abject Spirits and Birth, are the most insulting and imperious. Alexander
the Great, tho terrible in the field, yet was of a gentle, compla^sant
conversation, familiarly treating those about him: yet Crispinus, Narcissus,
Nymphidius, and other enfranchised bondmen, we find insolently trampling upon
the Roman Senators and Consuls. It Is therefore a great error for Persons of
Honor, to think they acquire a reverence by putting on a supercilious gravity,
looking coily and disdainfully upon all about them; it is so far from that, that
it gives a suspicion that it is but a pageantry of greatness, some mushrome newly
sprung up, that stands so stiff, and swells so much. But instead of teaching
others to keep their distance, this fastidious d^in invites them to a closer
inspection, that if there be any flaw either in their life or birth, 'twill be
sure to be discovered, there being no such prying inquisitor as curiosity, when
it is eggd on by a sense of contemt.

3. On the other side, if we consider the effects of Courtesy, they are quite
contrary; it endears to all, and often keeps up a Reputation in spite of many
blemishes: a kind look or word from a Superior, is strangely charming, and
insensibly steals away men's hearts from them. This the Wise man refers to
Ecclus. 18. 16. when he prefers a Word before a Gift. And it is Plutarch's
observation of Cleomenes King of Sparta, that when the Grecians compared his
Affability and easiness of Access with the sullen state and pride of other
Princes, they were so enamored with it, that they judged him only worthy to be
a King. And as their is no certainer, so also no cheaper way of gaining love: a
friendly salutation is as easy as a frown or reproach; and that kindness may be
preserved by them, which if once forfeited, will not at a far greater price be
recovered.

4. Besides, when human vicissitudes are considered, it may be a point of
Providence too; the greatest Persons may sometimes want assistance from the
meanest; nay sometimes the face of affairs is quite changed, and the wheel of
Fortune turns them lowest that were uppermost, and proportionably elevates the
meanest. It Is wisdom therefore so to treat all, as to leave no impressions of
unkindness, since none is so despicable, but may possibly at one time or other
have an opportunity to retaliate. It Was therefore a prudent as well as an
equitable resolution of the Emperor, who said he would so entertain the
addresses of his Subjects; as, if he were a Subject, he would wish the Prince
should entertain him. A rule very worthy to sway all Persons of Honor in their
intercourse with others. And since even among Persons in Command there are
degrees, and she which is superior to one, is inferior to another; they have a
ready way to compare the civility they pay, with that they expect. Let
therefore one who meets with a cold, neglectful Treatment from any above her,
examine her own resentments, and then reflect, that if she give the like to
those below her, they will doubtless have the same sense; and therefore let her
resolve never to offer what she so much dislikes to bear: and she that does
thus, that makes such inferences, will convert an injury into a benefit;
civilize her self by the rudeness of others, and make that ill nurture her own
discipline.

5. But hitherto we consider Affability only in its ethnic dress, as it is a
human ornament; 'twill appear yet more enamoring upon a second view, when we
look on it as bearing the impress of the Sanctuary, as a divine Virtue. And that
it is capable of being so, we have the authority of St. Paul, who inserts it in
the number of those Christian Graces which he recommends to his Roman
Proselites; condescend to them of low estate, Romans 12. 16. and that we may the
better discern its valu, it is observable that he links it with the most eminent
Virtue of Humility; for it immediately follows his Precept of be not high minded.
Indeed it is not only joined with it as a Friend or Allie, but derived from it
as its stock and Principle: and certainly a more divine extraction it cannot
have, Humility being the Alpha and Omega of Virtues, that which lays the
foundation, (without which the most towering Structure will but crush it self
with its own weight) and that which perfects and consummates the building also,
secures and crowns all other Graces; which when they are most verdant^ and
flourishing, are like Jonas his gourd, that may afford some shadow and
refreshment for a while, but are apt to breed that worm which will destroy
them. When once they are smitten with Pride, they instantly fade and wither; so
necessary is humility both for the acquiring and conserving, all that is good
in us.

6. We may therefore conclude; that courtesy and obligingness of behavior
which proceeds thence, is in respect of its spring and original, infinitely to
be preferred before that which descends from no higher stock then natural or
prudential motives; and since it is natural for every production to have some
similitude to that which produces it, we shall find it no less excellent in
respect of its properties then its descent, I shall instance only in two,
Sincerity and Constancy.

7. For the first as far as Affability partakes of Humility it must of
Sincerity also, that being a virtue whose very elements are plainness and
simplicity: for as it has no designs which want a cover, so it needs none of
those subtilties and simulations, those pretenses and artifices requisite to
those that do. It Is the precept of the Apostle, Phil. 2. 3. In lowliness of mind
let each esteem others better then himself, where we see it is the nature of a
lowly mind to transfer that esteem to others which he substracts from himself:
how where such an esteem is planted into the heart, it verifies all the
expressions and outward significations of respect, and renders the greatest
condescentions (which to an insolent humor may seem extravagant and affected)
real and unfeigned.

8. On the contrary that courtesy which derives no higher then from mere human
principles, is not much to be confided in. It Is the Psalmists affirmation that
all men are liars. And therefore there is more then a possibility of deceit in
their fairest shows. Sometimes we know smooth and plausible addresses have bin
designed as the stale to vile and treacherous practices. The extraordinary
blandishments and endearing behavior of Absalom to the people, was only to
steal their hearts, and advance his intended rebellion, 2 Samuel 15. and David
tells us of some, whose words were softer then butter, having war in the heart,
whose words were smoother then oil, and yet were very swords, Psalm. 55. 21. and
God knows this age has not so much improved in sincerity, that we should think
the same Scenes are not daily acted over among us.

9. But besides all the blacker projects of this kind, which nothingbut the
event can detect, there is a lower sort of this treachery, which is visible,
nay so avowed, that it is one of the most common subjects of mirth and
entertainment, I mean that of scoffing and derision, a thing too frequent among
all, but I fear I may say very peculiarly so among Ladies, those at least of
the modish sort, their very civilities and caresses, being often designed to
gain matter of scorn and laughter. Mutual visits we know are an expression of
respect, and should flow from a real kindness, but if those now in use br
sifted, how few will be found of that make? They are at the best formal, a
tribute rather paid to custom then friendship, and many go to see those, for
whom they are perfectly indifferent whether they find them alive or dead, well
or sick. Nay very often they are worse then thus, designed only to make
observations, to bolt out something ridiculous wherewith to sport themselves as
soon as they are gone; and least the inquest should return with a non inventus,
they will accept of the slightest discoveries, the least misplacing of a word,
nay of a hair shall be theme enough for a Comedy.

10. But if a poor Country Gentlewoman fall within their circuit, what a stock
of mirth does she afford them, how curiously do they anatomise every part of
her dress, her mien, her dialect, nay perhaps to improve the Scene, will
recommend yet greater absurdities to her, under the notion of the mode, that so
she may be the more ample subject of their scorn. Such visits as these are but
insidious intrusions, the insinuations of a spy rather then the good office of
a neighbor; and when it is remembered how great a portion of some women's time is
spent in this kind of diversion, we must conclude there have a multitude of
acts gone to make up the habit. I wish they would seriously reflect on it, and
unravel that injurious mirth by a penitential sadness, and either spend their
time better then in visiting, or else direct their visits to better purposes:
and this they would certainly do if they would exchange their mere popular
civilities (that kind of paint and varnishing manners) for that tr^ Christian
condescension; which admits of no dece^, but is as transparent as Drusus wished
his house ^ld be, that has no secret scrues and spring, to move the eyes or
tongue a contrary way from the heart, but is in reality all that it pretends to
be.

11. A second property of it is Constancy, for as it is true to others, so it
is to its self; it is foundid on the solidest of virtues, and is not subject to
those light and giddy uncertainties, that the vulgar civilities are. For he
that out of a disesteem of his proper worth, has placed himself in a state of
inferiority, will think it not an arbitrary matter, but a just debt to pay a
respect to those he thinks his betters; and an humble mind will in every body
find something or other to prefer to himself. So that he acts upon a fixed
principle, and is not in danger of those contradictions in his manners, which
shall render him one day sweet and affable, and another sour and morose. But
such mutations are frequently incident to those who are swaied by other
motives, sometimes an interest changes, and then the most fauning Sycophant can
transplant his flatteries, and court a new Patron; yea many times to the
despite and vilifying of the old.

12. Sometimes again, fortune may change; a man may fall from a prosperous to an
adverse state, and then those who were prodigal of their civilities whilst he
needed nothing else, will withdraw even those from him, least they should
encourage him to demand something more; an experiment of this Job made in his
friends (or rather flatterers) whom he fitly compares to winter brooks, running
over when not needed, but quite dry when they are.

13. But the most frequent change is that of fancy and humor, which has a much
more general sway then reason and judgment. This is so observable in the vulgar
rabble, that often in an instant they will shift passions, and hate this hour
what they doted on the last. Of this all popular states, have afforded many
costly experiments, but we need not go farther then the sacred Story, where we
find the Acclamations and Hosannahs of the multitude, quickly converted into
crucify him, crucify him. This levity of mind has bin observed so incident to
women, that it is become almost proverbial; for by how much their passions are
more violent, they are commonly the less lasting, and as they are reckoned
among those colder bodies that are particularly influenced by the Moon, so they
seem to bear a great resemblance to her in her vicissitudes and changes; yet
still with a greater degree of uncertainty, for she in all her revolutions
observes some constant periods, and we can tell in her wain when she will be at
full, so that she has a kind of certainty even in her planetary errors; but
what Ephemerides can be framed for some women's humors? who can tell how long
the present will last? and what will be the next that will succeed?

14. I need not bring instances of their inconstancy from that common place of
passionate widows, whohave let a newlove sail even through those floods of
tears wherewith they bewailed the old: for (besides that that is a case wherein
possibly they may find matter enough for retortion) it is here a little wide
from my purpose, which designs no farther inquisition then into their ordinary
conversation, wherein that love o^ variety which is so remarkable in their
habit, their diet, their diversions, extends it self often to their company,
their friendships also and converse. Those intimacies which they cherisht
lately, quickly grow despicable, and at last nauseous, and consequently their
behavior falls from kind and civil, to cold and disdainful. I doubt not this
has often bin proved by many of those humble companions, which officiously
attend them, who cannot alwaiesfix themselves, no notby those flatteries that
first introduced them; some new comer perhaps has better refined the Art, and
does the same thing more acutely and ingeniously, and then the old one is to be
turned off as too gross a Sycophant; or if they have bin so happy as to light
upon some of a more generous temper, who instead of a servile compliance with
their humor, and high characters of their worth, entertain them with the true
images of themselves, and endeavor to make what others only speak them, this is
that unpardonable crime which forfeits all degrees of favor, and does not only
avert, but incense. A faithful Monitor is as unacceptable as a true
Looking-glass to a deformed person, which at the best will be set aside, and
escapes well if not broken; and while great persons dispense their favors or
their frowns by such perverse mesures as these, they will be sure to do it
unjustly, as well as unconstantly.

15. I am far from making this an universal charge, I know there are women of
the highest quality, that guide themselves by other rules, that are deaf to all
the songs of Sirens, and have the prudence to valu a seasonable reproof before
the most extravagant Panegyric; but this is owing to that humility which I am
now recommending, without which it is as impossible for greatness to be proof
against flattery, as it is for a Pinnace with spreading sails, and a violent
gust of wind, to sail steddily without ballast. And the frequent want of this
is it which makes it no less frequent ^o see those unevennesses and
inequalities in be^avior; those partialities in dispensing even the ^ommonest
civilities, which I have now repre^ented.

16. And sure it is none of the meanest attri^utes due to that excellent virtue
of humility that ^t can thus fix and poise the mind, cure those ver^igoes and
giddy humors, incident to those who ^re mounted aloft: and above all that it is
a sure Antidote against the most insinuating poison of flattery, a holy spel or
amulet against the venom of a Parasite, which the Philosopher justly calls the
worst of tame beasts, as a Detractor is of wild: He being indeed a kind of
vulture, in the way of seizure, noless than ravine, who firstpicksout the eyes
of that which he designs to prey upon; suffering not the person concerned, to
see any thing of that destruction which he is to feel. And certainly none of
the ominous Birds, no night-Raven or screech-Owle can abode half so dismally as
these domestic Birds of prey, which are not only presages, but instruments of
ruin wheresoever they haunt.

17. It Is therefore the universal concern o^ those that are great and
prosperous, to chase them away, as Abraham did the Fowls from his Sacri(...),
Genesis 15. 11. but yet more peculiarly so o^ those to whom fortune hasgiven a
sudden rise, and unexpected grandeur, they being of all others the most
obnoxious to this sort of Harpies. The surprises of prosperity do no less
disturb the judgment then those of adversity: and as one who i^ in an instant
snatched up to some high Tower, is s^ amazed to see himself there, that he has
no ju^ mesure of the altitude, but thinks every thin^ farther below him then it
is: so they that ascen^ to greatness by swift and rapid motions, have their
heads so turned that they are apt to over* valu it; and to look with contempt
on those wh^ before perhaps they thought worth their envie^ And on a mind thus
prepared, flattery may mak^ any impressions, it suborning even Providence as a
witness on its side, and inferring from the Dignities obtained, the
transcending merit of the obtainer. A piece of Sophistry which the slightest
observer may easily confute, all Ages giving instances of those whose Vices
have preferred them, and by a strange Chimistry have extracted Honor out of
infamous acts. Yet to a mind possessed with its own admiration, this shall pass
for a demonstration: so treacherous a thing is Pride, that it combines with all
who design to cheat us: and indeed it is not only an accessory, but the
principal; none being in danger by others flatteries, who are not first seduced
by their own,

18. It will therefore be a point of Wisdom for all Persons of Honor to
increase their caution with their fortune, and as they multiply their Retinues
without, so especially to enforce their Guard within, that they become not
slaves to their own Greatness, fix not themselves in such a posture of State,
as to become immovable to all the offices of Humanity and Civility; nor think
that their admission to Greatness is upon the same terms on which the Jews were
wont to receive their Proselites, that they must renounce all their former
relations; but to remember that they differ no more from others then as a
counter set in the place of thousands or hundreds, does from one set in the
place of tens or units. A little transposition may quite alter the case; or
however, when they are all taken off the score, they are then indiscriminatly
tumbled together, and one has no precedence of another, either in place or
valu. So undiscernible will be the difference between the greatest Queen, and
the meanest Servant, when Death, that great Leveller, shall have mixed them;
there will be no inquisition in the Grave who came embalmed, or perfumed
thither. And, as a Learned man says, the Ulcers of Lazarus will make as good
dust as the Paint of Jezebel.

19. But I shall be thought to have outrun my Subject, or instead of that
amiable Image of Affability, and universal Obligingness, the great Ornament of
Life, introduce the grim figure of Death, that sullen Executioner, whom no
Gifts, no Prayers can mollify. Yet I cannot yield it wholly impertinent; for,
as its final stroke cures all the infirmities of the body, so the foresight and
contemplation of it is, as much a Catholicon for all the maladies of the mind;
especially that of insolence and disdain. For sure they cannot much pride
themselves in any exaltation, that remember they must finally fall into the
dust: nor arrogantly despise others, who consider that themselves shall one day
be insulted over by worms and insects. Such mental descents into the vault or
charnel-house, are the best disciplines for the demeanor in other places,
according to the admonition of the Wise man, Remember thy end, and thou shall
never do amiss.

SECT. V. Of Piety.
1. LASTLY, To complete and crown all other Excellencies, nothing is so proper,
so necessary as Piety and Devotion. This is the salt which seasons all
Sacrifices; yea, the Altar which sanctifies the Gift, no good (how splendid
soever in the sight of men) being acceptable to God, till it be thus
consecrated, and have the seal of the Sanctuary upon it. This is a Virtue truly
Divine, as well in its original as its end; for as it comes from Heaven, (is an
afflation of the blessed Spirit) so it tends thither also, and thither raises
its Votaries. This is it which sublimates and spiritualizes Humanity, defecates
and refines it from all the dregs of morality; and so wings our earthly lumpish
nature, that we can soar aloft to the region of Spirits, and by its raptures
make some essay of that state of separation, even while we are linked to the
body. This is it which combines us so with God, that we have the same
interests, the same choices; nay it does in a sort communicate and enterchange
properties with him; the all-Powerful God seems impotent and unable to resist
its influence, whilst it invests us feeble wretches in a kind of Omnipotence,
by engaging him for us who can do all things.

2. Now this Piety may be considered either in a larger, or more limited sense:
in the former it is as wide as the whole scheme of Duty, not confined to any one
act, but extended to all the commands of God. For as the animal Spirit diffuses
its self into all the most distant members of the body; so this more vital
Principle has as universal an influence on the mind, stamps that with such an
admiration and reverence of God, such a love and complacency in him, that every
act is (at least habitually) designed to obey and glorify him.

3. In the more limited sense, Piety is taken for our more immediate
intercourse with God, in things purely divine, as Adorations, Prayers,
Aspirations, and all pantings and breathings of the soul after him; and in this
notion it is more particularly called Devotion. And this is comprehended it: the
other, as a part in the whole; nay indeed, as an effect in its cause; for where
Piety has not first formed and modelled the soul, there can be no true
Devotion. External forms of it there may be, but that is but ceremony and
pageantry, the most submissive prostrations are there but like that of Dagon
before the Ark, the fall of a liveless trunk; the most elevated eyes but a kind
of convulsive motion; and the most rigid mortifications, but like the cuttings
and launcings of Baal's Priests. Of this the very Heathen had some notion, and
therefore in their worships had many preparatory ceremonies of lustration, and
purifying, as being conscious of the incongruity, that unholy Persons should be
admitted to Sacred things. And accordingly Socrates has excellently (I had
almost said Evangelically) defined, the best way of worshipping God, to be the
doing what he commands. Indeed without this, our Devotion is mere stratagem and
design: we invoke God as we use to cajole men, only to serve a present turn;
and of such disingenious addresses, it is easy to read the event; or, if we
cannot, Solomon will instruct us, Prove. 15. 8. The Prayers of the wicked are an
abomination to the Lord.

4. To treat of the several branches of Piety in the first notion, is not
agreeable to the intended brevity of this Treatise; nor necessary, because
there are so many distinct Tracts extant on that Subject; yet I shall the more
closely to adapt it to my female Readers, observe the propriety of it to women,
not only as it is their greatest ornament and advantage, but especially as they
have somewhat more of predisposition toward it in their native temper. God's
Laws, which are the rule of Piety, have this common with men's, that they are
enforced upon us by the proposalt both of punishments and rewards, by that
means engaging two of our most sensible passions, Fear and Love; and the female
Sex being eminent for the pungency of both these, they are consequently the
better prepared for the impressions of Religion.

5. This is so much acknowledged, that our masculine Atheists make an ill use
of it, and are willing to think that Religion owes its force only to the
impotence of the subject on which it works, that it is only an imposition upon
the easy credulity of women, and are content to allow them the enclosure of
it; wherein, tho they sufficiently show their contemt of Piety, yet they
unawares give a greater honor to that Sex then they intend, whilst they confess
it more capable of an assimilation to the supreme Goodness, and of the renewal
of God's Image (for to that all Piety is designed) then their own. And
therefore women have so little reason to be ashamed, that they ought to glory
in the concession, and gratefully to celebrate the goodness of God to them,
who, as he brings light out of darkness, so converts their natural infirmities
into a means of spiritual strength, makes the impotencies and defects of their
nature subservient to the operation of Grace; and by consecrating their very
Passions, makes even those Gibeonites serviceable to the Tabernacle. But then
it is to be remembered, that the greater is their obligation to comply with this
design of Gods, to let their passions run in the channel he has cut for them;
so to confine their Fear and Love to spiritual Objects, that they make no
inordinate eruptions to any thing else, but in all their estimations of things
dreadful or desirable, to give still the just deference to that which is
eternal.

6. And, as Women in General have this advantage toward Piety, and obligation
to it; so particularly those of Quality, who we may subpose to have generally a
more early institution and instruction in it then those of a meaner rank: and
besides, have afterward more opportunities of being built up in the knowledge
of their duty, and (by the help of an ingenious education) clearer
apprehensions to discern it; and when they do so, have greater obligations to
perform it, both in respect of God, of others, and themselves.

7. In respect of God they have the greatest tie of gratitude, not only for the
common mercies which they partake with the rest of mankind, but for those
peculiar, by which they are differenced from others; of which, if they want a
just valu, let them ask themselves how willing they would be to part with them,
how she that has fed delicatly, would like to be desolate in the street, or she
that has bin brought up in Scarlet, to embrace the Dunghill, Lam. 4. 5. and
according to the aversion they find to such a change, let them estimate their
present enjoiment, and the thankfulness it exacts.

8. Secondly, in regard of others, their Piety backed with their secular
advantages, may be of a more extensive benefit; they have many opportunities of
doing good by their influence on others; or if no way else, yet the splendour of
their example, will by the eminency of their conditions shine (as a light on
some high Tower) more perspicuously, and guide many into the same path of Virtue.
And certainly it is no small obligation that lies on them in this respect; for
God, who does nothing without an end worthy of his wisdom, can never be thought
to have selected some persons as the objects of his bounty, merely that they may
swill and glut themselves with sensual plesures. No doubtless, he who is the
great Master of the universe, disposes all things for common benefit; and
therefore, if He have placed some in an higher Orb then others, it is that they
may have an auspicous influence on those below them; and if they fail in this,
they are no longer Stars but Comets, things of ominous and unlucky abode to all
about them. I might enlarge on this Subject, but having don it already in the
Gentleman's Calling, I suppose it unnecessary, since that part is equally
adapted to both Sexes.

9. In the last place, they have all obligation to Piety, in respect of
themselves, and that in two considerations; the first, of their present danger;
the second, of their final account. For their danger, it is evident they do not
more outnumber their inferiors in any thing then in the opportunities, nay
solicitations to sin. Weal^ and Honor have many snares, and which is worse, do
often dispose the mind to such an heedless security, that it takes no care to
avoid them: and as in the body, the diseases of repletion are fa^ more numerous
then those of emtiness, so the mind is oftener vitiated by affluence and
prosperity, then by indigence and adversity. It becomes therefore those who are
so surrounded with enemies to fortify themselves: and that they can no way do,
but by a sincere Piety, that whole Armor of God which the Apostle describes,
Ephesians. 6. 13. by which alone they may repel all the darts of temtations; nay not
only ward the blow, but wrest the weapon out of Satan's hand, so that when he
urges to them the opportunities, the impunity which their wealth and greatness
gives them to be bad, they may retort his Argument, and by a wholsomer
inference collect thence their great obligation to be good, and that not only
upon the score of gratitude (tho that were enough to an ingenious soul) but in
the second place of interest also, in respect of that account they must finally
give. For tho God be not an unjust exactor to reap where he has not sowed, yet
he is not so negligently profuse, as to do that which no prudent man will do,
scatter his goods promiscuously, without taking notice where they fall; but as
he dispences all things by particular providence, so he does it to a particular
end, and will exact as particular an account how that end has bin complied with.

10. It is a smart exprobration of Gods to Israel, Ezekiel, 16, 17, 18, 19. that
she had sacrilegiously employed his silver and gold, his oil, his flower and
honey which he had given her in the service of her Idols, by which as we may see
he takes notice how we dispose of our temporal possessions, so it shows us how
the enditement will proceedagainst all thosewho so pervert their use: with what
confusion must they appear at the great Audit who can give no other account of
their receipts, but that they consumed them upon their lusts, wagedwar against
God with his own tresure, and bin as well thieves as rebels? What a Luciferian
fall will they have from their honors, who have endeavored to undermine Gods?
thought themselves too great to pay him homage, and by their profane and
vicious example, induced acontemt of him? In short what a retaliation of
inversions will there then be? those that have turned Gods grace into
wantonness, converted his bounty into the fuel of their pride and luxury, shall
then have their glory turn^d into sham, their riots and excesses into the want
of a drop of water, and shall retain nothing of their greatness, but the guilt,
the grating remembrance of having abused those temporal blessings, which if
well managed might have received them into everlasting habitations. How
necessary then is it for all who have received so much upon account, to be
often reflecting on it, examining what charges, the great owner has imposed
upon so ample an income? what God requires of them for whom he has don so
much? And this is particularly the business of Piety, which in all the
forementioned respects, is as the usefullest, so the noblest accomplishment of
greatness

11. And such it has bin accounted till this profane Age of ours, which has
removed all the boundaries of the former, reverst even the instincts of nature,
and will not leave us so much of Religion as had the very worst of Heathens.
For how erroneous soever their were in the choice of their Deities, they
always honored and reverenced those they chose, committed most of their
enormities in obedience not in affront to them: did not assign the votaries as
Jeroboam did his Priests of the meanest of the people, but thought themselves
dignified by their service, but esteemed it an infamy not to be pious. But alas
now we adays make other estimates, Religion is so abject so contemtible a
thing, as is thought fit to influence none that are great either in parts or
quality: and therefore tho too many are willing to appropriate it to women,
upon the first account, as the Gospel is the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor.
1. 21. yet they make exceptions upon the latter, and are not willing to afford
it any of the nobler Proselits even of that Sex.

12. I doubt not there are many Lectures read to such, to fortify them against
all impressions of piety, to raise out the common notion of a God, and in order
to that to depose his Vicegerent within them, discard their conscience, that
unmannerly inmate, which is still speaking what they have no mind to hear, and
will be apt sometimes to question their grand principle, and tell them they have
souls. And truly it is no wonder if the abetters of Athism take this course; for
since they have no solid foundation of truth or reason, it is but necessary they
support their Party by Authority; the countenance and applause of Great Persons,
and God knows they have too much succeeded in the design. But, in the mean
time, what security do they give for the truth of their pretensions? We know
it is still required of those that will practice upon other peoples concerns,
that they put in caution to secure the owner from damage, But alas, what gage
can they give for a soul? Who can contrive a form of Indemnity where that is
the thing hazarded?

13. It Is easy indeed for one of these Apostles of Satan, to tell a Lady that
she has nothing to do but to indulge to her pleasure; that it is the extremest
folly to be frighted from a present enjoiment, by a fear of I know not what
future smart; that God, and Sin, and Hell, are but names, certain Mormos and
Bug-bears conjured up by Divines, to work upon her fear, and abuse her
crudelity. This, and much more of this kind may be said, and I doubt often is;
but all this while the question is begged, and a strong affirmation must pass
for proof: for I defy all the Doctors of Atheism to make any demonstration of
their Tenet; and yet, though they pretend to no Demonstration themselves,
Religion must be condemned merely for the want of it: that is for not making
spiritual things liable to sense, for distinguishing between belief and
science; which is indeed for doing the most reasonable thing in the world, viz.
the remitting every object to the trial of its proper faculty: and they who
suspect it upon that account, may by the same kind of Logic wrangle us out of
all our senses, may persuade us we hear nothing because the eye discerns not
sounds, that we taste not, because the ear understands not gusts and ^apors, and
so on to the rest.

14. And yet this is the bottom of those Arguments which the great pretenders
to reason make against Religion, and in the mean time have so little ingenuity
as to exclaim on the light credulity of fools and women, that embrace the
dictates of faith, whilst the same instant they exact a more implicit assent to
their negative Articles, their no Religion. A strange magisterial confidence so
to impose on this Age, what is so universally contradictory to all former, and
to the common verdict* of mankind. For it is observable through all the
successions of men, that there were never any society, any collective body of
Atheists; a s^gle one perhaps might here and there be found (as we sometimes
see monsters or misshapen births) but for the generality they had always such
instincts of a D^ety, that they never thought they ran far enough from Atheism;
but rather choose to multiply their Gods, to have too many then none at all:
nay were apt to descend to the adoration of things below themselves, rather
then to renounce the power above them. By which we may see that the notion of a
God is the most indelible character of natural reason, and therefore whatever
pretense our Atheists make to ratioci^ation and deep discourse, it is none of
that primitive fundamental reason coetaneous with our humanity; but is indeed a
reason fit only for those who own themselves like the beasts that perish.

15. But admit we could be more bountiful to them, and allow their opinion an
equal probability with our Faith, yet even this could never justify any body
in point of prudence, that should adhere to them. Common discretion teaches us
that where two propositionshave an equal appearance of truth, there is no
rational inducement to prefer one before the other, till we have examined the
consequences, and find something in the one which may over-poise and outweigh
the contrary. Now in all things that concern practice, there are no motives so
considerable, either to invite or avert, as advantage or danger.

16. Let us apply this to the present case, and examine the pretensions of the
Atheist and the Christian in both respects. But first we are to remember, that
both advantage and danger are to be viewed under a double notion, either as
present or as future. The former is the Atheists most proper subject, and
indeed all he can pertinently speak to, who professes himself only a man of
this world. Here he will tell us that the disbelief of God and another life, is
the great enfranchiser of mankind, sets us at liberty from that thraldom, those
Bonds wherewith our superstitious fears had fettered us, that it supersedes all
those nice and perplexing inquiries of lawful and unlawful, and reduces all our
inquisitions only to this one, how we shall most please our selves. The glutton
need not put a knife to his throat, but is only to put an edge upon his Palate.
The drunkard need not refrain his cups, but only take care that the be filled
with the most delicious liquor. The wa^on need not pull out his eye, but only
cont^ve to possess what that temts him to desire^ and in a word none of our
appetites need ^e restrained, but satisfied. And this uncontrol^
licentiousness, this brutish liberty, is that su^mum bonum, that supreme
happiness which they propose to themselves, and to which they invite others.

17. On the other side the Christian is not without his claim to a present
advantage, tho of a far differing nature: he is not so preposterous as to think
it a preferment to sink below his kind; to aspire to an assimilation with mere
animals, which is the utmost the former amounts to, but he proposes to himself
the satisfaction of a man^; those delights which may entertain his reason not
his sense; which consist in the rectitude of a well informed mind. His Religion
is the perfectest Scheme of Morality, and makes him a Philosopher without the
help of the Schools, it teaches him the art of subduing his appetites, calming
his passions, and in a word makes him Lord of himself; and by that gives him
all the plesures which result from such a sovereignty, Nor is he totally void
even of the plesures of sense, which in many instances are greater to him then
to those that most court them. Temperance cooks his coursest diet to a greater
gust, then all their studied mixtures; chastity makes one lawful embrace more
grateful to him, then all the nauseating variety of their unbounded lusts; and
contentment swells (...) mite into a talent, makes him richer then the Ind^
would do if he desired beyond them. Nor is it a ^ntemtible benefit that his
moderation gives him (...) immunity from those sensitive pains which often bring
up the rear of inordinate sensual plesures. So that his condition even set in
the worst light in that very particular wherein the Atheist most triumphs over
him, is not so deplorable as it is represented.

18. But if it were, he has plesures that would infinitely overwhelm that smart,
and that not only in his reason (as has bin said before) but in his more
sublime diviner part, such irradiations from above, such antepasts of his
future bliss, such acquiescence in a calm and serene conscience, as isvery
cheaply bought with all he can suffer here. I know the profane laugh at these
things as Chimera's and the illusions of a prepossessed fancy (and truly if
they were so, they mightyetcome in balance with many of their plesures which
are as much owing to opinion and imagination:) but if we consider what supports
they have given under the heaviest pressures, how they enabled the primitive
Martyrs, not only to suffer, but even to court all that is formidable to humane
nature, we cannot think that a mere phantastic imaginary joy could deceive the
sense of such real, such acute torments. And tho in this great declination of
zeal, there be perhaps few that can pretend to those higher degrees of
spiritual raptures, yet certainly were the votes of all devout persons
collected, they would all concur in this testimony, that even in the common
offices of Piety, the ordinary discharge of a good conscience, there is an
infinitely greater complacence, a higher gust and relish then in all the
plesures of sense. But of this the most irrefragable witnesses are those who
from great voluptuaries have turned devotes, and I dare appeal to their
experience, whether of the two states is the most pleasant. I wish those who
will not believe this on others words, would themselves make the trial, and
till they do so they are notoriously unjust to pronounce that a fiction, of
whose reality they refuse to make proof.

19. By what has bin said, some estimate may be made which bids fairest) the
Atheist or Christian) as to present temporal felicity: but alas what an allay,
what a damp is it to felicity to say it is themporal, yet we may give it a term
below that, and say it is momentary. For since our life is so, nothing that
depends on that can be otherwise, and yet in this shallow bottom the
irreligious embark their all. For, as to all future advantage, it is their
Principle to disclaim it, they discer^ no reward for blameless souls, Wisd. 2.
22. So that in this particular the Christian does not compare with, but triumph
over them. He knows that if his earthly house of this Tabernacle be dissolved,
he has a building of God; an House not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. That when he parts with his life, he does not resign his
happiness, but shall receive it infinitely improved both in degree and duration.
And now certainly it is visible enough which opinion proposes the fairer hopes,
and consequently which (supposing but an equal probability of truth) is the
most inviting.

20. But some spirits there are so ignoble, that the most glorious Prize cannot
animate them; that like a swine, the muscles of whose eyes, they say, permit
him not to look upwards, is not concerned in all the felicities above, but
would at a venture resign his share in those, so he may securely enjoy his husk
and draff. But yet even these who are incapable of the more generous
resentments, may be apt enough to the more servile; and danger may fright, tho
glory cannot allure them. It concerns such therefore to compare the mischiefs
which each Opinion threatens to their opposits, and from thence make an
estimate which is safest to be chosen. And here let the Atheist himself cast up
the account of the dangers consequent to Christianity, and it can all amount
but to this, the deprivation (or rather moderation) of some present sensual
plesures, or the incurring of some present sensitive pains; the former in the
daily exercise of Temperance, and mortification; the latter, (more rarely and
ostner in purpose then act) the suffering for Righteousness sake. And both
these the Christian balances, nay out-weighs by two more important present
hazards on the other side. To the former, he opposes the danger of being
enslaved to the brutish part of a man's self, a thing so deplorable even in the
judgment of humanity, that all Writers of Ethics have uniformly declared no
servility to be so sordid and intolerable as that of the vicious man to his
Passions and Lusts. To the latter, he confronts the mischief of being a slave
to every man else; for such he certainly is, whom the fear of suffering can
baff^e outof any thing he thinks just and honest. For if all the men in the
World could successively have the power to afflict him, they wouldalso have to
command and rule him; and what can be more abject, more below the dignity of
human nature, then to have a spirit always prepared for such a servitude?
Besides, even the utmost sufferings which Christianity can at any time require,
is outvied daily by the effects of luxury and rage; and for one that has
opportunity to be a Martyr for his God thousands become so to their Vices.

21. If from the present we look forward to futuredangers, the Atheist must
here be perfectly silent; he cannot say that the Christian after this life
shall be in any worse estate then himself, since he concludes they shall both
be the same nothing. But the Christian threatens him with a more dismal state,
he allows him indeed a being, yea an eternal one; but it is only such as
qualifies him for a misery as eternal; the worm that never dies, the fire
unquenchable, where all the excesses of his short plesures shall be revenged
with more excessive, endless torments: his senses which were here the only
organs of his felicity, shall then be (tho not the only) the very sensible
mediums of his wretchedness; and that conscience which he here suspended from
its office, shall then take our its arrears, and return all its stifled
admonitions in perpetual horrors, and desperate upbraidings. I need not now
sure ask on which side the greater danger lies.

22. To conclude, the result of all is, that the transitory plesures of the
Atheist are over-poised even by the present satisfactions of the Pious And the
eternity of unbounded, unconceivable joies he expects hereafter, comes in ex
abundanti, having nothing on the other side that offers at a competition with
it. And at the very same rate of Proportion we have seen the dangers also are
so, that we can easily compute the utmost mischief our Christianity can do us,
if it should be false; but the damage of the other is inestimable, both for the
penalty of loss, and sense. I may now appeal to common prudence to judge of the
vast inequality, and to pronounce, that sure there had need be some great
evidence of truth on the Atheists side, to preponderate all these
disadvantages. Indeed, nothing much below a demonstration can justify the
choice of so dangerous Principles; I am sure an equal probability can never do
it, where the danger is so unequal; and were the veriest Atheist consulted in a
secular case of the like circumstances, he would certainly pronounce him a mad
man that should make such an election. How desperate a phrensy then is it to do
it, without so much as that equal probability: nay indeed, without any
probability at all? And yet this madness sets up for the monopoly not of Wit
only, but Reason too; and by confidence and clamor, seeks to run down those
Arguments it can never confute.

23. I may be thought here to have made too long a d^gression from my proper
Subject, but I cannot confess it so; for since my present business is to
recommend Piety, I can no way do that so effectually as by showing its
consonancy to right reason, especially considering the busy industry is now
used to represent it under another form, and to alienate from it those persons
whose Greatness may give it any luster or repute in the World; of which sort I
suppose there are few more frequently attaqued then Women of Quality, that
converse among those who call themselves the wits of the Age; who living in so
infectious an air, had need of some antidotes about them; and if what I have now
offered, appear not forcible enough, (for it pretends not to the tith of what
may be said on the Subject) yet it may at least do them this service, to put
them in mind of what they need, and send them to the fuller dispensatories of
others.

24. And that is the thing. I should earnestly beg of them, that they would be
so just to their own interest, as not to combine with seducers against
themselves; but if they have bin so unhappy as to lend one ear to them, yet at
least not to give up both to be forced in a slavish submission to their
dictates, but hear what may be said on the other side. And sure it is but a low
composition for God thus to divide with Satan, yet it is that of which his
Emissaries are so jealous that it is one of their grand Maxims, that none who
professes Divinity is to be advised with; and therefore by all Arts they are to
be rendered either ridiculous, or suspected; to which methinks may by applied
that Fable (which Demosthenes once recited to the Athenians, when Alexander
demanded of them to deliver up their Orators) of the Wolves and the Sheep, who
coming to a Treaty, the first Article of the Wolves was, that the sheep should
give up their mastives which guarded them: the resemblance is too obvious to
need a minute application.

25. But this is manifestly to reverse all former Rules, and to trust a man
rather in any Faculty then his own, and would never have prevailed in any thing
but where the soul is concerned, that poor despicable thing whereon alone we
think fit to make experiments. It Is sure, that if any should dispute their
title to an earthly Possession, they would not so tamely resign it, nor would
trust their own selves in its defense, but would consult their ablest Lawyers,
and, by them, sift out every circumstance that might establish their claim. Why
should they then suffer themselves to be talked out of an Heavenly Inheritance,
without so much as once proposing their doubts to those whose study and
profession it is to resolve them? But as in all other ills, so in this,
prevention is better than cure; and therefore to those that are yet untainted,
the securest course will be to stop both ears against all profane insinuations.
and to use those who temt them to be disloial to their God, that spiritual
adultery, as they should do those who solicit them to the carnal, not so much
as to enter parley, but with the greatest indignation detest and reject them.
It Is the saying of the Wise man, Prove. 25. 23. that an angry countenance
drives away a backbiting tongue. And certainly, would great Persons look
severely on such defamers of Religion, they would give some check to that
impudence of profaneness which has given it such a vogue in the World.

26. And sure this is much their Duty to do, if they own any relation to that
God who is so dishonored. They would think it a very disingenious thing to sit
by to hear a Friend or Benefactor reviled, and express no displesure; and is
God so friendless among them, that only his traducers and blasphemers can be
patiently heard? Among the Jews, at the hearing of any Blasphemy, they rent
their clothes; but I fear we have some of our nice Dames that would be much more
concerned at a rip in their garment, then at the rending and violating Gods
sacred Name; and could more patiently behold the total subversion of Religion,
then the disorder or misplacing of a lock or riband. But it is to be hoped there
are not many so impious, and those that are not, will surely think themselves
obliged with all their power, to discountenance all the Fautors of irreligion,
whether they be the solemn sedater sort that would argue, or the jollier that
would rallery them out of their Faith.

27. But when they have thus provided against the assaults of others, and
secured the speculative part of Religion, they have only established a
Judicatory against themselves, stored up matter of Conviction and Accusation,
if they answer it not in the practic. I must therefore after this long
excursion, return to my first Point, and beseech them seriously to weigh the
obligations they have to Piety in the general notion of it, as it comprehends
all the duties of a Christian life, of which as I intend not to speak
particularly; so I know not where to find a better summary, then that which S.
James has drawn up, Chap. 1. verse. 27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God
even the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.

28. But besides this general, there is (as I said before) another more
restrained notion of Piety, as it relates to our more immediate intercourse with
God in divine Ordinances and Worship, in which respect it commonly passes under
the name of Devotion, and thus considered it has a great propriety to the
female Sex. For Devotion is a tender Plant, that will scarce root in stiff or
rocky ground, but requires a supple gentle soil, and therefore the feminine
softness and pliableness is very apt and proper for it. And accordingly there
have bin very eminent growths of it in that Sex. I need not he^p up examples of
former Ages, but rather persuade this to leave some at least to the following;
and the more considerable the persons are the more conspicuous will be the
example, which seems themore toadapt it to those I now speak to. Devotion in a
Cloister is as recluse as the Votary, a light rather under a (...) then on a
candlestick: and in an obscure Cottage it is either not observed, or else
thought to be but the effect of destitution and secular wants a reserve rather
then a choice: but when those who are in the ei^ of the world, the most eminent
Actors on the Theater of human life, shall choose the part of a Saint, when
those who want none of the divertisments or blandishments of earth, shall have
their conversation in Heaven, this recommends it to the Spectators, as the true
and greatest object of human choice; since it is chosen by those who know the
utmost pretense of all its competitors.

29. Nor is devotion only more excellent in them in regard of its effects, but
it is also more necessary in respect of their obligation. Devotion is an
abstraction from the world, and therefore cannot in any eminent degrees, be
practiced by those whose necessities or business do much entangle them in it.
So that from such, a far less proportion will be accepted, then from those
whose plenty and ease give them no other want but that of emploiment. And
certainly if there be any of whom that can truly be said; women of quality are
the persons: for they in this respect exceed even men of the like rank, for the
men are often engaged in public emploiments, and must l^nd most of their time
to the use of others; or however all have the care of their own private affairs,
the managery of their fortunes to employ them. But of women the utmost that is
ordinarily required, is but a little easy inspection within their own walls,
the oversight of a few children, and servants, and even from this how many are
by their condition of life exemted? and how many more do by their niceness and
delicacy exemt themselves? And surely so perfect a vacancy is neither happy nor
safe. And therefore God who projects we should be both, never designed it for
any of mankind: but where he gives so much liberty from secular, he expects a
greater diligence in spiritual emploiments.

30. And indeed it is an amazing thing to see, that any into whom he has
breathed the breath of life, on whom he has stamped the image of his own
eternity, can think those immortal souls were given them only to serve the mean
and abject uses of their corruptible bodies, (for which the soul of the dullest
Animal would have don as well;) that eating and drinking, sleep and
recreations, which are only useful to the supporting us in this world, are the
only things for which we were sent hither. And yet if we may mesure their
opinions by their practice, this seems to be the persuasion of many of our
female Gentry, who look upon it as a degrading, a kind of attainder of their
blood, to do any thing but please their senses. An error sure of the most
pernicious consequence imaginable. We know a Lady of pleasure is in one sense a
very scandalous Epithet, and truly it is no very laudable one in the other, nay
which is worse, they are often coincident, and fall in with each other. She
whose sole universal aim is pleasure, will not think her self much out of her
road, in the pursuit of any particular. And she that thinks she lives for no
other purpose, will so often be at a loss for innocent pleasure, that she is
almost under a necessity to call in the nocent, to serve the very end (as she
supposes) of her being. Aut indeed were they sure to confine themselves to such
as are harmless in their kind, yet the excess of them renders them sinful, and
the doting pursuit denominates them lovers of Plesures more then lovers of God,
a character so black that the Apostle compleats his Catalogue of the worst
vice; of the worst times with it, 1 Timothy 3. 4.

31. It is therefore the great goodness of God to design a rescu for those
whose condition exposes them to that danger, and by exacting a liberal expense
of time in their devotion, divert them from lavishing both it and their souls
together. Neither does he by this defeat their aim of a pleasant life, but
rather assist it: for whereas sensual delights are vagrant, and must be chased
through a hundred turnings and wild Mazes, the spiritual are fixed, and one may
always know where to find them. How often are the voluptuous in pain to know
which pleasure to choose? like a surfeited stomac the greater variety is set
before it, the more it nauseats all. What difficulties has a Lady many times
to resolve whether an afternoon shall be spen at the Court, or at the Theater;
whether in dancing or at cards, in giving or receiving visi^s, as not knowing
which will best please her? But she that knows the delights of devotion, knows
withal that there is no other fit to come in competition with it; and so is
not distracted in her choice, nor need go farther then her Closet for the most
agreeable entertainment. I know this will sound a little incredible to those
that know no other use of Closets then as a conservatory of gauds and baubles;
that aspire to no pleasure there above that of children, the playing with the
Pictures and Popets that adorn it. Nor indeed do I pretend that such shall find
those satisfactions I speak of. Those whose errand is to Beelzebub the God of
flies, must not expect to be treated by the God of Israel. An ingenious man
will scorn to obtrude himself on those who desire not his company, and sure God
will not make himself more cheap. Those that will meet him in their Closets,
must come with that design, resort thither as to an Oratory; nay more then so,
they must come frequently. Spiritual joies know not the way to a place where
they are not often invited: and as men seek for each other not in places where
they seldom or never come, but where they daily frequent; so God contrives, not
to meet us in that place where we appear rarely and accidentally, but where we
usually resort.

32. I shall not need to branch out devotion into the several parts, that being
don already in a multitude of other Treatises, of which if they please to
consult any one, they cannot want a Directory for their worship, whether private
or public. Only let me observe the order and connection of those two, that they
are neither to be severed, nor yet to be ranged preposterously. The private must
not justle out the public, for God expects his solemn homage: and their hudling
it up in private, as it may give men Ground to suspect they pay none at all; so
neither God nor man can collect any thing better from it, then that they are
ashamed of the Deity they pretend to serve. On the other side the public must
as little swallow up the private, and where it does, there may be ajust doubt of
its sincerity, Many attractives there may be to Church besides that of Piety,
and indeed where that is really the motive, it teaches so much reverence to
that awful presence they are to approach, as not to come without some
preparation. What solicitude, what critical niceness will a Lady have for her
dress, when she is to appear at a solemn meeting at Court, and shall she take
no care how sordidly, how undecently she appear when the King of Kings gives
audience? Shall many hours, days, nay perhaps weeks, be taken up in contriving
for the one, and shall there never be a minute allotted for the other? This
were sure very unequal, and yet this is the case where the devotion of the
Closet does not prepare for that of the Church. If the mind be not tuned first
there, it will be very ill qualified for that harmony of souls, which is the
only thing God regards in our public offices. So that were there no other use
of private devotion, but as it relates to the public, that were enough to speak
the necessity of it.

33, But indeed it is not only a needful preparative to that sacred commerce,
but to our civil. The World is but a larger sort of Pesthouse, in every corner
of it we meet with infectious airs, and those that converse in it had need of
this Antidote. How many temtations does every place, every hour, every
interview, present to the shocking even of that moral integrity which a sober
Heathen would judge fit to preserve; much more of that strict Piety our
Christianity exacts.

34. 'Twas the observation that Origin made of himself, that the day in which
he so shamefully fell by sacrificing to Idols, he had ventured out in the
morning before he had completed his usual prayers; the Devil finding him so
unarmed took advantage to assault him, as knowing he had then but a single
impotent man to wrestle with, who had forfeited, by not invoking, the
protection of God. And indeed since prayer is the most powerful exorcism to
eject him, we may well conclude the omission of it is a likely means to invite
him: for if God have not the prepossession, if we do not by hearty prayer
surrender our souls to him in the morning, they are then all the day after like
that emty house mentioned in the Gospel, a fit receptacle for as many evil
spirits as please to inhabit there. Nor are these spiritual the only dangers
that attend us, we are liable to a multitude of secular ones also: our persons,
our fortunes, our reputations, every thing wherein we can receive a benefit,
renders us equally capable of a prejudice. What multitudes of accidents are
there to which we lie open, and nothing to guard us from them but the divine
Providence? which if we neglect to solicit we are sure very unworthy of its
defense. And this is a consideration that methinks should bring even the most
sensual persons upon their knees: for tho too many may be found that despise
the former danger, and can contentedly enough expose their souls, yet such are
usually the most tender of their temporal concerns it being commonly the
excessive love of those which makes them neglect the other. She that fears not
the fall into sin, will yet fear the tumbling into a precipice, and tho she
care not for the spotting of her innocence, would be very loath any accident
should blemish her face, disparage her fame, or impoverish her fortune, and yet
from any or all of these she is utterly unable to guard her self. So that if
Piety will not, yet interest me thinks should render her an homager to that
omnipotent power, from whence alone she can derive her safety.

35. And now methinks a Duty that is thus bound on with the cords of a man,
with human as well as divine perswasives, should not easily be shaken off. I
wish I could say it never is, but I fear there are some of those I now speak
to, who neglect it in spite of all these inducements; who tho they can pretend
nothing serious enough to own the name of business, do yet suffer a succession
of I know not what impertinencies to divert them. And indeed were the expense
of some Ladies days calculated, we should find every hour so full of emtiness,
so overladen with vanities that it is scarce imaginable where an office of
devotion should crowd in.

36. The morning is divided between sleep and dressing, nor would the morning
suffice, but that they are fain to make a new computation to mesure it not by
the Sun, but by their time of dining, which is often as late as the stationary
hours of the Primitive Fasts, tho upon a far differing motive. The afternoons
being by this means reduced, are too short for those many divertisements that
await them, and must therefore borrow as much of the night as they lent to the
morning. And when the mere fatigues of pleasure send a Lady to her rest, it is
not imaginable that she will permit Devotion to induce a yet greater, and more
disagreeable lassitude; so that the whole round of her time seems to be a kind
of magic circle, wherein nothing that is holy must appear. And indeed it is none
of the highest stratagems of Satan thus to forestal their time; and by a
perpetual supply of diversions, insensibly steal from them the opportunities of
divine offices; an artifice by which I presume he prevails on some, who would
startle at his grosser and more apparent temtations.

37. Nor needs he more then the success of this project; for if this habitual
neglect of Piety should not finally end in great and criminal commissions, (as
it is naturally very apt to do) yet his interest is sufficiently secured by such
a customary omission, which amounts to no less then the living without God in
the World: a state so hopeless, that when the Apostle recollects to the
Ephesians the wretchedness of their Gentile State, he does it in those very
words, Ephesians. 2. 12. And sure, those that live so under Christianity, are not in
a better, but worse condition, by how much contemt of God is more unpardonable
then ignorance.

38. It therefore infinitely concerns those who are in danger of so fatal a
snare, to look about them, and endevor to countermine Satan, and be as
industrious to secure their duty, as he is to supplant it; and to this purpose,
one of the usefullest expedients I know, is to be aforehand with him; I mean,
to make their Devotions the first business of the day; by which I intend not
only those Ejaculations wherewith we all should open our eyes, but their more
set and solemn Prayers; a Practice so highly expedient to the persons
forementioned, that it falls little short of necessary; and that upon several
reasons.

39. First, in relation to one of the great ends of Morning Prayer, which is to
supplicate the guidance and protection of God for the whole day. Now if this be
not don till some Ladies Dressings be finished, 'twill be half a mockery, a most
preposterous request, as to the greatest part of the day, which will be past
before; and besides absurdity, there is danger in it; for all the preceding
time is as it were outlawed by it, put from under the Divine Protection. Alas,
are God's safeguards to be only meridional, to shine out only with the noonday
Sun; Do they suppose Satan keeps their hours, and stirs ^ot abroad till the
afternoon, that there is no danger either of corporal or spiritual mischiefs
before that time of the day? Certainly, if the noise of the harp and the viol
which Isa. mentions, Chap. 5. 12. do not drown it, they may often hear a
morning as well as evening Passing Bell; with how many others does the glass of
life run out, whilst they are at their looking-glasses? How many bodies are
maimed and wounded in the time they are trimming and decking theirs? And who
made them differ from others, 1 Cor. 4. 7? Or what tenure have they in the
safety of one moment, save what they owe to God's Providence? And what rational
expectation can they have of that, when they do not invoke it?

40. Nor are the spiritual dangers less, but rather much more; and they must be
very slight observers of themselves, if they do not discern that snares may be
laid for them in their recesses in their chambers, as well as in places of the
most public resort. Indeed, were there no other than what relates to their
dress, and curiosity thereof, it were enough to evidence their danger; scarce
any part of that but carrying a temtation in it: to Pride, ifit hit right, and
please their fancy, to* Anger and Vexation, if it do not. They had need
therefore to put on their armor before their ornaments, by a prepossession of
Prayer and Meditation to secure their vitals, lest by an internal death of
Grace, their bodies (in their utmost luster) prove but the painted Sepulchers
of their Souls.

41. In the second place, this appears requisite in opposition to the indecency
and incongruity of the contrary. How inverted an estimate do they make of
things that postpone the interests of their souls, to themeanest member of
their bodies, pay^ supererrogating attendance to the one, before the other
comes at all into their care. But what is yet worse, how vile a contumely is
offered to the Majesty of God, who is used as they do their dunning Creditors,
posted off with an excuse of no lesure yet to speak with him; whilst in the
mean time all the factors for their vanitycan have ready access, and full
audience. God must attend till their Tailor, their Shoemaker please to dismiss
them, and at the best, can be allowed only to bring up the rear of a whole
shole of Artificers.

42. But thirdly, it is very doubtful whether he shall obtain so much from them;
for it may often happen that he shall be quite precluded: so numerous are the
parts of a modish equipage, and so exact a symmetry is required in the whole,
that it is the business of many hours to complete it; when as 'twas said of the
Roman Ladies, a counsel must be called about the placing of an hair that sits
irregularly, when one thing after another shall be tried, and again rejected,
as not exact, or not becoming; time all the while insensibly steals away, and
tho that will not stay for them, yet dinner does, and then their bellies begin
to murmur to pay any longer attendance on their backs, and claim the next turn;
and between these two competitors, it is odds devotion will be quite excluded,
or reduced only to a grace before meat: (and well if that, considering how
unfashionable even that is grown) in the mean time what a wretched improvidence
is it, to reduce the one necessary business of the day to such uncertainties,
nay almost to a certain disappointment.

43. Yet suppose this hazard were only imaginary, and a Lady were infallibly
sure not to lose the time for her Prayers; yet in the fourth place, she will be
likely by such preceding diversions to lose much of her zeal in them, so that
if they be said at all, they will scarce be said in a due manner. There ^s alas
such a repugnancy in our nature to any thing spiritual, that we cannot close in
an instant; but as a benumbed, frozen body will need some rubbing and chafing
before it can be fit for motion; so our more frozen souls require some previons
incitations before they can with any vigor exert themselves in Devotion. Now
sure the dressing time (I mean such a dressing as we now suppose) is not very
proper for such preparations. It Is; on the contrary, extreme apt to indispose
and unfit them; for when the fancy is possessed with so many little images of
vanity, they will not easily be ejected. That ranging faculty is, God knows,
too apt to bring in even the remotest diversions; but when it has such a stock
ready at hand, how will it pour them in upon the mind, to the great allaying,
if not utter extinguishing of Devotion.

44. When all these considerations are put together, 'twill sure appear wholesome
counsel, that such persons should not trust so important a duty to so many
casualties, but in the first place secure a time for that, repair to their
Oratory before their dressing room, and by an early consecration of themselmes
to God, defeat Sathan's claim, and discourage his attemts for the rest of the
day. We know there is a natural efficacy in a good beginning, toward the
producing a good ending: but in spiritual things the influence is yet greater,
because it draws in Auxiliaries from above, and engages the yet farther
assistances of Grace. Upon which account I am apt to believe, that where this
Duty is sincerely and fervently performed in the morning, it will not totolly
be neglected in the succeeding parts of the day. 'Twill be easy to discern the
same obligation, the same advantage of closing the day with God, that there was
to begin it; and when those two boundaries are secured, when those are looked
upon as strict duty, and constantly observed, it is not unlikely but their Piety
may grow generous, and with David, Ps. 55. 17. add to the evening and morning a
noonday office; for where Devotion is real, it is apt to be progressive; and
the more we converse with God, the more we shall desire to do so. Thus we see
how this little cloud like that of Elijah, 1 King. 18. 44. may overspread the
Heavens, and this handful of first fruits may hallow the whole day.

45. Nay indeed, when it has advanced thus far, 'twill probably go farther,
'twill not keep it self only on the defensive part, but invade its opposits,
get daily ground of those vanities by which it was before oppressed. For when a
Lady has in her Closet washed her cheeks* with penitential tears, she cannot
sure when she comes out think them prepared for the varnish of the paint and
fucus. When she has attentively examined her Conscience, that impartial mirror,
and there discerned all the blemishes of her nobler part, she will sure with
somewhat a more cold concern consult her looking-glass. And when she has bin
pious vows and resolutions put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13. 14. 'twill be
impossible for her to be very anxiously careful about her garments. This devout
temper of her mind will by a holy leger-demain shu^fle the Romances out of her
hand and substitute the Oracles of Truth; will not let her dream away her time
in phantastic scenes, and elaborate nothing, but promt her to give all
diligence to make her Calling and Election sure. In a word, when she once
understands what it is to spend one hour devoutly, she will endeavor to rescue
all the rest from trifles, and impertinent entertainments; and employ them to
purposes more worthy the great end of her being. Thus may she almost insensibly
wind her self out of the snare, disintangle her self from those temtations
wherewith she was enwrapt; and by having her heart so set at liberty, may run
the ways of God's Commandments, Ps. 119.

46. But Private Devotion, tho of excellent effect, cannot commute for the
omission of public, nor indeed can it long maintain its vigor, unless sometimes
cherished by the warmth of Christian Assemblies; and if God please to visit
them in their Closets, they are (even by their own Laws of Civility) obliged to
return his Visits, and attend him in his house, I fear too many adapt the
instance in the formality too, and come as unconcernedly to him as they do to
one another. It Is true, those that pay him a cordial reverence at Home, will
certainly do it at the Church; and therefore by the little we see performed by
some there, we may doubt God sees as little in their Retirements. But what speak
I of an hearty Reverence, when it is visible that there are those who pay none
at all? How rare a sight is it for some Ladies to appear at Church? How many
times (I had almost said hundreds) do we see their Coaches stand at the
Playhouse, for once at God's? They seem to own no distinction of days, unless
it be, that Sunday is their most vacant season to take Physic, or to lie a-bed;
and if such do ever come to Church; Devotion is like to be the least part of
their errand; some new garment perhaps or dress is to be showed, and that
thought the place where the most critical Judges of those things will be most
at lesure to observe them; or if they come not to teach new fashions, it may be
they come to learn; and such documents will be surer to be put in practice then
any in the Sermon. Possibly they expect to see some friend or acquaintance
there, and as if Christ were to be served (as he was born) in an Inn, make his
house the common rendezvous in which to meet their Associates. If they have any
more ingenious attractives, it is commonly that of curiosity, to hear some new
celebrated Preacher, and that rather for his Rhetoric then his Divinity; and
this Motive (tho the best of the set) is but like that which prevailed with
those Jews St. John mentions, who came to Jesus that they might see Lazarus,
Jo. 12.

47. I shall not rank among these Motives, that of Hypocrisy and seeming
Holiness; for from that all the rest do acquit them. Indeed it is the only sin
which this Age has seemed to reform, and that too only by way of
Antiperistasis, not by the Virtue but the Iniquity of the Times. Religion is
grown so unfashionable, so contemtible; that none can now be temted to put on
so ridiculous a disguise. And although as to single persons I confess Hypocrisy
one of the deepest Guilts, such as has a peculiar portion assigned it by Christ
in the place of torment, Mat. 24. 51. yet as to Communities, I cannot but think
it better to have a face of Religion then profaneness. The example of the
former may work beyond it self, and the form of Godliness in some may produce
the power of it in others; but a pattern of Profaneness, the farther it
operates the worse, and all the progress it can make, is from one wickedness to
another, so that I fear as St. Bernard wished for his Fever again, so the
Church may ere long for her Hypocrites.

48. But to recall my self from this digression, let us a little enquire how
those whom the forementioned Motives bring to Church behave themselves there,
and that is indeed with great conformity to the ends of their coming, their
errand is not to be Suppliants, neither do they put themselves in the posture,
kneeling is impertinent for them who mean not to pray, but as the Apostle
describes the Idolatrous service of the Israelites, They sat down to eat and
drink and rose up to play; so these sit down to talk and laugh with their
Pew-fellows, and rise up to gape and look about them. When they should be
confessing their sins to Almighty God, they are apologizing (perhaps) to one
another for the omission of a ceremonious visit, or some other breach of
civility; when they should be observing the goings of God in the Sanctuary,
Psa. 68. they are inquiring when this Lady came to Town, or when that goes out;
nay perhaps the Theater is brought into the Temple, the last Play they saw is
recollected, and Quotations enough brought thence to vie with the Preacher.
It Is impossible to reckon up all their Topics of discourse, nay it were indeed
scandalous for one that reproves them to pretend to know, by how many
impertinencies (to say no worse) they profane that holy Place and Time.

49. But that all seeing eye in whose presence they are, keeps an exact
account, and will charge them not only with the principal but the product; not
only with their own irreverences, but with those which by their example or
encouragement they have occasioned in others, nay farther even with that
scandal which redounds to Christianity by it. For when one that is to choose a
Religion, shall read the Precepts of Pythagoras enjoining that the Gods must
not be worshipped in passing by, as it were accidentally, but with the greatest
solemnity and intention, when they shall consider the care of Numa in
instituting Officers, who at Sacrifices, and all divine Services, should call
upon the people to keep silence and advert to Devotion, or but the practice of
the present Mahometans, who permit none to sit in their Moschos, nor to pray
without prostration. When I say this is considered, and compared with the
scandalous indecency observable in our churches, he will certainly exclude
Christianity from all competition in his choice; not allow that the name of a
Religion, whose very Worship appears so profane, and whose Votaries mock the
God they pretend to serve.

50. Yet how severe soever the charge may lie against some, I am far from
including all under it. I know there are many Ladies whose examples are
reproaches to the other Sex, that help to fill our congregations when Gentlemen
desert them, and to who sometimes we alone own that our Churches are not
furnished like the Feast in the Parable, Luke 14. 21. merely out of the high
ways and hedges, with the poor and the maimed, the halt and the blind; yet some
even of these may be liable to some irregularity, which may be the effects of
inadvertence or misperswasion, tho not of contemt or profaneness.

51. And first it is observable in some who com constantly, that yet they come
not early, so that a considerable part of Prayers is past ere they enter the
Church. This first causes some disturbance to others, the successive entry of
new comers keeping the Congregation in a continual motion and agitation, which
how unagreable it is to Devotion, Numa a Heathen Prince may teach us, who
Plutarch tells us took a particular care, that in the time of divine Worship,
no knocking, clapping, or other noise should be heard; as well knowing how much
the operations of the intellect are obstructed by any thing that importunes the
Senses. What would he have said, should he come into one of our City
Congregations, where often during the whole time of Prayer, the clapping of
Pew-doors does out-noise the Reader.

52. But besides the indecency of the thing, and the interruption it gives to
others, it is very injurious to themselves; a kind of partial excommunication of
their own inflicting; which excludes them from part of the divine Offices, and
from that part too, which is of the most universal concern, I mean the
confession of sins, which the wisdom of our Church has fitly placed in the
beginning of her Service, as the necessary introduction to all the rest. For
considering how obnoxious we all are to the wrath and vengeance of God, our
first business is to deprecate that by an humble confession of our guilt. Would
any Malefactor that had forfeited his life to Justice, come boldly to his
Prince, and without taking notice of his crimes, importune him to bestow the
greatest favors and dignities upon him? Yet it is the very same abrupt impudence
in us, to supplicate the divine Majesty before we attemt to atone him, to ask
good things from him before we have acknowledged the ill we have do against
him. And to such God may justly make such a return as Augustus did to one that
entertained him much below his greatness, I knew not before that we were such
familiars.

53. It will much better become them to anticipate the time, to wait at the
posts of his doors, Pro. 8. and contrive to be there before the Service begins,
that so by previous recollection they may put their minds in a fit posture of
address at the public Audience: which (by the way) speaks it to be no very
laudable custom which almost universally prevails, that those few who do come
early, spend the interval before service, in talking with one another, by which
they do not only lose the advantage of that time for preparation, but convert
it into the direct contrary, do thereby actually unfit and indispose
themselves. Godknows our hearts even in their most composed temper, are too apt
to create diversions; we need not start game for them to chase, and by
prefacing our Prayer with secular discourse, make a gap for the same thoughts
to return upon us in them. Besides in relation to the place, it has a spice of
profaneness, it is the bringing the Moabite and Ammonite into the Temple, Deuteronomy.
23. 3. a kind of invasion on Gods propriety, by introducing our worldly
concerns or divertisments into the house which is called by his name, solemnly
dedicated to him, and therefore dedicated that it might be his peculiar. So
that with a little variation, we may to such apply the expostulatory reproof of
the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. 22. what, have ye not houses to talk
and converse^ in, or despise ye the Church of God? But this is (...) confess a
reproof that will not reach to many, there being so few of the better sort that
come early enough to talk before Service, and as for those who talk at it, we
have already rankt them under another Classis. Yet give me leave to add that
those fall not much short of that degree of profaneness, who come late only
because they are loath to rise, or to abate any thing of the curiosity of their
dress. For she that prefers her sloth or her vanity before Gods Service, is
like (how decently soever she behave her self) to give but an unsignificant
attendance at it.

54. But I guess this may in many proceed from another cause, which tho less
ill in their intention, is not so in respect either of its unreasonableness or
its effects, and that is an unequal estimate they make of the parts of Gods
Service. This last Age has brought in such a partiality for Preaching, that
Prayer seems comparatively (like Sarah to Hagar) despicable in their eyes: so
that if they can but come time enough to the Sermon, they think they have
discharged the weightier part of the Law, and of their own duty. This
misperswasion, tho it have too generally diffused it self through both Sexes,
yet seems to have bin very especially imbibed by the female. And besides the
evidence that Sunday gives; the week-daies afford no less. Let there be a
Lecture tho at the remotest part of the Town, what hurrying is there to it, but
let the Bell tole never so loud for the Canonical hours of Common Prayer,
'twill not call the nearest of the Neighbor-hood. I speak not of those who are
at defiance with our Service, and have listed themselves in separate
Congregations (for I intend not to trace them through their wild mazes) but of
those who yet own our Church, and object not to its Offices, but only have
suffered their valu for them to be insensibly undermined by their greater zeal
for Preaching. God sure intends a Harmony in all sacred Ordinances, and would
not have set up a party against another, but mutually assist each others
operation upon us: thus Prayer disposes us to receive benefit by preaching, and
preaching teaches us how to pray aright, and God grant we may long enjoy the
public opportunities of both. Yet since this Age has brought themto a
competition, I must take leave to say, that if we come impartially to weigh
Prayer and Preaching, the Balance will incline another way then it seems with
many to do, and we shall find Prayer the more essential part of Religion.

55. The end of Preaching is twofold, either to teach us what we know not, or
to excite us to practice what we already know: now in relation to the first of
these ends, I suppose there is a wide difference between Preaching at the first
promulgation of the Gospel, and now: 'twas then the only way of revealing to
the World the whole mystery of our Salvation, so that the Apostles inference
was then irrefragable, How shall they believe on him of whom they have not
heard, and how shall they hear without a Preacher? To. 10. 14. But where
Christianity is planted, and the New Testament received, we have therein the
whole doctrine of Christ; nay we have not only the matter but the very form of
many of those Sermons which Christ and his Apostles preached; so that unless we
think them not sufficiently gifted, we cannot but acknowledge, we have in them
ampl^ instruction both for Faith and Manners; enough, as the Apostle speaks, to
make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. And the reading of those being a
considerable part of our Churches Service, we have the most genuine Preaching
even before the Minister ascends the Pulpit. Besides, for the help of those
whose youth or incapacity disables them from making collections thence for
themselves, our Church has epitomized the most necessary Points of Belief and
Practice in the Catechism, not (as the Roman) to preclude their farther search,
but to supply them in the interim till they are qualified for it; and by that
early infusion of Christian Principles, to secure them of that knowledge which
is simply necessary to their Salvation.

56. Now sure, to people in this state, Preaching is not of so absolute
necessity in respect of instruction, as it was to those who from Heathenism and
Idolatry were to be brought first to the Knowledge, and then to the Faith of
Christ. We seem therefore now more generally concerned in the other end of
Preaching, the exciting us to Practice; for alas, there are few of us who
stumble on sin for* want of light, but either through heedlesness, and want of
looking before us, or else by a wilful prostration of our selves to it; so that
we often need to be roused out of our negligence, to be frighted out of our
stubbornness, and by a close application of those truths we either forget or
suppress, be animated to our Duty. And for this purpose Preaching is doubtless
of excellent use, and the nauseating of it shows a very sick constitution of
mind; yet sure the over-greedy desire may be a Disease also. He that eats more
than he can concoct, does not so much assist as oppress nature, and those that
run from sermon to sermon, that allow themselves no time to chew, much less to
digest what they hear, will sooner confound their brains then better their
lives. Nay, it often betraies them to a very pernicious delusion, it diverts them
from many of the practical parts of Piety, and yet gives them a confidence that
they are extraordinarily Pious; and by their belief that Religion consists
principally in hearing, makes them forget to try themselves by that more
infallible test of doing God's will. So that whereas God never designed
Preaching for more then a guide in their way, they make it their way, and their
end too; and Hearing must, like a circle, begin and terminate in it self.

57. I am sure in secular concerns, we should think him a very unprofitable
servant, that after his Lord had given him directions what to do, should be so
transported with hearing his instructions, that he should desire to have it
infinitely repeated, and so spend the time wherein he should do the work. And we
have reason to think God will make the same judgment of those who do the like
in his service.

58. One would now think that this ravenous appetite of hearing should
supersede all niceness in it, yet we find it does not, but that some make* a
shift to be at once voracious and squemish. If this spiritual food be not
artificially dressed, it is too gross for their palats; the Phrase must be
elegant, the words well accented, and the enticing words of man's wisdom which
St. Paul disclaims in his Preaching, 1 Cor. 2. 4. is that which they
principally regard. Nay the memory of the Preacher becomes the most material
Point of his Sermon, and the first glance on his Book prejudges him. I need not
add the extravagances of an uncouth tone, a furious vehemence, or phantastic
gesture, wherein the soul and vital efficacy of Preaching has bin solemnly
placed. Now it is evident all these are but trivial Accomplishments; so that
thosewho insist so much on them, do make Preaching much less Sacred and Divine
then indeed it is; and therefore cannot without absurdity lay the main stress
of Religion upon it, or make that the highest of God's Ordinances, which owes
all its gratefulness with them to the Endowments of men. Some may think I pursu
this subject too far, but I am sure I do it not with design to derogate from
the juct respect due to Preaching; only I would not have it monopolize our
esteem, or justle out another Duty, which is of more constant use, and
indispensible necessity.

59. And such certainly is Prayer, that respiration of the soul, which is so
necessary, that it admits not of long intermission, and therefore seems to
carry the same proportion to hearing, which breathing does to eating: we may
make long intervals of feeding, and yet subsist; but if we should do so in
breathing, we cannot recover it. Prayer is the morning and evening Sacrifice
under the Law, which God ordained should be perpetual; whereas Preaching is but
like the Readings in the Synagogues on Sabbaths and Festivals. Indeed, however
we have confounded the terms, it is Prayer only that can properly be called the
worship of God; it is that by which we pay him his solemnhomage, acknowledge his
sovereignty, and our own dependence. When we hear, we do no more then what
every Disciple does to his Master; but when we pray, we own him as the spring
and source of all the good we expect, as the Author of our Being, and the
Object of our Adoration, in a word, we do by it profess him our God; it being
an impress of mere natural Religion to supplicate the Deity we acknowledge.

60. And as by Prayer we render the greatest Honor to God, so likewise do we
procure the greatest advantages to our selves. Prayer is the powerful Engine, by
which we draw down Blessings; it is the key which lets us into the immense
Storehouse of the Almighty; nay it is that upon which the Efficacy of Preaching
depends. The Word is but a dead letter without the Spirit; and God has promised
the Spirit to none but those that ask it, Luke 11. 13, So that Prayer is that
which enlivens and inspirits our most sacred actions; and accordingly in
Scripture she find it still a concomitant in all Ecclesiastical concerns. When
an Apostle was to be substituted in the room of Judas, we find, they referred
it not to the decision of lots, till God, who had the sole disposing of them,
Prove. 16. 33. had bin invoked by solemn Prayer, Act. 1. 24. So when Barnabas
and Saul were to be separated to the Ministry, tho the appointment were by the
Holy Ghost, yet that superseded not the necessity of Prayer; the Apostles
prayed, (yea, and fasted too) before they laid their hand on them, Act. 13. 3.
Nay, our Blessed Savior Himself, tho He knew what was in man, and needed no
guidance but his own Omniscience in this choice: yet we find that before his
Election of the twelve Apostles, he continued a whole night in Prayer to God,
Luke 6. 22. doubtless, to teach us how requisite Prayer is in all our important
interests, which like the Pillar of Cloud and Fire to the Israelites, is our
best Convoy through the Wilderness, through all the snares and temtations,
through all the calamities and distresses of this World, and our most
infallible Guide to the Land of Promise.

61. And sure when all these are the properties of Prayer, tho private, they
will not less belong to the public; such a conspiration and union of
importunate Devotion, must have a proportionable increase in its effect; and if
Heaven can suffer violence by the fervor of one single Votary, with what storm,
what batteries will it be scaled by a numerous Congregation? We find the Church
is, by Christ, compared to an Army with banners, Cant. 6. 3. but sure never is
this Army in so good array, in so invincible a posture as upon its knees. The
Ecclesiastical story tells us of a Legion of Christians in Aurelius's Camp, who
in that posture discomfited two assailants at once, the enemy and the drought;
that breath which they sent up in Prayers, like a kindly exhalation returned in
rain, and relieved the perishing Army: and had we but the same fervor, and the
same innocence, could we lift up but as pure hands as they did, there would be
no Blessing beyond our reach. But the less any of us find our selves so
qualified, the more need we have to put our selves among those that are.

62. There is an happy contagion in goodness; like green wood, we may perhaps
be kindled by the neighboring flame; the example of another zeal may awake
mine. However, there is some advantage in being in the company: those showers of
benediction which their Prayers bring down, are so plentiful, that some drops at
least may scatter upon those about them. We find Elisha for Jehoshophat's sake,
endured the presence of Jehoram, whom otherwise he professes he would not have
looked toward, 2 King. 3. 14. and God may perhaps do the like in this case; and
as he prospered Potiphar for Joseph's sake, Genesis 39. 23. so the Piety of foam
few may redound to the benefit of all. From all these considerations I suppose
may sufficiently be evinced the necessity and benefit, of public Prayer, and
consequently the unreasonableness of those, who upon any pretense neglect it. I
shall now only beseech those to whom I speak to make the application to
themselves, and to show they do so by their more early and more assiduous
attendance on it.

63. There is also another Duty to which many of these to whom I write seem to
need some incitation, and that is Communicating, a part of Devotion which the
looser sort scarce ever think in season till their death beds, as if that
Sacrament like the Romanists Extreme Unction, were only fit for exspiring
souls, but to such we may apply the words of the Angel to the woman, Lu. 24. 5.
Why siekye the living among the dead? Why think ye that the Sun of
Righteousness is only to shine in the shades of death, or that Christ is never
to give us his flesh, till we are putting off our own; It Is one principal end
of that Sacrament to engage and enable us to a new life; how preposterous then
is it, how utterly inconsistent with that end to defer it to the hour of death
It Is true it is a good Viaticum for such as are in their way toward bliss, but
it is too bold a hope, to fancy that it shall in an instant bring them into
that way, who have their whole life posted on in the contrary: the roads to
Heaven and Hell lie sure too far asunder to be within distance of one step, nor
can it with any safety be presumed that once receiving at their death, shall
expiate so many wilful neglects of it in their life.

64. But I shall suppose these total Omissions are not a common guilt: yet with
many others the fault differs only in degree, they do not wholly omit, but yet
come so infrequently as if they thought it a very arbitrary matter whether they
come or no. And this truly is observable in many who seem to give good
attendance on other parts of divine Worship, for indeed it is a sad spectacle to
see, that let a Church be never so much crowded at Sermon, it is emtied in an
instant when the Communion begins, people run as it were frighted from it, as
if they thought with those in Malachy, that the table of our Lord is polluted,
Mal. 1. 12. that some pest or infection would thence break forth upon them. A
strange indignity to the Majesty, and ingratitude to the love of our Redeemer.
Let a King, or but some great man make a public entertainment, how hard is it
to keep back the pressing multitude: many Officers are necessary to repel the
uninvited guests, and yet here there needs more to drive us to it, tho the
Invitation be moregeneral, and the Treat infinitely more magnificent.

65. I know this fault (like many other) shrouds it self under a fair disguise,
and this barbarous neglect pretends to the humblest veneration. People say it is
their great reverence they have for the Sacrament that keeps them at so great a
distance; but sure that is but a fictitious reverence which discards obedience;
and when Christ commands ou^ coming, our drawing back looks more like
stubborness and rebellion, then awe and respect. I suppose we pretend not to
exceed the Primitive Christians in humility and godly fear, and yet they
communicated daily, and therefore sure our reverence is of a much differing
make from theirs, if it produce such contrary effects. Indeed it is to be feared
that many put a great cheat upon themselves in this matter. The Eucharist is
justly accounted the highest of divine Ordinances, and those who think of no
preparation in other, yet have some general impressions of the necessity of it
in this; but the uneasiness of the task discourages them, they dare not come
without a wedding garment, and yet are loath to be at the pains to put it on, so
that all this goodly pretext of reverence, is but the Devil in Samuels Mantle,
is but sloth clad in the habit of humility.

66. And to this temtation of sloth, there is another thing very subservient,
and that is the easy and slight opinion which is commonly taken of sins of
Omission, many are startled at great Commissions think them to carry a face of
deformity and horror, who in the mean time look on Omissionsonly as privations
and mere nothings, as if all the affirmative Precepts were only things of form,
put in by Godrather to try our inclinations, then to oblige our performance;
and so were rather overtures and proposals which we may assent to or not, then
injunctions which at our peril we must obey. A fancy no less absurd then
impious. That God should be content so to compound with his creatures (and like
a Prince overpowered by his vassals) consent to remit all their homage, absolve
them from all positive Duty, so they would be but so civil as not to fly in
his face, or to commit outrage on his Person. But this wild imagination needs
no other confutation, then that form of indictment our Savior gives us as the
Model of that which shall be used at the last day, Mat. 25. where the whole
Process lies against sins of Omission, and yet the sentence is as dismal and
irreversible, as if all the Commissions in the World had bin put into the Bill.

67. And certainly of all Omissions none is like to be more severely charged
then this of communicating, which is not only a disobedience, but an
unkindness, which strikes not only at the Authority but the Love of our Lord,
when he so affects a union with us that he creates Mysteries only to effect it,
when he descends even to our sensuality, and because we want spiritual
appetites, puts himself within reach of our natural; and as he once veiled his
Divinity in flesh, so now veils even that flesh under the form of our corporal
nourishment, only that he may the more indissolvably unite, yea incorporat
himself with us. When I say he does all this, we are not only impious but
inhuman if it will not attract us. Nay farther, when he does all this upon the
most endearing memory of what he has before don for us, when he presents
himself to our embraces in the same form wherein he presented himself to God
for our expiation, whenhe shows us those wounds which our iniquities made,
those stripes by which we were healed, that death by which we are revived,
shall we to complete the Scene of his Passion, force him also to that pathetic
complaint, Lam. 1. 12. Have ye no regard all ye that pass by? Shall we instead
of smiting our breasts (as did other witnesses of his sufferings) turn our
backs? If we can habitually do this, it is to be feared the next degree will be
to wag our heads too, and we shall have the profaneness toderide, what we have
not the Piety to commemorate.

68. And this seems to be no improbable fear, for in Religion there are gradual
declinations as well as advances, coldness and tepidity will (if not stopped in
its progress) quickly grow to lothing and contemt. And indeed to what can we
more reasonably impute the great overflowings of profaneness among us, then to
our ill-husbanding the means of Grace? Now certainly of all those means there
is none of greater energy and power then the blessed Sacrament,

69. Were there no other benefit derived from it save that which the
preparation implies, 'twere very consider able. It brings us to a recollection,
fixes our indefinit purposes of searching and trying our ways, which else
perhaps we should infinitely defer, stops our carreer in sin, and by acquainting
us with our selves, shows us where our danger lies, and how we are to avert it,
what breaches are made in upon our souls, and how we must repair them, all
which are with many seldom thought of, but when the time of communicating
approches. We live so far off from our selves, know so little what is don in us
that we answer the description the Prophet makes of the surprise of Babylon, of
which the King knew nothing till post after post run to inform him that his
City was taken at one end, Jer. 51. 31. we often lie secure while the enemy is
within our walls, and therefore they are friendly alarms which the Sacrament
gives us to look to our defense. But if when the Trumpet sounds none will
prepare himself to the Battle, if when the Minister give* warning of a
Sacrament, and the preparation it requires, we go our ways, and with Gallio
care for none of th^se things, or with Felix, Acts 24. 26. put it off to a
convenient time, we wilfully expose our selves, and it is but just Christ's
dreadful menace should be executed upon us, that we die in our sins, who will
frustrate such an opportunity of a rescu from them.

70. But it is not only this remoter and accidental advantage (this preventing
Grace) which the Holy Eucharist affords, it contains yet greater and more
intrinsic benefits, is a Spring of assisting Grace also, it is a Magazine of
Spiritual Artillery to fortify us against all assaults of the Devil, the great
Catholicon for all the Maladies of our Souls, that which if duly received, will
qualify us to make St. Paul's boast, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me. In a word it is to us whatever we need, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemtion, because it possesses us of him
who is so, 1 Cor. 1. 31. so that whenever we neglect it, we manifestly betray
our own interest, and do implicitly chose death whilst we thus run from life.

71. Thus we see there is a concurrence of all forts of Arguments for this
Duty, oh that some (at least) of them may prevail! If we are not tractable
enough to do it in obedience* yet let us be so ingenious as to do it for Love,
for Gratitude, or if for neither of those, let us be at least so wise as to do
it for interest, and advantage. I know people are apt to pretend business, the
Farm and the Oxen must excuse their coming to the Feast, but alas what business
can there be of equal necessity or advantage with this? Yet even that Apology
is superseded to those I now speak to, who as I observed before have lesure
more then enough, so that it would be one part of the benefit, its taking up
some of their time: let me therefore earnestly beseech them, not to grudg a few
of their vacant hours to this so happy an emploiment.

72. Did any of their near Friends and Relations invite them to an interview,
they would not think him too importune, tho he repeated the summonsweekly, nay,
daily, but would punctually observe the meeting: And when their Savior much
seldomer entreats their company, shall he not obtain it? must he never see them
but at two or three solemn times of the year? and shall they wonder at any
intervening invitation (as the Shunamites husband did at her going to the
Prophet when it was neither new Moon nor Sabbath, 2 Ki. 4. 23.) and tell him
it is not yet Easter or Christmas, this were not only to be irreligious but
rude; and methinks those who stand so much upon the particulars of Civlity to
one another, should not then only lay aside their good manners when they are to
treat with their Redeemer. Certainly he is not so unpleasant company that they
need shun his converse: if he do appear so to any, it is that shunning that is
the cause of it. He does not open his tresures to strangers: they that come now
and then for form sake, no wonder if their entertainment, be as cold as their
address. They that would indeed taste how sweet the Lord is, Psa. 34. 8. must by
the frequency of their coming show the heartiness of it, and then they would
indeed find it a feast of fat things, as the Prophet speaks.

73. In a word, let them but make experiment, resolve for a certain time (be it
a year or thereabouts) to omit no opportunity, (and withal no due preparation)
of co^nicating, I am a little confident they will afterward need no other
importunity but that of their own longings: the expiration of that definit time
will prove the beginning of an indefinit, and their resolutions will have no
other limit but their lives. For certainly there is not in all the whole
mystery of Godliness, in all the Oeconony of the Gospel, so expedite, so
infallible a means of growth in Grace, as a frequent and worthy participation
of this blessed Sacrament; I cannot therefore more pertinently close this
Section, then with this exhortation to it, by which they will not only complete
all their Devotions, crown and hallow the rest of their Oblations to God, but
they will be advanced also in all parts of practical Piety* for tho this and
other sacred Offices be performed in the Church, the efficacy of them is not
circumscribed within those walls, but follows the devout soul through all the
occurrences of human life.

74. She that has intently considered the prefence of God in the Sanctuary, has
learned so much of his ubiquity, that she will not easily forget it in other
places, and she that remembers that will need no other guard to secure her
innocence, no other incentive to animate her endeavors, since she is viewed by
him who is equally powerful to punish or reward, who regards not the persons of
the mighty, nor can be awed into the connivance of a crime. Indeed a serious
advertence to the divine Presence, is the most certain curb to all disorderly
appetites, as on the contrary the not having God before their eyes, is in
Scripture the comprehensive description of the most wretchless profligated
state of sin. It concerns therefore all those who aspire to true Piety to
nurish that awful sense in their hearts, as that which will best enable them to
practice the Apostles advice, 2 Cor. 7* 1. To cleanse themselves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God.

75. I am sensible that this Section is spun out to a length very
unproportionable to the former; but as the principal wheel in an artificial
movement may be allowed a bulk somewhat answerable to its use, so upon the same
account, the size of this is not unjustifiable; the Piety which this designs to
recommend being the one necessary thing, which must influence all other
endowments. We know the course resemblance Solomon makes of a fair woman
without discretion, that she is like a jewel of gold in a swin^s sn^ut, Prove.
11. 12. but even that discretion (if any such could be) without Piety were but
the adding one jewel more, exposing another valuable thing to the same
despicable ridiculous use. But to speak truly there is no real discretion,
where there is no Religion: and therefore Solomon seems in this place to
understand by it that practical Wisdom, which in the sacred Dialect (his
writings especially) is equivalent to the fear of the Lord. It Is true, there
may be a rallying wit to scoff and abuse, a serpentine Wiliness to undermine
and deceive, but that sort of Wisdom (like that of Achitophel) finally converts
into foolishness, does very often appear to do so in this life, but most
certainly in the next, because it builds upon a falsebottom, prefers temporal
things before eternal. And as neither beauty or wit (the two celebrated
accomplishments of women) so will neither Greatness and Honor give any
advantage without Piety, 'twill only (as has bin already observed) make them
more exemplary sinners, inflame the account, and so expose them to a greater
degree of condemnation, for sure it is not their Sex that will rescu them from
the dismal denunciation of the Wise man. Wisd. 6. 6. Mighty men shall be
mightily tormented, I conclude all with another irrefragable maxim of the same
Author, Whether one be Rich, Noble, or Poor, their Glory is the Fear of the
Lord.

THE LADIES CALLING.
Part II.
Sect. I. Of Uirgins.
1. WE have taken a view of those general qualifications, which are at once
the duty and the ornament of the Female sex, considered at large. These like
the common Genius involve all; but there are also specific differences, arising
from the several circumstances and states of life, some whereof may exact
greater degrees even of the former virtues, and all may have some distinct and
peculiar requisits adapted to that particular state and condition: and of these
our proposed method engages us now to consider. Human life is full of
vicissitudes and changes, so that it is impossible to enumerate all the lesser
accidental alterations to which it is liable. But the principal and most
distinct scenes, in which a woman can be supposed regularly to be an actor, are
these three, Virginity, Marriage and Widowhood; which as they differ widely
from each other, so for the discharging their respective duties, there are
peculiar cautions worthy to be adverted to.

2. Virginity is first in order of time, and if we will take S. Paul's judgment
in respect of excellence also, 1 Cor. 7. And indeed she that preserves her self
in that state upon the account he mentions v. 33. that she may care for the
things that are of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in Spirit,
deserves a great deal of veneration, as making one of the nearest approaches to
the Angelical State, And accordingly in the primitive time, such a Virginity
was had in a singular estimation, and by the assignment of the Schoolmen, has
a particular coronet of glory belonging to it. Nay even among the heathens, a
consecrated Virgin was looked on as a thing most sacred. The Roman Vestals had
extraordinary privelidges allowed them by the state; and they were generally
held in such reverence, that Testaments and other depositums of the greatest
trust were usually committed to their custody, as to the surest and most
inviolable Sanctuary. Nay their presence was so to convicted malefactors; the
Magistrates veiling their fasces when they appeared, and giving up the criminal
to the commanding intercession of Virgin innocence.

3. As for the religious orders of Virgins in the present Roman Church, tho
some and those very great abuses have crept in; yet I think twere to be wishd,
that those who suppressed them in this nation, had confind themselves within the
bounds of a reformation, by choosing rather to rectify and regulate, then
abolish them.

4. But tho there be not among us such societies, yet there may be Nuns who are
not Professed. She who has devoted her heart to God, and the better to secure his
interest against the most insinuating rival of Human Love, intends to admit
none, and prays that she may not; does by those humble purposes consecrate her
self to God, and perhaps more acceptably, then if her presumtion should make
her more positive, and engage her in a vow she is not sure to perform.

5. But this is a case does not much need stating in our Clime, wherein women
are so little transported with this zeal of voluntary Virginity, that there are
but few can find patience for it when necessary. An old maid is now thought
such a curse, as no Poetic fury can exceed; looked on as the most calamitous
creature in nature. And I so far yield to the opinion, as to confess it so to
those who are kept in that state against their wills: but sure the original of
that misery is from the desire, not the restraint of Marriage: let them but
suppress that o^ce, and the other will never be their infelicity. But I must
not be so unkind to the sex, as to think it is always such desire that gives
them aversion to Celibacy; I doubt not many are frighted only with the vulgar
contemt under which that state lies: for which if there be no cure, yet there
is the same armor against this which is against all other causeless reproaches,
viz. to contemn it. Yet I am a little apt to believe there may be a prevention
in the case. If the superannuated virgins would behave themselves with gravity
and reservedness, addict themselves to the strictest virtue and piety, they
would give the world some cause to believe, 'twas not their necessity but their
choice which kept them unmarried; that they were preengag'd to a better Amor;
espoused to the spiritual Bridegroom: and this would give them among the
soberer sort at least the reverence and esteem of Matrons. Or if after all
caution and endeavor, they chance to fall under the tongues of malicious
slanderers; this is no more then happens in all other instances of duty: and if
contemt be to be avoided, Christianity it self must be quitted, as well as
virgin Chastity. But if on the other side they endeavor to disguise their age,
by all the impostures and gaieties of a youthful dress and behavior, if they
still herd them selves among the youngest and vainest company, betray a young
mind in an aged body; this must certainly expose them to scorn and censure. If
no play no ball, or dancing meeting can escape them, people will undoubtedly
conclude that they desire, to put off themselves, to meet with chapmen, who so
constantly keep the fairs. I wish therefore they would more universally try the
former expedient, which I am confident is the best amulet against the reproach
they so much dread, and may also deliver them from the danger of a more costly
remedy, I mean that of an unequal and imprudent match, which many have rushed
upon as they have ran frighted from the other, and so by an unhappy
contradiction, do both stay long and marry hastily, gall their neck to spare
their ears, and run into the yok rather then hear so slight and unreasonable a
reproach. They need not, I think, be upbraided with the folly of such an
election, since their own experience ^s (to many of them) but too severe a
monitor. I shall not insi^t farther on this, but having given the elder virgins
that ensign of their seniority as to stand first in my discourse, I shall now
address more generally to the rest.

6. And here the two grand elements essential to the Virgin state are Modesty
and Obedience, which, tho necessary to all, yet are in a more eminent degree
required here; and therefore, tho I have spoken largely of the virtue of
Modesty in the first part of this tract, yet it will not be impertinent to make
some farther reflections on it, by way of application to Virgins, in whom
modesty should appear in its highest elevation, and should come up to
Shamefacedness. Her look, her speech, her whole behavior should own an humbl
distrust of her self; she is to look on her self, but as a novice, a
probationer in the world, and must take this time, rather to learn and observe,
then to dictate and prescribe. Indeed there is scarce any thing looks more
indecent, then to see a young maid too forward and confident in her talk. It Is
the opinion of the wiseman, Ecclus. 32. 8. that a young man should scarce speak
tho twice asked: in proportion to which, 'twill sure not become a young woman,
whose sex puts her under greater restraints, to be either importunate or
magisterial in her discourse. And tho that which former ages called Boldness, is
now only Assurance and good breeding, yet we have seen such bad superstructures
upon that foundation, as sure will not much recommend it to any considering
person.

7. But there is another breach of Modesty as it relates to Chastity, in which
they are yet more especially concerned. The very name of virgin imports a most
critical niceness in that point. Every indecent curiosity, orimpure fancy, is
adeflowring of the mind, and every the least corruption of them gives some
degrees of defilement to the body too: for between the state of pure immaculat
Virginity and arrant Prostitution there are many intermedial steps, and she
that makes any of them, is so far departed from her first integrity. She that
listens to any wanton discourse, has violated her ears; she that speaks any,
her tongue; every immodest glance vitiates her eye, and every the lightest act
of dalliance leaves something of stain and sullage behind it. There is therefore
a most rigorous caution requisite herein: for as nothing is more clean and white
then a perfect Virginity, so every the least spot or soil is the more
discernible. Besides, youth is for the most part flexible, and easily warps
into a crookedness, and therefore can never set it self too far from a
temtation. Our tender blossoms we are fain to skreen and shelter, because every
unkindly air nips and destroies them; and nothing can be more nice and delicate
then a maiden virtue, which ought not to be exposed to any of those malignant
airs which may blast and corrupt it, of which God knows there are too many,
some that blow from within, and others from without.

8. Of the first sort there is none more mischievous then Curiosity, a
temtation which foiled human Nature even in Paradise: and therefore sure a
feeble girl ought not to trust her self with that which subdued her better
fortified parent. The truth is, an affected ignorance cannot be so blamable in
other cases as it is commendable in this. Indeed it is the surest and most
invincible guard, for she who is curious to know indecent things, it is odds but
she will too soon and too dearly buy the learning. The suppressing and
detesting all such curiosities is therefore that eminent fundamental piece of
continence I would recommend to them, as that which will protect and secure all
the rest.

9. But when they have set this guard upon themselves, they must provide
against foreign assaults too; the most dangerous whereof I take to be ill
Company, and Id'eness. Against the first they must provide by a prudent choice
of conversation, which should generally be of their own sex; yet not all of
that neither, but such who will at least entertain them innocently, if not
profitably. Against the second they may secure themselves by a constant series
of emploiments: I mean not such frivolous ones as are more idle then doing
nothing; but such as are ingenuous, and some way worth their time, wherein as
the first place is to be given to the offices of piety, so in the intervalls of
those, there are diverse others, by which they may not unusefully fill up the
vacancies of their time: such are the acquiring of any of those ornamental
improvements which become their quality, as Writing, Needle works, Languages,
Music, or the like. If I should here insert the art of Economy and Household
Managery, I should not think I affronted them in it; that being the most proper
feminine business, from which neither wealth nor greatness can totally absolve
them; and a little of the theory in their parentshouse, would much assist them
toward the practic when they come to their own. In a word there are many parts
of knowledge useful for civil as well as divine life; and the improving
themselves in any of those is a rational emploiment.

10. But I confess I know not how to reduce to that head many of those things
which from divertisements are now stepped up to be the solemn business of many
young Ladies, (and I doubt of some old;) such is in the first place gaming, a
recreation whose lawfulness I question not, whilst it keeps with the bounds of
a recreation: but when it sets up for a calling, I knownot whence it derives
its license. And a calling sure it seems to be with some, a laborious one too,
such as they toil night and day at, nay do not allow themselves that remission
which the laws both of God and man have provided for the meanest mechanic: the
Sabbath is to them no day of rest, but this trade goes on when all shops are
shut. I know not how they satisfy themselves in such an habitual wast of their
time, (besides all the incidental faults of avarice and anger) but I much doubt
that plea, whatsoever it is, which passes with them, will scarcehold weight at
his Tribunal, who has commanded us to redeem, not fling away our time.

11. There is another thing to which some devote a very considerablepart
oftheir time, and that is the reading Romances, which seems now to be thought
the peculiar and only becoming study of young Ladies. I confess their youth may
a little adapt it to them when they were children, and I wish they were always
in their event asharmless; but I fear they often leave ill impressions behind
them. Those amorous passions, which it is their design to paint to the utmost
life, are apt to insinuate themselves into their unwary readers, and by an
unhappy inversion, a copy shall produce an original. When a poor young creature
shall read there of some triumphant Beauty, that has I know not how many
captived Knights prostrate at her feet, she will probably be temted to think it
a fine thing; and may reflect how much she loses time, that has not yet subdued
one heart: and then her business willbe to spreadher nets; lay her toils to
catch somebody, who will more fatally ensnare her. And when she has once wound
her self into an amor, those Authors are subtle casuists for all difficult
cases that may occur in it, will instruct in the necessary Artifices of
deluding Parents and Friends, and put her ruin perfectly in her own power. And
truly thisseems to beso natural a consequent of this sort of study, that of all
the divertisements that look so innocently, they can scarce fall upon any more
hazardous. Indeed it is very difficult to imagine what vast mischief isdon to
the World, by the false notions and images of things; particularly of Love and
Honor, those noblest concerns of human life, represented in these Mirrors: but
when we consider upon what principles the Duellists and Hectors of the Age
defend their outrages; and how great adevotion ispaid to lust, insteadof
virtuous Love; we can not be to seek for the Gospel which makes these doctrines
appear orthodox.

12. As for the entertainments which they find abroad, they may be innocent, or
otherwise according as they are managed. The common intercourse ofCivilityis
adebt to Humanity, and therefore mutual visits may often be necessary, and so
(in some degree) may be several harmless and healthful recreations which may
call them abroad; for I write not now to Nuns, and have no purpose to confine
them to a Cloister. Yet on the other side to be always wandering, is the
condition of a vagabond, and of the two it is better to be a Prisoner to ones
home, then a Stranger. Solomon links it with some very unlaudable qualities ofa
Woman Pro. 7. 11. that her feet abide not in her house, and it is an unhappy
impotence not to be able to stay at home, when there is any thing to be seen
abroad; that any mask, or revel, any jollity of others must be their rack and
torment, if they can not get to it. Alas such meetings are not so sure to be
safe, that they had need be frequent, and they are of all others least like to
be safe to those, who much dote on them: and therefore those that find they do
so, had need to counterbiass their minds, and set them to something better, and
by more serious entertainments supplant those vanities, which at thebest are
childis^; and may oftenprove worse; it being tooprobable that thoseDinah's
which are stillgadding, tho onpretence to see only the daughters of the land
Genesis 34. may at last meet with a son ofHamor.

13. There is also another great devourer of time subservient to theformer, I
mean dressing: for they that Love to be seen much abroad, will be sure to be
seen in the most exact form. And this is an emploiment that does not steal but
challenge their time; what they wast here is cum Privilegio, it beingby the
verdict ofthis age theproper business, the one science wherein ayoungLady is to
be perfectly verst; so that now all virtuous emulation is converted into this
single ambition, who shall excel in this faculty. A vanity which I confess is
more excusable in the younger then the elder sort; they being supposable not
yet to have outworn the relics of their childhood, to which toies andgaiety
were proportionable. Besides it is sure allowable upon a soberer account, that
they who design Marriage should give themselves the advantage of decent
ornaments, and not by the negligent rudeness of their dress belly Nature, and
render themselves less amiable then the has made them. But all this being
granted, 'twill by no meansjustify that excessivecuriosity andsolicitude, that
expense of time and money too which is now used; a verymoderate degree of all
thosewill serve for that ordinarydecency which theyneed provide for, will
keepthem from the reproach of an affected singularity, which is as much as a
sober person need take care for. And I must take leave to say, that in order to
marriage, such a moderation is muchlikelier to succeedthen the
contraryextravagance. Among theprudenter sort of men I am sure it is, if it be
not among the loose and vain, against which 'twill be their guard, and so do
them the greater service: for certainly he that chooses a wife for
thosequalities for which a wise man would refuse her, understands so little
what marriage is, as portends nogreat felicity toher thatshall havehim But if
they desireto marry men of sobriety and discretion, they are obliged in justice
to bring the same qualities they expect, which will be very ill evidenced by
that excess and vanity we nowspeak of.

14. For to speak a plain (tho perhaps ungrateful truth, this (together with
some of the modish liberties now in use) is it, which keeps so many young
Ladies about the Town unmarried 'till they lose the epithet of young. Sober men
are afraid to venture upon a humor so disagreeingto their own lest whilst
(according to the primitive reason of marriage) they seek a help, they espouse
a ruin. But this is especially dreadful to a plain Country. Gentleman, who
looks upon one of these fine women as a Gaudy Idol, to whom if he once become a
votary, he must sacrifice a great part of his fortune, and all his content. How
reasonable that apprehension is, the many wracks of considerable familiesdo too
evidently attest. But I presumesome ofthe nicer Ladies havesuch a contemt of
anything that they please to call rustic, that they will not much regret the
averting of those whom they so despise. They will not perhaps while they are in
pursuit or hopes of others; but when those fail, these will be looked on as a
welcome reserve, and therefore 'twill be no prudence to cut themselves off
from that last resort, lest they (as many have don) betake themselves to much
worse. For as in many instances it is the Country which feeds and maintains the
grandeur of the Town, so of all commerces there, marriage would soonest fail,
if all Rural supplies were cut off.

15. But I have pursued this speculation farther than perhapsmy virgin
readerswill thankme for, I shall return to that which it was brought to
enforce, and beseech them that if not to Men, yet to approve themselves to God,
they will confine themselves in the matter of their dress within the du limits
of decency and sobriety. Ishall not direct them to those strictrules which
Tertullian and some other of the ancient Fathers have prescribed in this
matter; my petition is only that our virgins would at least so take care of
their bodies, as Persons that also have a soul; which if they can be persuaded
to, they may reserve much of their time for more worthy ^ses then those of the
Comb, the Tuillets, and the Glass. And truly it is not a little their concern
to do so, for this spring of their age is that critical instant that must
either confirm or blast the hopes of all the succeeding seasons. The minds of
young people are usually compared to a blank sheet of paper, equally capable of
the best or the worst impressions; it is pity they should be filled with
childish scrawls, and little insignificant figures, but it is shame and horror
they should be staind with any vicious characters, any blots of impurity or
dishonor. To prevent which let the ^everestnotions of modesty and honor be
early and deeply impest upon their souls, graven as with the point of a
Diamond, that they may be as indelible as they are indispensibly necessary to
the virgin state.

16. There is also another very requisite quality, and that is Obedience. The
younger sort ofvirgins are supposed to have parents, or if any has binso
unhappy as to lose them early, they commonly are left in the charge of some
friend or guardian, that is to supply the place; so that they cannot be to seek
to whom this obedience is to be paid. And it is not more their duty then their
interest to pay it. Youth is apt to be foolish in it its designs, and heady in
the pursuit of them; and there can be nothing more deplorable then to have it
left to its self. And therefore God, who permits not even the brutes to
destitute their young ones till they attain to the perfection of their kind,
has put children under the guidance and protection of their parents, 'till by
the maturing of their judgments they are qualified to be their own conductors.
Now this Obedience (as that which is due to all other superiors) is to extend
it self to all things that are either good or indifferent, and has no clause of
exception, but only where the command is unlawful. And in so wide a scene of
action there will occur so many particular occasions of submission, that they
had need have a great reverence of their parents judgments, and distrust of
their own. And if it should happen that some parents are not qualified to give
them the former, yet the general imbecility of their age, will remain a
constant ground of the later: so that they may safelier venture themselves to
their parents misguidance, then their own; by how much the errors of humility
and obedience, are less malignant then those of presumtion and arrogance.

16. But this is a doctrine which will scarce pass for orthodox with many of
the young women of our days, withwhom it is prejudice enoughagainst the
prudentest advice that it comes from their parents. It Is the grand ingenuity of
these times to turn every thing into Ridicule; and if a girl can but rally
smartly upon the sober admonition of a parent, she concludes she is the abler
person; takes her self for a wit, and the other for a fop; (a bugbear word
devised to fright all seriousness and sobriety out of the World;) and learns
not only to disobey but to contemn. Indeed the great confidence thatyouth now
seems to have of its self, as it is very indecent, soisit extremely pernicious.
Children that will attemt to go alone before their time, often get dangerous
falls; and when those who are but little removed from children, shall cast off
the wiser conductof others, they often sadly miscarry by their own,

18. I know this age has so great a contemt of the former, that it is but matter
of scorn to alledg any of their customs, else I should say that the liberties
that are taken now, would then have bin startled at. They that should then have
seen young maid rambling abroad without her mother or some other prudent
person, would have looked on her as a stray, and thought it but a neighborly
office to have brought her home; whereas now it is a rarity to see them in any
company graver then themselves, and she that goes with her parent (unless it
besuch a parent as is as wild as her self) thinks she does but walk abroad with
her jailor. But sure there are no small mischeifs that attend this liberty, for
it leaves them perfectly to the choice of their company, a thing of too weighty
an importance for giddy heads to determine; who will besure to elect such as are
of their own humor, with whom they may keep up a traffic of little
impertinencies and trifling entertainments; and so by consequence condemn
themselves never to grow wiser which they might do by an ingenuous conversation.
Nay it is well if that negative ill be the worst, for it gives opportunity to any
that have ill designs upon them. It will be easy getting into their company,
who have no guard to keep any body out, and as easy by little compliances and
flatteries to insinuate into their good graces, who have not the sagacity to
discern to what insidious purposes those blandishments are directed; and when
they once begin to nibble at the bait, to be pleased with the Courtship, it is
great odds they do not escape the hook.

19. Alas how many poor innocent creatures have bin thus indiscernibly
ensnared; have at first perhaps only liked the wit and raillery, perhaps the
language and address, then the freedom and good humor; 'till at last they come
to like the person. It is therefore a most necessary caution for young women,
not to trust too much to their own conduct, but to own their dependence on
those, to whom God and nature has subjected them, and to look on it not as
their restraint and burden, but as their shelter and Protection. For where once
the authority of a parent comes to be despised, tho in the lightest instance, it
lays the foundation of utmost disobedience. She that will not be prescribed to
in the choice of her ordinary diverting company, will less be so in choosing the
fixed companion of her life; and we find it often eventually true, that those
who govern themselves in the former, will not be governed by their friends in
the latter, but by pre-engagements of their own prevent their elections for
them.

20. And this is one of the highest injuries they can do their parents, who
have such a native right in them, that it is no less an injustice then
disobedience to dispose of themselves without them. This right of the parent is
so undoubted, that we find God himself gives way to it, and will not suffer the
most holy pretense* no not that of a Vow, to invade it as we may see his own
stating of the case Numb 30. How will he then rese^t it, to have his so
indispensible a^aw violated upon the impulse of an impotent passion, an amorous
inclination? Nor is the folly less then the sin: they injure and afflict their
parents, but they generally ruin and undo themselves. And that upon a double
account, first as to the secular part. Those that are so rash as to make such
matches, cannot be imagined so provident as to examine how agreeable it is to
their interest; or to contrive for any thing beyond the marriage. The thoughts
of their future temporal conditions (like those of the eternal) can find no
room amidst their foolish raptures; but as if love were indeed that Deity which
the Poets feigned, they depend on it for all, and take no farther care. And
event does commonly too soon instruct them in the deceitfulness of that trust;
love being so unable to support them, that it cannot maintain its self; but
quickly expires when it has brought the lovers into those straits, from whence
it cannot rescu them. So that indeed it does but play the decoy with them,
brings them into the noose and then retires. For when secular wants begin to
pinch them, all the transports of their kindness do usually convert into mutual
accusations, for having made each other miserable.

21. And indeed there is no reason to expect any better event, because in the
second place they forfeit their title to the divine blessing; nay they put
themselves out of the capacity to ask it, it being a ridiculous impudence to
beg God to prosper the transgressions of his law. Such weddings seem to invoke
only some of the Poetic Romantic Deities, Venus and Hymen, from whence they
derive a happiness as fictitious as are the Gods that are to send it. Let all
Virgins therefore religiously observe this part of Obedience to their parents,
that they may not only have their benediction but Gods. And to that purpose let
this be laid as a fundamental rule, that they never harken to any proposal of
marriage made them from any other hand; but when any such overture is made,
divert the address from her self and direct it to her parents, which will be
the best test imaginable for any pretender: for if he know himself worthy of
her, he will not fear to avow his design to them; and therefore if he decline
that, it is a certain symptom, he is conscious of something that he knows will not
give a valuable consideration; so that this course will repel no suitor but
such as it is their interest not to admit. Besides it is most agreeable to the
virgin modesty, which should make marriage an act rather of their obedience
then their choice; and they that think their friends too flow paced in the
matter, and seek to outrun them, give cause to suspect they are spurred on by
somewhat too warm desires.

22. But as a Daughter is neither to anticipate, nor contradict the will of her
Parent, so (to hang the balance even) I must say she is not obliged to force
her own, by marrying where she cannot love; for a negative voice in the case is
sure as much the child's right as the Parent^s. It is true she ought well to
examine the grounds of her aversion, and if they prove only childish and
fanciful, should endeavor to correct them by reason and sober consideration;
but if after all she cannot leave to hate, I think she should not proceed to
marry. I confess I see not how she can without a sacrilegious hypocrisy, vow
so solemnly to love where she at the instant actually abhors: and where the
married state is begun with such a perjury, it is no wonder to find it continued
on at the same rate, that other parts of the vow be also violated; and that she
observe the negative part no more then the positive, and as little forsake
others, as she does heartily cleave to her husband. I fear this is a
consequence whereof there are too many sad instances now extant; for tho
doubtless, there are some Virtues which will hold out against all the temtations
their a versions can give, nay which do at last even conquer those a versions,
and render their duty as easy as they have kept it safe; yet we find there are
but some that do so: that it is no inseparable property of the sex, and
therefore it is sure too hazardous an experiment for any of them to venture on.

23. And if they may not upon the more generous motive of Obedience, much less
may they upon the worse inducements of Avarice and Ambition; for a woman to
make a vow to the man, and yet intend only to marry his fortune, or his title,
is the basest insincerity and such as in any other kind of civil contracts,
would not only have the infamy but the punishment of a cheat. Nor will it at
all secure them, that this is only liable to Gods tribunal, for that is not
like to make the doom less but more heavy, it being as the Apostle witnesses, a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 20. 31. In a word,
marriage is Gods ordinance, and should be considered as such; not made a stale
to any unworthy design. And it may well be presumed one cause why so few
matches are happy, that they are not built upon a right foundation. Some are
grounded upon wealth, some on beauty, too sandy bottoms God knows to raise any
lasting felicity on: whilst in the interim, virtue and piety, the only solid
Basis for that superstructure, are scarce ever considered. Thus God is commonly
left out of the consultation. The Lawyers are resorted to, to secure the
settlements all sorts of Artificers to make up the equipage, but he is neither
advised with as to the motives, nor scarce supplicated as to the event of
wedding. Indeed it is a deplorable sight to see with what lightness and
unconcernedness young people go to that weightiest action of their livs, that a
marriage day is but a kind of Bacchanal, a more licensed a vowed revel, when if
they duly considered it, it is the hinge upon which their future life moves,
which turns them over to a happy or miserable being; and therefore ought to be
entered upon with the greatest seriousness and devotion. Our Church advises
excellently in the preface to matrimony, and I wish they would not only give it
the hearing at the time, but make it their study a good while before: yea and
the marriage-vow too, which is so strict and awful a bond, that methinks they
had need well weigh every branch of it, ere they enter it; and by the
ferventest prayers implore that God, who is the witness, to be their assistant
too in its performance.

SECT. II. Of Wives.
1. AND now having conducted the virgin to the entrance of another state, I
must shift the Scene and attend her thither also. And here she is lanched into
a wide sea, that one relation of a wife drawing after it many others: for as
she espouses the man s^she does his obligations also; and wherever he by ties
of nature or alliance ows a reverence or kindness, she is no less a debtor. Her
marriage is an adoption into his family, and therefore she is to every branch
of it to pay what their stations there do respectively require: to define which
more particularly, would be a work of more length then profit. I shall
therefore confine the present consideration to the relation she stands in to
her husband, and (what is usually concomitant with that) her children, and her
servants, and so shall consider her in the three capacities of a Wife, a
Mother, and a Mistress.

2. In that of a Wife her duty has several aspects, ^s it relates, first to his
Person, secondly to his Reputation, thirdly to his Fortune. The first debt ^o
his person is Love, which we find set as the ^rime Article in the marriage vow;
and indeed that ^s the most essential requisite; without this it is ^nly a
Bargain and Compact, a Tyranny perhaps on the man's part, and a Slavery on the
woman's. It Is Love only that cements the hearts, and where that union is
wanting, it is but a shadow, a carcass of marriage. Therefore as it is very
necessary to bring some degree of this, to this State; so it is no less to
maintain and improve it in it. This is it which facilitats all other duties of
marriag; makes the yoke sit so lightly, that it rather pleases then galls. It
should therefore be the study of Wives to preserve this flame; that like the
vestal fire it may never go out: and to that end carefully to guard it from all
those things which are naturally apt to extinguish it; of which kind are all
frowardness and little perverseness of humor; all sullen and morose behavior,
which by taking off from the delight and complacency of conversation, will by
degrees wear off the kindness.

3. But of all I know nothing more dangerous then that unhappy passion of
Jealousy, which the it is said to be the child of love, yet like the viper, its
birth is the certain destruction of the parent As therefore they must be nicely
careful to give their husbands no color, no least unbrage for it* so should
they be as resolute to resistall that occurs to themselves, be so far from that
busy curiosity that industry to find causes of suspicion; that eve^ where they
presented themselves, they should avert the consideration; put the most candid
construction upon any doubtful action. And indee^ charity in this instance, has
not more of the Dov^ then of the Serpent. It is infinitely the wises^ course,
both in relation to her present quiet, and her future innocence. The
entertaining a jealous fancy, is the admitting the most treacherous the most
disturbing inmate in the World, and she opens her breast to a fury that lets it
in. It Is certainly one of the most enchanting (...) imaginable, keeps her
always in a most restless importunate search after that which she dreads and
abhors to find, and makes her equally miserable when she is injured, and when
she is not.

4. And as she totally loses her ease, so it is odds but she will part also with
some degrees of her innocence. Jeolousy is commonly attended with a black
train; it musters all the forces of our irascible part, to abet its quarrel;
Wrath and Anger, Malice and Revenge: and by how much the female impotence to
govern those passions is the greater; so much the more dangerous is it to admit
that which will so surely set them in an uprore. For if Jealousy be as the wise
man says the rage of a man Prove. 6. 32. we may well think it may be the fury
the madness of a woman; and indeed all ages have given tragical instances of
it, not only in the most indecent fierceness and clamor but in the solemn
mischeifs of actualrevenges. Nay it is tobedoubted therehave bin somewhose
malice has rebounded, and have ruined themselves in spite; have bin adulterous
by way of retaliation: and taken more scandalous liberties then those they
complained of in their husbands. And when such enormous effects as these are
the issues of jealousy; it ought to keep women on the strictest guard against
it.

5. But perhaps it may be said that some are not left to their Jealousy and
conjectures; but have moredemonstrativeproofs. In thisage 'tisindeedno strange
thingfor men to publish their sin as Sodom, and the offender does sometimes not
discover but boast his crime. In this case I confess 'twill be scarce possible
to disbelieve him; but even here a wife has this advantage, that she is out of
the pain of Suspense; she knows the utmost, and therefore is now at lesure to
convert all that industry which she would have used for the discovery, to
fortify her self against a known calamity; which sure she may as well do in
this as in any other; a patient Submission being the one Catholicon in all
distresses; and as the slightest can overwhelm us if we add our own impatience
toward our sinking; so the greatest cannot, if we deny it that aid. They are
therefore far in the wrong, who in case of this injury pursue their husbands
withvirulencies and reproaches. This is as Solomon says Pro. 25. 20.
Thepowringvinegar upon niter, applyingcorrosives whenbalsoms are most needed;
whereby they not only increase their own smart, but render the wound incurable.
They are not thunders and earthquakes, but soft gentle rains that close the
scissures of the ground; and the breaches of Wedlock will never be cemented by
storms and loud outcries. Many men have bin made worse, but scarce ever any
better by it; for guilt covets nothing more then an opportunity of
recriminating; and where the husband can accuse the wives bitterness, he thinks
he needs no other apology for his own lust.

6. A Wise Dissimulation, or very calm notice is sure the likeliest means of
reclaiming, for where men have not wholly put off humanity, there is a native
compassion to a meek sufferer. We have naturally some regret to see a Lamb
under the knife; whereas the impatient roaring of a swine diverts our pity; so
that Patience in this case is as much the interest as duty of a Wife.

7. But there is another instance wherein that virtue has yet a severer trial,
and that is when a Wife lies under the causeless jealousies of the husband, (I
say causeless, for if they be just it is not so much a season for patience, as
for repentance and reformation.) This is sure one of the greatest calamities
that can befall a virtuous woman, who as she accounts nothing so dear as her
loialty and honor; so thinks no infelicity can equal the aspersing of those;
especially when it is from him, towhomshe has bin the most solicitous to approve
her self. Yet God who permits nothing but what he directs to some wise and
gracious end, has an overruling hand in this as well as in all other events of
life; and therefore it becomes every woman in that condition, to examine
strictly what she has don to provoke so severe a scourge; for tho her heart
condemn her not of any falseness to her husband, yet probably it may of many
disloialties to her God, and then she is humbly to accept even of this
traducing of her innocence, as the punishment of her iniquity, and bear it with
the same temper wherewith David did the unjust revilings of Shimei 2 Kings 16.
10. Let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him.

8. And when she has made this penitent reflection on her real guilts, she may
then with more courage encounter those imaginary ones which are charged on her;
wherein she is to use all prudent and regular means for her justification, that
being a debt she ows to truth, and her own fame; but if after all, the
suspicion remains still fixed (as commonly those which are the most
unreasonable are the most obstinate) she may still solace her self in her
integrity, and Gods approbation of it. Nor ought she to think her self
desolate, that has her appeal open to heaven. Therefore whilst she can look
both inward and upward with comfort, why should she choose to fix her eyes only
on the object of her grief; and whilst her own complaint is of defamation, why
should she so dishonor God and a good conscience, as to show any thing can be
more forcible to oppress, then they are to relieve and support? And if she may
not indulge to grief, much less may she to anger, and bitterness.

9. Indeed if she consider how painful a passion jealousy is, her husband will
more need her pity, who tho he be unjust to her, is yet cruel to himself; and
as we do not use to hate and malign those Lunatics who in their fits beat their
friends, and cut and gash themselves, but rather make it our care to put all
harmful engines out of their way; so should the wife not despitefully ruminate
upon the injury, but wisely to contrive to avert his temtations to more; by
denying her self even the most innocent liberties, if she see they dissatisfy
him. I know there have bin some of another opinion, and as if they thought
jealousy were to be cured by majoration, have in an angry contemt don things to
inflame it; put on an unwonted freedom and jollity, to show their husbands how
little they had secured themselves by their distrust. But this as it is no
Christian, so I conceive it is no prudent expedient; it serves to stengthen not
only the husbands suspicion, but his party too, and make many others of his
mind; and it is a little to be feared, that by using so to brave the Jealousy,
they may at last come to verify it. I have bin the longer on this theme,
because as Jealousy is the most fatal pest of a married life, so I think it
more ordinarily occurs among people of quality, and with the worst and most
durable effects; yet what ever pretenses people may take hence, the marriage
vow is too fast a knot to be loosened by fancies and chimeras; let a woman
therefore be the person suspecting or suspected, neither will absolve her from
that love to her husband she has sworn to pay.

10. But alas what hope is there that these greater temptations shall be
resisted, when we see every the slightest disgust is now adays too strong for
the matrimonial love, nay indeed it does of course fall off of it self, which
is an event so much expected, that it is no wonder to see it expire with the
first circuit of the moon; but it is every bodies admiration to see it last one
of the sun; and sometimes it vanishes so clearly, as not to leave so much as a
shadow behind it, not so much as the formalities of marriage; one bed, one
house cannot hold them, as if they had bin put together like case-shot in a
gun, only that they might the more forcibly scatter several ways. Nay as if
this were designed and intended in the first addresses unto marriage; a
separate maintenance is of course aforehand contracted for, and becomes as
solemn a part of the settlement, as a Jointure is. Plutarch observes of the
ancient Romans, that f r 230. years after founding of their state, there never
was one example of any married couple that separated* it is not likely they
could have a more binding form of marriage then ours is, the difference must
lie between their v^racity and our falsness.

11. But even amongst those who desert not each other, too many do mutually
fall from that entireness and affection which is the soul of marriage; and to
help on the declination, there are fashionable Maxims taken up, to make men and
their wives the greatest strangers to each other: Thus it is pronounced a piece
of ill Breeding, a sign of a country Gentleman, to see a man go abroad with his
own wife (I suppose those who brought up these rules are not to seek what use
to make of them) and were the time of most of the modish couples computed,
itwould be sound they are but few of their waking hours (I might say minutes)
together; so, that if nothing else, mere desuetude and intermission of
conversation must needs allay, if not quite extinguish their kindness. But I
hope there are yet many who do not think the authority of a fashion
greaterthenthat of a vow; and such will still think it* their duty both to own
and cherish that kindness and affection they have so solemnly promised.

12. Another debt to the person of a husband is Fidelity: sor as she has
espoused all his interests, so she is obliged to be true to them, to keep all
his secrets, to inform him of his dangers, yea and in a mild and gentle manner
to admonish him of his faults. This is the most genuine act of friendship;
therefore she who is placed in the nearest and most intimate degree of that
relation, must not be wanting in it. She that lies in his bosom should be a
kind of second conscience to him, by putting him in mind both of his duty and
his aberrations, and as long as she can be but patiently heard it is her sin to
omit it; it is the greatest treachery to his noblest, to his immortal part, and
such as the most officious cares of his other interests can never expiate. Nay
indeed she is unfaithful to her self in it, there being nothing that does so
much secure the happiness of a Wife as the virtue and piety of the husband. Yet,
tho this is to have her chiefest care, as being his principal interest, she is
to neglect none of the inferior, but contribute her utmost to his advantage in
all his concerns.

13. Beyond all these the matrimonial fidelity has a special notion as it
relates to the Bed; and in that the wise is to be most severely scrupulous, and
never to admit so much as a thought or imagination, much less any parley or
treaty contrary to her loialty. It Is true wantonness is one of the foulest blots
that can stain any of the sex; but it is infinitely more odious in the married,
it being in them an accumulation of crimes; perjury added to uncleanness; the
infamy of their family superstructed upon their own; and accordingly all laws
have made a difference in their punishments. Adultery was by Gods own award
punished with death among the Jews, Levit. 20. 10. And it seems it was so
agreeable to natural justice, that diverse other nations did the like; and I know
no reason, but the difficulty of detection, that should any where give it a
milder sentence. The son of Sirach has excellently described the several
gradations of the guilt Ecclus. 23. 1. which I shall desire the Reader to
consult: which who so does must certainly wonder at the Alchimy of this age,
that from such a mass of shame and infamy can extract matter of confidence,
that those who lie under so many brands and stigmas, are so far from hiding
their faces, that none show them with so much boldness; and the assurance of
the guilty far exceeds that of the innocent. But impudence is a slender shelter
for guilt; and serves rather to betray then hide; so that theyare not able to
outface the opinions of men; much less can they the judgments of God; who as
He was solemnly invoked as witness to their vow, so by his omnipresence is
against their wills a witness too of its violations.

14. Another duty to the person of the husband is obedience, a word of a very
harsh sound in the ears of some wives, but is certainly the duty of all: and
that not only by their promise of it, tho that were sufficient; but from an
original of much older date, it being the mulct that was laid upon the first
woman's disobedience to God, that she (and all derived from her) should be
subject to the husband; so that the contending for superiority, is anattemt to
reverse thatfundamentallaw, which is almost as ancient as the World. But surely
God with whom there is no shadow of change, will not make acts of repeal to
satisfy the petulancy of a few masterless women. That statute will stillstand
in force, and if it cannot awe them into an observance, will not fail to
consign them topunishment. And indeed this fault is commonly its own lictor,
and does anticipate (tho not avert) its final doom. Theimperiousness
ofawomandos oftenraise those storms, wherein her self isshipwrack'd. How
pleasantly might many women have lived if they had not affected dominion. Nay
how much of their will might they have had, if they had not strugled for it.
For let a man be of never so gentle a temper (unless his head be softer then
his heart) such a usurpation will awake him to assert his right. But if he be
of a sour severe nature; if he have as great a desire of rule as she, backed
with a much better title, what tempests what Hurricanes must two such opposite
winds produce? And at last it is commonly the wives lot, after an uncreditable
unjust war, to make as disadvantageous a peace; this (like all other
ineffective rebellions) serving to straiten her yoke, to turn an ingenuous
subjection into a slavish servitude: so that certainly it is not only the
virtue, but the wisdom of wives to do that upon duty, which at last they must
(with more unsupportable circumstances.) do upon necessity.

15. And as they ow these severalls to the person of the husband, so there is
also a debt to his reputation. This they are to be extremely tender of, to
advance it, by making all that is good in him as conspicuous, as public as they
can; setting his worth in the cleerest light, but putting his infirmities in
the shade; casting a veil upon those to skreen them from the eyes of others,
nay (as far as is possible) from their own too; there being nothing acquired to
the wifeby contemplating the husbands weakness, but a temtation of despising
him; which tho bad enough in itself, is yet renderd worse by that train of
mischievous consequences which usually attend it. In case therefore of any
notable imperfections in him, her safest way will be to consider them no
farther then she can be instrumental to the curing them; but to divert from
those, and reflect upon her own* which perhaps if impartially weighed, may
balance* if not overpoi^ his. And indeed those wives who are apt blaze their
husbands faults, do show that they have either little adverted to theirown,
orelse find them so great, that they are forced to that art of diversion, and
seek in his infamy to drown theirs. But that project is a little unlucky, for
nothing does in sober judges create greaterprejudice to a woman, then to see
her forward in impeaching her husband

16. But besides this immediate tenderness of his reputation, there is another
by way of reflection, which consists in a care that she her self do nothing
which may redound to his dishonor: there is so strict union between a man and
his wife, that the law counts them one person, and consequently they can have
no divided interest, so that the misbehavior of the woman reflects
ignominiously on the man; it therefore concerns them as well upon their
husbands as their own account, to abstain even from all appearance of evil, and
provide that themselves be (what Caesar is said to have required of his wife)
not only without guilt but without scandal also.

17 Another part of the wives duty relates to her husbands fortune, the
management whereof is not ordinarily the wives province, but where the husband
thinks fit to make it so, she is obliged to administer it with her best care
and industry; not by any neglect of hers to give others opportutunity of
defrauding him, yet on the other side not by an immoderate tenacity or griping,
to bring upon him and her self the reproach, and which is worse the curse that
attends exaction and oppression. But this is not usually the wives field of
action, tho he that shall consider the description which Solomon gives of a
virtuous wife Prove. 31. will be apt to think her Province is not so narrow and
confined, as the humor of the age would represent it. He tells us that she
seeks wool and flax, and works diligently with her hands, that she is like the
merchants ships, and brings her food from far. That she considers a field and
buys it, and with the fruit of her hands plants a vineyard, etc. And least
this should be imagined to be the character of a mean country Dame, he adds
that her household is clothed in scarlet, and that her husband sits among the
Elders of the land. It were easy to give instances from history of the
advantageous menage and active industry of wives, not only in single persons,
but whole Nations. But nothing can be more pregnant, then that among the
Romans: in the very height and flourish of the Empire Austus himself scare wore
any thing but of the Manufacture of his Wife, his Sister, daughters, and
nieces, as Suetonius assures us. Should the gay lilies of our fields, which
neither sow nor spin, nor gather into barns be exemted from furnishing others,
and left to cloth themselves, it is to be doubted they would reverse our Saviors
Parallel of Solomon's glories, and no beggar in all his rags would be araied
like one of these. Luc. 12. 27.

18. But we will be yet more kind, and impose only negative thrift on the wife,
not to wast and embezle her husbands estate, but to confine her expenses within
such limits as that can easily admit; a caution which if all women had
observed; many noble families had bin preserved, of which there now remains no
other memorial but that they sell a sacrifice to the profuse vanity of a woman;
and I fear this age is like to provide many more such monuments for the next.
Our Ladies, as if they emulated she Roman Luxury (which Seneca and Pliny
describe with so much indignation) do sometimes wear about them the revenues of
a rich family; and those that cannot reach to that, show how much it is against
their wills they fall lower, by the vast variety and excess of such things as
they can possibly compass; so much extravagance not only in their own dress,
but that of their houses and apartments, as if their vanity like the Leprosy we
read of Lev. 24. had infected the very walls. And indeed it is a very spreading
fretting one, for the furniture often consumes the house, and the house consumes
the land: so that if some Gentlemen were to calculate their estates, they might
reduce all to the inventory of Scopias the Thessalian, who professed his all lay
only in such Toies as did him no good. Women are now skillfull Chemists, and
can quickly turn their husbands earth into Gold: but they pursue the experiment
too far, make that Gold too volatile, and let it all vapor away in
insignificant (tho gaudy) trifles.

19. Nor is it ever like to be otherwise with those that immoderatly affect the
town, that forge of vanity, which supplies a perpetual spring of new
temtations. It Is true there are some Ladies who are necessarily engaged to be
there: their husbands emploiments orfortuneshave marked that out as their proper
station, and where the ground of their stay is their duty, there is more reason
to hope it will not betray them to ill, for temtations are most apt to assault
stragglers, those that put themselves out of their proper road. And truly I see
not who can more properly be said to be so, thenthosewomen whose means of
subsistence lies in the Country, and yet will spend it no wherebut at London,
which seems to carry something of opposition to Gods providence, who surely
never caused their lot to fall, as the Psalmist speaks, in a fair ground, in
goodly heritages Psalm. 16. with an intent they should never inhabit them. The
12 tribes of Israel had their peculiar Portions in Canaan assigned them by lot
Jos. 14. 2. and every one acquiesced in his part, dwelt in his own inheritance:
had they bin impatient of living any where but in the Metropolis, had they all
crowded to Jerusalem, all the rest of the land would have bin as desolate
before the capt^ty as it was after; none would havebin left but such as
Nabuzaradan permitted to stay Jer. 52. 16. some of the poor to dress the
vines, and to till the ground. And truly the same is like to be the fate of
this nation, if this humor goes on as it has begun; which may in time prove as
mischievous to the public as it daily is to private families.

20. But besides this it is yet farther to be considered, that where God gives
an estate, he as the supreme landlord affixes something of duty, lays a kind
of a rent charge upon it, expects it should maintain both hospitality and
charity; and sure both these are fittest to be don upon the place whence the
ability of them rises. All public taxes use to be levied where the estate lies,
and I know not why these which are Gods assesments upon it, should not be paid
there too. When a Gentleman's land becomes profitable unto him by the sweat and
labor of his poor neighbors and tenants, twill be a kind of muzling of the ox
1. Cor. 9. 9. if they never taste of the fruit of their pains, if they shall
never have the refreshment of a good meal, or an alms; which they are not very
like to meet with, if all the profits be sent up to maintain an equipage, and
keep up a parade in town. But alas it is often not only the annual profits that
go that way, not only the crop, but the soil too; those luxuries usually pray
upon the vitals, eat out the very heart of an estate, and many have stayed in
the Town 'till they have nothing left in the country to retire to.

21. Now where this proceeds from the wife, what account can she give to her
husband, whose easiness and indulgence (for that must be supposed in the case)
she has so abused? as also to her posterity and family who for her pride must
be brought low, reduced to a conditiod beneath their quality, because she
affected to live above it? But she will yet worse answer it to her self, on
whom she has brought not only the inconvenience but the guilt. It Is sure a
lofty mind will feelsmart enough of a fall, a diminution, much more an
indigence will be sufficiently grievous to a vain and lavish humor; yet here it
will farther have an additional sting, from the conscience that she ows it only
to her own pride and folly; a most imbittering consideration, and such as
advances the affliction beyond that of a more innocent poverty, as much as the
pain of an envenomed arrow exceeds that of another.

22. But the saddest reckoning of all is that which she is to make to God, who
has declared he hates robbery tho for a burnt offering to himself. How will he
then detest this robbery this impoverishing of the husband, when it is only to
make an oblation to vanity and excess? It should therefore be the care of all
wives to keep themselves from a guilt for which God and man, yea and themselves
also shall equally accuse them, and to keep their expenses within such limits,
that as bees suck but do not violate or deface the flowers, so they as joint
proprietaries with the husbands, may enjoy but not devour and destroy his
fortune.

23. I have now run through the duties to be perfrom'd unto the Husband,
wherein I have not used the exactness of a casuist in curiously anatomizing
every part, and showing all the most minute particulars reducible to each head.
I have only drawn out the greater lines, and insisted on those wherein
Wives-are most frequently deficient. I shall only add this caution, that
whatever is duty to the husband is equally so, be he good or ill, the Apostle
commands the subjection and fidelity, even to heathen Husbands, 1 Pet. 3. 12.
and it is not now their defect, either in Piety or Morality, that can absolve
the Wife. For, besides the inconvenience of making her duty precarious and
liable to be subtracted upon every pretense of demerit, she has by solemn
Contract renounced that liberty, and in her Marriage-vow taken him for better
for worse; and it is too late after Vows to make enquiry, Prove. 20. 25. to seek
to break loose from that bond of her Soul; and how uneasy soever the
perverseness of the husband may render it, he cannot thereby make it less, but
more rewardable by God: for what the Apostle speaks in the case of Servants, is
no less appliable to this, 1 Pet. 2. 19. for this is than worthy. if for
conscience toward Godye endure grief, suffering wrongfully. Whatever duty is
performed to Man with aspect on God, he owns as to himself; so that how
unworthy soever the husband may be the Wife cannot misplace her observance,
whilst she finally terminates it on that infinite Goodness and Majesty to whom
no love or obedience can be enough.

24. From this relation of a Wife, there ordinarily springs another, that of a
Mother, to which there belongs a distinct duty, which may bebranched into many
severals: but I shall at present only reduce them to two Heads Love and Care. A
Mother is a title of so much tenderness, that we find it borrowed by our common
Dialect to express the most exuberant kindness; nay, even in Sacred Style it
has the same use, and is often set as the highest example our weakness can
comprehend of the Divine Compassions. So that Nature seems sufficienly to have
secured the love of Mothers to their Children, without the aid of any positive
Law; yet we find this (as other Instincts of Nature) is sometimes violated, and
oftener perverted and applied to mistaken purposes: the first is by a defect of
Love; the other, by an imprudent excess of t: the defect does, I presume, more
rarely occur then the other; yet it does sometimes happen, and that either from
a morosesowrness of humor, or else from too vehement an intention on something
else.

25. Some Women have such a ruggedness of nature, that they can love nothing;
the ugly Passions of Anger and Envy, have, like Pharaoh's lean Kine, eat up the
more amiable, of Love and Joy. Plato was wont to advise crabbed austere
tempers, to Sacrifice to the Graces; and such as these had need have a great
deal of Christian Philosophy, to allay and sweeten their native Bitterness. But
there are others that are not void of the affection of Love, but it is
forestalled by some other Object, and so diverted from their Children; and it is
a little to be doubted, those Objects which so divert are none of the best, for
the Wisdom of God has disposed all duty into such a Harmony and Consent of
Parts, that one interferes not with another. If we love no prohibited thing,
all the regular Objects of our kindness will agree well enough, and one need
never supplant another. And indeed it is often observable, that those Women who
immoderatly love their own Plesures, do lest regard their Children; they look
on them as Clogs to keep them within doors, and think their adverting to them,
will hinder their free range abroad; those are turned off to the care of a
Nurse or Maid, whilst perhaps a Dog or a Monkey is thought worthy their own
attendance.

26. Plutarch relates it as a Sarcasm of Caesar's to some Foreigners whom he saw
(at Rome) strangely fond of such little Animals, that he asked them whether the
women in their Country had no children; thereby intimating, how unreasonable it
was for those that had, to bestow their Caresses on such Creatures. And surely
he would not have given a milder reprimand to some of our Ladies, who not only
please, but pride themselves in those little Brutes, show them to all comers,
when perhaps you may converse with them diverse days, before you shall, by any
mention of theirs, know that they have a Child.

27. To this defect of Love, many are apt to impute the Mothers transferring
the Nursing her Child to another. I am not forward to pronounce it, being loath
to involve so many as I then must in the imputation of unnaturalness; I rather
think it is taken up as a piece of State and Greatness; for no other motive,
but what is sounded in their Quality, could so universally prevail with all
that are of it. But sure this is one of the vain Punctillio's wherewith this Age
abounds; for whatever rank the Mother is of, the Child carries proportion to
it, and there is the same equality between the greatest Lady and her own Child,
as is between the meanest Beggar and hers: tho indeed if there were any
condescension in it, the aversions of that ought not to outweigh the impulses
of Nature, and the many advantages the Child may receive by taking its
nourishment whence it derived its substance. And therefore, tho I will not be
too positive in asserting the necessity, yet I confess, I cannot but look with
reverence upon those few Persons of Honor, who have broke through an
unreasonable Custom, and preferred the good of their Children before that
fantastic privilege of Greatness. And such must in all Justice be acknowledged
to have given a much better evidence of their love to their Children, then the
others.

28. There is in A. Gellius, in his fourteenth book so fine a Discourse on this
subject, where Favori^us the Philosopher is introduced, persuading a Noble
Lady, notwithstanding the usual Excuses, to Nurse her Child; that nothing
besides the length, could temt me to omit the transcribing it: unless happily
the little success, which a Noble Person of the same Sex here concerned I mean
the Countess of Lincoln, in the Ingenious book wrote by her, and called her
Nursery, be a sufficient ground of despairing to convince by any thing that can
be said. However let these delicate ones consider the severe words of the
Prophet, Lament. 4. 3. The sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to
their young ones, the daughter of my people is become cruel like the ostrich in
the Wilderness, who is hardened against her young ones, as tho they were not
hers: her labor is in vain without fear, because God has deprived her of
wisdom, neither has he imparted to her understanding, Job. 39. 16.

29. But as there may be a fault in the defect, so there may be also in the
excess of love. God is the only unlimited object of our love, toward all
others it is easy to become inordinate, and in no instance more then in this of
children. The love of a parent is descending, and all things move most
violently downwards, so that whereas that of children to their parents commonly
needs a spur, this of the parent often needs a bridle, especially that of the
Mother, which (by strength of feminine passion) does usually exceed the love of
the Father. Now to regulate this affection, she is to advert to these two
rules, first that she hurt not her self by it, and secondly that she hurt not
her children: of the first she is in danger if she suffer that humane affection
to swell beyond its banks, so as to come in any competition with the Divine,
this is to make an Idol of her child; for every thing is so to us, which
rivals the love of God in our hearts, and he who owns the title of a jealous
God, may be provoked as well by the bowing our souls to a living image, as the
prostration of our bodies to a dead. Accordingly we often see the effects of his
jealousy in this particular, the doting affection of the mother is frequently
punish with the untimely death of the Children, or if not with that it is many
times with a severer scourge: they live (but as it was foretold to Eli* 1 Samuel
2. 33.) to grieve her eyes and to consume her heart, to be ruinous to
themselves, and afflictions to their friends, and to force their unhappy
mothers to that sad acclamation Lu. 23. 29. Blessed are the wombs which bare not

30. And as this proves often true, when the dotage is general upon all the
children, so does oftener when it is more partial and fixed upon any one; that
darling which she makes the only object of her joy usually becomes that of her
sorrow. It is an ordinary infirmity in Parents toheap all their kindness upon
one, to the defrauding of the rest, and too many times upon very undue motives:
a little excelling in point of beauty turns the scales, when perhaps many more
solid excellencies are the counterpoise. And surely this is not only unjust but
irrational in the parent: for all peculiarity of favor in a superior, should be
dispensed either by way of reward or encouragement; and neither of those ends
can take place where it is only the outward form that is considered, for that
cannot be rewardable, to which the party has contributed nothing, and the
Psalmist will tell us that it is God* that has made us and not we our selves
Psalm. 100. 2. and as little room is there for the other end, that of
encouragement. For as our Savior tells us Ma. 6. none can add a cubit to his
statute, nor make one hair white or black: it is certain themselves cannot
really do either, tho by the aid of artificial hypocrisy they frequently
appear to do both; but those are arts which neither deserve nor want
encouragment, the natural beauty must have its increase from the same source
whence it derived its being: there is therefore no reasonable account to be
given why a child should be preferred for any such exterior excellency.

31. The only justifiable ground of partiality to children is their virtue, for
to that their own choice concurs, and so may entitle them to reward, and it is
also in their power to advance, and so encouragements are not cast away upon
them: nay the influences of those may extend farther, and provone a virtuous
emulation in the rest; but then the Mother must so manage it, as to evidence
that it is no inequallity in her own inclination, but merely the force of the
others desert, not the person but the goodness, that biasses her, and when
virtue is known to be the only ingratiating quality, they will at once learn
the way to become hers and Gods favorites. And unless it be upon this one
design, it is a very unsafe thing for a parent to make any partial
discrimination among children, which is sure to tempt the more neglected both
to repine at her, and envy her darlings; and oftentimes such seeds of rancor
have bin by that means sowed in children, as have bin hard to eradicate in
their riper years. Nor is the mifchief less which she does to her fondlings,
who besides that they are exposed to the malice of the rest, are usually spoild
by it, made insolent and untractable perhaps their whole lives after, for where
the mothers affection is unbridled, commonly the child's will is so too, her
fondness superseding that discipline and correction, which should, as the wise
man speaks; bow down its neck from its youth.

32. And the like may be said where the indulgence is more universal to all the
Children, which is in one respect worse then the partial, because it spoils
more, not one or two but all the brood. The doting love of a mother blinds her
eyes, that she cannot see their faults, manacles her hands that she cannot
chastise them, and so their vices are permitted to grow up with themselves: as
their joints knit and gather strength, so do their ill habits, 'till at last
they are confirmed into an obstinacy; so setting them in a perfect opposition
to to that pattern they should imitate, for as Christ's childhood increast in
wisdom, and the divine favor, Lu. 2. so do theirs in all those provoking
follies, which may avert both the love of God and man. And alas what recompense
can the little blandishments and caresses of a mother make her children, for
such important such inestimable mischiefs? So that she that will be really kind
must temper her indulgence with a prudent severity, or else she eminently
violates the second rule, by which she should regulate her love, and does that
to her children which Jocob feared from his father Genesis 27. brings a curse upon
them and not a blessing.

33. Indeed the best way of approving their love, is by well discharging the
other branch of their duty, that of care; without this all the most passionate
rapturesof kindness, are but an airy apparition, a fantastic scene, and will no
more advantage a child, then the whole shambles in picture can feed and nurish
it. Now this care is not a temporary, momentary duty, for some one critical
instant, but is to attend the child through the several stages of its minority,
viz. Infancy, childhood, and youth. The very first part of their infancy is a
season only for those cares which concern their bodies, providing for their
careful attendance, and all other things conducing to the strengthening their
constitutions, and laying a foundation for future health and vigor; which is
their interest not only upon a bodily, but upon an intellectual account, the
good temperature of the body being a great aid toward the free operations of
the mind. And therefore Socrates and other Philosophers much recommend to their
disciples the care of health, as that which freed the soul from many
encumbrances in its pursuit of knowledge: and it was the comprehensive prayer of
the Poet, that the Gods would grant a sound mind in a healthful Body.

34. But this health is not always the consequent of a very nice and tender
breeding but is very often overthrown by it; and if Ladies could but find in
their hearts to try it, they would, I doubt not, find, that the inuring them to
moderate hardships, would much more conduce to the establishing and fortifying
their constitutions.

35. Beyond all this, the care for their exterior is soon overtaken by a more
important one, that of their interior, in the timing of which there seems to be
a very common mistake in the World. We look upon the seven Years or infancy, as
the life merely of an Animal, to be spent only in the Entertainments of sense;
and as we use not to yoke Calves, or back young Colts, so we think our children
are for a while to be left at the same liberty; to have no restraint put on any
of their Passions. Nay many times we excite and foment them, teach Children to
be angry and envious, proud and sullen, as if we feared their Natural
Propensions to all these were too faint, and wanted the help of Institutions.
But surely this is a great and pernicions error, and this supposing Children to
be so long Brutes, is the way to make them so longer. The Patrons of Atheism
make it a most constant Topic in the disparagement of Religion, that it is owed
to the prejudices infused in the first infancy: it were to be wished, that this
Objection might so far be complied with, that the fear of God, the love of
Virtue, and hatred of Vice, might have the first possession of the Soul; and
they be made to moderate their Passions, as soon as they are in a capacity to
have them excited and engaged.

36. And truly, if we will observe it, we may see very early dawnings of reason
in Infants, which would sooner come to a brightness, if we would betimes set to
the scattering of those Passions which eclipse and darken it. A Child will
quickly be taughtto knowwhat pleases ordispleases a Parent, and by a very
little taste of reward or punishment, will learn to do the one, and avoid the
other: and when this is don, the Parent has gained the fundamental Point, That
of obedience; and may superstruct on it what she pleases, and then it is her
fault if the Child be not by easy and insensible degrees molded into a right
form. It Is at first all one to the Child, whether he name God in an Oath or in
his Prayers; but a Mother by punishing the one, and rewarding the other, will
quickly bring him to know there is a difference, and so proportionably in other
instances. As to the way of discipline, it may not be amiss to observe, that
when thereis occasion for severity, it is better to awe by actual punishment
then terror, and never to make use of infinite and invisible affrightments, the
beloved methods of Nurses and Servants, such as are the menacing of Sprights
and Mormo's, and leaving in the dark; that frequently make dastardly and
timorous impressions, which a long Age scarcely wears off.

37. A sober sense of things, is to be impressed by treatable means, and this
will be don with most ease, both to the Parent and Child, the sooner it is set
upon. The will of a tender Infant, is like its Limbs, supple and pliant, but
time confirms it, and custom hardens it; so it is a cruel Indulgence to the poor
Creature, to let it contract such habits, which must cost him so dear the
breaking; or dearer, i^ never broken. And if this early care be taken of the
Infancy, 'twill much ease the next part, that of the Childhood; for where the
Iron sinew in the neck is broken, where the native stubbornness is subdued so
early, the yokewill sit easy, all succeeding parts of discipline will comewith
more facility and profit. The care proper to this Age, is, the instructing in
all parts of useful Knowledge, of which, as the Divine for the excellency both
of its nature and its end, must be first ranked, so should it be first and most
industriously cultivated, and by all endearing methods impressed, not only on the
understanding, but the heart. Piety and Virtue should be propos dasthemost
amiable, as well as necessary things, and they would be invited not only to
know, but love them.

38. This part of Learning is equally competent to both Sexes, and therefore,
when the Sons are removed from under the Mothers tuition, and sent to more
public places of erudition, her Provinceis still the same as to her Daughter*
to whom she shouldnot only Preach, but exemp^ifieit inher own practice, no
Precepts penetrating so much into Youth, as those that are so enforced. And in
order to this, I should commend to Mothers, the being as much with them as they
can, and taking the personal Inspection of them; not to turn them off wholly to
Servants, no nor yet Governesses, but frequently themselves to examine how they
proceed in the speculative part of Knowledge, and no less frequently exhort them
to the practic.

39. Marcus Cato would not let his Son learn of his Slave, as disdaining a
Child should owe so considerable a benefit to so servile a person; and if he
thought the mere teaching of Grammar, too great a charge for such a one, surely
the whole Institution of Youth is a much greater, it being that on which, not
only a few outward Accomplishments, but even their Eternity depends. The great
Cornelia, Mother of the Gracchi, and Aurelia the Mother of Augustus, thought it
worth their pains to be Governesses. And the truth is, the Soul of a Child is a
little too precious a Trust to commit wholly to the diligence and care of a
mercinary servant; or if they happen not to want those Qualifications, yet it is
very possible they may Prudence, of which there is no small degree requisite to
the Instructing of Youth, too great a remissness or severity being equally
destructive in that affair. And indeed, besides this immediate, there are some
other collateral Benefits consequent to the Mothers performing that Office,
'twill bring her and her Children into an intimacy and conversation, give her
an acquaintance with their several Capacities and Humors; for want of which,
many Parents have erred in their Conduct, one sort of Treatment being not fit
for all Children; and the distinguishing that depending wholly on their
discerning their particular Tempers, which cannot well be don without-som
converse with them.

40. Besides by this they will be witnesses how they dispose their time, that
they neither lose it by doing nothing, nor yet mis-employ it by doing ill. And
indeed there is scarce any part of the parents care more important then this,
idlenessbeing no farther removed from vice, then a cause is from its immediate
effect. Therefore if children be permitted to trifle avay their time, they will
soon learn to trifle avay their innocence also: so that it is highly necessary
that they be provided of a succession of emploiments, that by the variety they
may be insensibly drawn on: nay methinkes, it might verywell be contrived that
their recreationsmight sometimes consist of such ingenious exercises, that they
may at once both play and learn.

41. There is yet another good effect of the mothers presence with the children
(which is perhaps no less material then any of the former) it is, that by this
associating them with her self, she prevents the danger of worse society.
Children if the parents allow them not their company, are necessarily cast upon
that of servants, than which there is scarce a greater danger that attends
youth; for besides that that low sort of converse debases their minds, makes
them mean and sordid, it often corrupts their manners too; children usually not
receiving more pestilent infusions from any then such. Servants that desire to
ingratiate themselves, and having no laudable quality whereby to do it, must
first endeavor to ingratiate vice to them, and then by their officious
ministries in that, have a ready way of introducing themselves into favor.
Perhaps this will be thought to concern only the masculin part of children, and
that the female who are commonly in a distinct appartment, and converse only
with their own sex, are more secure. But I would not advise mothers to depend
too much on that, for they are no surer that their daughters shall not converse
with men, nay men of the meaner sort too, then that their maids and attendants
shall notdo so; and when it is considered, how apt those are to entertain, if
not to invite amors, it is not very probable the rooms where they quarter
shallbe inaccessible to those they affect. And it were much safer for children
to be in the most public concourse of m^n, then to be witnesses and observers
of the private intrigues of such lovers; the memories of youth are very
tenacious, and if they once be tainted with any indecent thing will be apt to
recollect it, 'till at last perhaps they come to transcribe it. It Is therefore
in this respecta very useful part of the Mothers care, to make her self company
to her daughters, to prevent the dangers of a more unequal and infectious
converse.

42. But if this be useful in childhood, it is no less then necessary in the
next period of their time, when they arrive near the growth and age of women:
then indeed the mother should not only make them her companions, but her
friends, allow them such a kind, yet modest, freedom, that they may have a
complacence in her company, and not be temted to seek it among their inferiors;
that the belief of her kindness may supplant the pretensions of those meane^
sycophants, who by little flatteries endeavor to seru themselves into their good
opinion, and become their confidents; then which there is nothing more
mischievous, those private caballs that are held with such, serving only to
reader them mutinous against their parents: these family incendiaries like
those in the state and church, still inculcating the one grand principle of
Liberty, a word so charming to our depraved nature, and especially to youth,
that they should not be trusted with such Lectures. Besides those intimacies
are often introductions toworse; many scandalous amors and unequal matches
having had their rise from them. It should therefore be the business of Mothers
to prevent all such pernicious leagues, by preingaging them in more safe
familiarities, either with her self, or some other, of whose virtue she has
reason to be confident.

43. But the most infallible security against this and all other mischeifs is
the bringing them into an intimacy and conversation with their maker, by fixing
a true sense of Religion in their hearts, if that can be effectually don, twill
supersede all other expedients. She that duly considers she is allwaies in
Gods presence, will want no other inspector; nor will she much need monitors,
who attends to the advices of her own conscience. Neither will it only tend to
the securing her innocence but her reputation too; it being one part of the
Christian law to abstain from all appearance of evil 1 Thessalonians. 22. to do things
that are of good report Phil. 4. 8. so that piety is the (...) complete armor
to defend both their virtue and fame. And it is extremely necessary they should
be furnished with it, at this Age especially, when they do at first enter into
the World, which we may well look on as a taking the Field, considering how
many assaults they are there like to meet with; and if they go without this
Armature, they may, none knows how soon, be incurably wounded, of which there
want not many sad instances, some whereof might probably have bin prevented,
had the Parent taken care to have better fortified them.

44. And indeed it is not a little sad to see how much this their most important
concern is neglected. Many mothers who are nicely curious in other parts of
their daughters breeding, are utterly inconsiderate of this; they must have all
civil Accomplishments, but no Christian. Those are excluded out of the scheme
of Education, and by that means lie under the prejudice of being not only
unnecessary, but ungentile, below the regard of Persons of Quality. It Is much
to be feared, that this neglect toward their children, is founded in a previous
contemt of Piety in themselves, yet I suppose it is often increased by a little
Vanity they have of seeing them excel in some of those exterior qualities, which
may recommend them to the humor of the World upon the improving whereof they
are so intent, that more material things are overlookt; and when those are
acquired, the pride of showing them betrays them to other in onveniencies. The
mother often not only permits, but incites the daughter to the oportunities of
boasting her excellencies sends her so often abroad on that design, that at last
perhaps she cannot when she would keep her at home, as I believe too many have
found experimentally true. In a word, this Interval between Childhood and
Majority, is the most Critical point of a Woman's Life, and therefore should be
the most nicely and warily attended; and a mother had need summon not only all
her care and diligence, but her prudence too, well to discharge this part of
her Obligation.

45. I shall not insist more minutely upon Particulars: I have in the former
Section spoken somewhat of what it is fit these young Virgins should do and
avoid, and whatever by that, or by any more exact rule appears their interest
or duty; it is the Mothers to see it be not neglected by them: but where
Kindness alone will not prevail to employ their authority too, and by a discreet
mixture of each, secure their observance by both the tenures of Love and
Reverence. Yet I shall a little reflect upon one particular I mentioned before
I mean that of Marrying where they have aversion, which tho I there charged as
the crime of the Daughter* yet I must here say the Original, and more
inexcusable guilt is usually in the Parents, who are sometimes such Idolaters
to Wealth and Honor, that they Sacrifice their Children to them; a more
barbarous Immolationthen that to Moloch; for tho that were very inhumane, yet
it had this alleviation, that the pain was short: but a loathed Bed is at once
an acute and a lingering Torment, nay, not only so, but a temtation too; so that
it is a Tyranny of a most unlimited kind, extends its Effects even to Eternity;
and sure that Mother must have very petrified Bowels, have lost all Natural
Compassion, that can so impose on her Child.

46. I shall add no more concerning this relation of a Mother, but only one
short advice, That those who groan under the frustration of their hopes, whose
Children by any scandulous misbehavior become Objects of their shame and grief,
would soberly consider, whether it have not bin some way owing to themselves,
either by neglect in their Education, or by their own ill Example: It Is usually
one, and sometimes both. They that upon recollection can assure themselves it is
neither, may bear the Affliction with much the greater cheerfulness; but they
that cannot, I am sure ought to bear it with much the more patience and
submission, take it as Gods Lecture of Repentance, and look on their Childrens
faults as the product of their own. And because Satisfaction is an
indispensible part of Repentance, they are with their utmost industry to
endeavor the repairing those ruins they have made, by recalling those to Virtu,
who by their means have straied from it. It Is true, the errors of Education,
like a subtle Poison, do so mix with the Blood, so incorporate into the Humors
and Manners, that twill be very difficult to allay their Effects; and therefore
the less they are themselves able to do toward it, the more earnestly they
must importune a Higher Power. He who divided the Light from the Darkness, can
separate the Effects from the Causes; and as he restrained the natural property
of Fire, in the case of the three Children, Dan. 3. so He only can rescu
theirchildren from that destruction to which their negligence has exposed them.
But as to the influence their example has had, theymay do something toward the
redress of that, by setting them a new Copy, making their own change so
visible, so remarkable, that they mayhave the very same means of reclaiming,
which there was of seducing them. And this is a piece of Justice, which seems
to call aloud upon many Mothers. The irregularities of Youth could hardly have
grown to the present height, had they not received warmth and shelter from the
practice of their Elders, which does at once give encouragement and take of
restraints, the Mother loses not only her Authority, but her confidence to
admonish or reprove. With what face can she require that strict and severe
modesty of a young Girl, which she who should be a Matron will not practice? or
tie up the giddy wandering humor of Youth, within those bounds she thinks too
strait for her own? and how ready a retortion will even Scripture it self
afford for such an Imposer? Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy
self? Romans 2. 21. Let it therefore be the care of all Mothers to live a
perpetual Lecture to their Children, so to exemplify to them all Virtu and
Piety, that they may contribute something to their Spiritual, as well as their
natural life, that however they may at least deliver their own souls, and not
have their childrens guilt recoile upon them as the unhappy originalls of it.

47. The last relation of a married woman is that of a Mistress, the inspection
of the family being usually her Province; and tho she be not supreme ^here, yet
she is to improve her delegated authority to the advantage of all under it; and
her ^nore constant residence gives her more opportunities of it, then the
frequent avocations of the husband will perhaps allow him. St. Paul sets it as
the calling, and the indispensible duty of the Married women, that they guide
the house, 1 Timothy 5. 18. not thinking it a point of greatness to remit the
manage of all domestic concerns to a mercinary housekeeper. And indeed since
it has bin a fashionable thing for the Master to resign up his concerns to the
steward, and the Lady hers to the Governant, it has gone ill with most great
Families, whilst these Officers serve themselves instead of those who employ
them, raise fortunes on their Patrons ruins, and divide the spoil of the
family, the housekeeper pilfering within doors, and the Bailiff plundering
without.

48. Now to the well guiding of the house by the mistress of it, I know no
better or more comprehensive rule, then for her to endeavor to make all that
are hers to be Gods servants also; this will secure her of all those
intermedial qualifications in them in which her secular interest is concerned,
their own consciences being the best spy she can set upon them, as to their
truth and fidelity, and the best spur also to diligence and industry. But to
the making them such, there will need first instruction, and secondly
discipline. It is a necessary part of the rulers care to provide that none in
their family should want means of necessary instruction. I do not say that the
Mistress should set up for a catechist, or preacher; but that they take order
they should be taught by those who are qualified for the emploiment. And that
their furnishing them with knowledge, may not serve only to help them to a
greater number of stripes, Luke 12. 47. they are to give them the opportunities
of consecrating it to prayer and devotion, to that end to have public divine
offices in the family; and that not by starts or accidents (when a devouter
guest is to be entertained, and laid by when a profane) but daily and
regularly, that the hours of prayers may be fixed and constant as those of
meals, and (if it may possibly be) as much frequented; however that toward it
she give both precept and example.

49. A Christian family should be the Epitome of a Church; but alas how many
among us lie under a perpetual Interdict, and yet not from the usurpation of
any foreign power, but from the irreligion of the domestic. One may go into
diverse great families, and after some stay there, not be able to say that the
name of God was mentioned to any other purpose than that of blasphemy and
execration, nor a text of scripture unless in burlesque and profane Drolery.
And sure we need not wonder at the universal complaint that is now made of ill
servants, when we reflectupon this ill government of families. They that are
suffered wholly to forget their duties toward God, will not alwais remember it
toward man. Servants are not such Philosophers that upon the bare strength of
a few moral instincts they will be virtuous, and if by a customary neglect of
all things sacred, they are once taught to look at nothing beyond this world,
they will often find temtation enough here to discard their honesty, as the
most unthriving trade. And indeed when the awe of religion is quite taken off
from the vulgar, there will scarce any thing else be found to keep them within
any tolerable bounds; so that it is no less impolitic then profane to slacken
that reine.

50. But it is not only the interest, but the duty of all that have families,
to keep up the esteem and practice of Religion in them. 'Twas one of the
greatest endearments of Abraham to God, that he would command his household to
keep the way of the Lord Genesis 18. 19. And Joshua undertakes no less for the
piety of his household then himself, as for me and my house we will serve the
Lord Jos. 24 (...) And sure it is but reasonable, that where we our selves owe
an homage, we should make all our dependents acknowledge the same. Besides, it
is a justice in respect of them; for where we entertain a servant, we take the
whole person into our care and protection, and are salse to that undertaking if
we suffer his soul the most precious part of him to perish; and God who keeps
account even of his meanest creatures, will not patiently resent such a neglect
of those who bear his own Image, and were ransomed with as great a price as
their Masters were, for there is no respect of persons with God Ephesians. 6. 6.

51. But when Piety is planted in a family, 'twill soon wither, if it be not
kept in vigor by Discipline: nay indeed, to have servants seemingly devout in
the oratory, and yet really licentious out of it, is but to convert ones house
into a Theater, have a play of religion, and keep a set of actors only to
personate and represent it. It Is therefore necessary to inquire how they behave
themselves when they are off the stage, whether those hands which they elevate
in prayer, are at other times industriously applied to work; or those mouths
wherewith they there bless God, are not else where filled with oaths and
curses, scurrilities and revilings; in a word, whether that form of Godliness
be not designed in commutation for sobriety and honesty. Indeed the governors
of families ought to make a strict inspection into the ^anners, of their
servants, and where they find them good to affix some special mark of favor, by
which they may both be encouraged to persevere and others to begin; butwher
they discern them vicious there as eminently to discountenance, severely to
admonish them, and use all fit means for their reclaiming, and when that seems
hopeless, to dismiss them that they may not infect the rest. A little leven
says the Apostle leveneth the whole lump, Gal. 5. 9. and one ill servant (like
a perished tooth) will be apt to corrupt his fellows. It Is therefore the same in
families that it is in more public communities, where severity to the ill is
mercy and protection to the rest; and were houses thus early weeded of all idle
and vicious persons, they would not be so overgrown, nor degenerate into such
rude wildernesses, as many (nay I fear most) great families now are.

52. But as servants are not to be tolerated in the neglect of their duty, so
neither are they to be defeated of any of their dues. Masters are to give to
their servants that which is just and equal, Col. 4. 1. And sure, it is but just
and equal that they who are rational creatures should not be treated with the
rigor or contemt of brutes: a sufficient and decent provision, both in sickness
and in health, is a just debt to them, besides an exact performance of those
particular contracts upon which they were entertained. Laban had so much of
natural justice, that he would not take the advantage of Jacobs relation to
him, to make him serve him gr^tis, Because thou art my brother should thou
the^fore serve me for naught? tell me therefore what shall thy wages be? Genesis
29, 15. But alas now a days where servants have bin told, nay expressly
articled for their wages, it is with many no easy thing to get it: nay it is
thought by some Masters an insolence, a piece of ill manners to demand it; and
when they have worn out a servant, they either pay him not at all, or with the
same protraction and regret, which they do their Tailors for the old clothes
they have cast off. I fear there are many instances of this, especially among
great persons, it being a received mode with too many of them to pay no debts
to those who are too mean to contest with them. But however they may ruffle it
out with men, it will one day arraign them before God as most injurious
oppressors; there being no crime of that kind more frequently or severely
branded in Scripture, then this of detention of the wages of the servant and
hireling. Besides, this examples of injustice, wherein the servant is passive,
is often transcribed by him in acts of fraud and deceit, and he is apt to think
it but an equal retaliation, to break his trust where the Master breaks his
covenant, and when he once attemts to be his own play master, it is not to be
doubted but he will allow himself large use* for the forbearance of his wages;
so that the course is no less unprofitable to the Master then unjust and
dishonorable.

53. I am not sure it is alwaie's in the wives power to prevent this or any of
the former faults (...) the menage of the family. For her authority being but
subordinat, if the husband who is supreme suspend her power, he does by that
vacating her rule take off the duty consequent to it; so that what I have said
can be obligatory to none that are so impeded: but to those who either can do
it themselves, or persuade their husbands to it, the omission will be their
sin, all the profaneness and disorder of the family will be charged upon their
account, if it came by their default.

54. And this methinks is a consideration that may much mortify one usual piece
of vanity, I mean that of a multitude of servants. We shall all of us find
burden enough of our own personal miscarriages, and need not contrive to fetch
in more weight from others. And in families it is generally observable, that the
bigger they are the worse; vice gains boldness by numbers, is hatched up by the
warmth of a full society; and we daily see people venture upon those enormities
in consort and in a crowd. which they would not dare did they think they stood
single. Besides the wider the province is, the more difficult it is well to
administer it; and in a heap of servants many faults will escape undiscern^d,
especially, considering the common confederacy there is usually amongthem, for
the eluding of discipline: so that what the wiseman speaks of not desiring a
multitude of unprofitable children, I think may very well be applied to
servants, whose unprofitableness usually increases together with their number.
I have now run through these several obligations consequent to the married
state, wherein even upon this very cursory view, there appears so many
particulars, that if they were all duly attended, Ladies need not be much at a
loss how to entertain themselves; nor run abroad in a Romantic quest after
foreign divertisements, when they, have such variety of engagements at home.

SECT. III. Of Widows.
1. THE next state which can succeed to that of Marriage is Widowhood, which
tho it supersedes those duties which were terminated merely in the person of
the husband, yet it endears those which may be paid to his ashes. Love is
strong as death, Cant. 8. 6. and therefore when it is pure and genuine cannot
be extinguished by it, but burns like the funeral lamps of old, even in vaults
and charnel houses, the conjugal love transplanted into the grave (as into a
finer mould) improves into piety, and lays a kind of sacred obligation upon
the widow to perform all offices of respect and kindness which his Remains are
capable of.

2. Now those Remains are of three sorts, his body his memory, and his
children. The most proper expession of her love to the first, is in giving it
an honorable Enterrment; I mean not such as may vye with the Poland
extravagance (of which it is observed that two or three near succeeding
funerals ruin the family) but prudently proportioned to his quality and
fortune, so that her zeal to his Corpse may not injure a nobler relic of him,
his Children. And this decency is a much better instance of her kindness, then
all those Tragical Furies wherewith some. Women seem transported toward their
dead Husbands, those frantic Embraces and caresses of a Carcass, which betray
a little too much the sensuality of their Love. And it is something observable,
that those vehement Passions quickly exhaust themselves, and by a kind of
Sympathetic Efficacy as the Body (on which their assection was fixed) moulders,
so does that also, nay often it attends not those lesurely degrees of
dissolution, but by a more precipitate motion seems rather to vanish then
consume.

3. The more valuable Kindness therefore, is that to his Memory, endeavoring to
embalm that, keep it from perishing; and by this innocent Magic (as the
Egyptians were wont by a more guilty) she may converse with the dead, represent
him so to her own thoughts, that his life may still be repeated to her: and as
in a broken Mirror the refraction multiplies the Images, so by his dissolution
every hour presents distinct Ideas of him; so that she sees him the oftener, for
his being hid from her eyes But as they use not to Embalm without Odors, so she
is not only to preserve, but perfume his Memory, render it as fragrant as she
can; not only to her self but others; by reviving the remembrance of whatever
was praiseworthy in him, vindicating him from all calumnies and false
accusations, and stifling (or allaying) even true ones as much as she can. And
indeed, a widow can no way better provide for her own honor, then by this
tenderness of her Husbands.

4. Yet there is another expression of it, inferior to none of the former, and
that is, the setting such a valu upon her relation to him, as to do nothing
unworthy of it. 'Twas the dying charge of Augustus to his Wife Livia, Behave
thy self well, and remember our Marriage. And she who has bin Wife to a Person
of Honor, must so remember it as not to do any thing below her self, or which
he (could he have foreseen it) should justly have bin ashamed of.

5. The last Tribute she can pay him is in his children. These he leaves as his
Proxies to receive the kindness of which himself is incapable; so that the
Children of a Widow may claim a double portion of the Mothers love, one upon
their Native right, as hers; the other, as a bequest in right of their dead
Father. And indeed, since she is to supply the place of both Parents, it is but
necessary she should put on the affections of both, and to the tenderness of a
Mother, add the care and conduct of a Father. First, in a sedulous care of
their Education: and next, in the prudent managery of their Fortu^e; an order
that is sometimes unhappily inverted, and Mothers are so concerned to have the
Estate prosper in their tuition, that the Children cannot; whilst (by an
unseasonable frugality) to save a little expense, they deny them the advantages
of an Ingenious and Gentile Breeding, swell their Estates perhaps to a vast
bulk, but so contract and narrow their minds, that they know not how to dispose
them to any real benefit of themselves or others. And this is one of the most
pernicious Parsimonies imaginable, a Mother by this seems to adopt the Fortune,
and abdicate the Child, who is only made the Beast tobear those loads of Wealth
she will lay on, and which she evidently owns as the greatest Tresure, since in
tenderness to that she neglects him.

6. Yet sometimes the same Effect springs from another Cause, and Children are
ill bred, not because the Mother grudges the charge, but out of a Feminine
fondness, which permits her not to part with them to the proper places for
their education; like Jacob to Benjamin, her Soul is so bound up in them, that
she cannot lend them a while even to their own most necessary concerns; and
this, tho not so ignoble a motive as the other, is of no less mischief, at
least to her Sons, who being by it confined to home, are consequently condemned
to be poisoned (if with nothing else, yet) with the flatteries of Servants and
Tenants, who think those the best expedient to secure their own station. And
with these the young Master or Landlord is so blown up, that as if his Manors
were the confines of the World, he can look at nothingbeyond them; so that when
at last he breaks loose from his Mothers arms, and comes abroad, he expects
scarce to find his Equals, much less his Betters; thinks he is still to receive
the samefawning Adorations which he was used to at home: and being possessed with
this insolent expectation, he will scarce be undeceived, but at the price of
many Affronts, nay, perhaps he may buy his experience with the loss of his
life; by his ill manners draw on a Quarrel, wherein he finally perishes. That
this is no impossible Supposition, some unhappy Mothers have found to their
unspeakable affliction.

7. It Is not to be denied, but there are also dangers consequent to the
breeding Children abroad, Vice having insinuated it self even into the places
of Erudition, and having not only as many, but the very same Academies with
Virtue and Learning; so that the extreme depravation of the times new states the
Question, and we are not to consider which is best, but which is theleast ill
disposure of Children. And in that competition sure the home Education will be
cast; for there they may suck in all the Venom, and nothing of the Antidote;
they will not only be taught base things, but (as I before observed) by the
basest Tutors, such as will add all the mostsordid circumstances to the
improving of a Crime. Whereas abroad they are first not like to meet with any
whose interest is so much to make them Vicious: And secondly, they may (as ill
as the world is) meet with many who may give them both Precepts and Examples of
a better kind. Besides, the Discipline used in those Communities makes them
know themselves; and the various sorts of Learning they may acquire, will not
only prove usefuldivertisement (the wantofwhich is the great spring of
mischief) but will, if rightly applied, furnish them with Ingenious and
Virtuous principles, such as may set them above all vile and ignoble practices.
So that there seems a conspiration of motives to wrest the child from the
relucting mother, and to persuade her for a while to deny her self that desire
of her eyes, that so he may at last answer the more rational desire of her
heart.

8. As to the other part of her obligation, the managing of their fortune,
there is the same rule for her as for all other persons that have a Trust, viz.
to do as for themselves; that is, with the same care and diligence (if not a
greater) as in her own peculiar concern. I do not say that she shall confound
the property, and make it indeed her own by applying it to her particular use.
A thing I fear which is too often don, especially by the gayer sort of widows,
who to keep up their own equipage, do sometimes incroach upon their sons
peculiar, and I wish even that (tho bad enough) were the only case wherein it
were don. But it is sometimes to make her a better prize to a second husband:
she goes into another family, and as if she were a Colony sent out by her son,
he must pay for the planting her there; indeed the often repeating this injury,
has advanced it now into a custom, and the management of the minors estate is
reckoned on as part of the widows fortune. But I confess I see not what there
is in the title of a mother, that can legitimate her defrauding her child; it
rather envenoms the crime and adds unnaturalness to deceit. Besides it is a
preposterous sort of guilt. Orphans and Widows are in Scripture linked together
as objects of Gods and good men's pity, and of ill men's oppression, and how ill
alas does civil war look among fellow sufferers; the Widow to injure the
orphan is like that uncouth oppression Solomon speaks of Prove. 28. 3. Apoor man
that oppresses the poor, is like a sweeping rain which leaves no food. Such
kind of rapins are as excessive in their degree as prodigious in their kind,
and I believe there are many instances of sons, who have suffered more by the
guardianship of their Mothers, then they could probably have don by the outrage
of Strangers.

9. How well such Mothers answer their obligations to their dead Husbands, I
must leave it to their own consciences to discuss: I shall only offer them
these steps of gradation by which to proceed. First, that injustice of any sort
is a great sin; secondly that when it is in a matter of trust it is complicated
with treachery also, thirdly that of all trusts those to the dead have allwaies
bin esteemed the most sacred: if they can find any allay to these by the two
remaining circumstances, that it is the trust of a husband, and the interest of a
child, I shall confess them very subtle casuists.

10. I have hitherto spoke of what the widow ows to her dead husband; but there
is also somewhat of peculiar obligation in relation to her self. God who has
pla^d us in this World to pursue the interests of a better, directs all the
signal acts of his providence to that end, and intends we should so interpret
them. So that every great change that occurs, is design^d either to recall us
from a wrong way, or to quicken our pace in the right, and a widow may more
then conjecture, that when God takes away the mate of her bosom, reduces her
to a solitude, he does by it sound a retreat from the lighter jollities and
gaieties of the world. And as in compliance with civil custom she immures her
self, sits in darkness for a while; so she should put on a more retired temper
of mind, a more strict and severe behavior, and that not to be cast off with
her veil, but to be the constant dress of her widowhood. Indeed that state as
it requires a great sobriety and piety, so it affords many advantages toward
it: the Apostle tells us, that she who is married cares for the things of the
World how she may please her husband 1 Cor 7. 34. There are many things which
are but the due compliances of a wife, which yet are great avocations, and
interrupters of a strict devotion; when she is manumitted, from that
subjection, when she has less of Martha's care of serving, she is then at
liberty to chose Mary's part, Luke 10. 42. She has her time and her fortune at
her own command, and consequently may much more abound in the works both of
piety and charity. We find God himself retrench the wive's power of binding her
own soul Number. 30. Her vows were totally insignificant without her husbands
confirmation; but the widow might devote her self to what degree she pleased,
her piety has no restraint from any other inconsistent obligation, but may
swell as high as it can. Those hours which were before her husbands right seem
now to devolve on God the grand proprietor of our time: that discourse and free
converse wherewith she entertained him, she may now convert into colloquies and
spiritual intercourse with her maker; and that love which was only human
before, by the change of its object acquires a sublimity, is exalted into
divine; from loial duty and conjugal affection becomes the eternal work and
happiness of Angels, the ardor of a Cherubim. Thus may she in a ^gher sense
verify Sampsons riddle, Judge. 14. fetch honey out of a carcass, make her
husbands Ashes (like those of the heifer under the law, Heb. 9. 13.) her
Purification; his corruption may help to put on incorruption, and her loss of a
temporary comfort may instate her in an eternal.

11. And as her self so her fortune may also be consecrated; and indeed if she
be, that will also If she have made an escape out of Egypt, there shall not a
hoof be left behind her, Exodus 10. 26. No part of her possessions will be
assigned to vanity and exccss. She who has really devoted her self to Piety,
fasted and prayed with Anna Luke 2. 37. will also be full of good works and
alms-deeds with Tabitha, Act. 9. 36. Thus she may be a mother when she ceases
to bear; and tho she no more increase one family, she may support many; and
certainly the fertility of the womb, is not so valuable as this of the bowels.
Fruitfulness can be but a happiness, Compassion is a virtue. Nay indeed it is a
greater and more certain happiness; a child is not brought forth but with pangs
and anguish, but a work of mercy is produced not only with ease, but delight.
Besides, she that bears a Child, knows not whether it may prove a Blessing or a
curse; but Charity gives certain title to a Blessing, and engages the most
solvent Paymaster, even God himself, who owns all such disbursments as a loan
to him. He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord: and that which
he has given will he pay him again, Prove. 19. 17.

12. There was in the Primitive Times an Ecclesiastical Order of Widows, which
St. Paul mentions 1 Timothy 5. whose whole Ministry was devoted to Charity. They
were indeed of the poorer sort, fit rather to receive then give Alms; yet the
less they could do with their Purses, the more was required of their Persons,
the humbler offices of washing the Saints feet, the careful task of bringing up
children, and a diligent attendance on every good work. And sure there is
parity of Reason, that those who upon the score of their Wealth, exemt
themselves from those Laborious Services, should commute for it by more Liberal
Alms. In the warmth and zeal of Christianity, Women of the higest Quality
performed both sorts of Charity, forgot their Greatness in their
condescensions, yet assumed it again in their bounty; founded Hospitals, and
yet with a labor of love, as the Apostle styles it, Heb. 6. 10. disdained not
sometimes to serve in them. But these are Examples not like to be transcribed
in our days, Greatness is now grown to such an unweildiness, that itcannot
stoop tho to the most Christian Offices, and yet can as little soar up in any
Munificent Charities: it stands like Nebuchadnezzars Golden Image, a vast Bulk
only to be adored.

13. Now certainly, if any Women be qualified to avert this reproach, it must be
the Dowagers of great Families and Fortunes, they have none to control their
Visits to the sick and afflicted, or to resent a disparagement from their
humility, neither have they an account to give of their Possessions to any but
God and themselves; to him sure they can bring none so like to procure them the
Eulogy of well don thou good and faithful servant, Matthew. 25. 21. as a
Catalogue of their Alms. Nor indeed can they any other way dispose their
Fortune so much to their own contentment; they may indeed cloy and satiate
their senses, make provision for the flesh; but that no way satisfies their
reason, much less their Conscience. The Soul, which is the superior part; is
quite left out in that distribution, nothing is communicated to it but the
guilt of those dear bought Excesses. The only way it has to be a sharer in
their Wealth, is by a charitable dispensing. The Poor are its Proxies as well
as Gods, and tho in all other respects we may say to the Soul, as the Psalmist
does to God, Ps. 16. 2. my goods extend not to thee: yet by this way, it
becomes not only a partaker, but the chief proprietor, and all is laid out for
its use. The harboring an outcast, builds it an everlasting habitation, Lu.
16. 9. The clothing the naked, arrays it in pure white linen, Rev. 19. 8. and
the feeding the hungry, makes it a guest at the supper of the Lamb. v. 8. nay,
it gains not only an indefeisible title to these happy Reversions, but it has a
great deal in present possession, a huge rational Complacence in the right
applying of Wealth, and doing that with it for which 'twas designed; yet more,
it gives a sensitive delight, nothing being more agreeable to human nature,
then the doing good to its own kind. A seasonable Alms leaves a greater
exultation and transport in the Giver, then it can ordinarily raise in the
Receiver; so exemplifying the Maxim of our Blessed Lord, that it is a more
blessed thing to give then to receive, Act. 20. 35. This indeed is a way to
elude the severe denuntiation of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 6. A widow that lives
in this pleasure, is not dead whilst she lives; but on the contrary, shall
live when she dies; when she resigns her Breath, shall improve her being; the
Prayers of the Poor, like a benign gale, shall assist her flight to the Region
of Bliss; and she who has here cherished the afflicted Members, shall there be
indissolubly united to their Glorious Head.

14. And now methinks Widow-hood, under this aspect, is quite transformed, is
not so forlorn; so desolate an estate as it is usually esteemed. And would all
Widows use but this expedient, thus devote themselves to Piety and Charity, it
would* like the healing Tree, Exodus 15. 25. sweeten the Waters of Marah, render
the condition not only supportable; but pleasant; and they would not need to
make: such affrighted; such disadvantageous escapes, as many do, from it. It Is
true, the Apostle's affirmation is unquestionable, that the wife, when her
husband is dead, is at liberty to be married to whom she will, 1 Cor. 7. 39.
But the advice he subjoins is authentic too, she is happier if she so-abide.
She that may solace her self in the Society, in the Love of her God, makes an
ignoble descent to Human Embraces; she that may purchase Heaven with her
Wealth, buys a very dear Bargain of the best Husband on Earth; nay indeed, upon
a mere secular account, it seems not very prudent to relinquish both Liberty
and Property, to Espouse at the best a Subjection, but perhaps a Slavery; it a
little resembles the mad Frolicks of freed Gallyslaves, who play away their
Liberty as soon as they regain it.

15. Marriage is so great an Adventure, that once seems enough for the whole
life; for whether they have bin prosperous or adverse in the first, it does
almost discourage a second attemt. She that has had a good Husband, may be
supposed to have his Idea so fixed in her Heart, that it will be hard to
introduce any new Form: nay farther, she may very reasonably doubt, that in
this commond earth of Virtu, two good Husbands will scarce fall to one Woman's
share, and an ill one will become more intolerable to her, by the reflections
she will be apt to make on the better. On the other side, if she have had a
bad, the smart sure cannot but remain after the rod is taken off; the memory of
what she has suffered should, me thinks, be a competent caution against new
adventures. Yet experience shows us that women (tho the weaker sex) have
commonly fortitude enough to encounter and baffle all these considerations. It
is not therefore to be expected that many will by any thing that has or can be
said be diverted from remarrying: and indeed she that does not preserve her
widowhood upon the accounts forementioned, may perhaps better relinquish it.
St Paul we see advises that those Widows who found no better emploiment then
going from house to house, that grew by their vacancy to be tatlers and busy
bodies 1 Timothy 5. 13. should marry again; it being the best way to fix these
wandering planets, to find them business of their own at home, that so they may
not ramble abroad to intermeddle with that of others. And the truth is they
that cannot brook the retiredness and gravity which becomes a widow, had better
put themselves in a state that less requires it; and, if they resolve not to
conform their minds to their condition, to bring their condition to their
minds; but in the doing that there will be some cautions very necessary to be
observed. I shall reduce them to two, the one relating to the times, the other
to the equality of the match.

16. First in respect of time, common decency requires that there be a
considerable intervall between the parting with one husband and the choosing
another, This has bin so much observed by nations that were at all civilized,
that find Numa made it a law, that no widow should marry under 10. months, and
if any did she was to sacrifice as for the expiation of a crime; and this
continued in force many ages after, in so much that when upon reasons of State
Augustus found it useful to marry his sister Octavia to Antonius, nothing less
then a decree of the Senate could license the anticipating the time; so zealous
observers were they of this point of Civility, that they thought the whole
state was concerned in the violation. It Is true we have no law in the case, but
we have somewhat of custom, I know not how long we shall have, since the
frequent breaches of it threaten quite to cancel it: yet a woman that is ten
er of her honor will scarce give her example toward the rescinding it. The
wounds of grief are seldom healed by any hand but that of time, and therefore
too sudden a cure shows the hurt pierced not deep; and she that can make her
mourning veil an optic to draw a new lover nearer to her sight, gives cause to
suspect the sables were all without.

17. The next thing considerable is the equality of the match. Marriage is so
close a link, that to have it easy it is good to have the parties as even
proportioned as may be. And firstin respect of quality and fortune, it is to be
wished there should be no eminent disproportion. Those that meet most upon a
level, are least subject to those upbraidings that often attend a great descent
of either party; it is therefore no prudent motive, by which some Widows are
swai'd, who marry only for a great title; who often do not meet with so much of
obeisance from strangers, as they do with contemt from their husbands and his
relations. There have bin many examples of Lords, who have used rich, but
inferior, widows like spunges, squeezed them to fill themselves again only with
the air of a big name. On the other side for a woman to marry very meanly and
too much below her self is rather worse; those kind of matches are ordinarily
made in a transport of passion, and when that abates and leaves her to sober
reflections, she will probably be so angry with her self, that she will scarce
be well pleased with her husband. A state of subjection is a little sweetened by
the worth and dignity of the ruler: for as it is more honorable, so it is also
more easy; the serviler spirits being of all others the most imperious in
command. And sure 'twill not a little grate a woman of honor, to think she has
made such a one her Master, who perhaps would before have thought it a
preferment to have bin her servant. Nay farther, such marriages have commonly
an ill reflection on the modesty of the Woman, it being usually presumed that
where the distance was so great, as to discourage such an attemt on his part,
there was some invitation on hers. So that upon all accounts she is very
forlorn who thus disposes of her self: yet it is too well known such matches
have often bin made, and the same levity and inconsideration may betray others to
it; and therefore it is their concern well to ballast their minds and to provide
that their passion, never get the ascendant over their reason.

18. Another very necessary equality is that of their judgment as to Religion.
I do not mean that they are to catechize each other as to every minute
speculative point; but that they be of the same profession, so as to join
together in the worship of God. It is sure very uncomfortable that those who
have so closely combined all their other interests, should be disunited in the
greatest; that one Church cannot hold them, whom one house, one bed does; and
that religion which is in it self the most unitingthing, should be the only
disagreement between them. I know it is often made a compact in such matches, that
neither shall impose their opinion upon the other: yet I doubt it is seldom
kept, unless it be by those whose carelessness of all religion abates their zeal
to any one. But where they have any earnestness in their way, especially where
one party thinks the other in a damnable error, twill scarce be possible to
refrain endeavoring to reduce them; and that endeavor begets disputes, those
disputes heats, those heats disgusts, and those disgusts perhaps end in
aversion; so that at last their affections grow as unreconcilable as their
opinions, and their religious jars draw on domestic. Besides if none of these
personal debates happen, yet the education of the children will be matter of
dispute; the one parent will still be countermining the other, each seeking to
recover the others proselytes. Nay it introduces faction into the inferior
parts of the family too: the servants, according to their different persuasions
bandy into leagues and parties; so that it endangers, if not utterly destroies
all concord in families: and all this train of mischiefs, should methinks be a
competent prejudice against such matches.

19. There is yet a third particular wherein any great disproportion is much to
be avoided, and that is in Years. The humors of youth and age differ so widely,
that there had need be a great deal of skill to compose the discord into a
harmony. When a young woman marries an old man, there are commonly jealousies
on the one part and loathings on the other; and if there be not an eminent
degree of discretion in one or both, there will be perpetual disagreements. But
this is a case that does not often happen among those I now speak to: for tho
the avarice of Parents sometimes forces maids upon such matches, yet widows who
are their own choosers seldom make such elections. The inequality among them
commonly falls on the other side, and old women marry young men. Indeed any
marriage is in such a folly and dotage, they who must suddenly make their beds
in the dust, what should they think of a nuptial couch? And to such the answer
of the Philosopher is apposite, who being demanded what was the fittest time
for marrying, replied, For the young not yet, for the old not at all.

20. But this dotage becomes perfect frenzy and madness when they choose young
husbands: this is an accumulation of absurdities and contradictions. The
husband and the Wife are but one person; and yet at once young and old, fresh
and withered. It Is a reversing the decrees of nature, and therefore 'twas no
ill answer which Dionysius the Tyrant gave his mother, who in her age designed
such a match, that tho by his regal power he could dispense with positive laws,
yet he could not abrogate those of nature; or make it fit for her an old woman
to marry a young man. It Is indeed an inversion of seasons, a confounding the
Calendar, making a mungrel month of May and December: and the conjunction
proves as fatal as it is prodigious; it being scarce ever seen that such a
match proves tolerably happy. And indeed it is not imaginable how it should, for
first it is to be presumed she that marries so must marry meanly, no young man
who does not need her fortune will take her person. For tho some have the humor
to give great rates for inanimate antiquities, yet none will take the living
gratis. Next she never misses to be hated by him she marries: he looks on her
as his rack and torment, thinks himself under the lingering torture devis d by
Mezentius, a living body tied to a dead. Nor must she think to cure this by any
the little adulteries of art: she may buy beauty, and yet can never make it her
own; may paint, yet never be fair. It Is like enameling a mud-wall, the
coursness of the ground will spoil the varnish; and the greatest exquisitness
of dress serves but to illustrate her native blemishes. So that all she gains
by this is to make him scorn as well as abhor her.

21. Indeed there is nothing can be more ridiculous, then an old Woman gaily
set out; and it was not unaptly said of Diogenes to such a one, If this decking
be for the living, you are deceived; if for the dead, make have to them: and I
doubt many young husbands will be ready to say as much. Naybecause death comes
not quick enough to part them, there is few have patience to attend its
loitering pace: the man bids adieu to the Wife tho not to her fortune, takes
that to maintain his luxuries else where, allows her some little annuity, and
makes her a pensioner to her own estate. So that he has his design, but she
none of hers: he married for her fortune, and he has it; she for his person,
and has it not: and which is worse buies her defeat with the loss of all; he
commonly leaving her as emty of money as he found her of wit.

22. And truly this is a condition deplorable enough, and yet usually fails
even of that comfort which is the last reserve of the miserable, I mean Pity.
It Is the Wise man's question, Eccles. 12. 13. Who will pity a charmer that is
bitten with a Serpent? he might have presumed less on his skill, and kept
himself at a safer distance; and s^re the like may be said of her. Alas, what
are her feeble charms, that she should expect by them to fix the giddy
appetites of youth? And since she could so presume without sense, none will
regret that she could be convinced by smart. Besides, this is a case wherein
there have bin a multitude of unhappy Presidents which might have cautioned
her. He that accidentally falls down an undiscovered precipice is
compassionated for his disaster; but he that stands a great while on the brink
of it, looks down and sees the bottom strewn with the mangled carcasses of
many that have thence fallen; if he shall deliberately cast himself into their
company, the blame quite extinguishes the pity; he may astonish, but not melt
the beholders. And truly she who casts her self away in such a match, betraies
not less but more wilfullness. How many ruins of unhappy women present
themselves to her, like the wracks of old vessels, all split upon this rock?
And if she will needs steer her course purposely to do the same, none ought to
grudg her the shipwreck she so courts.

23 Nor has she only this negative discomfor to be deprived of pity, but she is
loaded with censures and reproach. The World is apt enough to malicious errors,
to fix blame where there is none, but it is seldom guilty of the charitative,
does not overlook the smallest appearance of evil, but generally puts the worst
construction on any act, that it will with any probability bear; and according
to that mesure women in this condition can expect no very mild descant on them.
Indeed such matches are so destitute of any rational Plea, that it is hard to
derive them from any other motive then the sensitive. What the common
conjectures are in that case, is as needless as it is unhansom to declare: I
will not say how true they are, but if they be, it adds another reason to the
former, why such marriages are so improsperous. All distortions in Nature are
usually ominous; and sure such preternatural heats in Age, may very well be
reckond'd as dismal Presages, and very certain ones too, since they create the
ruin they foretell. And truly it is not only just, but convenient, that such
motives should be attended with such Consequences; that the Bitterness of the
one may occasion some reflection on the Sordidness of the other. It Is but
kindly, that such an Alhallontide Spring should meet with Frosts, and the
unplesantness of the event chastise the ugliness of the Design; and therefore I
think those that are conscious of the one, should be so far from murmuring,
that they should be very thankful for the other; think ^t Gods discipline to
bring them again to their Wits, and not repine at that smart which themselves
have made necessary.

24. And now I wish all the Ancienter Widows, would seriously weigh how much
it is their Interest not to sever those two Epithets; that of Ancient they
cannot put off, it daily grows upon them; and that of Widow is sure a more
proprotionable adjunct to it, then that of Wife; especially when it is to one
to whom her Age might have made her Mother. There is a Veneration due to Age,
if it be such as disowns not it self: The hoary head, says Solomon, is a crown
of glory if it be found in the way of righteousness, Prove. 16. 32. but when it
will mix it self with Youth, it is disclaimed by both, becomes the shame of the
Old, and the scorn of the Young. What a strange fury is it then which possesses
such Women, that when they may dispose their Fortunes to those advantageous
Designs before mentioned, they should only buy with them, so undecent, so
ridiculous a slavery? that when they may keep up the reputation of Modesty and
Prudence, they should expose themselves to an Universal Contemt for the want of
both; and that they who might have had a reverence, put themselves even out of
the capacity of bare compassion.

25. This is so high a Frenzy, as sure cannot happen in an instant; it must
have some preparatory degrees, some rooting in the constitution and habit of
the mind: Such Widows have sure some lightness of humor, before they can be so
giddy in their Brains, and therefore those that will secure themselves from the
Effect, must substract the Cause; if they will still be wishing themselves
young, it is odds but within a while they will persuade themselves they are so.
Let them therefore content them selves to be old, and as Fashions are varied
with Times, so let them put on the Ornaments proper to their Season; which are
Piety, Gravity, and Prudence. These will be not only their ornament, but their
Armor too; this will gain them such a Reverence, that will make it as
improbable they should be assaulted, as impossible they should assault. For I
think one may safely say, It is the want of one or all of these, which betraies
Women to such Marriages.

26. And indeed it may be a matter of Caution, even to the younger Widows, not
to let themselves too much loose to a light frolic humor, which perhaps they
will not be able to put off, when it is most necessary they should. It will not
much invite a sober Man to marry them while they are young; and if it continue
with them till they are old, it may (as natural Motions use) grow more violent
toward its end: precipitate them into that ruinous Folly we have before
considered. Yet, should they happen to escape that, should it not force them
from their Widow-hood, it will sure very ill agree with it: for how
preposterous is it for an Old Woman to delight in Gauds and Trifles such as
were fitter to entertain her gran-children? to read Romances with spectacles,
and be at Masks and Dancings, when she is fit only to act the Antics? These are
contradictions to Nature: the tearing off her Marks, and where she has writ
fifty or sixty, tolessen (beyond the proportionof the unjust Steward) and write
sixteen. And those who thus manage their widow-hood, have more reason to bewail
it at last then at first, as having more experimentally found the mischif of
being left too their own guidance. It will therefore concern them all to put
themselves under a safer Conduct, by an^ assiduous Devotion to render themselves
up to the leading of the One infallible Guide, who, if he be not a covering of
the eyes, Genesis 20. 16. to preclude all second Choices, may yet be a light to
them for discerning who are fit to be chosen; that if they see fit to use their
liberty and Marry, they may yet take the Apostles restriction with it, 1 Cor.
7. 40. that it be only in the Lord. Upon such sober Motives, and with such due
Circumstances as may approve it to Him, and render it capable of his
Benediction.

The Close.
1. I HAVE now gone through both Parts of the proposed Method. The former has
presented those Qualifications which are equally necessary to every Woman:
These, as a Root, send sap and vigor to the distinct Branches, animate and
impregnate the several successive States through which she is to pass. He that
has pure Ore or Bullion, maycast it intowhat Form best fits his use, nay may
translate it from one to another; and she who has that Mine of Virtues, may
furnish out any Condition; her being good in an absolute consideration, will
certainly make her so in a relative. On the other side, she who has not such a
Stock, cannot keep up the Honor of any State; like corrupted Liquor, emty it
from one Vessel to another, it still infects and contaminates all. And this is
the cause thatWomen are alike complained of under all Forms, because so many
want this Fundamental Virtue: were there more good Women, there would be more
modest Virgins, loyal and obedient Wives, and sober Widows.

2. I must therefore entreat those who will look on this Tract, not only to
single out that part which bears their own Inscription, but that they think
themselves no less concerned in that which relates indefinitely to their Sex;
endeavor to possess themselves of those excellencies which should be as
universal as their kind: and when they are so stored with Matter, they may
leave Providence to diversifie the Shape, and to assign them their Scene of
Action.

3. And now would God it were as easy to persuade, as it is to propose; and
that this Discourse may not be taken only as a Gazet for its newness, and
discarded as soon as read; but that it may at least advance to the honor of an
Almanac, be allowed one Year ere it be out of date: and in that time, if
frequently and seriously consulted, it may perhaps awaken some Ladies from
their stupid Dreams, convince them that they were sent into theWorld for nobler
purposes, then only to make a little Glittering in it; like a Comet, to give a
blaze, and then disappear. And truly, if it may Operate but so far as to give
them an effective sense of that, I shall think it has don them a considerable
Service: They may, I am sure, from that Principle, deduce all necessary
Consequences, and I wish they would but take the pains to draw the Corollaries;
for those Inductions they make to themselves, would be much more efficacious
then those which are drawn to their hands. Propriety is a great endearment, we
love to be Proselytes to our selves; and People often resist others Reasons, who
would upon mere partiality pay reverence to their own.

4. But besides this, there would be another Advantage, if they could be but
got to a custom of considering, by it they might insensibly undermine the grand
Instrument of their ruin. That careless incogitancy, so remarkably frequent
among all, and not least among Persons of Quality, is the source of innumerable
Mischiefs; it is the Delilah, that at once lulls and betrays them; it keeps them
in a perpetual Sleep, binds up their Faculties, so that, though they are not
extinct, yet they become useless. Plato used to say, That a man asleep was good
for nothing: and it is cretainly no less true of this Moral drousiness then the
Natural. And as in Sleep the fancy only is in motion, so these inconsiderate
Persons, they rather dream then discourse entertain little trifling Images of
things, which are presented by their Senses, but know not how to converse with
their Reason. So that in this drousy state, all temtations come on them with
the same advantage, with that of a thief in the night; a Phrase by which the
Scripture expresses the most inevitable unforeseen danger, 1 Thessalonians. 5, 2. We
read in Judges, how easily Laish became a preyto a handful of men, merely
because of the supine negligent humor of the Inhabitants, which had cut them
off from allintercourse with any who might have succor'd them, Jud. 18. 27, 28.
and certainly it gives no less opportunity to our Spiritual Assailants, leaves
us naked and unguarded to receive all their Impressions. How prodigious a thing
is it then, that this state of dullness and danger should be affectedly chosen?
yet we see it too often is, even by those whose qualities and Education fit
them for more Ingenious Elections; nay, which is yet more riddle, that very
aptness disenables, sets them above what it prepares them for. Labor is looked
on as utterly incompatible with Greatness, and Consideration is looked on as a
labor of the mind; and there are some Ladies, who seem to reckon it as their
Prerogative, to be exemted from both; will no more apply their Understandings
to any serious Discuffion, then their Hands to the Spindle and Distaff; the one
they think pedantic, as the other is mean. In the mean time, by what strange
measures do they proceed? they look on Idiots as the most deplorable of
Creatures, because they want reason, and yet make it their own excellence and
pre-eminence, to want the use of it; which is indeed so much worse then to want
the thing, as sloth is worse then poverty, a moral defect then a natural. But
we may see by this, how much civil and sacred estimates differ: for we find the
Bereans commended, not only as more diligent, but as more noble too, Act. 17.
11. because they attentively considered, and strictly examined the Doctrine
preach' a to them. By which they may discern, that in Gods Court of Honor, a
stupid Oscitancy is no ennobling Quality, however it comes to be thought so in
theirs.

5. And if this one point might be gained, if they would but so far actuate
their Reason, as deliberatly and duly to weigh their Interest, they would find
that so strictly engaging them to allthat is virtuous; that they must have a
very invincible resolution for ruin, if that cannot persuade them: and I hope
all women are not Medea's, whom the Poet brings in avowing the horridness of
that fact, which yet the resolved to execute. They are generally rather
timorous, and apt to start at the apprehension of danger; let them but see a
serpent tho at a great distance; they will need no homilies or lectures to be
persuaded to fly it. And sure did they but clearly discern what a sting there
is in those vicious follies they embrace, their fear would make them quit their
hold; put them in such a trembling, as would, like that of Belshazzars, slacken
their joints, and make those things drop from them, which before they most
tenaciously grasped. For indeed in sin there is a conspiration of all that can
be dreadful to a rational being, so that one may give its compendium by the
very reverse of that which the Apostle gives of Godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 8. for as
the one has the promises, so the other has the curses of this life, and of that
to come.

6. In this life every depraved act (much more habit) has a black shadow
attending it; it casts one inward upon the conscience in uncomfortable
upbraidings and regrets. It Is true indeed, some have the art to disguise that
to themselves by casting a yet darker over it; suppressing all those reluctings
byan industrious stupefaction; making their souls so perfect-night, that they
cannot see those black images their consciences represent. But as this renders
their condition but the more wretched; so neither can they blind others tho
they do themselves. Vice casts a dark shadow outward too, not such as may
conceal but betray its self: and as the evening shadows increase in dimension,
grow to a monstrosity and disproportion; so the longer any ill habit is
continued, the more visible, the more deformed it appears, draws more
observation and more censure.

7. 'Twere indeed endless to reckon up the temporal evils to which it exposes
its votaries; immodesty destroi's their fame, a vain prodigality their fortune,
anger makes them mad, pride hateful, levity renders them despised, obstinacy
desperate, and irreligion is a complication of all these, fills up their mesure
both of guilt and wretchedness, so that had virtue no other advocate, her very
Antagonist would plead for her: the miserable consequences of vice, would like
the flames of Sodom send all considering persons to that little Zoar, which how
despicable soever it may have appeared before, cannot but look invitingly when
safety is inscribed on its gates.

8. But it must infinitely more do so, if they please to open a Visto into the
other World, make use of divine perspectives to discern those distant objects
which their grosser senses do here intercept. There they may see the dismal
Catastrophe of their Comedies, the miserable inversion of all unlawful or
unbounded plesures: there that Prophetic menace concerning Babylon which we
find, Rev. 18. 7. will be literally verified upon every unhappy soul, According
as she exalted her self and lived delicately, so much the more tribulation give
her; the torment of that life will bear proportion to the pride and luxuries of
this. It will therefore be necessary for those who here wallow in plesures, to
confront to them the remembrance of those rivers of Br^mstone, and ask
themselves the Prophets question, Who can dwell with everlasting burnings? We
find Esaias, when he denounces but temporal judgments against the daughters of
Zion, he exactly pursues the Antithesis, and to every part of their effeminate
delicacy he opposes the direct contrary hardship; instead of sweet smells there
shall be a stink, instead of a girdle a rent, in stead of well-set hair
baldness, in stead of a stomacher a girding with sackcloth, and burning in
stead of beauty, Esai. 3. 24.

9. It were well the daughters of our Zion would copy out this lecture, and
prudently forsee how every particular sin or vanity of theirs will have its
adapted punishment in another World. And sure this consideration well digested,
must needs be a forcible expedient to cleanse them from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit, as the Apostle speaks 2 Cor. 7. 1. For is it possible for her to
cherish and blow up her libidinous flames here, who considers them but as the
first kindlings of those inextinguishable ones hereafter? Can she make it her
study to please her appetite, that remembers that Dives's unintermitted feast
ends in as unallaied a thirst? Or can she deny the crumbs of her table to that
Lazarus, to whom she foresees she shall then supplicate for a drop of water? In
fine can she lay out her whole industry, her fortune, nay her ingenuity too, in
making provision for the flesh, who considers that that flesh will more corrupt
by pampering, and breed the worm that never dies? Certainly no woman can be so
desperately daring, as thus to attaque damnation, resist her reason and her
sense, only that she may ruin her soul; and unless she can do all this, her
foresight will prove her escape, and her viewing the bottomless pit in Landscape
and picture will secure her from a real descent into it.

10. But now that this Tract may not make its exit in the shape of a fury,
bring their meditations to hell and there leave them, it must now at last shift
the Scene, and as it has showed the blackness of vice by that outer darkness to
which it leads, we also will let in a beam of the Celestial light to discover
the beauty of Virtue; remind the Reader that there is a region of joy as well
as a place of torment, and piety and virtue is that milky way that leads to it;
a state, compared to which the Elyzium of the heathen is as inconsiderable as
it is fictitious, the Mohammedan Paradise as flat and insipid as it is gross and
brutish; where the undertaking of the Psalmist shall be completely answered,
those that fear the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good, Ps. 34.
10. And this happy state is as accessible as excellent, God is not unsincere in
his proposals, offers not these glories only to Tantalize and abuse us, but to
animate and encourage mankind. He sets up an inviting prize, and he not only
marks out, but levels the way to it; makes that our duty which is also our
pleasure, yea and our honor too: So has he contrived for our ease, that knowing
how hardly we can divest our voluptuousness and ambition, he puts us not to it;
all he demands is but that he may choose the objects, and in that he is yet
more obliging, for by that at once he refines and satisfies the desires. He
takes us us off indeed from the fulsom plesures of sense, which by their
grosseness may cloy, yet by reason of their emtiness can never fill us; and
brings us to taste the more pure spiritual delights which are the true elixir of
Plesures; in comparison whereof all the sensual are but as the dregs or feces
in an extraction, after the spirits are drawn off. In like manner he calls us
from our aspiring to those pinnacles of honor, where we always sit totter ^gly
and often full down, but yet invites us to soar higher, where we shall have the
moon with all her vicissitudes and changes under our feet Rev. 12. 1. and enjoy
a grandeur as irreversible as splendid.

11. Thus does he show us a way to hallow our most unsanctified affections;
thus, according to the Prophecy of Zeehariah, may holiness be writ even upon
the bells of the horses, Zec. 14. 20. upon our most brutal inclinations; and
thus may all those feminine Passions which now seduce women from Virtue, advance
them in it. Let her that is amorous, place her love upon him who is (as the
Spouse tells us, Cant. 5. 10.) the chiefest among ten thousand; she that is
angry, turn her edg against her sins; she that is haughty, disdain the Devils
drudgery; she that is fearful, dread him who can destroy both Body and Soul in
Hell, Matt. 5. 28. and she that is sad, reserve her tears for her penitential
offices. Thus may they consecrate even their infirmities; and tho they cannot
Deifie, or erect Temples to them, as the Romans did to their Passions, nay
their Diseases; yet after they are thus cleansed, they may sacrifice them as
the Jews did the clean Beasts in the Tabernacle. Only irreligion and
profaneness is exemt from this Privilege, no water of Purification can cleanse
it, or make it serviceable in the Temple; that, like the spoils of Jericho, is
so execrable, that it must be devoted to destruction, as an accursed thing,
Jos. 6. 17. For tho God do not despise the work of his own hands, have so much
kindness to his Creatures, that he endeavors to reduce all our native
inclinations to their primitive rectitude, and therefore does not abolish, but
purify them; yet Atheism is none of those, it is a counterblast from hell, in
opposition to that mighty wind in which the holy Spirit descended. Tho the
subject in which it subsists may be reformed, the person may turn Christian,
and the wit that maintained its blasphemousparadoxes may be converted to holier
uses: yet the quality it self is capable of no such happy Metamorphosis; that
must be extirpated, for it cannot be made tributary; which shows how
transcendent an ill that is which cannot be converted to good: even that
Omnipotence which can out of the very stones raise children to Abraham, attemts
not any transmutation of this; which ought therefore to possess all hearts with
a detestation of it, and to advance them in an earnest pursuit of all the parts
of Piety.

12. And that is it which I would now once more (as a farwell exhortation)
commend to my female Readers, as that which vertually contains all other
accomplishments; it is that pearl in the Gospel for which they may 'part with
all and make a good bargain too. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom says the wisest of men Prove. 1. 7. and by his experience he shows that
it is the completing end of it too; for he no sooner declined from that, but
he grew to dotage and dishonor. Let all those therefore to whom God has
dispenst an outward affluence, given them a visible splendour in the eyes of the
World, be careful to secure to themselves that honor which comes from God only,
Joh. 5. 44. unite their souls to that supreme Majesty who is the fountain of
true honor who in his bestowing the Crown of righteousness proceeds by the same
mesures by which he disposed the Crown of Israel, when he avowed to Samuel that
he looked not on the outward appearance but beheld the heart, Sam. 16. 7. If God
see not his own Image there, all the beauty and gaiety of the outward form is
despicable in His eyes, like the apples of Sodom only a Kind of painted dust.
But if Piety be firmly rooted there, they then become like the Kings daughter
all glorious within too; a much more vanluable bravery then the garment of
needle work and vesture of Gold, Psalm. 45. 13. And this is it that must enter
them into the Kings Palace, into that new Jerusalem, where they shall not wear,
but inhabit pearls and Gems Rev. 21. 19. be beautiful without the help of art
or nature, by the mere reflection of the Divine brightness; be all that their
then enlarged comprehensions can wish, and infinitely more then they can here
imagine.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Part. I.
Sect. 1. Of Modesty. p. 1. Sect. 2. Of Meekness. p. 29. Sect. 3. Of
Compassion. p. 48. Sect. 4. Of Afsability. p. 65. Sect. 5. Of Piety. p. 79.
Part II.
Sect. 1. Of Virgins. p. 143. Sect. 2. Of Wives. p. 165. Sect. 3. Of Widows. p.
210. The Close. p. 234.

