

London Printed for John Kidgell at ye. Golden Ball (...) Gate in ^^rn

THE VANITY OF THE CREATURE. By the AUTHOR OF THE Whole Duty of Man, etc.
Together with a LETTER Prefixed, sent to the Bookseller, relating to the AUTHOR.

ECCLES. 1.2. Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity.

LONDON: Printed for John Kidgell at the Golden-Ball near Grays-Inn-Gate in
Holborn 1684.

TO THE Bookseller.
Mr. Kidgell,
YOu having Printed that most Excellent piece, Entitled, The Whole Duty of
Man, Part II. Wherein the Author of that Book has discovered much Judgment,
together with a composure of Elegancy of Style and Expression, I having a good
opinion of your Conversation by a little acquaintance with you, at the request
of my Kinsman Mr. G. L. I. send you an account of the little Tract you are
Printing, called The Vanity of the Creature; which was, (if my word may pass
for it) written by the first Author of The Whole Duty of Man. That he was a
person of great Learning and Piety, I think no man will gainsay; which if he
did, he would be sufficiently confuted by that his most Excellent and Divine
Treatise. He was also of that Christian-like temper of meekness and modesty,
rarely to be found in the best of men of these flagitious times, that out of a
perfect enmity and aversion to vainglory, he purposely concealed his name;
which has been the occasion of as many conjectures (almost) to know who he
was, as there have been scrutinies to find out the head-spring and original
source of the River Nile. For my part, I shall not (though I could) break the
rules of Decency and good Manners, to satisfy the itching desire of the
overcurious, in divulging that which the Author himself was so careful to
conceal. -- Cum vides velatam, quid inquiris in rem absconditam? This is
certain, and I will adventure at the boldness to say, that all those several
Discourses which have appeared abroad in the World under our Authors name, were
not written by him; but whoever were the Authors, it cannot be denied, but that
they have written them with the greatest Judgment, Learning, and Piety
imaginable, and that they are only worthy of imitating so great a Divine as our
Author.

Yours in all Civil Offices, J. L.

THE Vanity of the Creature.
THE Creatures Vanity and Mutability is so great, that it should be the
greatest incentive to us to look to the Supreme good, as the only Center of our
Happiness and Felicity. Since the Summum bonum of Man lies in something more
sublime and excellent than any Created Being, it is not in vain for him, in
order to attaining the true object of his real Happiness, to take a
Contemplative view of the Creatures vanity, which is most perspicuously
demonstrable even in Monarchies, which Bodin tells us, are more durable than
Popular States, because less subject to be divided, (Unity being the great
Preserver of all things:) and yet have these had, as the Moon, not only their
increase and full light, but also their wain and changes, and this sometimes in
a moment. That as in Music you shall hear sometimes a string tuned up to its
ultimum potentiae, as high as it will bear, and presently depressed again to
the lowest Key, and another elevated, yet both of them breathing but light
Airs, and of short continuance: So may you see a Monarchy now wound up to the
highest pitch of Happiness, and by and by let down again into the lowest depths
of misery. This is Gods doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

And here I shall begin with those Empires and Monarchies that were most famous
among the rest.

For how soon was the Assyrian or Babylonian Monarchy swallowed up by the
Persian, the Persian by the Greek or Macedonian Empire, and the Greek by the
Roman? which the Prophet Daniel presents unto us, by the Gold, Silver, Brass,
and Iron, whereof Nebuchadnezzars Image consisted, Dan. 2.32. The dissolution
of one, as in natural things, so here, being still the generation of another;
and again, the erection of the later being the destruction of the former.

And as for the Roman Monarchy, their own Historian can tell us of that, how it
had both its Infancy, Youth, Manhood, and Old age, as it were by turns: As its
Infancy under Kings, its Youth under Consuls, its Manhood from the first Punick
War unto the time of Augustus Caesar, and from that time its Old age under the
succeeding Emperors; until at length that solid Body was torn asunder by the
struglings of her own Children, into the Eastern and Western Empires, whereof
the former was soon eaten out by the Turks and Saracens, and the later also
fell away much, after a little revolution of time, by the falling off of diverse
Nations from her, each of which after they had plucked off their own feathers
from the Roman Eagle, left her almost naked; As the Franks and Burgundians in
France, the Goths in Spain, the Normans and Lombards in Italy, together with
the English and Scots in Britain: until at the last cast the Roman Monarchy
began a little to recall her self into Germany, where she has held up since
little more than the bare name of the Empire. So that Vicissitude you see is
the great Empress of the world, unto whose unstay'd Dominion all earthly Powers
and Principalities must be subject, even those that are of the first Magnitude,
much more others that move in a lower Orb.

And of these I shall single out only three, which I conceive most eminent, to
be instanced in for this point.

The first is Judea, whose Government was Monarchically settled by God himself;
yet how often did she change her Lords and Masters, yielding her self as it were
successively first to the Babylonian, and after that to the Roman, Persian,
Saracen, Christian, Egyptian, and now to the Turkish power? That as the Poet
spoke of Troy, Fuit Ilium; so may we of Jerusalem, her Metropolis, Fuit
Hierosolyma, that Jerusalem was; She was great among the Nations, or Domina
Gentium, the Lady of the Nations, but now, Non sic ut olim, it has not been
with her for these many Generations past, as in former days, (to use Job's
words in his twenty ninth Chapter, second and third verses) when God preserved
her, when his Candle shined upon her head, and when by that light she walked
through darkness; but Servants have ruled over her, and there was none to
deliver her out of their hands. Which is a good Lecture of Mutability to other
Kingdoms and their Mother-cities. For Jerusalem was once a holy and happy City,
and had been happy still, and she but continued holy; but that failing, How is
her Gold become dim, how is her fine Gold changed into Dross! as she complains
her self.

The second Example I produce here is Naples, which we many well call the Ball
of Providence: And indeed so it was, being bandied from one Lord to another ten
several times, before it came to lie (as now it does) at the foot of Spain. For
being a Country at first diversely peopled, it was upon the division allotted
to the Eastern Emperors, but from them forced by the Almains, and so to the
Greeks and Saracens, and then successively hurried about to the Normans,
Germans, French, Hungarians, Arragonoys, and from them to the French again;
till in the end the Spaniard seized upon it: and whether it will continue long
with him or no, is very uncertain; especially if we remember how of late years
a poor Fisherman (Massinello by name) snatched up the Reins of Government from
him, and (had not God otherwise determined of that Kingdom, by infatuating that
Mushrome-King) for ought we know, he might have run quite away with them; so
slippery are all earthly Kingdoms*

3. But not to look out any longer to other Nations of Christendom, (methinks)
we may instance this best by reflecting upon our selves. For you all know (I
suppose) how the Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans, had each of them their
several and alternate days of Lordship over this Nation; but yet because they
did not know in those their days the things that belonged unto their Peace, how
do we see the shadows of the night stretched out upon them, their Suns set with
us, and their days shut in!

The longest day we read of, was that in Joshuah's time, wherein though the Sun
stood still in Gibeon for the space of a whole day, yet set it did at last.

The day of the Romans was long upon our Horizon, for the Sun of their
prosperity shone here for the space of four hundred years and more; yet did it
then go down as to us in this Nation, and Darkness here now does lie upon

Again, the day of the Saxons continued five hundred years and upwards; That of
the Danes two hundred fifty five years, or thereabouts.

And how long the day of the Normans has lasted, every petty Almanac can tell
us. I, and if none of those Suns come to rise again within our Hemisphere,
(when the sins of this Nation are ripe, and call for Gods sickle to cut them
down) it is beside his ordinary rule, which usually runs out all Humane things
by a changeable circumference; for so Solomon tells us in his Book of
Ecclesiastes, That the Sun rises, and the Sun goes down, and hastes to the
place where he arose.

Neither is this all, that the Powers and Principalities on earth are upon a
daily turn, but as the Primum Mobile (you know) carries about the other
Spheres; so do these carry about many other changes and alterations with them:
As that of Religion, Laws, Liberties, Sciences, Customs, and such like. Nay,
even the Houses of God, which before to violate, was held a Crime inexpiable,
yet are they now upon such removes broken down without scruple; and the very
Urns of the Dead, which have been always looked upon as Sacred Cabinets to
preserve the Bodies of Gods Saints in for Eternity, yet are they now broken up,
and their Ashes thrown about, (such is the unsetledness of all things here
below) even as the vilest Dust upon the face of the earth.

Beloved, it has been ever thus upon the conversion of such great Bodies, and
it is so still: for never was there any conversion in this Land like to that
our eyes have seen of late; That if any one should have slept but some few
years last past (as the Ancients fain of Epimenides) and should have awaked
again in these times, how would he wonder at those strange Metamorphoses that
are now among us, there being Nova rerum facies, A new face of things both in
Church and State! Insomuch, (as Mr. Harding spoke sometimes of Rome, That he
did quaerere Romam in Roma, That he did seek Rome in Rome, and could not find
it,) so may we say now, That we may quaerere Angliam in Anglia, That we may now
seek for old England in our new England, and yet go without it, it is so much
changed from what it was before.

And as we have seen much of this already, so who knows but we may come to see
a great deal more hereafter? Since we know not what a Day may bring forth.

Secondly, Neither is this true only in Empires and Monarchies, but also in
Cities and their popular Governments. Etiam summis negatum est urbibus stare
din, says the Moralist. And to this purpose tends that of the Author to the
Hebrews, Heb. 13.14. We have here no abiding City, but we look for one to come,
whose foundation is in the heavens.

There is then no City on earth, nor any kind of Government in it that ever
stood up long in one posture, none that ever was, or shall be abiding. Pass ye
up to Calneh and see, says the Prophet, Annos 6.2. and from hence go to Hemath
the Great, and so to Gath of the Philistines. So, pass ye up to Athens the eye
of Greece for Knowledge and humane Literature, and see; and from thence go to
Rome, the Head of the Western Empire, and so come to Florence, the Beauty of
Italy; (for I forbear to name more, Examples in this kind being almost
infinite) in all which you may read this truth at large.

And first for Athens: How many changes of Governors and Governments did she
endure? putting her self off from Hereditary Kings to Archons, or
Aristocratical Lords, who governed first for term of life, then decennially;
and after these, to Democratical Rulers.

Next for Rome; how often has that City been altered by Gauls, Hunnes, Goths and
Vandals?

Yea, how often has the Government of it been passed away from one hand to
another?

It is mystically represented to us, Rev. 17.3. by the beast of seven heads,
which is there interpreted by the seven Hills it is built upon, to be Rome: And
according to the number of those Hills, to so many Masters did it submit it
self, who had their several turns of supreme power and regiment over her, as
Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemviri, Tribunes, Emperors, and Popes: under the
last of which, I do not find that it was ever Besieged by any that took it not:
such strange ebbings has that Sea had experience of!

Last of all for Florence. It is strange to tell what various whirlings about
that has had in point of Supreme Rule and power. For at first the Nobility
ruled it in an Aristocratical way. But a little after, some Grandees among the
people wrested it to themselves; who being tired out with continual
quarrellings one with another, (for the people were divided into three ranks)
the middle sort of them took upon them the management of the State. And these
also falling quickly together by the ears, the third and lowest sort became
Masters of it. Which holding not long, by reason of their mutual discords, they
yield themselves and the Government of their City unto Charles of France,
Brother to Lewis the Ninth; who within a short time being invited to the
Kingdom of Naples, and leaving only Deputies at Florence, the Florentines
return to their Popular Government, and renew their Civil Wars among themselves
For redress whereof, they send for the Duke of Athens, and give up all to him.
But shortly they supposing themselves to be brought in bondage, and to be
despoiled of their Liberty by the fear of his Guard, banish him the City, and
within less than one years space shake off his Government over them. After
which they come to an Aristocracie again, devising new Names and Officers for
their Magistrates, and changing and rechanging them so often, that sometimes
their State was no better ordered, than if it had been committed to Mad men, or
Children without discretion, the City scarce twenty years together keeping the
same form of State: but as sick men in Fevers (says Bodinus) desire to be
removed now hither, and by and by thither, or from one bed to another, as if
the Disease were in the places where they lay, and not in the intrals of their
own Bodies; so were the Florentines still turning their State, till they turned
it into the hands of the Medices, who now hold it. A thing almost incredible,
(says he) did not their own Recorder leave it recorded to posterity.

But in the second place let us descend to Families or Races of men that are
lineally successive for Name and Greatness.

And here let me ask, where are those Illustrious Families cried up so much in
former times, and famous in their Generations?

As the Courageous Family of the Maccabees in Jewry, and of the Ptolemies in
Egypt.

Again, where is the Zelzuccian Family in the less Asia, and the Imperial
Family of the Palaeologi in Greece?

That of the Merovignians in France?

Of the Plantagenets in England, with many more of this rank I might name, did
not the narrow compass of so small a Treatise bound me?

Tell me, is not the Name and Greatness of these Families long since expired,
the Roots and Branches of them quite removed, and others planted in their
rooms? Examples of this sort are innumerable, as Elihu says in Job: He breaks
in pieces mighty men without number; (so mighty Families without number) and
sets up others in their stead.

And as for such Families as are of a lower form, we need not go far, since our
own knowledge here will lead us to continual changes and alterations.

For thou have seen it may be many Families heretofore in this Nation,
brim-full of earthly happiness, and running over; and now upon thy second view
of them, behold there is no such thing, but they are much altered, and running
very low in the world, if not clean run out.

So that prosperity (you see) was never yet so entailed upon any Family, and
the Heirs thereof, but within a little time some one or other has cut it off.

But last of all, if we look upon particular persons, this will appear most
evident; but especially if we consider them three ways. In respect of their
Bodies, Minds, and Estates.

Gregory Nazianzen has an excellent saying of the two former jointly
considered, which is this; (...). i. e. We are not mixed Creatures only, but
also contrary both to others and our selves: not continuing truly the same, no
not so much as one day; but both in regard of our Bodies and Minds, perpetually
flowing and perpetually changing.

And we can instance this in all the stages of our life, wherein by the
ordinary course of Nature, we are first weak, and then strong, and after weak
again. As in our Childhood, we are then weak both in Body and Mind: in our
Youth, strong in Body and weak in Mind; and in our Manhood, strong in both; but
in our Old age, strong in Mind and weak in Body; and in our Decrepit, weak
again in both, as we were in our Childhood at the first.

But to leave this general consideration of them, and to look upon them now
more distinctly and severally by themselves. And first for the change of
particular Persons in regard of their Bodies.

And here it is true of them, what Seneca affirms, viz. That no man is the same
to day, he was yesterday: Ego ipse (says he) dum haec loquor mutari, mutatus
sum. Our Bodies (says he) are like a River, which keeps nothing but the bare
name that was first given it; for as touching the present individual matter,
which is the watery substance of it, this is always transient, and other comes
into its room: And so it is with the Body of Man, which is always receiving in
new Air and Life, and venting the former. Which makes David profess of himself,
that he was tossed up and down like the Locust; and Job compares Man for his
bodily substance to a flower that never continues in one stay, Job 14.2. For
now we are strong, and by and by weak; now beautiful, and presently deformed. A
little Fit of the Fever, Small Pox, or the like, alters us so, as if we were
not the same men we were before; insomuch that we hear some speaking thus unto
us, -- Hen quantum mutatus ab illo! Alas, how has this fit altered you from
what you were in your health! for how are your lips grown pallid, your cheeks
discolored, your eyes sunk into their holes, and your face quite disfigured!
And others there be of our acquaintance that like Jobs three friends do lift up
their eyes afar off, and know us not; so much are we changed in respect of our
Bodies!

But Secondly, Let us consider it also in respect of men's Minds.

And here (to say nothing of a moral change, which is obvious every where) as
on the one side we find nothing more notable Quinquennio Neronis, than the
first five years of Nero's, Reign, and more excellent than his Youth: Yet
afterward, having well tasted the sweet morsel of Sovereignty, he became (says
one) the most detestable Tyrant that ever was: And so also of Herod the Great,
Philo says, that he Reigned six years as a good and just Prince, presenting the
Protasis of his Reign with a large Fringe of Goodness about it; (as Joaz,
Amazias, and Ozias did) but as for the Catastrophe of it, that was very sad and
fearful. So on the other side, we find Manasseh and Paul soaking the forepart
of their Lives in Blood, being no better at first then Nero was at the last,
even a piece of clay tempered with blood; yet was their end like the end of
David's good man, The end of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37.

But to wave these, (whereof much might be said, did it not quite lie out of my
road I am now in) and to insist only upon the changeableness that does
naturally adhere to the mind of man.

Now tell me, if any thing in the world may be said to be more moveable than
the mind of man.

It is a Spiritual substance, and so is always moving, (though insensibly) from
one thing unto another; never resting, until at last like Noah's dove it be
taken into the Heavenly Ark. S. Chrysostom therefore compares it to a Bird,
which flies in a moment of time over Mountains and Hills, over Seas and Rocks,
without any hinderance: for now it is upon the lowest Shrub, and presently upon
the highest branch of the tallest Cedar; now upon heavenly, and within the
twinkling of an eye upon earthly things; now at Dan, and in a trice at
Beersheba; now at one part of the earth, and then at another: for sometimes it
is soaring after Principalities and Powers, and spiritual Wickednesses in high
places, as the Apostle speaks; then after Riches, and by and by after
pleasures; now rejoicing, and then sorrowing; now quieted, and immediately
troubled, and as soon pacified again; now hoping, and straightway fearing those
hopes; now loving, and then hating what it loved before. Sic omnia mutabilitati
subjacent (says St. Augustine) Thus do all things lie down under mutability!
And it amazed Saint Bernard much, to consider how in the same moment of time
his mind was not only diversely, but likewise contrarily affected, and as it
were pulled a pieces betwixt love and hatred, joy and sorrow, fear and hope;
having as many varieties of affections within him, as there were diversities of
things in the world for them to light upon.

So that you see how the several Passions of our Minds do in a breath, and with
the turning of a hand, steer diverse ways, first looking one way, and then
another, according as they are wheeled about with the motions of outward
Contingencies.

But in the last place, we shall add unto the former, the great changes that
particular men are subject to in regard of their outward Estates and Fortunes.
For the condition of Mortals (says a Heathen man) has its turns and returns,
both of Prosperity and Adversity.

That as in a Military skirmish there be some come up to discharge, while
others fall of: So is it in the World's Militia.

One there is that is raised out of the Dust to sit among Princes: whereas
there is another that is flung down from the pinnacle of worldly joy and
prosperity, and stated, as Job was, upon the Dunghill. And this does the
Preacher tell us, among the rest of those changes that fell under his
observation, That one comes out of Prison to Reign, (as Queen Elizabeth did out
of the Tower to the Throne) whereas also there is he that is born in his
Kingdom, and becomes ver poor; (as our Henry the Third was, while he lived
sometimes on the Churches Alms.)

God has appointed us (says one well) all our parts to play, and has not in
their distribution been either spare-handed to the meanest, nor yet partial to
the greatest.

He gave Caius Marius at first the part of a Carpenters Son, but afterward the
part of one that was seven times Consul. So also Agathocles the part of a
Potters Son at the first, but afterward of the King of Sicily.

So also on the other side, Darius played the part one while of the greatest
Emperor, and another time of the most miserable Beggar, begging but a little
water to quench the drought of Death. And Bajazet played the Grand Signior in
the morning, but in the evening stood for Tamerlains footstool.

And Jane Shore, Edward the Fourths Minion, acts now as Mistress of a stately
Palace, and a little after dies in a Ditch for want of a House; and (as he said
of Icarus) so may we of her, That -- Nomina fecit aquis, she gave Name to the
place where she died, it being called from her Shore-ditch to this day.

But I forbear, since there is enough recorded for our use in the Sacred
Scriptures to this purpose; where we find an example of the one in David, who
says, that God took him from following the Ewes with young, and set him upon
the Throne; there to feed (as he says) Jacob his people, and Israel his
Inheritance. And to go lower yet, not only from the sheepfold, so he says,
Psalm. 113.7. and 8 verses; God takes the poor out of the Dust, and the needy
out of the Dunghill, that he may set him among Princes, even with the Princes
of his people. Now more vile and contemptible than the Dust we tread upon,
which the least breath of wind commands any way; or than the worst of dust,
which is that of the Dunghill, we cannot be; yet these are they (says the
Psalmist) whom he sets among Princes, even with the Princes of his people.

An example of the other we have in Antiochus, 2 Mac. 9.9. who was so filled
with Pride through the rankness of his Prosperity, that he thought he might
command the Sea, (so proud was he, says the Text, beyond the condition of man)
and further, that he could weigh the Mountains in a balance, and reach up to
the Stars of Heaven: yet by and by is his Comb cut, all his Glory worm-eaten,
and none able to endure him for the filthiness of his smell.

Add to this the example of Balthazar, Dan. 5.5. who was now carousing in the
Consecrated Vessels that Nebuchadnezzar his Grandfather had plundered the Temple
of, and House of God at Jerusalem, as you may see, 2 Kings chap. last. But in
the same hour (says the Text) came out the handwriting of the wall against
him, and then was the Kings countenance changed, his thoughts troubled, the
joints of his Loins loosed, and his Kingdom given away to the Medes and
Persians.

Thus are we for outward things like so many Counters, which stand one while
for a pound, and another for a penny.

That was we see commonly in Highways, where one man has seth his foot,
another presently follows him and treads it out again; so is it usually, That
if one man beat out an Honor or Estate to himself, another comes after and
treads out that impression; and whose it shall be next, there is no man knows.
Nay, Lucan, Ipsa vices natura subit -- Even the whole course of Nature runs
about in a circular motion Our Bodies, Minds, and outward felicities,
whatsoever we are, or whatsoever we have, are all subject to change in such
wise, that we can have no assurance of them, no not for a day. We know not what
a day may bring forth.

And so much for the demonstration of this truth, viz. That there is such a
Vicissitude.

The next thing is the Efficient Causes of it. For we never know any thing
thoroughly, (says the Philosopher) until we know the Causes of it.

Now in speaking to this, I shall proceed, 1. Negatively, 2. Affirmatively.

1. Negatively, in showing what have been thought to be the causes of all
Changes and Alterations, yet are not so indeed. And here the Epicures and
vulgar Heathen have thought Fortune to be the cause of them: And they define it
thus to be, An Event of things without Reason.

But how unreasonable it is to say, That an Event of Things without a Cause,
should be the Cause of all Events, judge ye.

For it was only the ignorance of the true Causes, that made the name of
Fortune; there being nothing fortuitous in it self, but only to us and our
ignorance; since the power and providence of God has the ordering and
disposing of all things here below. And this did the wiser sort among them
confess, as the Satyrist tells us.

Nullum, numen abest si sit prudentia, sed te
Nos facimus Fortuna Deam --
Others again, as the Stoics, make Fate or Destiny the cause of all
Alterations, which they say is an Event that necessarily falls out, from a
certain inevitable order and connection of Natural Causes, working without the
will of God, as the Supreme Orderer and Disposer of them, he being subjected to
them, and not they to him: whereby they take away the very Nature of the
Godhead, which is to be a most powerful and free Agent, that works what, and by
what means it pleases; all secondary causes depending upon that, and that upon
none.

But enough of these: For I must remember my self, that I am now speaking to
Christians, who acknowledge the Divine Providence in all things; and therefore
shall speak no more of these Negative and supposed Causes, but shall now give
you the true Efficicent Causes of them, by way of Affirmation.

And here know, that Logicians tell us of two Efficient Causes; Principal, and
less Principal: And this is twofold, Impulsive, and Instrumental.

First then, the Principal Cause of all Changes and Alterations is God: for so
said the Heathen man, -- Valet ima summit
Mutare, and insignem attenuat Deus,
Obscura promens --


But why borrow I weapons from the Philistines forge, when as there is enough
for this, that may be drawn out of Gods Armory of the Scriptures? as Psalm.
75.6, 7. Promotion, says the Prophet, comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor from the South; but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up
another. So also Job 34.29. When he gives Quietness, who can make Trouble? and
when he hides his face, who can behold him; whether it be done (says Elihu)
against a Nation, or against a particular man only? Again, Amos 5.8. He makes
the Seven Stars and Orion, and turns the shadow of Death into the morning: The
Lord is his Name.

The Orator expresses this well, by comparing Gods Omnipotency to the power
of the Soul over the Members of the Body, which upon the least intimation of
the Mind do turn and move about with all facility. Now God (says he) is the
sole Mind of the Universe, and has all parts and parcels thereof at his beck
and pleasure, to be turned into any shape or form at his disposal.

Nay, it is no dishonor for God to cast the eye of his Providence upon the
alteration even of the meanest things: for who is like, says the Psalmist, to
the Lord our God, who has his dwelling on high, and yet humbles himself to
behold the things in Heaven and Earth? Not only to behold the things in Heaven,
which is a great condescension to him, whom the Heaven and the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain; but also the things in Earth. Now how unworthy these
are of his taking notice of, you may see by those diminutive expressions of
them, compared with Gods greatness, Isa. 40.15. where the Prophet says, Behold,
the Nations are but as the drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small dust
of the Balance; Behold, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. And if
this be not low enough for them, he says further, v. 17. That all Nations
before him are as nothing, and are counted to him as less than nothing. Now
look what a wide difference there is betwixt the Sea and a Bucket of water, yea
the drop of a Bucket; or betwixt a heap of dust, and the small dust of the
balance; betwixt very great and very little; betwixt all things and nothing at
all, yea less then nothing, (if less could be:) so vast is the disproportion
betwixt God and all Nations, which are the greatest among all earthly things.
And yet for all this, is God pleased so far to extenuate his own greatness, and
to take off from it, as to look after them, and run them about in their several
stages from one point unto another.

And if you would have this truth to be made out further unto you, our Savior
does it, Mat. 10.29. by two several instances.

The one is of two Sparrows, which are little birds and of small value; but the
Greek yet runs it more diminutively, (...) two little sparrows; and so they
must needs be, for they were sold both even for a farthing, and this is price
little enough. Yet the Arabic makes it less, and has for it Phals, which is
the least piece of money that can be; and accordingly expresses the two Mites
spoken of, Mark 12.42. (which makes but one Farthing) by Phalsain in the dual
number, as a late and learned Expositor notes.

The other is of the Hairs upon our Heads, being a kind of Excrement belonging
to our Bodies, and no integral or necessitous part of them, (as the Heart,
Hands, and Feet are;) and yet he tells us, that God numbers these, and takes
such a particular account of them, that not one of them falls to the ground
without his disposal.

In the vision of the Wheels we read of a wheel within a wheel. Now the wheel
within is the wheel of Gods Providence, that turns about the wheels of all
outward things, be they never so low and mean. For as God does not labor in
doing the greatest things, so neither does he disdain, either to do or undo the
least; but as he made the small and great, (says the book of Wisdom) so also
does he care for both alike. The Potter having power over his Clay, either to
make of it a vessel of honor or dishonor, and being made, either to preserve
it in that form and being he has bestowed upon it, or else to deform and
destroy it, since it is equitable that every one should do with his own as he
pleases. Nay, as he says of the gnat, that Nusquam potentior natura quam in
minimis; So may we say, that God does no ways advance his Power and Wisdom
more, than in ordering of the least accidents to be disposed of to his Glory,
and the good of his Children. And so much for the Principal Efficient cause.

The less Principal follows; which (as I said) is either Impulsive or
Instrumental.

Now the Impulsive cause of all Changes and Alterations is the sin of man. This
ushered them in at the first, and so it does still. For before Adam sinned, he
enjoyed a Paradise of constant and uninterrupted happiness: but so soon as he
sins against God, then follows a great change presently: For the Earth all
fruitful before, now becomes barren, himself subject to labor, his Wife to
Travail and Sorrow, and both to cares and troubles, to weakness and
dissolution. And so it is also with Nations and Kingdoms. If they be changed at
any time, sin is the cause of it; and the greater their sin is, the greater
ususually is their change. Great sinnings are the floud-gates to let in great
Alterations upon them. For it is not a bare sinning in a Nation, (from which
there is none that could ever plead exemption) but a sinning in some high
measure, that is an inlet to Changes in the highest kind. Which made David
say, Psalm. 107.34. That a fruitful land is turned into barrenness for the
wickedness of those that dwell therein; which the vulgar Latin reads, Propter
malitiam, i. e. for the malicious wickedness of those that dwell therein; which
notes a sin of a high nature, viz. such a one as is persisted in both against
Knowledge and Conscience. And therefore it is a good observation which Musculus
has upon the words: These strange Alterations, says he, of Nations and
Kingdoms, are not for the sinning of them, (from which no Nation can be free)
but for their malicious sinning. And this you may see farther in Jerusalem,
Ezekiel. 21. where we read of a very great Judgment that should befall her from the
Babylonian, viz. Utter Destruction, expressed by the threefold Overturn
wherewith God threatens her, v. 27. And v. 24. he lays down the Impulsive
cause that moved him to it; and this is an impudent and shameless sinning
against God: for they did not commit their sin in a corner, as those that were
ashamed of it, but (brazenfaced Wretches as they were) they declared their sin
as Sodom, and discovered it openly in the face of the Sun: and this they did
too, not only in one or two particular acts, but generally, says the Text, in
all their doings.

Now there is some hope of a modest and bashful, but none at all of a shameless
and obdurate sinner. Thus the Father, when his Son has done amiss, yet is he
well persuaded of his amendment, if he but see him blush upon his reproving of
him. But when like Judah, he has once a Whores forehead, and refuses to be
ashamed, then does he give him over as a lost Child, and not to be recovered.

So that from hence we see, that in what place soever we find such a Turn, such
an Eversion as this, where all is turned upside down) there has been without
question some great Aversio a Creatore ad Creaturam, some great sinning against
God (as the Schoolmen call it.) Which was the reason that when the English were
(now upon their quitting of France, in Henry the Sixth's days) demanded of the
French by way of derision, when they would make their return thither; it was
feelingly answered by one of our Nation thus, When your sins are greater than
ours.

It is sin then that ruins particular persons, that subverts Families, that
periods Kingdoms, that wheels about Governments, that overturns States, that
disjoynts Common-weals, and says unto them as to the proud waves, Thus far ye
shall go, and no farther.

And so I have done with the Impulsive Cause, and come next to the Instrumental
causes or means which God uses in effecting his Changes here; and they are two.

The first is the Motion and Influences of the Celestial Bodies.

And this will the better appear, if we consider their forcible workings upon
the Mind of man. For though they cannot work immediately upon it, because it is
immaterail; yet may they, and do work mediately upon it, as by the Body, which
is the Instrument of the Soul to work by, and the Case wherein it is put up
here for a time; and so make it either well or ill affected, according to the
Bodies present temper. By which means it comes to pass many times, that not
only the dispositions of particular men, but also of whole multitudes collected
together in a Politic Body, are much altered and changed, either to labor or
Sloth, to Peace or Disquiet, to good or evil actings, according as they are
inclined by the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies.

And that these Celestial Bodies have their energy upon all Sublunary things,
is plain,

First, by Scripture; as Job 38.33. where the Lord speaks thus to Job, Know
thou the Ordinances of Heaven? and can thou set the dominion thereof in the
Earth? which implies,

1. That the Heavens have power and dominion in the Earth.

2. That this power of theirs is set them from Gods ordinance and appointment.

Secondly, by the constant Observation and Experience of all Ages. Bodinus the
French Lawyer speaks well to this point; Many err (says he) greatly, who think
the influence of the Celestial Spheres to be nothing, when as their strength
has ever been most effectual, as in Sacred Writ is to be seen: and he cites
the 38. chap. of Job beforementioned to prove the same. Adding further, That
many ancient Writers have noted the great Changes in Cities and Kingdoms upon
the conjunction of the Superior Planets, but to them only where they have been
deputed of God to that end and purpose. And that they have been instrumental
toward the working of such effects, he shows by an induction of some
particular instances: As, that before the translation of the Roman Sovereignty
unto Caesar, there was a great Conjunction of the Superior Planets met together
in Scorpio: which fell out again seven hundred years after, when the Arabian
Legions received the Law of Mahomet, rebelled against the Greek Emperors, and
subdued the Eastern Asia from the Christians.

The same also came about again, Anno Christi 1464. after which Ladamachus,
King of the Tartars, was by his Subjects thrust out of the Chair of
Sovereignty; and Frederick the Third driven out of Hungary by Matthias
Corvinus, who from a Prisoner stepped up to the Royal Throne, etc.

And Alstedius tells us, that the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
February, 1642. did foretell and portend the revolution of some new Empire and
Government to fall out after it in Europe. The effect whereof in part (it is
like) we have seen in this Nation already, and may live (if God so dispose of
us) to see further of it yet in time to come.

But to pass this, and to come to that daily and usual course of Gods
proceedings with us in the world. Here methinks there should be few, (though of
ordinary capacities among us) but (if we be a little observing) may see this
truth made good by the eye of our own experience, which tells us, that the
Earth is either Fruitful or Barren, and the Air either Wholesome or Infectious,
sutably to that measure and manner of influence they receive from them.

And therefore when God will at any time bring about some great change in the
world, it is then easy to see how usually he fits his inferior means,
according to their several natures, for the orderly transacting of it in those
stations wherein he has set them. As, when he will turn a fruitful Land into
barrenness, and again, a barren Land into fruitfulness, (which he promised his
own people, Hos. 2.21.) there he tells them in what order he will work it: I
will hear (says he) the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and they shall
hear Jezreel. For this is a sure rule, That the Supreme Cause of all does not
take away the natures and workings of Secondary Causes, but rather establish
them: which is the reason of that Speech of God to Job, in the ordinary
revolution of the times and seasons of the year, Job 38.31. Can thou bind the
sweet influences of the Pleiades, and loose the bonds of Orion?

Now the Pleiades are those we commonly call the Seven Stars, that have their
influence on the earth, by producing sweet showers to the opening and
refreshing of it, about the Spring of the year; and Orion is a Constellation
most conspicuous in the Winter-season, as having a commissionary power to bind
up the earth with Frosts. Again, can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his
season, (i.e. the twelve Signs successively after one another) or guide
Arcturus with his Sons? (i. e. the Polar Star, as some will have it, with those
ignes minores that wait upon him; or Boots, as others.) It is not then so much
the Earth, as the Heavens that give us either fruit, or withhold it; they being
the first ordinary means, whereby God uses to work out alterations in sublunary
things.

The second Instrumental cause of these strange Vicissitudes here below, is the
Will of Man: for though it have not a liberty to Spiritual, yet all grant it a
liberty to external acts, and moral goodness. And this Liberty of Man's Will,
does God use as an under-wheel to turn about most of those Alterations that are
in the world.

It is true, that Health and Sickness, Peace and War, Plenty and Scarcity,
Riches and Poverty, proceed from God as the principal Efficient cause; but yet
for all this we deny not but that God makes use both of our selves and others,
as to the means of bringing them about. The life of Joseph was checkered with
variety of accidents: for he is now a Slave to the Ismaelites, and by and by a
Prince in Egypt. Now these although they proceeded from God as the Author, yet
was the will of his Brethren, as the will of Reuben and Judah, the instruments
of preserving his life, and the wills of his other Brethren the means of
selling him into Egypt.

Now because it is the Nature of Instruments to be subservient to the principal
Agent, and to be determined by it; therefore give me leave here by the way to
fasten this exhortation upon you, That in all Changes whatsoever you will look
beyond the Instruments of them, unto God the Principal Agent. For so did Job in
his losses, beyond the plundring Chaldeans and Sabeans, unto Dominus abstulit,
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away; looking upon them as we use
to do upon an Index, tantum in ordine ad Librum, only in order to the Book it
self, Et in transitu ad Deum, in his passage unto God, who sets them a work, as
to their natural powers and faculties, though to the evil of them no otherwise,
than by ordering and overruling it to the good of his Children. And hence it
is, that the wicked are called Gods Sword, as in the 17 Psalm, v. 13. Deliver
my Soul (says David) from the wicked which is thy sword. And so must we in all
those Losses that befall us here, have in our eye not so much the Sword, as the
Hand that holds it: which will be one means, and a good one too, to bring us to
David's calm temper in the 39 Psalm. 19. who says in the like condition, That he
was dumb, and did not open his mouth, nor let fall an impatient word in it,
because it was Gods doing: And therefore when Abishai would have taken away
Shimei's life for cursing of David, No, (says he) Let him alone, Iussit enim
Dominus, for the Lord has bidden him curse; who then shall say, Wherefore have
thou done so? q. d. Who then dare expostulate with God, or call him to account
about it, as if he were unrighteous in it; since evil men are but Swords in
Gods hand, who, when he has once done his work by them, will either put them
up again into his Scabbard, and lay them by, or else so blunt the edge of their
power, that it shall not cut, or else break them a pieces, and throw them quite
away? And so much for the Efficient Causes of Vicissitudes.

Next I shall speak to the Ends, or Final Causes of them.

And these are either Ex part Dei, or Nostri; in respect of God, or our selves.

First, in respect of God; and so the Principal End why God rings such Changes
upon all earthly things, and will have them disposed of after so various a
manner, is to make them by it the more tunable to his own Glory, which by this
means is exceedingly magnifyed and advanced: but especially in the Attributes
of his Power, Truth, Wisdom, and Goodness.

1. In his Power and Omnipotency: that so he may let the world know, that the
Finger of his Power is in all Transactions; and that he can do whatsoever he
will, both in Heaven and Earth, and yet changes not.

For why else did God work so many miraculous Changes in Egypt by the hand of
Moses?

Why turned he Moses Rod into aSerpent, and the Egyptian waters into Blood?

Why their Dust into Lice and Flies, and their Light into Darkness for the
space of three days together?

Why else Created he a new generation of Frogs and Locusts among them?

Why unheard of Diseases upon themselves, and upon their Cattle?

Why destroyed he their Herbs and Fruit Trees with Hail, and their firstborn
with untimely death?

In a word, Why caused he the Redsea to go out of its natural course and
chanel, whereby it became a wall to the Israelites, and a grave to the
Egyptians?

Did not God all this to make known the glory of his power, in the preservation
of the one and destruction of the other? Yes; For this cause (says God to
Moses) I have raised thee up, to show in thee my power, and that my Name may be
declared in all the earth.

2. He advances also his Glory this way, by manifesting his Truth and
Faithfulness: in that those things which are accidental in regard of us, and
seem as impossible, yet are they exactly brought to pass in their due times and
seasons. As in the bringing of the Israelites out of Egypt, wherein God was
full as good as his word, and kept touch with them to a day in their
Deliverance, as you may see, Exodus 12.41. where we read, That it came to pass
in the end of four hundred and thirty years, even the self-same day it came to
pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out of the land of Egypt. All
Pharaoh's oppositions and tergiversations could not prorogue their Bondage so
much as one day beyond the time prefixed of God, but served only to fill up
that Interim, or void space of time betwixt Gods Promise made to Abraham and
his performance of it.

And if you ask by what intervals of time the truth of his promise came about
so punctually, Divines will tell you, That from Abraham's receiving of the
promise, unto the birth of Isaac, were five and twenty years; sixty from thence
to Jacobs birth; and to his death (which fell out presently upon their entrance
into Egypt) a hundred and thirty years. After which unto the death of Levi,
who was Vltimus Patriarcharum, the last of the Patriarchs that survived, and in
which space the Israelites were kindly entreated for Joseph's sake, were ninety
four years; and a hundred and one and twenty more of cruel Bondage, until Moses
came to deliver them from it in the Reign of Pharaoh Cencres.

All which particulars being gathered up together, do make up the complete sum
of four hundred and thirty years, and may serve to justify God in all his
sayings, and to clear his Truth in the least circumstance and punctilio of
time, when it shall come to be judged.

For when once Gods appointed time is come to introduce a change, either for
better or worse, among any people, then shall every breath of wind, how cross
soever it seems to blow at the present, yet be so far from hindering Gods work
in it, as that one way or other you shall find it in the sequel, to contribute
its help and assistance to it.

3. God advances also his Glory this way, in the manifestation of his Wisdom
and Goodness; in that he makes a sweet harmony of so many different cords and
changes, and frames a most admirable Order out of a seeming Disorder and
Confusion.

Many and diverse are the qualities of Herbs, yet if a skilful Simpler has the
mixing of them, he knows how to make of them a well-relish'd and wholesome
Sallade: So, many were the interchangeable passages that happened to Joseph;
and had we the same, it may be we should think them very confused ones; but yet
let the Wisdom and Goodness of God but lay them together, and we shall
presently find, as Joseph did, the close of them all in a sweet Diapason.

For though all things, as to us, are floating up and down, to and again, by
chance as it were and accident; (...), says Gregory Nazianzen; yet if we look
to the order and appointment of Gods Providence, (which does always most wisely
contrive all events for the good of his Children) they are fixed and stable,
howbeit they may seem to go contrary at the present.

And of Gods dealing in this kind we have Job an aminent example; who is to day
the greatest man for Wealth and Honor in all the East, (and a Tablet of this
is Greatness you may see in his 29 Chapter, which I desire you to read over at
your leisure) wherein you shall find a whole series of worldly prosperity to
wait upon him;) yet tomorrow he is poor, even to a byword and proverb, As poor
as Job: insomuch as he spends all the next Chapter in bemoaning his sudden
change, beginning it with a But; which though a small Monosyllable, yet as the
Helm of a Ship turns about the Vessel any way, so does this But turn about Job,
and all his former Honor and Prosperity, into the extremest contempt and
adversity. But now, says he, they that are younger than I have me in derision,
whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my Flock; and
ending it with this doleful accent, verse last, versa est cithara mea in
luctum, and organum in vocem flentium; My harp is turned into mourning, and my
organ into the voice of those that weep.

Yet all is well (we say) that ends well; and so it was with Job, which makes
Saint James say, by way of support unto Gods people in their afflictions, Ye
have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; i. e.
what good end God gave him in it; for the next day God brings a great deal of
Light out of this Darkness, by a wise and gracious disposing of all that evil
to him for the best, in giving him twice as much as he had at the first, and
blessing his later end more than his beginning.

So that although for a time all those sad Changes that befell Job, seemed even
to cross the ordinary course of Gods care and Providence to him; yet in the
conclusion you see how his Wisdom and Goodness cut them all out, and made them
serve to his greater Honor and Abundance.

And so much for the Ends or Final Causes in respect of God.

They follow now in respect of our selves.

And these are two: first to confirm our Faith; secondly to reform our Lives,
and to work out by them good to his servants.

First, to confirm our Faith.

And so God brings many times great Changes into the world, to try, if amidst
those shakings of outward things among us, we will be shaken in our Faith, or
not. That as the Apostle speaks of Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.19. Oportet esse
Haereses, There must be Heresies among you, that they which are approved may be
made manifest; so say I, Opertat esse mutationes, There must be Changes: and
these not so much in respect of the things themselves, which are in their own
natures liable to alteration and dissolution; as in respect of Gods end in it,
that they which are approved and sincere in the Faith, may be manifested to be
so, by their constancy and perseverance in it. That as there is a necessity of
Fire to try Gold, whether it be true or else counterfeit; so also is there a
necessity of Changes: for by these it will appear, whether we will measure our
Religion by outward things, and in the loss or enjoyment of them be lost in our
Protestant Faith, yea or no.

There is nothing, Beloved, more discovers the Hypocrite than his Ingenium
versatile, (as Livy said of Cato) than his turning humor in Religion: for
which I do not say he shall be plagued in Hell, by being wheeled about there
continually without any relaxation, (though that may seem a punishment somewhat
suitable to his Weathercock-disposition here upon earth;) no, Hoc nimis
Ethnicum, This is too heathenish: but rather with the Prophet David, That he
shall turn into Hell with all those that forget God, which is that portion of
Hypocrites mentioned by our Savior, Matthew. 24. last.

For if an Apple be rotten at the coare, it will not hold long upon the Tree,
but upon the least Wind will fall from it. And so it is with the rotten-hearted
Hypocrite; if a little cross wind do but blow upon him, oh how soon does he
fall off from the Tree of Life, and become a wind-fall in his Religion, for the
Devil that old Serpent to prey upon!

Every Cock-boat (you know) will bear up well enough in a calm sea: but that is
a stout Vessel that can live in the most troubled water. And too too many there
were in the Primitive times, that like Dr. Pendleton in Queen Mary's days,
boasted much of their Constancy in the Orthodox Faith during Constantines days,
so long as God hedged about his Vineyard with Peace and Prosperity; but so soon
as that Hedge was broken down, and erroneous, yea Heretical Doctrines were let
in like so many Beasts of prey to devour, then how quickly did these prove
Turncoats, and Apostates from the Faith!

But as for the true Christian, he is like a Rock, -- Mediis immotus in undis;
That although the waves are always swelling against him, yet is he the same man
still in his Reformed Religion, and wavers not: or else like that House built
upon the Rock, against which the Floods came, and the Winds blew, but it fell
not, because it was built upon a Rock.

And such a well built house was St. Basil, who being threatened with death by
Valens, if he would not advise further and turn Arrian, answered with this
brave resolution, I need not any further advice than I have taken already about
this matter; for to morrow I shall be the same man that I am to day therein,
and no other.

And here know that some things are of Necessity, wherein we cannot but change,
as in natural, civil, and moral things; and to change in there is only humane.

Others again are of Duty: and these either prohibited, or enjoined.

1. Prohibited, as in evil and erroneous things: and to change here is pious
and divine; and not to change, either Weakness or Obstinacy.

2. Enjoined, as in sacred and religious: and to change here is impious and
Diabolical; and not to change, true Christian Fortitude and Constancy.

Whatsoever things we see then wheeling about in the world, as Governments,
Families and the like; nay, howsoever we may change our selves or be changed in
some things of an indifferent nature, by those that have dominion over our
Bodies and Estates; yet is there no man that has dominion over our Faith: But
this is Gods peculiar, and therefore in this we must not change.

It is not with saving Truths as it is with Clothes, which alter every year as
the fashion does: for the fashion of the world passes away (says St. John;) but
true Religion is ever in fashion with good men, and alters not.

And herein we may justly take occasion to bewail the unsteadiness of some in
these times, who are mere Scepticks in Religion, always conceiving some new
Opinions in it, and always in pain till they be delivered of their new
conceptions, though never so monstrous and deformed.

That which was truth with them yesterday, is no such thing to day; and what is
so to day, is otherwise to morrow; such Changelings there be in this last Age,
who like the Moon do never appear the same two days together! And I would to
God, (says St. Ambrose,) that their change were no worse than that of the Moon;
for she returns again within a little time to her full light, but these never.

And he is blind that sees not this among us, (namely) how some turn every day
to Popish Superstition, but more to Anabaptistical Fancies; some unto Socinian
Blasphemies, but most unto Atheistical Notions, and all into Sensuality; this
being the common Sewer into which all the former run, and are ultimately
resolved.

But as St. Paul said to his Galathians, so do I to such, O foolish Galathians,
who has bewithc'd you that you should not obey the Gospel? And it is a
metaphor, says one, from Sorcerers, who use to cast a mist before the peoples
eyes, that so they may not take a right view of what is presented to them: As
if he had said, Who has cast a mist before the eyes of your understandings, to
make that appear unto you for truth which indeed is not? What? Are ye so
foolish, that having begun in the Spirit, ye will be perfected in the Flesh?
So, Are ye so foolish, that having begun in truth, ye will end in falsehood? or
can ye be so simple, as to exchange Gold for Dirt, Wheat for Chaff, and your
precious Faith, as St. Peter calls it, which is the substance of things hoped
for, for Errors of all sorts, and mere shadows of Truth? I trow not. For if
Error (as our Kingly Divine said well) have any advantage, it consists in
Novelty: or if Truth any, it consists in Constancy.

Was the Doctrine then of the Reformed Churches, and the Harmony of our
Confessions grounded upon evident and pregnant Scriptures, maintained by the
Orthodox and Primitive Fathers, and conveyed to us by the constant tradition of
the Universal Church, the Faith of Christ once delivered to the Saints, and the
Truth of God yesterday? why, so it is to day, and will be to morrow also. And
therefore to day in our profession of it we must be as yesterday, and to morrow
as this day: because as God is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; so
also is the Truth of God, That which was once so, will be so always, and cannot
be otherwise.

Oh that we would then be exhorted in the Apostles words, To stand fast in the
Faith, to quit our selves like men, and be strong: and not to be as children,
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine; but to be as
men in understanding, steadfast and immovable; that so God may have cause to
glory on our behalf, as he did on Jobs, Have thou considered (says God to
Satan) my servant Job? So, have thou considered such a servant of mine? See
thou to how many changes I have subjected him? to changes in his Children, to
changes in his Estate, to changes in his Liberty, to changes in his Friends and
Acquaintance? Nay, see thou how many of his Brethren are changed of late,
from a febrish distemper before, now into a sleepy Lethargy? See thou how
indifferent they are for their Religion round about him, and how many shaken
reeds there are on every side of him? And yet for all this, as my servant Job
did, so does he still hold his integrity. But enough of this.

Secondly, Gods end also in it is, To reform our Lives, and do us good by his
so various dispensations toward us Hence we read, Isa. 30.28. of a sieve of
vanity, wherein God says, he will sift the Nations, and shake them to and fro
one after another, that so he may winnow them from that chaff of sin that is
within them. For why was Moab at ease from his youth? why settled he upon his
lees, and held still his corrupt taste? but because he was never disquieted, nor
emptied from vessel to vessel, Ier. 48.11. Thus a sedentary life we find very
subject to Diseases; and a long standing Prosperity to a Nation, is like a
standing Pool, whose water does soon puddle and putrify. And this is the
reason of that speech of David, Psalm. 55.19. Because they have no Changes
therefore they fear not God; making by it the uncheckt prosperity of worldly
men, a great occasion of their continuance in sin, and so an Index of Gods
Wrath upon them, rather than of his special Favor to them.

And therefore now we have seen the Angel of God moving the waters of this
Church and State by Intestine War, new Opinions in Religion, by Sects,
divisions, and the like; it will be good for us to meditate, how God hereby
intends to purge us from that sinful filth that adheres to us, as our
disrespect to Gods Ministers, and contempt of his Word, our Cruelty and
Oppression, our Pride and Security, our Worldly-mindedness, and Hypocrisy.

Indeed men, who are the instruments of them, may have other ends in such
Alterations, as to wreak their own spleen upon their Adversaries, to unhorse
others, and get themselves into the Saddle either of Profit or Preferment;
(That as Demitrius the Silversmith said, We get our gains by this means; so say
they, We get our Honors and Estates by these means, for if the waters had not
been troubled, we had caught nothing:) or else to satisfy their own corrupt
wills and pleasures; as the Author to the Hebrews says of earthly parents, That
they chasten their children after their own pleasure, but God who is the
Supreme Agent, he does it for our profit, and not his own; there being no ends
of gold and silver, no mere will or revenge in his end, but only our profit,
and to take away the dross from the silver, that so he may bring forth (to use
Solomon's expression) a Vas electum a chosen Vessel, as St. Paul was, and fit
for the Finer.

Thus the Scripture tells us of Joseph, how he was passed over from his
brethren to the Ismaelites, and from them to Potiphar; and his Brethren had one
end in it, but God another: for they did it for evil against him, (as he tells
them himself) and to get twenty Pieces by the sale of him; but as for God, he
meant it to him for good, and to save much people alive.

And so also was Christ the Antitype of Joseph, thrust (as we say) from post to
pillar, viz. from Judas to Caiaphas, from him to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod,
from Herod back again to Pilate, and then into the hands of the clamorous and
unreasonable multitude to be crucified; and Judas had one end in Christ's death,
but God another. The end of Judas in it was to silver his bag with thirty
pieces, but Gods end was to satisfy his own Justice, and to save Mankind by it.

So that let men's sinful ends in these Changes and Alterations be what they
will, yet is Gods end in it the gaining of glory to himself, by his taking away
that sin and corruption which he sees contracted in us by a long standing
security. And if these changes of his be not as a gentle fire to purify us,
they shall be as a consuming fire to destroy us.

And so much for the Efficient and Final causes of Vicissitudes.

The Uses follow; and they are three.

First, To take us off from our greedy desire of worldly things.

Secondly, To unpride us in a prosperus condition.

Thirdly, To comfort and support us in an afflicted one.

And to this purpose there is a good saying of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the
best of all the Heathen Emperors, which is this:

Meditate (says he) with thy self how swiftly all things that subsist are
carried away: for both the substances themselves are in a continual flux, and
all actions in a perpetual change; yea the causes of them also, subject to a
thousand alterations, neither is there any thing that can be said to be settled
or at a stand.

And from hence he draws this inference: Art thou not then unwise, who for
these things art either distracted with cares, puffed up too much with pride,
or dejected with troubles?

And it may put many of us Christians to the blush, who seldom make so good use
of it as this Heathen did, though we have a far clearer light than he had to
guide us to it.

First then, the consideration of this point, viz. The great Vicissitude and
Inconstancy of all earthly things, may serve to wean our hearts from the
pleasing teat of this world, and to raise them up to that place where only
fixed good is found.

Here we are all too apt with the rich fool to set down our rests, when (God
knows) we have little or no cause so to do. Nescis enim, ah nescis serus quid
vesper ferat; Since we do not know what the midwifery of this evening, nay
less, of this hour or moment may help to bring forth.

It may be a change of our Estates into Beggary, by Fire, Thieves, and the
like; or else of our Liberty into Thraldom, or of our Health into Sickness;
all these successively wheeling about, until at last our great change come from
Life to Death, and swallow up the rest, as the sea does the waters that fall
into it.

Alas! here we are subject to a thousand casualties; but in Heaven, there,
there we shall meet with no such alterations; for that is a Kingdom that cannot
be shaken as earthly Kingdoms are, either by War, Factions, all-eating time, or
the like. No, but there is Peace without War, Quiet without Trouble, Freedom
without Thraldom, Day without Night, Health without Sickness, and Life without
Death: whereas here it is far otherwise; for God takes away one it may be, with
a Fever, another with the Sword, as Saint Augustine reckons them up. Nay, he
cuts off the spirits of Princes (says the Psalmist:) which Junius and Tremelius
Translate by Vindemiat, i.e. he slips them off as a Vintager does a Bunch of
Grapes from a Tree, it is so quickly done. Even the highest enterpizes that the
greatest Magnifico's of the earth undertake, God does but blow upon them a
little with the breath of his displeasure, and how soon are they blasted and
shrink away to nothing!

An example of this we have in Xerxes, who went against Greece with a Million
of men, and as many Ships as covered the Hellespont; as if he would have
subdued the Sea, have put a hook into her jaws, and have led her away in
triumph: yet how soon was his overbold pride dashed in pieces by a handful of
Greeks! One and the same day saw him both happy and miserable; using him as a
tender and indulgent Mother in the morning, but in the evening as a cruel and
hard Stepdame.

Oh the folly then of those that lie always sucking at these earthly flowers,
which are as various in their shapes, as ever Proteus was, and constant in
nothing save in their inconstancy!

It was the saying of Maximilian the Second, That every year of our life was a
Climacterical year, and brought with it some great change or other.

And if every year be so changeable, what fools then are they that join land to
land, and house to house, that they may dwell alone in the earth! yea what mean
great men to pride it so much in their Babels here below, and out of a greedy
desire of gain to run out of their own Channels, and to call their Lands by
their own names? For they that do thus, declare plainly that they think
themselves to enjoy a settled estate here on earth, as if they should never see
a change, or at least did not for the present look for in Heaven a better and
more enduring substance, as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, Heb. 12.34.

And yet as the Prophet Isaiah complains, so may we, Quis credidit auditui
nostro? who has believed our report? or to whom is this truth of God revealed?
For it is strange to see how few among us do believe this, that both in our
persons and estates we are so changeable.

But this is their way, says David, this is their foolishness.

For how soon did Galba start aside from the Empire. Degustans Imperium,
tasting it only as Jonathan did the Honey with the end of his Spear! How soon
was Haman changed from the Minion of the Court, to be the hang-by of the world!

Again, how soon was Nebuchadnezzar changed, even from a Man to a Beast: and
Herod from the highest of Men, to be Meat even for the lowest of Reptiles?

And the prosperity of Richard the Third was so short (says our incomparable
Historian) that it took end ere himself could well look over it.

There is not any thing then that we can call constant here on earth; which
makes the Author to the Hebrews, speaking of Abraham, say, That he looked for a
City having foundations: Upon which one gives us this Note; That the Heavenly
City can only be said to have properly a Foundation, whereas those Cities that
are on earth, do show plainly by their daily ruins, that they have no sure
foundation to rest upon.

Oh let this be a means to take off the wheels of our Affections from their
eager pursuit after earthly things, and set them upon things above, where the
moth cannot come at them, nor thieves break through to steal. And let us look
to that charge of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge those that are rich in the
world, that they trust not in uncertain Riches; or rather in Riches which are
Uncertainty it self in the abstract; (for so the Greek runs it; (...) i.e. in
the uncertainty of Riches.) And that we may in no wise doubt of this their
uncertainty, the Wise man prefixes a note of certainty before this uncertainty,
Certainly (says he) Riches make themselves wings, and fly away as an Eagle
toward Heaven: as if he should have said, Certainly Riches and all worldly
things are as uncertain as a Bird that is upon the wing: and therefore we must
not set our hearts upon them; but our daily prayer and practice must be, So to
pass through things temporal, that so we do not loose those things that are
eternal: or else with David, let us beseech God to incline our hearts unto his
Testimonies, and not to Covetousness. Now this inclining our hearts unto Gods
Testimonies, is nothing else but that holy and penitential change of Heart and
Life, or else that turning unto God with all our hearts, which God calls for at
our hands, and expects from us in all his changes, whether personal or else
National; which if he find in us, then let what changes soever fall, they shall
all work together for our good: but if not, we must then look to be as a
rolling stone, and to have our daily turns and changes in this life from one
degree of misery to another, until at last we turn into Hell, as David speaks,
with all those that forget God.

Secondly, The consideration of this point may be a good antidote against Pride
in a prosperous Condition, since God has so ordered the Web of our Lives, as
that Adversity as well as Prosperity is interwoven in it: For there is nothing
that swells us up so much, as prospering here in worldly things; and nothing
again that is more effectual to assuage this swelling in us, than to consider
the brevity and mutability it is subject to.

Now it swells us up with a high opinion either of our own Goodness above
others, or else of our own Greatness.

1. Our prospering in worldly things swells us up with a high opinion of our
own Goodness above others; as

1. It makes us think our selves the only good men in Gods eye, because we are
prosperous in the worlds; whereas indeed, this can be no certain rule to
measure out any such thing by, since the world and the prosperity of it is so
variable and uncertain.

And therefore, when at any time God shall water us more than others with the
lower springs of his earthly Blessings, we are not therefore to have an
overweening conceit of our selves, and our own causes, above others, (as if God
upon this ground had tied his special love either to us or them:) For you know
that when God would choose a King for Israel, he chose him not by outward and
perishing excellencies, for then he would have chosen in the room of Saul,
Eliab, Aminadab, or Shammah, who were the three elder brothers of David, and
men of goodly personages to look upon; yet God chose none of these, (says the
Text) but David the youngest of them, though not so outwardly, yet inwardly
glorious, being a man after his own heart.

It is the chief Argument the Turks use at this day, to prove themselves the
only Musselmen, or true believers; We thrive (say they) and prosper in the
world: for how has our Mahometanism overrun all Asia, Africa, and the greater
part of Europe too! And do not they among us then reason more like Turks than
Christians, who speak after this manner, Come, see how we bear down all before
us, and ride upon the backs of the poor in triumph! Thus and thus do we prosper
in the world, and do even what we list; and is not this an evident sign we are
Gods Children, and that the right end of the staff is ours? Sure, if we were
other than Gods peculiar people, he would not bless us so much as he does.

But to these I answer, That these and such like are only Bona Scabelli, (as
Divines distinguish well out of that place of Isaiah) and not Bona Throni, the
Goods of Gods Footstool, (but earthen ware) and not the good things of his
Throne, which are Grace and Glory; and therefore can set upon us only an
earthly mark for men here to take notice of us, but not any heavenly cognizance
for God to look upon us, as upon his dear and elect Children. For else it would
easily follow, That the Alchoran were better than the Bible, and the Turks
fancy better than our Faith of Christianity.

And were there no other signal place of Scripture for this, than that of the
Prophet David in his 73. Psalm, (as indeed there are very many) this alone
(methinks) were enough to impress this as a truth upon us, where he speaks of
some that are not in trouble like other men, but pride compasses them about as
a chain, violence covers them as a garment, their eyes stand out with fatness,
and they have more than their heart can wish; yet these (says he) v. 12. are
the ungodly who prosper in the world. And the Prophet Jeremy makes bold to
question with God about it, in these words, Jer. 12.1, 2. Wherefore, says he,
does the wicked prosper? and why are all they in wealth that rebelliously
transgress? and he rests satisfied with this, verse 3. That God did by that
prosperity of theirs fatten them as sheep to the slaughter, and prepare them
for the day of destruction. And this is that prosperity of fools that the Wise
man speaks of, which will destroy them, Prove. 1.32.

It is not then our thriving in Temporals, but in Spirituals, that speaks us
and our Faith to be accepted of God.

For the truth of Grace or Religion, and the goodness of a man's Cause, is not
measured by the Soldiers Sword, but by the Word of God, which is the Sword of
the Spirit.

God Saints no man for his goodly Personage, for his Riches, for his politic
headpiece of contriving, and bringing about his own worldly and sinister ends,
or for his Arms and Conquests; for then Saul and Croesus Ahitophel and
Alexander the Great had been high in Gods book: but he values Men only by their
Spirituals, as their graces of Faith, Humility, Patience, Meekness, Obedience,
and the like: and where he finds these, (how unfurnished soever they are
otherwise) yet these are mine, says the Lord; and in that day when I shall
make up my Jewels, I will spare them, even as a Father does his Son; and then
shall ye discern between the righteous and the wicked, betwixt him that fears
God, and him that fears him not.

Indeed God may sometimes permit evil to prosper in the world, but never
approve of it: for so acknowledges the Jewish Church, Lament. 3.35. To turn
aside the right of a man before the face of the most High, or to subvert a man
in his cause, the Lord approves it not. And therefore to argue from Gods
permission to his approbation, is a gross Non sequitur, nay more, a laying our
iniquity on Gods back, as if he would take it well at our hands to be made a
Packhorse at every turn to bear all our execrable burdens, and were (as David
speaks) such a one as our selves, to favor evil courses, or else to own them
as his offspring.

Which made Dionysius the elder conclude Sacrilege to be no sin, when he had
robbed the Temple at Locri, because the Gods seemed (as it were) to smile upon
the action, in giving them fair Winds and Weather, both in their voyage thither
and return back again.

But, as it was a great Blasphemy (says one) for the Devil to personate God,
when he would be similis Altissimo; so is it greater to make God personate the
Devil. And yet this he does, that makes God patronize his evil, because he
prospers in it; for this brings in God saying, That he will be like the Prince
of Darkness, and makes the Holy Ghost to leave his Dove-like shape, and come
only to us in the form of a greedy Raven or Vultur.

2. As our prospering in worldly things swells us up too high with an opinion
of our own Goodness, and makes us think better of our selves than is meet; so
also does it on the other side lift us up too far with thoughts of evil toward
our brethren, and make us think worse of them, and the ways of God they walk
in, than we should, by charging them as utterly deserted of God, because we see
not now the same hedge of Gods favor about them as heretofore we did, but the
stakes that then prop'd them up, are now thrown away as useless and
unserviceable. Whereas Afflictions on this hand are every way as temporary and
transient, as Prosperity was on the other; and being so, must needs be as a
broken reed, or a reed of Egypt, wherewith we cannot exactly measure Gods
Temple, nor the Spiritual estate of his Children.

It was a hard stumbling block to the Prophet David for a time, when he says
that his feet were almost gone, and his footsteps had well-nigh slipped, upon his
sight of the wickeds prosperity; until he went into the Sanctuary of Gods Word,
where he learnt to settle his wavering and distrustful thoughts: for there he
saw, that notwithstanding his outward afflictions, that God held him up under
that sore temptation with his right hand, and would (in opposition to
transitory goods, which are the proper blessings of the wicked, because they
have no others but these to trust unto) guide him with that which should
infinitely exceed them, to wit, his Counsel here, and his Glory hereafter.

And it was the great question so much agitated betwixt Job and his Friends,
Whether those doleful changes that befell him were the cognizance of his
insincerity to God, and of Gods disfavour to him upon it, yea or no. His
Friends taking advantage upon his present weakness and distemper, maintain it
strongly against him in the affirmative, that they were: until at length God
himself steps in to the rescue of the weaker side, and makes the conclusion (as
all Logical conclusions do) to follow the weaker part, determining it for Job
against his Opponents in the Negative, and telling them, that they spoke not of
Job, nor of his proceedings toward him that which was right, Job last, verse 7.

Seneca a Stoic Philosopher, has a set discourse to this purpose, Cur bonis
viris mala eveniant, why the evils of this life most commonly fall out to good
men: and he concludes it thus, That temporal evils are no sign of Gods hatred
to them. For, do thou think (says he) that the Lacedaemonians hated their
Children, when as they experimented their disposition to virtue by stripes in
public? No. So, do we think Gods Children in disfavour with him, because he
lays here sore blows upon their Bodies and Estates by evil men, as his rods and
scourges in it? No; for we see and feel many times (says an experimental
patient of our own well) the deep lines and strokes of Gods hand upon us, when
as we cannot by our skill in Palmestry decipher his meaning in it, no more than
the Malteses could by the viper upon Saint Paul's hand judge of his condition to
Godward.

For God sometimes (that we may not thus judge) inverts humane order, and runs
out his dealings toward us in the ordinary chanel of his universal Providence,
Justice and Equity, by which he waters here all alike.

Indeed they may seem (I grant) to go counter to our apprehended rules of
common right: yet are they always agreeing both with Gods secret and revealed
will, though (like the Sun in its sphere) not perceptible to us, because too
mysterious and dazzling: however, many pretend to interpret them by a blaze of
fire lighted at the natural pride of their own private spirits, and that dim
twilight of knowledge which is in them; when as they are altogether in the dark
to the true light of Gods word and works herein.

And here take in the opinion also of Epictetus another Stoic and Heathen man,
which speaks most Christianly to this point, namely, That all are not hated of
God, who do wrestle here with variety of Miseries: but that there are with God
good causes of it, though so secret that few can reach them.

And therefore, albeit we cannot see how these actings of God may stand with
his tender love to his children, and so may conceive an ill opinion of them;
yet when we shall think seriously, that Gods thoughts and ways are not as ours,
it will teach us to give them a more favorable interpretation.

For how dare humane rashness (says Saint Bernard) reprehend that which it
cannot comprehend; in giving demonstrative reason why wordly prosperity should
be Virtues stepdame, and not her natural mother!

But (to close up this Discourse) you see here by what has been said, that it
is a great error (howbeit now grown more than popular) to judge of persons and
causes by the events, whenas all outward things (says Solomon) fall alike to
all, neither can any judge of love or hatred by what is before him: Prosperity
and Adversity being but separable accidents to them, and no essential
properties of them, because they are grounded upon worldly things, that have so
loose and mouldring a foundation, as that a man cannot tell concerning them
what a day may bring forth. Again,

2. As worldly prosperity swells us up with a high opinion of our own Goodness
above others, so likewise of our own Greatness. And this makes us slight those
that are under us, and deal hardly with them, (as to temporal things) which we
would not do, if we once considered the mutability of it.

And therefore if at any time God shall give up unto us those we conceit our
enemies, to be dealt with (if we will) by all harshness and extremity; yet are
not we then to trample upon them in the pride of our hearts, nor to add more
load to that which God has already laid upon them; but rather to take off from
it what we can, and to use them with all gentleness and compassion, with all
mildness and moderation, as considering our selves, that we are not here to
live always as Gods upon earth, the same yesterday, to day and for ever: but
what is the bitter cup of their portion to day, may be ours to morrow.

It speaks out but a coarse and ignoble spirit, to crow and insult over those
that are down. The very Heathen thought it so, who had only the glimmering of
Nature to guide them; much more ought we Christians, whom the Apostle exhorts,
that our moderation may be known to all men. That as the Apostle will have his
Corinthians to use the world with a tanquam, as if they used it not; so must
they among us, that have wealth, power and authority, so use them, as if they
used them not: that so when they shall fail us, (as they will ere long, since
the wind blows not always out of one and the same favorable quarter) we may
then be able to say with comfort, That we never misemployed those talents of
Gods outward favor to us unto the pressure and destruction of our Brethren,
but only to their relief and preservation.

The Prophet David in his Tenth Psalm, speaks of some, who through the pride of
their countenance do not seek after God, neither is God in all their thoughts.
But their ways are always grievous; they puff at their enemies, and say in
their hearts, they shall never be moved, nor be in adversity.

And such were the Babylonians, who (besides their barbarous cruelty to the
Israelites under captivity) added this above all, that they scoffed and jeered
at them in their miseries, with Sing us now one of the Songs of Sion. So also
were the Edomites, v. 7. who cried over Jerusalem in the day of her visitation,
Raze it, raze it even to the foundations.

And were we sure that the sun of our earthly Happiness would always stand will
in this our Gibeon, it may be we might take liberty to do the like, and think
we did well in it too. But when as we come to consider seriously, that there is
no Solstice here upon earth, but so soon as the Sun is come to his furthest
Summer-point in our Horizon, it is then presently vertical, and turning again
to make winter-weather with us, how will this assuage that swelling of pride
that is within us, and make us humble?

To this purpose there is a memorable History of Caganus King of the Huns, unto
whom Theodorus Medicus being sent in an Embassy from Mauritius the Emperor, to
divert those swarms of people wherewith Caganus at that time threatened to storm
the Empire, he applied himself to him in these words; Audi Cagane, utilem
narrationem Sesostris, etc. Hear, says he to Caganus, a profitable Narrative of
Sesostris King of Egypt, who being lifted up too high with his great successes
against his enemies, caused four Kings taken prisoners to draw his Triumphal
Chariot, wherein one of them looked back with smiles to the wheel of the
Chariot, and being demanded his reason for it, answered, That he smiled to see
the spoak of the wheel now at the top, to be presently at the bottom; and
again, that which is now at the bottom, to be by and by at the top. The very
hearing whereof did so mollify, and keep down the haughty Princes spirit, that
it drew him a little to forbear his acts of hostility against the Emperor.

And from this Topic also of volubility, did Croesus draw an argument to
dissuade Cyrus from his intended inrode into Scythia: for if thou did lead
(says he) an immortal Army, then is there no need for thee to ask my advice in
it; but if thou do acknowledge thy self a man, and a leader of mortals, then
think that there is a wheel of humane affairs that turns about continually, and
suffers nothing here below to stand long upon the same bottom.

But this advice of Croesus took no place with Cyrus; If it had, he would have
kept himself (as the Tortoise does) intra testudinem, within his own shell,
within his own dominions, and not have causelessly usurped upon the rightful
possessions of others to his own destruction: for see the issue and event of it!

Even that God who is infinite in his Wisdom, and terrible in his Power and
Justice, he that resists the proud, and looks upon them afar off, He (I say)
made the pride of Cyrus serve as a snare to take himself in, and to work his
ruin: for he was no sooner entered Scythia, but he found by sad experience how
unconstant the World wa^ not looking now upon him with (...) smiling aspect it
did before; but the wind was now in another quarter, and (as the Wise man says
or Riches, that they make themselves wings and fly away) so did his former
prosperity betake her self now to her wings, and flew away, his whole Army
being quite defeated, and himself slain by Tomyris Queen of Scythia.

A good example to make the secure wretch look about him, and to pull down the
high looks of the proud.

And therefore when ever any flushing of pride begins to rise within thee, and
to bud forth, as it is in Ezekiel, into violence, and oppression of others,
then think thou hear some Monitor calling unto thee, as King Philips Page
did to him, Memento te esse mortalem, remember that thou art Mortal: so,
remember that thou art changeable as well as others, and this will be an
excellent means to keep it in.

For tell me, would Cyrus, think you, have invaded Scythia, had he thought so
sad a fate would have attended him in it?

Or would Pharaoh have oppressed the Israelites so much, had he thought that
God would have tumbled him up and down so much as he did, from one plague to
another, and at last made the sea his champion to revenge their injuries upon
him?

Or would Joseph's brethren have persecuted him as they did, if they had
thought he should afterward have been lord over them?

Or the Gileadites have expelled Jephtha, had they known he would have been
such a shelter against a storm, and of such use unto them against the Ammonites?

Or (to say no more) would Darius have called Alexander Philip's boy in
derision of him, had he known that he should have been conquered by him?

No, little do proud men think that the water which is now in the float, will
presently be in the ebb; and that the spoak of the wheel which is now at the
top, may quickly be at the bottom: and then he that is the greatest now among
us, may come (how soon he knows not) to stand in need of the meanest creature
whom he now despises.

It is wisdom then for every Christian, when as he is at the top of the wheel,
and may lord it over those that are beneath, yet not to overlook them with a
scornful eye, but to let down his spirit, and (as the Apostle exhorts us) to
condescend to men of low degree: For one scale is not always in depression. No,
This were dura infoelicitas, a very hard and high measure of infelicity.
Neither is the other always in elevation: This were foelicitas miseranda, a
happiness to be pitied. But the alternate wave of the beam keeps them both in
awe, and especially the proud person, who seems unto me as a bird tied to a
string, which if it fly too high, the hand draws in the string and pulls it
down again. And so if we shall let out our spirits too high with pride, God
has then a line of vicissitude in his hand to pull us in at his pleasure.

The Prophet David said in his prosperity, that he should never be moved, his
mountain was made so strong; yet God did but hide his face from him a little,
and he was troubled.

Naturally then we are too apt to know no measure in a high fortune; but (as a
person of Honor and Piety in this Nation said) although in the heat of summer
we easily believe there will come after it a cold season of frost and snow, yet
are we so stupid as in Prosperity not to consider of Adversity, though the one
be as successive as the other. And this makes us to exalt our selves so much
above all that is called God. That as it is observable touching the Book of
Esther (which is nothing else but a Declaration of acts done in reference to
the Greatness, Power and Glory of Ahasuerus the Persian Monarch, as to the
principal instrument of them) that in that whole Book the Name of God is not so
much as mentioned at all: So does it also commonly fall out, that while we are
here in the ruff of our worldly Glory and Prosperity, we seldom or never speak
of God, and as seldom think of him, but set our selves up in his room, as
Nebuchadnezzar did, who spoke too big, and too much of himself, saying, Is not
this great Babel that I have built for the house of my Kingdom, by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my majesty? As the fly said in the Apologue
when it was got up to the top of the wheel, See what a dust I make! So, see
what a dust makes this poor Worm, what a Mying there is with him in the height
of his pride! nothing but my Kingdom, my Power, and my Majesty: but as for God,
Ne gry quidem, There is not a word of him; He is not in all his thoughts.

And therefore how soon the house of his Kingdom fell upon his head, yea how
short-lived the might of his power was, and the honor of his Majesty, you may
see by the next verse, where it is said, That while the word was in the Kings
mouth, there fell a voice from Heaven, saying, O Nebuchadnezzar, to thee be it
spoken, Thy Kingdom is departed from thee.

The world then may well be compared to the Sea of glass which Saint John saw
in his vision, Revelat. 4.6. and there be also, that from the resemblance of
the one to the other, interpret it thus. For

First, It resembles the Sea either for its ebbing and flowing; or else for the
sudden change of it: for how soon is the face of the Sea altered? in one and
the same hour (it may be) thou may see her smiling upon thy vessel, and
frowning too; playing with it, and swallowing it up. Noli igitur (says the
Moralist) tranquillitati ejus credere, i.e. Do not therefore trust too much to
her smooth and calm looks; in hoc enim momento mare evertitur, for in one
moment does she appear wrinkled with billovvs, and turns about from a calm
unto a storm.

Secondly, It resembles also glass, and that either for its brittleness,
because nothing is sooner broken: or else for its slipperiness, because he that
walks upon glass can have no sure footing; and therefore for any man to presume
upon the steadiness of it, must needs be very dangerous.

That as the ancient Romans used to distinguish their days into Dies albi, and
Dies atri, white and black days: so does God, and there is no man but has the
later of these as well as the former, his black as well as his white days.

Oh the madness then of wicked men, who are always plotting against the
righteous, and gnashing upon them with their teeth! At ridebit Deus, says
David, But God shall laugh at them for it: and he gives this reason, v. 13.
because he sees that their day is coming, i. e. he sees clearly that their
black and dismal day is coming upon them, though themselves will not see it
through the pride and security of their spirits; yea, and he knows also
punctually when it will be, though we know it not: for though to day may be
fair and shining, yet may to morrow be dark and tempestuous with them; since we
know not what a day may bring forth.

Last of all, (because I am loath that my Sun should set in a cloud) The
consideration of this point may serve as a good antidote against despair in an
afflicted condition; or as a cordial to stay up our spirits in the saddest and
most distressed times, and to teach us patience and contentedness in them: that
so as in prosperity we should not say, we shall never be moved, so neither in
adversity, that we shall never be delivered; when we shall consider, that what
weight of affliction soever we lie under, is not of a continuant, but of a
changeable nature. And to this end we have the sure staff of Gods promise unto
his children to lean upon, as in the tenth Chapter to the Hebrews, where he
says thus, Yet a little while, or rather as it runs in the Greek, yet how very
very little while, (with a double diminutive) and he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry. And in the precedent verse he tells them, they have
need of patience, that they may receive this promise. And in the twelfth
Chapter to the Hebrews, the Apostle takes up an exhortation to it from the Wise
man, and makes a consolatory use of it to his Hebrews, withal taking them to
task for their forgetfulness of it; And ye have forgotten the exhortation which
speaks unto you, as unto children: My Son, despise not thou the chastning of
the Lord, nor faint, or be not broken in mind (as others translate it) when
thou art rebuked of him. For we had (says he) the fathers of the flesh, who
verily chastened us a few days after their own pleasure, and we were patient
under their rod, and gave them reverence, but God a few days only, for our
profit. Shall we not then be much rather in subjection to him who is the father
of spirits, and live?

Thus when Boethius, that Christian Consul and Martyr at Rome, was wrongfully
deprived by Theodoricus of his Honors, Estate and Liberty, Philosophy brings
in what we call Gods Providence, comforting him in these words:

I turn about my wheel continually, and delight to tumble things upside down;
why then does thy heart shrink within thee, when as this changeableness of mine
is cause enough for thee to hope for better things?

And so also, when many of our Brethren were heretofore in Exile for their
Religion in Queen Mary's days, what (I pray) did that Jewel of our Church
comfort them with, but only this, Haec non durabunt, aetatem; These will not
endure an Age? as indeed you know they did not, her Reign being not full out
six years time.

And with the same consideration also should we cheer up our selves now under
that black cloud that hangs over the Church, that it will not endure an Age,
but be as Ephraim's righteousness was, even as the morning cloud, or as the
early dew that passes away.

To this end, it will not be amiss to note, how the afflictions of Gods people
in the Scripture, are run out not by any long tract of time, as by an Age,
Year, Month, Week, or the like; but by the shortest measures that can be, as by
a Day: now a Day (you know) holds not long, but is quickly gone, even as a
flying Bird, or a Poast that runs by. And thus good Hezekiah calls the time
of Sennacheribs rage against Judah, a Day of trouble, Isa. 37. v. 3.

Or if this be not enough, you have them then contracted within a lesser room,
and measured only by a Night, which is no more but the dark side of a natural
Day, and therefore is a great deal shorter. And this made the Prophet David
say, Psalm. 30. v. 5. That heaviness may endure for a Night, but joy comes in
the Morning. The time then that heaviness shall endure to the Godly can be but
a Night at the longest, but whether it shall be so long or no, the Prophet is
very uncertain and unsatisfied, for which cause he expresses it here with a May
be, Heaviness may endure for a Night.

But if this expression be not full enough to set forth the brevity of them,
our Savior does it then by an Hour, which is shorter yet, and but the four and
twentieth part of a natural Day; for so he calls the time of his persecution by
the High Priests and Elders of the people, Their hour, and the power of
Darkness, Luke 22.53.

Or, if this be yet too long a space to set forth the brevity of their
afflictions, and to give a through Comfort to Gods people, their little
continuance is then expressed by a Moment, which I am sure is short enough; so
you have it Isa. 54. v. 7. For a small moment (says God to his Church) have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I gather thee: And again, v. 8. In a
little wrath I hid my Face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy upon thee.

Or last of all, if any time can be shorter than this, it must then be the
present time; yet such are the sufferings of Gods children, in St. Paul's
account, but the sufferings of the present time, Romans 8.18. and a shorter time
than this there cannot be. For as the French our Neighbors are said to be for
their inconsiderateness, Animalia sine praeterito and futuro, Creatures that
have respect neither to time past nor time to come: so may we say of the
present time, That it is as short a measure as can possibly be imagined, having
in it nothing either of time past or future, the first of the two being dead
already, and the later of them being not yet born unto us. And yet we see here
for all this, that St. Paul, when he had cast up the account of all which he
suffered in the cause of Christ, how he reckons and concludes it to be only
the suffering of the present time, and not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed.

A Prayer.
ALmighty God, who rulest the Sea of this World by thy power, and whose paths
are in the roughest Waters; We the unworthiest of all thy Servants commit our
frail Barks, with all that we have, to the Steerage of thee our great Pilot,
and faithful Preserver: beseeching thee so to order by thy good hand of
Providence all outward contingencies to us, that we may be able to bear up
through them with a steady and even Course, against the several Storms we shall
meet with in this passage to our blessed Harbor of Eternity. And however
earthly things may like Watery Billows be every day rolling up and down in
their vicissitudes about us; yet suffer, oh suffer not the Heavenly truth of
our Reformed Religion to flote about any longer so uncertainly among us, nor
our selves to be as Children tossed to and fro with every Wind of Doctrine. But
let us be constant and unwavering in the profession of that Holy Faith we have
received; and (Thou that art the God of Truth) be graciously pleased to stay us
up firmly in it by the sacred Scriptures, which are thy Word of Truth, and the
sole Anchor of our Faith to rest upon. Lord, pull in the Sails of our desires
toward fleeting and transitory substances: for who will cast his eyes upon
that which has wings to flee away as an Eagle toward Heaven! Ballast our
Spirits with Humility in a prosperous condition; and when we have the highest
and most pleasing Gale of the worlds favor for us, give us to strike our
spreading Sails of Pride, and to make our Lenity and Moderation to be known to
all men, for the Lord is nigh at hand. But if thou in thy just judgment against
us for our manifold and heinous sins, shall cause some cross wind or other to
blow upon us, and give us over to Shipvvrack in our temporals; Supply then, we
entreat thee, their want with thy spirituals of Patience, Faith, and other
suffering graces; That although the tempest be never so boisterous without, yet
we may enjoy within a Christian calmness of Spirit, in a happy quietude and
contentedness of mind with all thy dealings toward us, and not set down our
rest upon the Creature, which is so restless with us, but amidst the sundry and
various changes of the world, may there fix our Hearts, where only true and
unchangeable joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

