A PREPARATION FOR THE LORD'S SUPPER. To which are Added, MAXIMS OF TRUE
CHRISTIANITY.

Written Originally in French, by P. Allix.

Englished by P. Lorrain.

LONDON: Printed for Brab. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1688.

IMPRIMATUR,

Jun. 13. 1687. Guil. Needham.

TO THE Right Honorable The LADY MARGARET RUSSELL.
May it please Your Honor,
BEING to expose this Translation to a World, who generally have a great
indifference (not to say aversion) for the Mysteries of OUR RELIGION,
especially That of the HOLY EUCHARIST, and have espoused Maxims quite opposite
to Those here laid down, I had reason to believe it would stand in need of a
Powerful Authority to support and vindicate it against the Cavils and
Prejudices, that in the minds of many may rise against the Subjects it treats
of. And as I was looking about for such a PATRONAGE, which (at once) might as
well by its GREATNESS authorize and commend, as by its GOODNESS exemplify and
attest them, it was my happiness to fix upon YOUR HONOR, who is so signally
and incontestably possessed of both these Advantages. This, MADAM, was the
Consideration made me aspire to the boldness of craving YOUR ILLUSTRIOUS NAME,
to countenance these Papers; in condescending to which, as your HONOR will do
manifest Justice to PIETY, so will it be interpreted a transcendent Favor to,
and ever acknowledged as such by,

May it please Your Honor, YOUR HONOR'S most humbly devoted and obedient
Servant, Paul Lorrain.

THE PREFACE.
THERE are three Things absolutely requisite for the making of any one a Worthy
and Happy Communicant.

1. HE must thoroughly understand those Truths, the Memory whereof Our LORD
designed to preserve in the Institution of the Holy Eucharist. For no Man can,
with any benefit, receive this Sacrament, unless his Spirit be filled with the
same Thoughts, which Our Savior did thereby suggest to his Apostles.

2. HE ought to have a lively Sense of those Comforts, arising from a
Consideration of the Important Truths, which CHRIST so clearly represents to us
in the Celebration of this Sacred Mystery; for as much as our Communicating in
the LORD'S SUPPER ought not only to consist in the having our Spirits possessed
with the Image of Him, who was crucified for us; but in our gathering the
precious Fruits, which accrue to us by his Death.

3, and Lastly. As it would be an extreme Injustice for us to be found wanting
in our Faithfulness, Acknowledgement, Love and Obedience to GOD, who so
graciously acquaints us with, and makes us sensible of these Wonders of his
Mercy and Compassion towords us; so we may easily conceive the Necessity,
Reasonableness, and Extent of the Duties our Participation of the Holy
Sacrament engages us to; which we ought, with a Religious Care, to discharge,
through the whole Course of our Lives.

NOTHING can therefore be of greater Use to Christians, with respect to the
Holy Communion, than to have the great Truths, implied in the Eucharist,
distinctly propounded to them, and be made apprehensive of those delightful
Comforts treasured up therein, to the end they may thereby be disposed to a
ready performance of the Duties it lays upon them.

THIS is my Design in this small Treatise, wherein I shall follow no other
Method, than that just now hinted at; that is, I shall,

First of all, endeavor to make out, that the Eucharist exhibits the most
weighty and Fundamental Points of Christianity to our View.

In the next place, demonstrate, that the Meditating upon these important
Verities (which are frequently called to mind by this Sacrament, kept up in the
Church) is to true Believers a Wellspring of inexhaustible Comfort, and
indefectible Joy.

And finally conclude, with pointing at those several Duties, which this Holy
Institution does so necessarily charge us with, that we cannot neglect the
same, but at the peril of our Everlasting Ruin.

To which three things I intend to speak, without entering upon any of those
Controversies, which divide Christians in this Matter; my Design here being not
(chiefly) to oppose Error, but to excite and fortify their Devotion and Piety,
who are already acquainted with the Truth, though they do not always duly
consider and reflect upon it.

GOD grant we may so plainly discover to them, the Connection there is between
the Truths, Consolations and Duties of OUR RELIGION, that while they are
seeking for Comfort in the Meditation of DIVINE TRUTHS, they may at the same
time, meet with strong and urgent Motives to apply themselves, with all
Diligence and Perseverance, to the Practice of True Holiness.

A PREPARATION FOR THE Lord's Supper.
CHAP. I. THE History of the Institution of the LORD'S SVPPER.
THE Meaning of Our LORD in his instituting of the Fucharist, can no way be
better understood, than by a careful Examination of the Terms He used, and the
Circumstances of his Discourse.

HIS Words express the Thoughts He would suggest to the Minds of his Apostles,
and all other Christians after them; and to the end we should the better
apprehend the Sense of them, the Evangelists have not only given us a plain
Relation of his Institution, but been very careful in describing all the
Circumstances thereof to us.

THEY therefore acquaint us, that JESUS CHRIST instituted this Holy Sacrament
that same Night He was Betrayed, and delivered up to the Jews by one of his
Disciples, after he had celebrated with them the Anniversary of their
Forefathers Deliverance out of Egypt, in eating the Paschal Lamb, according to
the Law of God. Exodus 12.

AS to the Form or Manner which CHRIST observed in his Celebrating the
Eucharist, the Evangelists agree, that after the Paschal Supper, He took Bread,
and having given Thanks, brake it, and distributed it to his Disciples, saying;
Take, eat, this is my Body, which is broken for you; do this in remembrance of
me.

THEN they tell us further, that Our Lord having likewise taken the Cup, and
given Thanks, He delivered it to his Disciples, saying, Drink ye all of this;
for this is my Blood, the Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you; do
this as often as you drink of it in remembrance of me.

IN a word, they intimate to us, that the Disciples did all drink of it, and
that having sung an Hymn, they accompanied JESUS to the Garden of Gethsemane on
the Mount of Olives, where after his having endured a most Bitter Agony, He was
laid hold of, in order to be exposed to all the Reproaches He soon after
suffered, both from the Jews and Romans, and sinally to be crucified. Thus
ending his Life by a Punishment, that was equally painful and accursed.

MOREOVER it appears, that the Design of our Lord JESUS CHRIST was, That this
Ceremony should be in all Afterages exactly observed in his Church. This may
plainly be seen, First, From his Substituting it to that of the Passover, which
was to continue as long as the Jewish Religion lasted, as being that which took
its Beginning from the Rise, or at least the Grand Deliverance of that People.
Secondly, Because this Ceremony was to be the Sacrament of a New Covenant, that
should not be abrogated by any other whatsoever. Thirdly and Lastly, Forasmuch
as the Apostle St. Paul, who had been rapt up into the Third Heaven, there to
be further acquainted with the great Mystery of Faith, informs the Believers,
that they ought to declare, that is (according to the Jewish way of speaking)
to celebrate the Memory of CHRIST's Death, until his Coming again, that is, to
the End of the World, when he shall return from Heaven to judge both the Quick
and the Dead, in order to the Completion of his Promises, and our Hopes.

CHAP. II. That JESUS CHRIST borrowed the Actions and Expressions HE made use
of in the Institution of the Eucharist, from the Jews.
THERE are two sorts of Reflections may be made upon the Institution of the
Lord's Supper. Some do serve to explain the Letter, and outside of this
Sacrament; and others, again inform us of the great Aim and Design of it. I
begin with the First.

AS it is well known, that in the Institution of Baptism, CHRIST borrowed the
Rite of Washing, practiced by the Jews on those Gentiles they admitted to the
Public Profession of Judaism; so it is as plain, that our Savior in the
Institution of his Holy Supper, did so far comply with the Jewish Customs,
after the Celebration of their Passover (yet raising some of them to a much
more excellent Sense, than they had before) that He followed closely the
Notions and Expressions of the Jews.

TO clear this, we must know that the Evening of the Passover, the Master of
the House began this Solemnity with Praises to God, holding in his Hand a Cup
of Wine, whereof himself having first drunk, he gave it to all the Company.

AFTER this, instead of the usual Blessing of the Bread, he was wont to take an
unleavened Cake in his Hand, saying, This is the Bread of Affliction, which our
Fathers did Eat in Egypt. Words that had a Natural Relation to the History of
their Bondage and Deliverance of old.

I omit the whole Ceremony of the Paschal Lamb, which is described in the 12th.
Chapter of Exodus, and shall only remark, that after this Feast the Master of
the House was used to take the Cup again, which at first he had consecrated,
and having given thanks, to present it to the Participants, saying to them,
that That was the Fruit of the Vine, and the Blood of Grapes. An Expression
borrowed from Genesis, Chap. 49.11. and Deuteronomy. Chapter 32.14.

FINALLY, after this Ceremony, their Custom was to Sing the 113th. and 114th.
Psalms, as an Hymn that concluded the Devotion of this Solemnity: Which Song of
Praise they still at this day call the Hallel.

IT IS evident our Lord did imitate this Usage, which is still observed by the
Jews, save only that they don't eat a Lamb. When therefore He had eaten the
Paschal Lamb, He took the Bread, which was designed to commemorate the Misery
the Children of Israel underwent in Egypt; and made use of the same Blessing
and Giving of Thanks, which was received among the Jews; Brake the Bread He had
taken; and intending this Ceremony should preserve the Remembrance of his
Death, He still prosecuted the same Notions and Expressions of the Jews;
saying, that it was his Body which was now to be broken for the Remission of
the Sins of Mankind.

AFTER this, He (according to the Practice of the Jews) took the Cup, gave
thanks a second time, and having ended his Blessing or Prayer, (for these
signify the same thing among the Jews) He declared that this Cup was the New
Testament in his Blood, or the Blood of the New Testament by which God granted
penitent Sinners the Pardon of their Sins.

WHICH Expressions clearly show, that He would have this Cup to be considered
as a Memorial of the New Testament, of which he was the Mediator.

IN short, is it not manifest, that He, together with his Disciples sang the
same Hymns, which were solemn and customary with the Jews on this occasion?

THERE is no man who does not easily perceive that JESUS CHRIST found in this
constant Custom of the Jews, a just ground for expressing himself as He did,
when he designed to institute, and perpetuate in his Church a Public Memorial
of his Death and Sufferings.

THE Jews themselves, the Mortal Enemies of our Religion, do agree with this.
They highly maintain, that according to CHRIST's Sense, these Words, This is my
Body, etc. which He pronounced in showing the Bread, cannot import the notion
of Reality, but only of Signification; that his Meaning was very apparent, both
because He said in the 6th. of St. John concerning the Eating here mentioned,
The Words that I speak to you are Spirit and Life, that is, they are to be
understood in a Spiritual Sense; and because it was an usual Expression with
them to say, This is the Bread, which our Fathers did Eat, though indeed it was
but the Memorial of it. Fortalit. Fid. L. 3. 11. p. 172.

Thus the Expressions of our Lord being (as appears) made up of those common
Idea's so current among the Jews, it is evident that his Design in instituting
of the Eucharist, was to represent his Death to us, as a thing, which for time
to come was to be commemorated by the Church, He substituting it in the room of
the Memorial of the Deliverance out of Egypt, and the ancient Covenant God had
made with the Jews, after his having set them at Liberty from their hard
Bondage.

BUT these Remarks, which only respect the outside of the Eucharist, are of
much less importance than those of the Second Order, which refer to our Lord's
Design in his Institution of this Holy Sacrament.

CHAP. III. That JESUS CHRIST in his Institution of the Eucharist has followed
Idea's or Notions, quite opposite to those of the Paschal Lamb; And what those
Idea's of the Paschal Lamb are.
OUR Savior's Words are not to be compared only with those the Jews made use
of at the Eating of their Unleavened Bread, which they called the Bread of
Affliction, because it was a Representative of it; but (that they may be
thoroughly illustrated) they are to be considered with opposition to the Idea's
of the Paschal Lamb, to which our Lord was willing to make the Celebration of
this Sacrament to succed. And indeed not only St. Paul leads us naturally to
look upon the Sacrifice of the Passover as a he says 1 Cor. 5.7. that CHRIST
our Passover is Sacrificed for us; nor only did JESUS CHRIST for this choose
the time of the Passover to ordain the Memorial of his Death; but the Jews
themselves seem fully to agree with it, when they propound this, as one of
their most ancient Traditions, That the Messiah is to procure their Salvation
the self same Day, in which they were delivered from their Egyptian Bondage.
Fagius ad Exodus 12.13.

First then, I say, that it is evident our Lord's Design was to substitute the
Memorial of the Deliverance of Mankind by his Death, in the room of the
Remembrance of the Jews Deliverance by the Blood of the Paschal Lamb. He does
not now command the Eating of a Lamb as formerly; and his Words, Do this, are
not at all spoken to that purpose; but his Intent was to abolish the Memory of
the Curse GOD had pronounced against the Race of Cham, which was executed in
the Death of the Firstborn in Egypt, and had been a Principle of Division
among those Nations he now unites again. It is with respect to his Death (which
under the Appearance of a Curse, has made him the Blessing of the World) that
he ordained this Ceremony of breaking and eating Bread. Which latter Ceremony
CHRIST prefers before the Eating of the Paschal Lamb, it being his Will, that
it should thenceforwards be considered as the Chief Ceremony of his Religion,
as being a solemn Token of his having abolished the Curse due to Sinners;
whereof indeed the Paschal Lamb was a public Monument with respect to the
Egyptians, though it was a Signal of God's Blessing to the Israelites.

IN the second place I say, that Christ expresses himself so as to give us
Idea's very much differing from those of the Jews. For First, He speaks of a
New Testament, in opposition to the Old he was about to abolish. Secondly, He
opposes his Blood, Which was shed for many, for the remission of their Sins, to
the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, that was poured forth only for a few, and the
Ceremony of it celebrated but in one Nation, viz. that of the Jews, to which
alone the Benefit of the Egyptian Deliverance was appropriate. Thirdly, He
opposes the Eating of his Flesh, which he represents as a Sacrifice He was
about to offer up for the Sins of the World, to the Eating of those Lambs, that
were slain in pursuance of God's Law.

This being laid down (which I hope cannot be contradicted) it is plain that
forasmuch as JESUS CHRIST did partly make use of the Idea's or Notions of the
Paschal Lamb, and partly expressed himself with opposition to that Ceremony, We
must necessarily, in order to our apprehending the true Meaning of our Lord in
the Institution of his Supper, and having a perfect Knowledge of it, make out a
due Parallel between the Paschal Lamb, that kept up the Remembrance of the
Egyptian Deliverance, and the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which preserves that
of the Death of our Lord and Savior.

In order whereto these following Reflections may be made upon the Institution
and Celebration of the Paschal Lamb.

The First is, That is was God's Pleasure in instituting this Ceremony, to
transmit the Memory of so great and prodigious an Event as that of his People's
Deliverance out of Egypt, was to all Posterity. This He Himself expresses in
the 12th. Chapter of Exodus, in this manner: This day shall be unto you for a
Memorial; and you shall keep it a Feast to the Lord throughout your
Generations: And when your Children shall answer, It is the Sacrifice of the
Lord's Passover, who passed over the Houses of the Children of Israel in Egypt,
when He smote the Egyptians, and delivered our Houses. It was with regard to
this, that to excite the Curiosity of all the People, yea, even of the very
Children, He ordained that they, who were to celebrate the Passover, should
take a Journey to the Temple, in that Equipage of Travelers, in which their
Forefathers departed out of Egypt. He would have them also eat Unleavened
Bread for the space of sevendays, and bitter, or wild Herbs with the Paschal
Lamb; and He (in like manner) ordained, that they should every year renew this
Ceremony, wherein their Children had a share as soon as they were capable of
asking their Fathers the reason of all this change from their usual way of
Eating. And indeed such a Ceremony thus solemnly observed every year, and to
which every one, from one Generation to another, does by a public Law submit
himself, is an infallible means to establish the Belief of a Matter of Fact,
and preserve the Memory of great Events.

The Second is, That GOD would have his People consider with what exact
Faithfulness, He had acquitted Himself of all his Promises, by delivering them
with a strong Hand, and stretched-out Arm from the cruel Power of the
Egyptians, at the same time when He made an Example of this Barbarous Posterity
of Cham, who had afflicted them in a long and painful Servitude. For as on one
hand GOD had subjected all the Progeny of Cham to his Curse (as you may see,
Genesis 9.25.) which began to take Effect in those Plagues wherewith He smote
Egypt, though it was afterward more exactly fulfilled by the Destruction of
the Canaanites; So on the other He said to Abraham, Genesis 15. v. 13, 14, and 16.
where he explains the promised Blessing; Know of a Surety, that thy Seed shall
be a Stranger in a Land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they
shall afflict them four hundred years. And also that Nation whom they shall
serve, will I judge; and afterward shall they come out with great Substance.
But in the Fourth Generation they shall come hither again. Behold here the
Oracle that contains an Excellent Promise; which being made good to the Jews,
He commands them to celebrate the Memory of the Exact Accomplishment thereof by
observing the Anniversary Festival of the Paschal Lamb.

THE third Reflection we may make upon the Institution of the Paschal Lamb, in
this, That God would have the Jews look on their Deliverance out of Egypt, as
the greatest Blessing He had ever vouchsafed to them. And certainly as He had
expressed an exceeding great Favor in withholding Abraham's Knife from
slaying Isaac, and substituting a Ram in the Room of him; so there was none of
the Firstborn of the Israelites, but could say, that GOD had been as
favorable to them, as He was to Isaac, by causing the Sword of the Destroying
Angel to fall upon a Lamb, at a time when he was commissioned to slay all the
Firstborn in Egypt both of Man and Beast.

The Fourth Reflection was hinted at just now, which is, That GOD would have
his People understand, that the Expiation of the Sins of their Ancestors had
been typify'd and prefigur'd by his accepting of the Blood of their Lambs,
instead of the Lives and Blood of their Firstborn. And indeed in agreement to
this Observation we may say, that the whole Law in all its several Expiations,
wherein Sin was transferred upon the Sacrifice, did nothing else but further
illustrate and extend the Figure of Abraham's Offering, as likewise that of the
Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb, and represent the same more lively and
distinctly to the Minds of them that Offered; God having joined to this
Expiatory Sacrifice, certain circumstances of Places, Persons, and Time, to the
end the Impression of it might be the deeper, and leave a more lively Sense in
the minds of those that were concerned therein.

A Fifth Reflection upon the Paschal Lamb is this, that it was to be considered
as a Public Pledge and Token of the Covenant GOD had made with the People of
Israel, by preferring them before the Ismaelites and Edomites, who were
descended, the former from Abraham, and the latter from Isaac. The Sign of
Circumcision did sufficiently acquaint the Jews, that by this distinguishing
Character GOD had chosen them from among all other Nations of the Earth, to
accomplish in the midst of them the Promise He had made to Abraham, namely,
that of his Seed the Messiah was to be born, in whom all Nations should be
blessed: But this sign of Circumcision being common to the Jews, with the
Ismaelites and Edomites, the pretenses of both these to the Privileges of the
Covenant (which GOD had first made with Abraham, and afterward renewed with
Isaac) was still kept up. It was therefore requisite there should be a
Religious Ceremony, that might demonstrate that this Covenant was particularly
confined within the Family of Jacob. Which was done by the Paschal Lamb. For
this represented to them, that (according to what was foretold Genesis 15.)
Affliction, and that in this State they had received a particular Relief and
Deliverance from GOD; which, forasmuch as it could not be said of the
Ismaelites or Edomites, did most strongly refute all their Pretensions to a
Right in God's Covenant with Abraham. This likewise most clearly set forth to
them, that God by virtue of his Covenant, had, out of his Mercy, preserved them
at a time when the Egyptians felt the Effects of his Curse and Vengeance, and
that accordingly He would not fail of fulfilling that Great Promise, in order
to the accomplishment of which He had so miraculously preserved Isaac, and
after him, their Fathers also, from the Sword of the Destroying Angel.

LASTLY, It is to be observed, that as this Ceremony reminded them of GOD'S
Love for their Nation, of his Faithfulness in making good his Promises, of the
Expiation of their Iniquities, and of his Covenant with them (A Covenant by
which He had engaged to be their God, that is, their Benefactor and Protector,
and one day to give them the Messiah, who was to be born of their Nation,) so
it naturally led them also to look upon themselves as the People of GOD, and to
obey Him faithfully; In a word, to answer by a Holy Life, and all the marks of
true Gratitude, the Honor GOD had conferred upon them, by his making (out of
his mere Good Will) a Covenant with them, and calling them to so great Hopes,
as those were, which He had set before them.

CHAP. IV. Of the Truths which the Holy Communion represents to us.
THESE are the Principal Truths, great Comforts and just Obligations to serve
GOD religiously, which so manifestly were implied in the Celebration of the
Paschal Lamb. But how much more important is the thing our Savior has made to
supply the place of it in his Institution of the Eucharist! That which he
exhibits to us in this Sacred Mystery (whether with respect to the Truths,
Comforts, or our Obligations to Piety it contains) is infinitely more Sublime,
great and real. To be assured of this, we need only to resume and attentively
consider the forementioned three Points. I begin with the Truths the Eucharist
represents to us.

THE first of these Truths respects the Purpose and Design of our Lord, when He
instituted the Sacrament of his Supper. Certainly it was (as all Christians
agree) to establish a public Monument of his Death, as being the greatest
Event that could ever be commemorated. First, He brake the Bread; and then, to
express what He meant by this breaking of the Bread, He said, that it was his
Body broken, i. e. torn by the cruelty of his Tormenters. He presented
afterward the Cup to his Disciples; and to unfold the Mystery thereof, added
that it was the New Testament in his Blood; which had a natural reference to
his Death. This He explains more clearly in his command, Do this in remembrance
of me, that is, in commemoration of my Sufferings. Which made St. Paul say, As
often as you shall Eat of this Bread and Drink of this Cup, you show (or
according to our way of speaking, you must show or declare) the Lord's Death,
i. e. you are to call to mind, and solemnly commemorate this wonderful effect
of the Love of God. Indeed we see the Evangelists have so exactly described the
Death of Christ, with all the Circumstances thereof to us, that we may aver,
they have (as it were) presented us with the very Picture and Lively Image of
it. So that had we been Eyewitnesses of the same our selves, and in company
with them upon Mount Calvary, we should hardly have been so well acquainted
therewith, as now we are. But besides this, it was our Savior's will, that by
a Religious Ceremony, which should be solemnized to the World's End, his Death
might continually be placed before our Eyes. And notwithstanding this ignomious
Death was to prove a Stumbling Block to the Jews, and at first be looked upon
as mere Foolishness by the Gentiles; yet would He have the Remembrance thereof
to be dearly preserved in his Church, by his instituting of the Eucharist much
after the same manner as God the Father had instituted the Ceremony of the
Paschal Lamb, which did yearly refresh the Memory of the Jews about their
Deliverance out of Egypt, as the most remarkable Event, that had ever happened
to their Nation.

THE second Truth which the Eucharist offers to us, is, That JESUS CHRIST is
the true MESSIAH promised by God, and that we have in Him the Accomplishment of
the ancient Prophecies; which (among the diverse Characters that the MESSIAH
was to be known by, and are exactly found in Our Lord) expressly foretold that
He was to suffer Death. Psalm. 22. Is. 53. Dan. 9.26. And here it is well worth
our while to consider: First, That GOD had stamped the mark of his Curse upon
the Punishment of the Cross. Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree, Deuteronomy.
21.23. Gal. 3.13. Secondly, That though GOD had described the MESSIAH, as One
who was to be the Fountain of Blessings to all Nations, Tribes and Families of
the Earth; yet at the same time He had given forth many Oracles concerning his
Death upon the Cross, and the several Circumstances of it. Thirdly, That GOD
was pleased to dictate a greater Number of Oracles relating to this matter,
than to any other of those Glorious and wonderful Events, whereby the MESSIAH
was to be distinguished during his Life here. The Prophecies mentioning his
Birth, and the place of his Nativity, are but few; whereas GOD presignifi'd by
the Prophets, and represented by manifold Lively Types and Figures 1. That both
Jews and Gentiles were to join together in the Destroying of the MESSIAH, Psalm.
2.1. 2. That his own Disciple, and one that ate Bread with him should betray
him. Psalm. 41.9. 3. That He should be sold for thirty Pieces of Silver, Zach.
11.12. 4. That his Disciples would forsake Him, Zach. 13.7. 5. That He was to
be the scorn and derision of his Adversaries, Psalm. 22.7. 6. That He should
hold his Peace as a Sheep dumb before his Tormenters, Isa. 53.7. 7. That the
Great Men of the World were to take Council together for putting Him to Death.
Psalm. 2.2. 8. That He was to be exposed as an Object of Horror and Detestation,
Isa. 53.3. 9. That He was to be reckoned among Transgressors, Isa. 53.12. 10.
That they should pierce his Hands and Feet, Psalm. 22.16. 11. That Lots should
be cast upon his Vesture, Psalm. 22.18. 12. That He should be insulted over, and
derided on the account of his trusting in God, Psalm. 22.8. 13. That he was to
complain of his being abandoned by GOD to the fury of his Enemies, Psalm. 22.1.
14. That they would give Him Gall and Vinegar to drink, Psalm. 69.22. 15. That
He was to commit his Soul into the Hands of GOD, Psalm. 31.5. 16. That his Side
was to be pierced with a Spear, Zach. 12.10. 17. That none of his Bones should
be broken, Exodus 12.49. Psalm. 34.20. 18. That He should be laid in a Rich Man's
Tomb, Isa. 53.9. And besides these, there a great many other Circumstances to
the same purpose, exactly specified by the Prophets. But I wave them; my Design
being only to hint at the most remarkable.

WHAT I have mentioned here is sufficient: First, to demonstrate, that CHRIST'S
Death (with all the notable passages of it) was a convincing Proof of his being
the promised MESSIAH. But in the second place, it is yet more evident, that as
our Savior would have a lively Sense of his Bloody Death and Passion, to be
preserved by a public Monument, that might perpetuate the memory of it in his
Church, so was He willing thereby to inculcate the more forcibly this Proof of
his being the Messiah. A Proof taken from the kind of Death, which He suffered,
and the Circumstances attending it. For as much as this Death (which had so
much Scandal in it) being the Object of the Christian Religion would inevitably
expose it to many Reflections and the Opposition of great difficulties.

THE third Truth, which the Eucharist represents to us, is, That the Passion of
CHRIST, which the Jews look upon, as an Evident Sign of the Curse of God, is
most truly a plentiful conveyance of the greatest Blessings to Sinners. This we
are made sensible of, as soon as we reflect upon these two Things. 1. That GOD
denounced his Curse against Sinners, not only when He said, Genesis 3.17. Cursed
shall be the Ground for thy sake, or when in Deuteronomy. 27.26. He pronounced him
accursed, who did not continue in all the Words of the Law to do them; But also
by annexing this Curse in particular to that kind of Death which our Lord
suffered; it being said, Deuteronomy. 21.23. He that is hanged is accursed of GOD. 2.
That though GOD by his Oracles given to Abraham had promised, that all Nations
should be blessed by means of the Messiah, yet He does no less expressly
declare, that the Messiah was to suffer the Punishment of the Cross, and
consequently be under the Curse of GOD, Psalm. 22. Zach. 12.10. A man must
either make no use of his own Reason, or presently infer from these Truths,
that the MESSIAH was to be a Blessing to the World, no other way than by his
being exposed to the Curse for a time, viz. by undergoing an accursed Death
before he could shower down all the Blessings of his Grace and Glory upon us.
The Eucharist preserving the Memory of our Savior's Passion, naturally leads
us to this Reflection. Which will be much more sensibly impressed upon us, if
with it we join a view of JESUS CHRIST; who presents Himself on the Cross, as a
Victim offered for Sinners, and his Death as a Real Sacrifice.

THE fourth Truth, is that which is most distinctly laid open to us in the
Manner and Circumstances of the Eucharist. For,

First of all, CHRIST did not only institute this Ceremony after He had eaten
the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples, which set before their Eyes. 1. The
Sacrifice of the Ram, that was offered up in the Room of Isaac. 2. That of the
Lambs in Egypt, for the redemption of the Firstborn of the Israelites. 3. The
Testimony of John the Baptist expressed in these Terms; This is the Lamb of
God, who takes away the Sins of the World. Which saying of his explains all the
ancient Types, and with one word does illustrate whatever we read concerning
the Death of the Messiah in the 53d. of Isaiah. And,

Secondly, CHRIST in the Institution of his Sacrament expresses Himself also by
way of opposition to the Paschal Lamb, and other Sacrifices of the Law; thereby
to intimate that the ancient Deliverance the Jews had obtained by their
offering of Lambs for their Firstborn, was but a Figure of that which was to
be procured by his Death, and that this Death was to be considered as a true
Sacrifice, by means of which GOD was certainly and fully reconciled to Sinners.
And this Truth it is evident CHRIST was willing to declare most sensibly to us;
1. When He represents his Body as broken, and his Blood as shed. 2. When he
wills us to eat the Bread of the Eucharist, and drink of the Cup, as Eating his
Body and drinking his Blood. Indeed when Our Savior commanded his Disciples,
(and in their Persons all the Faithful) to eat his Flesh and drink his Blood,
it is manifest, that He would, 1. Take off the restraint of the Old Law, which
forbad Sinners to eat of the Sacrifice that was offered for their Sins. 2.
Abolish that Precept of the same Law, which absolutely enjoined Men to abstain
from Blood. And as this intimates that those Victims of old had never made any
through Expiation; so it plainly shows, that CHRIST offered up Himself as the
true Sacrifice from which this Blessed Effect was to be looked for. Moreover
after his having suggested these Ideas of Himself as a Victim slain, He now
represents Himself to us under the Notion of an High Priest, when he says, Mat.
26.29. I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine, until that Day
when I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom; In which words He alludes
to the Custom of of the High Priest, who after he had happily concluded his
Solemn Sacrifice on the Day of Atonement, and was come home safe from the
Sanctuary (where GOD had killed some) he was wont to make a Feast to his
Friends, in token of joy, for the good success of his Function.

IT IS this important Truth the Apostle St. Paul so strongly asserts in his
Epistle to the Hebrews; And it is for the same reason, that when he was
desirous to take off the Corinthians from the Communion they had with Heathens
in their Sacrifices, he represents to them the Celebration of the Eucharist, as
a participating of the Sacrifice offered up by our Lord.

INDEED if this Sacrament had been instituted by CHRIST, after his Resurrection
(which wholly effaced the Pourtraiture of his Shame and Sufferings) it would
have been much more difficult to have thence inculcated to us this important
Truth of the Christian Religion. But Our Lord did expressly choose the time
immediately before his Death, that so the Ceremony, which was to preserve the
Memory of it, might so fill us with the sense of the Shame and Punishment he
endured, that it might lead us to make a continual Reflection upon these
Truths, viz. That when JESUS CHRIST died; He died for Sinners; That when He was
nailed to the Cross, He bore their Sins in his Body on the Tree; That when He
was wounded, it was for our Transgressions; and that by his Stripes we are
healed.

THE fifth Truth, which our Savior was willing continually to set before our
Eyes by the Celebration of the Eucharist, is, That this Bloody Death of his was
the Blessed Means, by which GOD entered into Covenant with Mankind. Moses had
said of the Blood he sprinkled upon the People, Behold the Blood of the
Covenant which the Lord has made with you, concerning all these words, Exodus
24.8. And Our Savior plainly opposing his Blood to that, says concerning the
Cup, This Cup is the New Covenant (or Testament) in my Blood, which is shed for
the remission of your Sins. This Covenant is the greatest and most important
Truth of our Religion. By it GOD delivers Men from Hell, and restores them to
his Favor and Protection. It is this also displays before us the whole Mystery
of our Redemption; as 1. That Man being created Innocent fell into Rebellion
against GOD, by listening to the insinuations of the Devil. 2. That though Man
deserved to be not only reduced to nothing, from whence the Hand of GOD had
raised him at the first, but to be cast into Hell, there to undergo the
punishment due to his Disobedience; yet GOD being moved with pity, resolved to
forgive all, and make a New Covenant with him. 3. That it was the Will of GOD
that his Own Son taking in due time Human Nature upon Him, should be the Person
in whose Blood this Covenant was to be Established. 4. That JESUS CHRIST having
really shed his Blood, this Covenant was fully ratified and confirmed, and
Remission of Sins offered to all that would repent. For that is the thing which
is meant by the New Covenant, according as GOD expresses it in Jeremy 31.34.
saying, I will forgive their Iniquity and remember their Sin no more.

THE sixth considerable Truth is, That our Savior would have us always to bear
in mind his Last Coming to judge the World, and consummate the Work of Our
Redemption. Accordingly this Sacrament contains solemn Marks and Instances of
the fulfilling of the Promises God had made to send the Messiah into the World.
It sets forth in what manner He began to act and suffer for Mankind. But He
being to continue but a little while here upon Earth, and to be taken up to
Heaven, there to remain to the End of the World, this Ceremony acquaints us,
that He is then to come again from thence, in order to fulfill our Hopes, by
causing us to reap the last Fruits of his Expiation of Our Sins, that is, in
destroying Death, by a glorious Resurrection, and making us to live for ever
with GOD, a Life that neither Sin, nor Death (which Sin has brought into the
World) can ever disturb. And it may be said, that as the first Coming of the
Messiah was the great Object of the Religion, Desires and Hopes of the Jews,
Art thou (say they) He that should come, or do we look for another? Mat. 11.3.
as likewise of the Promises of Blessings which GOD had made to the Gentiles
themselves, He being called the Expectation and desire of all Nations; Hag.
2.7. so is his second Coming the great Object of the Christian Religion. This
same JESUS (said the Angels to his Disciples, gazing up to Heaven) who is taken
up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as you have seen Him go
into Heaven, Act. 1.11. On this account also the Church is represented to us
(Rev. 22.17.) calling for her Bridegroom. And the Spirit and the Bride say,
Come. And let him that hears, say, Come. And indeed as the Prophets describe
these two Comings of the Messiah under the notion of one single Object; so we
see, that according to the mind of St. Paul (who assigns for the continuance of
this Holy Ordinance the whole Interval of time to the end of the World and
Christ's Return.) Our Savior has in this Sacrament united this his two
Comings, as being the greatest Objects of our Religion.

CHAP. V. Of the Comforts the Holy Eucharist administers to us.
THUS having explained the important Truths which the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper engages us to meditate upon, it is very Evident that Our Participation
of this Sacrament furnishes us with most lively and refreshing Comforts, which
I now come to propose in order, with reference to the foregoing Truths.

FIRST then, What joy must we needs feel when we reflect upon this great Event,
viz. the Death of Our Savior? Let us but compare our Happiness with the
Condition of the Patriarchs, and we shall easily perceive how high a pitch our
Joy ought to be raised to. St. Peter tells us, that the Prophets have enquired
and searched diligently what, or what manner of time the Spirit of CHRIST,
which was in them did signify when it testified beforehand the Sufferings of
CHRIST and the Glory that should follow, 1 Pet 1.10, 11. The Promises of GOD
did fill their Hearts with gladness, even before they came to pass, yea, though
it was revealed to them, that it was not to themselves, but to us that they
ministered those things, which have been declared to us by the Preachers of the
Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.12. They rejoiced to see the Faithfulness of GOD in the future
accomplishment of his Promises. And to this purpose St. Paul informs us, that
the Patriarchs and Holy Men of old died in the Faith, not having received the
Promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them and
embraced them. Heb. 11.13. Yet all this at a distance. Thus Balaam, Numb.
24.17. I see Him, but not now; I behold Him, but not nigh. But it is our
happiness that we are come to that Blessed State, which Our Savior
appropriates to his Disciples. We see those things which so many Kings and
Righteous Persons desired to see, and did not see them. John the Baptist who
Baptized Him, bore Witness of Him, and foretold his Death; yet never saw it.
This was an Advantage reserved for us. His Death is now in most lively Colors
presented to our View. It is Matter of Fact, certain and indubitably attested.
He is come down from Heaven; He has taken our Flesh upon Him; discharged the
Functions of his Ministry here upon Earth, Sanctified Himself for our sakes;
suffered Death, and ordained a Memorial of it, as of a thing past and done.
They of old had no distinct knowledge of the Death of the MESSIAH, nor of the
kind and manner of it. All which is clearly manifested to us, at this Day. And
though the Jew meets with Matter of Scandal, and the Gentile and occasion of
Reproach, yet the Christian finds subject of the most exalted Joy and Comfort,
in the Celebration of these Holy Mysteries.

THE Second Comfort the Eucharist administers to the Faithful, is exceeding
sweet, and ravishing. We can no sooner in our Meditations, reflect upon the
fulfilling of the ancient Types of the Paschal Lamb, and the Oracles of old,
concerning the Coming of the MESSIAH, but we find the support of our Faith, and
a solid ground for our Hope to rest on. Who can conceive the least doubt of
GOD'S performing those Promises, the Execution of which seems as yet very
difficult, and at a great distance, since He has already fulfilled that of
sending the MESSIAH, who had been so long looked for, during the Course of so
many Ages? He sills us with good hopes for things to come (says an ancient
Father) For He who has given Himself to us here, will much rather do so
hereafter, Chrysostom. H. 6. ad. Pop. And indeed, who sees not that this
Dispensation of his being manifested in our Flesh, and his Death in particular,
must fill us with strong and lively Hopes, when we address our Prayers to Him?
Christian, It Is true, thou must appear before GOD, but GOD has left all
Judgment to the Son; and He by partaking of Flesh and Blood, is become thy
Brother. He shed his Blood, and laid down his Life to redeem thee; He died to
deliver thee from that Misery and Curse to which thou had doomed thy self to
all Eternity. Would thou be as fully convinced of his tender Love and
Compassion, as thou art of his Power? Consider He feeds thee with his own
Blood, and is set forth in the Holy Supper, as the Lamb of God. is it possible
that this Consideration should not remind us of that Excess of Love, which
prompted Him to die for us? We see here not a Sheep, but the Shepherd, giving
his Life for the Salvation of his Sheep. Where will you meet with a Shepherd
that feeds his Sheep with his own Blood? Yet JESUS CHRIST, the Great Shepherd
feeds us with his. What may not we expect from so punctual a Faithfulness,
supported by a Goodness and Compassion that is beyond all Example?

THE third Comfort, which we may reap hence, is this, That being delivered from
the Curse we lay under, every one of us may now say to his Soul, Return unto
thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; And with St.
Paul triumphantly cry out, There is now no condemnation to them who are in
CHRIST JESUS. It Is He has delivered us from the fear of Death; by means of
which we were all our Life's time subjects to Bondage. Before we are convinced
of this Truth we are in a State of Misery, Terror and Despair. But since
CHRIST has altered our Condition, by removing the Curse that was against us,
What Peace, Joy and Comfort ought not to possess our Consciences? If we
consider David's Condition before Nathan had assured him of GOD'S Pardon, we
have a lively Emblem of the lamentable Circumstances in which the Sinner is,
whose Ears always ring with the Sound of this dreadful Sentence, Cursed is he,
that continues not in all the Words of this Law to do them. Deuteronomy. 27.26. He
sees the Sword of the Destroying Angel ready to strike him. But now this
Sacrament tells him, that God has put away his Iniquities, and removed the
Curse he had so justly drawn down upon himself. This Religious Ceremony which
CHRIST has annexed to the Declaration of his Gospel, is a Public Monument,
that GOD henceforth is not only become placable, but thoroughly appeased and
reconciled to Man. He cries to us, that our Iniquities are pardoned, but says
the Sinner, what shall I offer to GOD to make atonement for my offenses? Shall
I offer him, (as Abraham did Isaac) my Firstborn for my Transgressions? And
the Eucharist points him (as the Angel did Abraham) at the Victim prepared by
GOD, or rather bespeaks him in the Words of St. John the Baptist, Behold the
Lamb of GOD that takes away the Sin of the World. And then the Sinner with Joy
and Exultation breaks forth, He is, He is indeed come into the World; He has
suffered Death to save Sinners, whereof I am chief.

NOW, if these Reflections on the Eucharist afford such Comforts to Christians
in general, they will more sensibly affect us, when we come to consider these
Comforts more distinctly. The Holy Sacrament by preserving the Remembrance of
CHRIST'S Death, obliges us more particularly to meditate upon this wonder of
the Wisdom and Love of GOD, whereby He has delivered us from our Sins, by
charging them upon our Lord; who, like a Sacrifice, was slain in the room of
Sinners, as the Ram was in the stead of Isaac, and as the Lambs, which were
killed, to redeem the Firstborn of the Israelites, from the Sword of the
Destroyer. Now as there is nothing more stupendous than this Substitution, so
nothing yields Consolation like it. For here we see, 1. The Love of the Father,
who withheld the stroke of his Vengeance from Mankind, whereas He destroyed the
Apostate Angels, without remedy. 2. The Charity of the Son, who is become our
Surety. Herein is the Love of GOD, not that we loved Him first, but that He
loved us. No man has greater love than this, that he lays down his Life not for
his Friend, but his Enemy. And yet thus far did our Savior's Love carry Him.
He presented Himself a Sacrifice to GOD the Father. He received the stroke that
was to wound us; neither the horror of those Crimes we had committed, nor the
dreadful Punishments that were due to us for them, being able to deter Him from
taking upon him our Nature and Sufferings. GOD gave him to us, that He might be
the High Priest of his Church. But He was not invested in this Dignity, nor is
represented as making Intercession in Heaven for us, neither set forth as
Blessing of us, but because He has expiated our Sins, by offering up Himself a
Sacrifice to free us from Death. Moses's Wife seeing her Husband threat'ned
with Death by the Angel for her Son's not being circumcised, thought it
expedient to hazard the Child's Life by an hasty and venturous Circumcision,
that she might secure her Husband from the danger that hung over him. GOD in
this Case, does something far more great and wonderful for us. He gives the
Life of his own Son to redeem his Enemies; and behold, the Son readily
consents, and yields himself, as Isaac did. Lo, I come (says He) in the Volume
of thy Book, it is wriiten of me, I delight to do thy Will, O my God. O
Ineffable and amazing Love to Mankind, who deserved nothing, but an Eternal
Curse!

AS it was in the Blood of Lambs, that GOD made a Covenant with the People of
Israel, so the Eucharist representing to us in the fifth Place, that the Blood
of CHRIST is the Ground and Foundation of the New Covenant, which GOD has made
with Christians, we cannot look upon the Sacrament as the Pledge and Seal of
this Covenant, without being filled with an Excess of Joy and Consolation. For
indeed, what greater Glory can be imagined, than for Man to be admitted to a
Treaty with GOD? And what an inconceivable Advantage is this, that GOD should
vouchsafe to enter into Covenant with us? There are none but are sensible of
the Happiness of the Israelites, in this regard. To be convinced of which, we
need only hear them, even at this day, speaking with the greatest Comfort, of
the Honor GOD therein has done them, notwithstanding their total dispersion,
and groaning under the Burden of that Curse, which pursues and overtakes them
every where. Now, that ancient Covenant GOD has abolished, as being imperfect;
but this which we commemorate, is to endure for ever. The Design of the former
was only to give the Jews a lively Sense of Sin, or at the best to administer a
Typical Expiation; whereas the latter, viz. the New (according to the Prophet
Jeremy) makes a true Atonement for Sin, and affords a Remission rightly and
properly so called. That had no promises, but what concerned a Happiness here
on Earth; whereas This does promise a Resurrection and Eternal Glory.

THE greatest Honor the Old Covenant did confer upon the Jews, was this, That
the MESSIAH should be born of their Blood; but the Advantage of the New, is,
That the MESSIAH partaking of Flesh and Blood with the rest of Mankind, has
given his own Blood to raise them to the Glory of Adoption, who shall believe
in Him. O how happy is the People, whose God is the Lord! And what does this
Expression, to be the God of any one, import, but this, viz. To be his Great
and Sovereign Benefactor? Of old He was the GOD of Abraham, but not of Loath,
and his Posterity; Of Isaac, but not of Ismael and his Offspring; Of Jacob,
but not of Esau and the Edomites. Now, He is the GOD of all the Earth. But he
has not made this Covenant with all the Nations of the World, save only by
virtue and on the Sole Account of the Blood of CHRIST. And can we with any
attention, reflect on this Truth, represented to us in the Holy Eucharist,
without feeling a Joy unspreakable and full of Glory? GOD had promised to enter
into such a Covenant, as this; and Jeremy describes it in the 31. Chap. of his
Prophecies; Yet the Old lasted till John the Baptist, and so long the
Ceremonies of it were in use. But then comes CHRIST, and instead of continuing
the Celebration of the Old Covenant, which was made in the Blood of the Paschal
Lamb, He abrogates it, and in its room substitutes the New Covenant, made in
his own Blood. Do this (says He) in remembrance of me. Not That which was done
before, but This: For this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed
for the Remission of your Sins.

TO conclude, it is to be considered (and this is the last Vein of Comfort hid
in the Eucharist) that this Holy Sacrament inviting us to take a View of
CHRIST'S second Coming, as well as of his Dispensation in the Flesh, it is
impossible but it must fill our Souls with surpassing Joy and Comfort. The full
Salvation of Believers does, as yet, only consist in Hope. GOD indeed pardons
their Sins; but they are still subject to all the Miseries Sin has brought into
the World. They hope for Eternal Life; and yet dye like other Men. Their Bodies
are laid in the Grave, and become the food of Worms. So that their Expectation
seems to be quite frustrated. And as the Jews and Gentiles find Matter of
Scandal and Derision in the Death of the Son of GOD, so according to all
outward appearance, they have the same reason to insult over the Faith and Hope
of his Followers, when they compare these with their present Condition, which
to the Eye, differs not from that of other Men. But all these dark Clouds shall
at last be scattered; these Shadows vanish, and the Glory of our Lord and his
Faithful be revealed. He shall appear from Heaven in the Glory of his Father,
and every Eye shall see Him, even they who have pierced Him. And as He will
thus display his Majesty in the Sight of all the World, so will He at the same
time unvail the Life and Glory of his Children, who at present are ready to
sink under the burden of Sin, the Violence of CHRIST's Adversaries, the
deceits of the World, and the Devil, and the Power of Death, which is the last
Enemy of CHRIST and his Church. He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood has
Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Whosoever eats of this
Bread shall live for ever. These are our Savior's Promises, wherein as He
terms the Embracing of Him by Faith, an Eating of his Flesh, in opposition to
the Type of Manna; So this Eating may be as truly ascribed to them, who by
Faith consider Him, as the Sacrifice that has taken away the Punishment due to
Sin. O what comforts do arise to the Faithful from the Expectation of this his
Return! What exulting Joys will they be filled with at his Coming! What
Delights flow in upon them as they mediate hereon! What ravishing Pleasures
does it afford us amidst the greatest Evils of this Life! What quiet in the
sharpest Trials! And what Confidence even at the time when Death stares us in
the Face!

CHAP. VI. Of the Duties prescribed to us in the Holy Eucharist.
I SUPPOSE I have very clearly made out, that it is impossible attentively to
consider the Truths, which the Lord's Supper discovers to us, without reaping
the unspreakable Comforts which so naturally spring from it. And it may (with
as much Ease) be demonstrated, that these Truths indispensably engage us to the
most Essential Duties of our Religion; and that GOD having comprehended what is
most capable to administer the sweetest Consolations to our Souls, in this
Mystery, it cannot but at the same time be very influential toward
Sanctification and a Godly Life. To the making out of which I design the
Conclusion of this Treatise, where I intend to represent these Duties, as the
necessary and natural Consequents of what I have before laid down. It behooves
every Communicant seriously to consider of these Engagements; And the rather,
because this is a sure way for them to know whether they have worthily received
the Sacrament, or to amend the faults by them committed in any preceding
Communion, for want of discharging these Religious performances as they ought.

FIRST then, Is it possible that a Christian, who knows that JESUS CHRIST
designed the Celebration of the Eucharist for a public Monument of his Death,
as of a most Signal Event, worthy of all Commemoration, should express any
neglect of, or indifference for this Sacred Feast? The Primitive Church called
the Faithful to it every Lord's Day, looking upon the partaking of this Holy
Sacrament, as a Public Profession of our Faith, and the very Badge of
Christianity. And shall our remissness and coldness in Religion be a lawful
Excuse for our absenting our selves from the Lord's Table, when He himself
invites us to it, and affords us opportunities for it? Some perhaps will fancy
that they have a just pretense to abstain from Receiving, because of
differences or Lawsuits they are engaged in. But if CHRIST debars them his
Table, who are so unkindly disposed toward their Neighbors, does not He teach
us withal, and point us at the Remedy that is to be found for the Cure of such
Uncharitableness? He tells us, in this Case, that he who is about to offer,
must leave his Gift before the Altar, and go and first be reconciled to his
Brother, and then come and offer his Gift, Mat. 5.24. And why this? But to
teach us, that we must either wholly renounce our Religion, or else put our
selves upon faithful Endeavors to obey the Laws of it; That a Profession of
Christianity is both Erroneous and impious, which is not accompanied with a
Practice of the Duties it prescribes; and that it is impossible for a Man, with
any fruit or benefit, to perform the public Requirings of it, while its most
important Precepts and Rules are neglected.

SECONDLY, let it be observed, That since Christians look upon the Celebration
of the Eucharist, as a convincing Proof of the Truth of their Religion (it
being a public Memorial of Our Savior's Death, which was a most signal
fulfilling of GOD's Promises, and an Evident Character, whereby CHRIST was to
be known for the true Messiah) they cannot but find a Natural Obligation
incumbent on them to become Christians indeed. The Sacrament of Baptism is
conferred upon us at a time when we know not the Nature of the Engagements we
enter into, nor the Justice and Extent of the Promises made in our behalves
therein. But he who receives the Lord's Supper, ratifies before GOD and Man,
the Promises made in his Name at his Baptism. And this he does in his own
person, as supposing he has now sufficiently examined the Truth of the Religion
on he professes. He is satisfied that his Parents have done him the greatest
kindness imaginable, by engaging him in GOD's Service from his most tender
Infancy; and that they did well to consecrate him to it for ever, since it is
in this Profession his whole Happiness consists; and he now solemnly renews the
Oath of his inviolable Obedience and Faithfulness to GOD, which before he had
done by his Sureties. Can we thus reflect upon the Participation of the
Eucharist, and not conceive a most sensible sorrow for having acted contrary to
the Laws of CHRIST and Our own Hopes? Can we entertain this Notion of it, and
not resolve for the time to come; more diligently to pursue Our Heavenly
Calling, and more exactly answer the Holy Design of the Religion we profess?
Certainly it is against Common Sense to pretend to be a Christian, and yet to
live like a Jew, or Heathen. It is ridiculous, outwardly to acknowledge Laws
more Holy and Divine, than those the World is governed by, and at the same time
to follow the Customs and Manners of Worldly Men. All the Vices of the Age
ought to find their Death in this Reflection, as they do their Condemnation in
the sacred Laws and Religion of Our Lord and Savior.

WE come now to a third Reflection upon the Holy Communion, which is no less
plain and natural than the foregoing, viz. That in this Sacrament we consider
the Death of CHRIST, as the Source of that Blessing GOD had promised, and the
Principle of all those He will hereafter impart to us. This Notion sets before
our Eyes the Curse we should inevitably have fallen under, had not GOD reversed
it. Can any one seriously think of this Truth, without praising God with all
the Power of his Soul, and returning the Fruits of a just acknowledgement to
Him for the same? O how dreadful a thing it is, to be accursed of GOD! Go ye
Cursed into Eternal Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And on the
contrary, how transporting and full of Comfort it is, to be blessed by Him.
JESUS CHRIST, the Blessed of GOD, has blessed us with all manner of Blessings.
He became a Curse for us, that we might be made a Blessing of God in Him. Come
(says He) Ye Blessed of my Father. And by what other means can we be raised to
this Bliss, but by the Study and Practice of Holiness? It was the Unhappiness
of the Jews to fancy, that all should partake of GOD'S Promises to Abraham, who
were descended from him after the Flesh. But the Gospel acquaints us with these
three Things. 1. That Faith in CHRIST is the means GOD has appointed to make
the Heathens partakers of this Advantage. 2. That the Profession of believing
in CHRIST is vain, and deceitful, where it is unaccompanied with an Holy Life.
Faith without Works is Dead. It is but a pretended and false Profession. 3. And
Lastly, That JESUS CHRIST will never own any for the Blessed of his Father, but
such as by their Works of Charity and Perseverance in Godliness, shall have
made good the Sincerity of their adherence to his Religion.

TO this we are further engaged by a fourth Reflection, which we make upon the
Father's giving his own Son for a Sacrifice to expiate our Crimes. Here we see
on one hand, the Extreme Aversion GOD has for Sin, while on the other, we
discover the infinite Love He expresses to Sinners. We have set before us the
lively Image of that Abyss of Misery into which we had been plunged, had not
GOD prepared this his Lamb, who gave his own Blood and Life to redeem us. Now
our Hearts must be utterly obdurate and insensible, not to make a most serious
reflection upon on this Hatred, GOD bears to Sin. We behold it punished in a
most dreadful and affrighting Manner, when GOD destroyed the Old World by the
Deluge, and rained down Fire from Heaven on Sodom, and the Cities that snared
in her unnatural Lusts. These Punishments were Marks of his Justice, taking
Vengeance of Sinners. But how infinitely more terrible is GOD'S Detestation of
Sin, pourtrai'd in the Death of his Dear and Only Begotten Son, whom we see
smitten for our Iniquities, and in all outward appearance forsaken of his
Father. St. Peter had not yet seen Him extended on the Cross, nor heard Him
uttering these doleful Words, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? Yet
could not he, when he saw Him only exposed to his first Reproaches, forbear
shedding Tears of a true Repentance. And what may then be expected from a
Sinner, who in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, has all the Ideas of his Agony,
Sufferings and Death, most lively delineated to Him? What an irreconcilable
Aversion ought not he to conceive for his Sins? What Resolutions ought not he
to take of leaving and forsaking them for ever?

AND to this we find our selves still more indispensably obliged, by the Nature
of this Sacrament. For, in the fifth Place, it is (as I have said before) the
Memorial of CHRIST'S Blood, by virtue whereof GOD has made a New Covenant with
Sinners; In which He has assured us, that He will forgive us our Sins, and
bestow the Glory of his Kingdom upon us. But the Condition without which we
cannot be made Partakers either of the Remission of Sins, or of the Glory of
Heaven, is, the Repenting of our Iniquities, and applying our selves to the
Study of Sanctification, to our Life's End. The Benesit of this New Covenant
is, That God remembers our Transgressions no more; but the Condition He
requires of us, is, That whereas the Jews laid up his Laws in the Ark, without
having them in their Hearts, we must always have them written in ours, in order
to a continual Religious Observance of them. Now, as it is his Will, that we
should daily beg of Him the Pardon of Our Sins (which plainly shows He is ready
to grant it us;) so the Only Command He lays upon us, is, That for the time to
come we sin no more, lest a worse thing befall us. And indeed is it not
exceedingly unaccountable, that Men, who would pass for Children of GOD, should
live the life of Devils? That they, who look upon themselves as Confederates
with CHRIST, should continually violate the Conditions of this Covenant? GOD
reminded the Jews of their Obligation to Holiness, upon the account of his
being their GOD. Moses implies thus much in the 24. Chap. of Exodus, where the
People having accepted of the Laws which he had propounded to them from GOD,
after he had wrote them in a Book, and read the same in the Audience of the
Congregation, they answered, All that the Lord has said will we do, and be
obedient. Whereupon Moses sprinkled the Blood on the People, and said, Behold
the Blood of the Covenant, which the Lord has made with you concerning all
these Words. And shall Christians believe, that GOD will own them for his
People, while they remain in their Bondage to Sin? The Meaning of the Covenant
we have made with GOD, has been clearly expressed by a Pagan, viz. Pliny, who
in his Epistle to the Emperor Trajan ( Lib. 10. Ep. 97.) thus explains the
Notion Christians had of this Glorious Covenant, they were entered into with
GOD, They bind themselves (says he) by a Sacrament or Oath, not to commit any
such Crimes, as are falsely reported of them, but to abstain from Robbery, Theft
and Adultery, to be as good as their Word, and Faithful to their Trust, etc. He
plainly shows, that Believers looking upon themselves as Confederates and
Parties in the same Covenant with GOD, banished all manner of Divisions from
the midst of them; And further intimates, that as they did all eat of the same
Bread, so they were of one Heart and Mind, and united to GOD by their
resemblance of Him, and imitation of his Holiness. Now since that time the
Gospel is not altered; for its Maxims are unchangable. Neither is it only with
respect to the Prophecies or Promises therein contained, that it abides to
Eternity, without any possibility, that so much as one tittle of it should ever
fall to the Ground; but the same must be understood of it, as it is the Rule of
our Life and Manners, prescribed to us by our Lord and Master.

LAST of all, Since JESUS CHRIST has in this Sacrament, united the Memorial of
his Coming in Glory to the Remembrance of his Humiliation even unto Death, will
not this Consideration most naturally inspire us with powerful Encouragements
to Piety, and an indefatigable Perseverance in that Fidelity we owe to Him? In
commemorating our Savior's Passion, we are obliged to deny our selves, and to
be ready to lay down our Lives, whenever it shall please God to require it,
in order to the advancement of his Glory. JESUS CHRIST tells us, that he is
unworthy of Him, who is not willing to leave all to follow Him. He has given
his own Life for us, and calls us to a like Abnegation of our selves. They who
seek their own Pleasures, desire to be Rich: But CHRIST chose a Voluntary
Poverty. They are Ambitious of Honors, whereas He refused to be made a King.
They fear Death; but He freely submitted Himself to it. They abhor the Cross,
that ignominious and painful way of Dying; whereas He declined not to be
Crucified. We can commit no Sin, but so far as we desire the things which He
despised, or endeavor to avoid those He so willingly underwent. Certainly the
sight of this Example ought powerfully to oblige us to an imitation of it. It
was a Saying of St. Cyprian's ( Epist. 30.) That Men are not fitted for
Martyrdom, when they are not furnished for the, Fight out of the Church's
Magazine, and that the Soul is apt to faint, when it is not strengthened by a
frequent Communion. This Father was in the right, and his Reason for it, is the
more Solid, because the Eucharist, immediately after it has exhibited to us the
Representation of our Lord's Death (which arms us with constancy,) shows us the
Reward of Believers, by setting before our Eyes his Coming again from Heaven to
glorify them. It Is this Return of our Lord, that will prove the great Comfort
of the Righteous, and at the same time, a dread and trouble to the Wicked.
JESUS CHRIST, by thus reminding us of his Glory, while we are meditating upon
his Sufferings, does much the same thing He did upon the Cross; where he
accepted of the Repentance of the Converted Thief, approved of the Acts of his
Faith, the Marks of his Love and Tokens of his Zeal for the Innocence and Glory
of this JESUS, whom he now looked upon, as his Savior. CHRIST kindly received
and rewarded the evident Expressions of his Hopes. But on the other hand,
punished the Unbelief and Impenitence of his Companion; He assured the former,
that he would admit Him into his Kingdom, because He saw in his Heart the
Character of a sincere Believer, and all the generous Inclinations of a Martyr;
but left the latter to the just deserts of his Iniquities. A true Penitent
meets with the greatest Comforts imaginable in the Eucharist, where the
Impenitent (who treads under foot the Blood of the Covenant, and discerns not
the Lord's Body) receives his own Damnation. It Is absolutely impossible this
Sacrament should not have such different Effects upon these two sorts of
Communicants. For from it proceeds a Voice, that proclaims Pardon to penitent
Sinners; and in it we plainly see the Solid Foundation of that Mercy, which GOD
will in his due time, fully display; But withal we ought to take notice it
cries aloud, that we must enter upon the Way of Holiness, and persevere therein
to the End, even to Death, as JESUS CHRIST did, if we desire to appear with
full assurance before his Throne, who is to judge all Men at the last Day, and
render to every one according to his Works.

THE END.
EPICTETUS CHRISTIANUS; OR, Maxims OF TRUE CHRISTIANITY.

LONDON, Printed for Brab. Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhil. 1688.

Advertisement TO THE READER.
THERE is nothing in these MAXIMS, but what is universally acknowledged and
received by the CHRISTIAN World; And though they are all so very plain and
evident, as not to be liable to the least Dispute; yet it was supposed, that a
Collection of them, would not be altogether unprofitable. It Is true, no Body
will argue against them, when proposed; Yet it must be granted, there are very
few that mind, and fewer that practice them.

THERE be many, who fancy they are good CHRISTIANS, because they apply
themselves to the Outward Duties of Religion; Others think they go much
further, because they study those Disputable Points, which divide CHRISTIANS
among themselves. This Customary Devotion, or Controversial Divinity is not
chiefly That, which GOD requires of us. There is something more sublime and
satisfactory in the Sincere Profession of Religion.

IN these Maxims an Essay is made to give an Idea of Christian Duties to such,
as never have made it their business to inform themselves about them. If there
be any, who object that they contain nothing but some very common Reflections,
which are frequently heard from the Pulpit, they ought to consider, that they
are the less excusable for their ignorance of, or not practicing (Maxims) which
would not be so often inculcated, were they not the most Essential Part of
Gospel-Precepts.

THE only aim in the Method observed, and Brevity affected here, is to make the
Reader more easily sensible of the necessity of these Reflections, and the
Importance of the Truths contained in them. GOD grant, that as the Design in
Writing of them, was to be subservient to the Salvation of Sinners; so they may
stir up in some a Desire of employing themselves, with more care and fervency,
about the Duties they point at.

EPICTETUS CHRISTIANUS; OR, Maxims OF TRUE CHRISTIANITY.
MAXIM I. That it behooves us to have Maxims of Piety.
THE most important Duty of Man, is Piety. It is no very great matter whether
we are successful, or not, in all other Employments of this Life, provided we
discharge well the Duties of CHRISTIANITY; and approve our selves just and
honest. In such Case we cannot miss of being happy.

HOW great an Error is it to frame Maxims to our selves, whereby to attain
Skill in Arts and Sciences, while at the same time we neglect to use the like
Method in the concerns of Godliness? No wonder therefore that so little
Progress is made in it. Is it possible for him to advance in his way, who keeps
no certain path?

WE must cure our selves of that rashness and inadvertency, which commonly
attend our actions. Certainly the Thing upon which our Eternal Happiness, or
Everlasting Misery depends, is well worth our most serious Consideration. We
must furnish our Hearts with Maxims of Piety, and pursue them with the utmost
earnestness.

MAXIM II. That it imports us in, the first place, to examine what our Chief
and Last End is.
THE first Act of Wisdom is, to examine how we came into the World; whether by
an Effect of Chance, or that we owe our Being to the Almighty Hand of GOD, who
created us.

THE Second; Whether we ought to govern our selves by Rules; or, without any
the least reflection or restraint, may give way to all the thoughts of our
Hearts, the words of our Mouths, and the works of our Hands.

AND lastly, the Chief Act of Wisdom is, to consider what we ought to be, and
how to behave our selves with respect to our Last End. GOD having of his
Goodness, created us, we must be entirely subject to Him. Let us therefore look
upon our selves as made for Him, and consequently so direct the whole Course of
our Life, that it may contribute to his Glory.

MAXIM. III. That in all our actions, we ought to have a due regard to our Last
End.
IT is most strange and deplorable, to see the greatest part of Mankind depart
this Life, without a just consideration and knowledge of the End, for which
they were brought into it. This arises either from their never entertaining any
thoughts of the Matter, or neglecting to acquaint themselves with it thoroughly.

AND yet a more sad thing it is, when after this Examination and Knowledge had
of our Last End, we do not act conformable to our Informations and Reflections
thereupon. This cannot but render our Disorders the more inexcusable, and make
our Sins to cry the louder for Vengeance.

WE must have a continual regard to our Last End, that so it may regulate all
the actions of our Life, and make us truly wise. But how can we think of it, as
we ought, without telling our selves, that our not minding this, must needs be
our ruin?

MAXIM IV. That we ought to consider we are God's Creatures.
SOME few years since, I had no Existence, and now I find I have a Being, Life,
Motion, a Rational Soul, Enlightened Mind, and a Body more perfect, than that of
any other Animal.

ALL Creatures administer continual Supplies to my Wants; the Heavens afford
me their Lights and Influence; the Earth yields me her Fruits, Waters and
Remedies; the Creatures she abounds with, serve for my Food, Necessity and
Delight.

SHALL I be excusable then, if I forget HIM, who made me? No, I must love Him
with all my Soul, obey Him with all Faithfulness, and in consideration of these
his Benefits heaped upon me, bless and magnify his Great Name. These are Duties
we shall find to be absolutely indispensable, if we do but seriously consider
we are his Creatures.

MAXIM V. That we ought to be most sensible of God's Favor in our Preservation.
WE must leave it to Atheists to attribute their Subsistence, as they do their
Being, to Chance; As for our part, we ought to look upon our Preservation, as a
continual Creation; since GOD, by his Power, Goodness and Wisdom, communicates
Life to us every moment.

THERE is not one instant of our Life, but GOD delivers us from infinite Evils,
which, but for his Preventing Han, dwould most certainly destroy us; who to
this is pleased to superadd such plenty of Blessings, as to make our Life. most
sweet and comfortable.

HOW thankful therefore ought we to be? How great acknowledgments ought we to
return to GOD, for these signal Favors to us? Shall not we therefore, as often
as we respire, meditate on Him, who so constantly thinks of us?

MAXIM VI. That we should continually reflect upon the Great Work of our
Redemption.
HE who made, and does still preserve me, is the same, who has redeemed me. It
is neither Man, nor Angel, but the Only Son of GOD, JESUS CHRIST Himself, who
was willing to become my Surety, and appease the Wrath of his Almighty Father,
in dying for me.

WHAT Outrages, what Torments, did not he suffer! He was crucified like a
Slave, and underwent a Punishment, that GOD Himself had called a Curse. Not
only the World and Hell insulted over Him, but He complained of his being
forsaken even of his Father.

O WHAT a strange and horrible thing is Sin, that JESUS CHRIST must shed his
Blood to deliver me from it! What Profaneness! What Sacrilege is it, to
trample under Foot that Precious Blood, with which we are redeemed! How
hellishly wicked must we be, not to love a SAVIOR, who so dearly loved us!

MAXIM VII. That we must follow the Divine Call.
IT IS GOD draws us, that we may come to Him; without which we could not have
the least thought or desire thitherward. We must obey his Voice, while He is
pleased to direct it to us; For else, Life and Redemption procured by Him, will
be unprofitable to us.

HOW many Heathens have been without the Advantages we enjoy! How many Infidels
and Idolaters have been deprived of this Grace of Vocation, without which a Man
can never be converted! Shall we make them rise up in Judgment against us?

O THE wonderful Patience and Forbearance of GOD! who after a thousand
Contempts of his Grace, receives us to Repentance; After many obstinate
resistings of the Heavenly Inspirations of his Spirit; is yet pleased to
continue his Gracious Call to us! Follow we then his Voice, which invites us to
the Supremest Good.

MAXIM VIII. That we must Study God's Conduct toward us.
WE lose the Benefit of the Mercies and Chastisements, GOD dispenses to us,
while we are unacquainted with the Conduct He observes toward his Children.
Through our ignorance of this, we afflict our selves with that which is Matter
of Comfort, and make merry in the midst of Temptations.

HAD Joseph understood GOD'S Leading, he would have wept, when he found himself
his Master's Favorite, and rejoiced, when the accusation of his lustful
Mistress cast him into that Prison, which advanced him to little less, than
Pharaoh's Throne.

THE Devil prompts us to judge of GOD'S Conduct according to outward
appearance. This is one of his most dangerous Delusions. It is therefore our
Duty to meditate upon those Maxims, GOD has revealed to us, and upon the
Examples of his Providence toward the Saints, who have been before us.

MAXIM IX. That we ought daily to examine our Conscience.
NOT to reflect upon our Behavior, is to live without Reason; and not to
remind our selves, every day, of the State of our Hearts, is to live without
Grace. We ought to take daily notice what good we have omitted, and what evil
we have done.

WE cannot be saved without the sorrows of Repentance, without a through
resolution to amend what is amiss, and an anxious seeking after those Remedies
that can heal us. Which is not attainable but by a constant Review of our
Thoughts, Words and Actions.

WE daily behold our selves in our Glass, and yet are careless of consulting
the Law of GOD. It Is to undervalue the Study of Perfection, thus to neglect our
own Hearts, and bring our selves to that pass; as not to pray any more out of a
sense of our needs, but out of mere Custom.

MAXIM X. That we ought to avoid too much Business.
A SOUL taken up with the Cares of Salvation, does not cumber her self with the
things of this present Life. The retirement (which she consecrates to to God,
by devoting it to Pious Reflections) is much dearer to her, than all the
Employments in the World.

LET us remember the Parable of Our Lord, which assures us, that the Word
falling into the Heart of a Man, distracted with worldly Cares, is like Seed
that falls among Thorns, which growing up, choke it at last.

MY GOD! How much more advantageous is it, by means of a calm and composed
temper of Mind, to resemble that good Ground, which brings forth Thirty, Sixty,
yea, even an Hundred Fold; than to have our Hearts crowded with a thousand vain
Solicitudes, how innocent soever they may appear to us!

MAXIM XI. That we must often recollect our selves, to think of our Salvation.
THE greatest part of our Life is spent in a guilty kind of Slumber. Time flies
away, and the Glass of Life hastens to wards Death. We come, we go, we talk and
act; and this almost continually, without having the least regard to what
concerns Salvation.

IF we judge aright, we shall find, that either we do that which is altogether
evil, or at least, very remote from the Principal End of Life; or else we
Squander our time in idleness, and do nothing at all. Which neglect, though it
be least criminal, yet is not quite faultless.

WE can make no better use of our Life, than when by frequent retirement, we
renew the Pious Resolutions we have formerly taken. We must examine very
narrowly, whether our Life and Actions are answerable to that Model we have set
before us.

MAXIM XII. That we ought carefully to consider the Vanity of this Life.
THERE is nothing more miserable, than Life's inconstancy. Its longest Date is
but a Span. It is obnoxious to many thousand accidents, that snatch it away,
when we least think on it. It is more brittle, than Glass; and at best but our
way to Death,

AND can we thus reflect upon the Vanity of this Life, and not be disgusted?
Can we help despising the pleasures of it, and lifting our Hearts above Time,
fix them on the Life Eternal?

THE World passes away, and we in it: Its Delusions, that have so often
surprised us, scatter and vanish, proportionably to the growth of our
Experience. They only have attained a six'd and settled State, who have resigned
themselves to GOD, and the Contemplation of Eternity.

MAXIM XIII. That we ought frequently to think of Death.
WE cannot avoid Death; But the time, place, manner, and circumstances of it,
we know not. How great would be our Unhappiness, should it surprise us in Sin
and Impenitence, and come to execute the dreadful Decree of our Everlasting
Damnation!

THE very image of Death affrights us, though we suppose it afar off. What will
it do, when it shall stare us in the Face, and set before our Eyes our great
and innumerable Sins, in opposition to GOD'S Favors, and sill our Souls with
Remorse and Terror?

GOD makes use of this Prospect of the Grave to affright us to him. It awakens
our Consciences, fortifies our Faith, and animates our Hopes. But Good GOD!
What would become of us, should we descend to Death without having once
thought of, or considered it, and without being made wiser by the Instructions
it affords?

MAXIM XIV. That we ought to consider every Day, as if it were our last.
JESUS CHRIST has commanded us, to watch constantly for his Coming to judge the
World. GOD has left us uncertain of the Hour of our Death. What would not we
wish we had done, if this very Day CHRIST should come to Judgment, or Death
snatch us away, and set us before GOD'S Tribunal?

WE lose opportunities of doing good, and embrace those of doing ill; because
we think we are sure to live long, and repent before Death surprises us.
Strange blind Security!

I AM assured GOD will pardon me, if I truly repent before the Day of my Death;
but should be stark mad to think of delaying the Duty of Repentance, a Moment,
since it is not impossible but that even that very Moment may be my last.

MAXIM XV. That we ought continually to set the Judgment of God before our Eyes.
HOW terrible will the Judgment of GOD be to the Wicked! CHRIST, whom they have
outrageously abused, is to give Sentence; their own Consciences to be Witness
against them, and the Devil waits for the word of Command to put it in
Execution. No Grace now to be hoped for; no room left for Repentance.

SECRET Thoughts, idle Words, wavering Actions; All shall be brought forth to
Judgment. GOD'S Assistance, Patience and Benefits will be our reproach. Sins
committed, good Deeds omitted, Time lost, and the like, will be punished.
Excuses, Prayers, Tears; All these will avail nothing against the Justice of
this Tribunal.

OH! How much ought the dread of this Judgment to come, to possess our Minds!
How can we sleep in Sin quietly? Our Souls may each moment be cited before the
Throne of GOD, there to be judged and sentenced to Eternal Pains.

MAXIM XVI. That the Consideration of the Torments of Hell ought to affright us
to Heaven.
IF the Divine Favors prove too weak, to overcome our Obstinacy; yet (at
least) let the pains of Hell, terrify us into Endeavors to prevent them.

LET our minds visit this Abyss of Misery, where the Sinner suffers, in every
Sense, Torments proportioned to his Crimes. He has lost GOD for ever, and is
given up to Eternal Remorse of Conscience.

Prisons, Dungeons, Racks have their Terrors. But what are these to Hell?
Eternal Darkness, unquenchable Fire, the presence of Devils, and the Damned;
Lamentations, Howlings, Blasphemies, Despair. These are but a rude Draught of
that Region of Anguish.

MAXIM XVII. That the Glory of Heaven ought powerfully to incite our Piety.
HEAVEN is the Lot of the Righteous; where the absence of all Evil, an
unspeakable fullness of Blessings, both for Body and Soul, and a perfect
fruition of GOD, shall make up our Happiness. JESUS CHRIST, the Bridegroom,
will there give Consummation to our Joys.

NO more Temptations, no more Sins, no more Sufferings, no more Fears; But
Light in the Mind, Comforts in the Heart, Peace in the Conscience, a perfect
Union of the Faithful in giving Eternal Thanks to God, in the enjoyment of
Felicity that shall have no end.

What ought not we to do; what Miseries should not we be content to suffer, to
secure the hope of this Glory God has promised to us? What Terror ought to
seize us, when we reflect upon our Sins, which (if not repented of) will
deprive us of it for ever?

MAXIM XVIII. That we are always to stand in a Religious Fear.
CHRIST having told his Disciples, that one of them would betray him, they all
trembled at the horror of this Crime, though there was but one, that was to
commit it.

Let us always be watchful against the inconstancy of our Nature. Who knows
whether the Eye of GOD does not discover that in our Hearts, which is yet
unknown to us? The Example of the Saints, ought to inspire us with a Religious
Fear.

THE Fall of St. Peter was expiated by Tears of Repentance. But how can he who
considers on his failing, trust to his own Strength? The Looks of his Master
infused the Motives to his Remorse. But CHRIST does not always afford his
Gracious Countenance to those, who desert and deny him.

MAXIM XIX. That Sin is more to be feared than Death.
SIN is Treason against the King of Heaven: It Is copying from the fallen
Angels. It is the only Object of GOD'S Aversion. He punished it without remedy,
in those Cursed Spirits. And who can cast up the Accounts of them, Sin sends to
Eternal Destruction?

IF Death could be separated from the Curse of GOD; If it did consist in a
total Annihilation; Wicked Men ought to wish for it, as a Cure of the
Reproaches and Disquiets of their own Consciences. But alas! it is quite
another thing.

LET us therefore fear Sin more than Death it self; Or rather; Let the Waters
of the Deluge, the Flames of Sodom, and all other Exemplary Judgments upon
hardened Sinners, display to us the horrors of Sin, and the Everlasting
Punishment reserved for it.

MAXIM XX. That we ought to fear GOD more than Men.
WHAT blindness is it to fear Men, more than GOD! We bear with patience, the
wrongs done us by our Superiors, least our Complaints should increase our
Oppression. But we too often offend the Weak, notwithstanding CHRIST'S Command
to the contrary.

It Is easier to restrain our Anger against our Inferiors (as CHRIST requires)
than to endure injuries from Great Men. Why should we then kindle a Fire, which
CHRIST would have extinguished, when the only fear of Men, makes us careful to
extinguish the Fire they kindle in us?

LET us therefore judge righteously; be ashamed of our imperfections, and blush
at our doing less for the fear of the LORD (that LORD we are so much bound to
love) than for the fear of Men, who have to Title like his, either to our fear
or love.

MAXIM XXI That the whole Course of our Life ought to be a continual Study of
Mortification.
SO horribly has Sin corrupted our Nature, that unless we take great care
continually to restrain our inclinations to Evil, we shall unavoidably fall
into all manner of Vices.

UNLESS the Flesh be mortified, it will rebel against the Spirit. Unless we
resist our Passions, they will prevail against the Light of our Reason, and our
Reason, unless enlight'ned, will oppose GOD'S Law and our Duty.

LET us beware of those things that flatter our Senses, and feed our Passions.
Let us not suffer our Thoughts to wander, but govern our Hearts and Minds, by
bringing them into a due Subjection to Reason and the Will of GOD.

MAXIM XXII That we ought continually to strive against the Vnruliness of
Self-Love.
THE Prevalence of Self-love is the Source of Sin. We all naturally aspire to
Happiness; this is innocent; But we place Felicity either in Riches, Honors or
Pleasures; which is our mistake.

GOD does not forbid us to love our selves; for Self-love is necessary to our
Preservation; But he charges us, not to love our selves with a blind and
unaccountable Love; that is, to love our Body better than our Soul; this
Temporal, more than Eternal Life.

LET US labor to rectify our Passions, by proposing to them due Objects, things
truly Good, Solid Honors, and Riches that take not to themselves Wings. Let us
believe GOD'S Decisions concerning these, rather than the Suggestions of
Sensuality.

MAXIM XXIII That we ought to resist our Passions.
THIS Life is a Scene of Combat, where though we are not always fighting with
our Enemies, or wild Beasts, yet must ever be contending against our Passions,
that endeavor to usurp the Dominion of our Hearts.

IF we suffer any one of these to be the Mistress of our Soul, then Farewell
Reason and Tranquillity. Then will both our Soul and Body be exposed to
inevitable Dangers: An Eternal Death to both, must be the portion of such, as
shall be subjected to this Tyranny.

BUT while we courageously oppose their assaults, we secure our quiet, and are
in the sure way to Glory, whereof we have foretasts even in this Life, at least
a certain Hope shall crown the Conflict.

MAXIM XXIV. That we ought to bridle that Pride, which is apt to reign in us.
THERE is nothing more difficult, than the freeing our selves from Pride. Men
are naturally in love with their own Worth, and proud of what they possess.
They love to be esteemed of others, delight to make a show of their
Perfections. In a word, their ambition is to be thought and considered as wise,
skilful and honest Men.

BUT nothing is more necessary, than to oppose a Passion, which is the Mother
of Boasting, Vainglory, Obstinacy, Presumption and Hypocrisy. What safety can
these hope for, when GOD has declared, he resists the Proud, and gives Grace to
the humble?

LET us consider the Cause of this Passion. The Devil, who is King of the
Children of Pride, has infused it into us. Its Effects here below, fill Human
Societies with Troubles and Debate; and its Eternal Effects hereafter, are the
uniting us to him, and separating us from our LORD, who is Humility it self.

MAXIM XXV. That we ought to suppress all desires of becoming great.
EVERY Condition has its Comforts and Distasts. The reason why we desire to
rise in the World, is, because we have no mind to know this Truth, viz. That no
State is happy, but that of the Virtuous, be their Condition what it will.

LET us not think so much of rising and becoming great, as of collecting
Comfort from a troublesome Life, and extracting Pleasure from Calamity. Let us
free our selves from disquiets; the Place we may aim at, is no better than that
we are in.

GOD has appointed every one of us his Place and Bounds. These he has
determined for us by our Birth, Wealth and Capacity: Let us not presume to quit
or go beyond them; since we cannot do it, without violating the Decrees of his
Providence, and exposing our selves to manifold Temptations.

MAXIM XXVI. That Humility ought to be the Badge of our Profession.
THERE is no true Christianity without Humility; It was this CHRIST taught us,
by his Life and Doctrine. How dare we assume the Name of Christians, while we
neglect to practice his Precepts?

WE ought therefore ingenuously to acknowledge our weakness, and instead of
making a show of our Parts, or other Advantages, and seeking the praise of Men,
embrace all occasions, which may abate and mortify our Pride.

TO do this, we need no more, than reflect on what we are. We come from
nothing, and are Sinners into the bargain; The Advantages we possess, are the
fruit of the Divine Bounty, and we must one day give an account for them.

MAXIM XXVII That we ought to beware of Covetousness.
HOW properly is Covetousness called by St. Paul, the Root of all Evil? Love of
Riches makes us deal unjustly with our Neighbor; It stifles all sense of
natural Affection, and changes an Apostle of CHRIST into a Minister of the
Devil.

A SOUL that is eagerly inclined to the love of Riches, exposes it self to a
certain danger for an uncertain gain; it fears not Eternal Destruction, so it
may but satisfy its greediness. Behold here the Quintessence of Blindness and
Folly.

LET us dread to be possessed of so vile a Passion, which will not stick to
prompt us to betray our LORD himself. Judas did not betray Him, for fear of
Persecution, but through love of Money; and the same will make CHRIST to destroy
us, without remedy, for having so sottishly sought for Happiness, in heaping up
a little shining Dust.

MAXIM XXVIII. That we ought to restrain the motions of Anger.
ANGER disfigures a Man, by dethroning his Reason. It is the rise of Quarrels,
Cursings and Blasphemies. It begets Hatred and Revenge, without considering
Reason, Justice or the Divine Laws.

HOW dangerous is it to give up our selves to this Passion, and follow the
motions of it! What an horrible thing to be transported upon every slight
occasion, or charge GOD with our disasters, and murmur against him, or brandish
our fury against our Neighbor?

LET us betimes resist the Motions of Anger. Let us learn to look upon our
Miseries as Chastisements; and upon Injuries, as Trials GOD lays upon us. If
our Heart at any time, rises in spite of us, let us presently recall our
selves, and not suffer the Sun (according to the Law of CHRIST) to go down upon
our Wrath.

MAXIM XXIX. That we must root Envy out of our Hearts.
WHAT greater Madness, than to be grieved at our Neighbor's Welfare, as if his
Happiness must needs make us Miserable! What Injustice to rejoice at his
Misfortunes, and insult over him, or take delight in his being cast down! This
Passion cannot possess a Heart, that is not given up to the Devil.

IF we will not abhor Envy, because it consumes the Envious, and tears him
inwardly; or for its delighting in, and feeding it self with Filth and Ordure;
Let us at least hate it, as being the Source of that detestable Crime the Jews
committed in delivering up Our LORD to Death.

O LET us strangle this Monster, and acquiesce in GOD'S Way of dispensing his
Favors. Let us freely impart the Prosperity he has given us, or beg of Him to
supply our want of power, by granting our desires for the good of our Neighbor.

MAXIM XXX. That we ought to bear Injuries with Patience.
SOCRATES being struck, would not revenge himself. This Example of Patience,
several Heathens have imitated; Yea, they have made it their Endeavor to
conquer the malice of their Enemies with kindness.

ALAS! How many Christians may justly fear, that the Benignity of a Heathen
will aggravate their Condemnation? We are Christians, and as such should own
this for a Maxim, That he who does the injury, is the Wretch, not he who
suffers by it. We are the Disciples of GOD, who forbids us all Self-revenge;
and yet we are ready every minute to thunder out our resentments against others.

LET us in a word wisely consider, that we are Criminals, who sue for Pardon;
that we are at the foot of the Throne, and under the Eyes of a GOD, who has
proclaimed to us, that Vengeance is his. Let us not set light by his Presence,
his Voice and Dreadful Judgments.

MAXIM XXXI. That we must abhor all Impurity.
WE cannot justly pretend to the Glory of Angels, unless we imitate their
Purity. To follow the pleasures of the Flesh, hunt after its Allurements, and
cherish its filthy Delusions, is to walk in the Path of Damnation.

CAN we be convinced of these Truths, without being in love with Chastity;
without avoiding all dangerous occasions, as enticing Company and guilty Sloth,
and without arming our selves against the Flesh, by Fasting and Mortification?

LET us make a Covenant with our Eyes, that they never open a Door to any
unclean Thoughts; and if at any time they break this Covenant, let our Heart,
being animated by the Cross of JESUS, stifle all those Thoughts in their Birth,
which might lead us to Sin.

MAXIM XXXII. That we ought to beware of Detraction.
DETRACTION is the Character of Malignity. We cannot revile another, without
hurting our selves, and them that take delight to hear us. We make them
Accomplices in our Sin; and by inspiring them with the same Hatred we have for
our Neighbor, rob them of their Rest.

WE justly hold it sinful to stain our Hands in our Brother's Blood; and can
we think it innocent to dip our Tongue in it by Calumny, by publishing his
faults, by rendering his Principles doubtful, or decrying his Virtues?

DAVID declares he could not abide Slanderers in hi^ Court. Can we imagine
CHRIST will admit them into Heaven, who blast their Brothers Reputation, and
take delight in this kind of Cruelty?

MAXIM XXXIII. That we ought never to believe Calumny, to the prejudice of
Truth.
PILATE perceiving the malice of the Jews, and the Innocence of CHRIST, would
fain have cleared Him; but was vanquished by a Motive of Carnal Policy. He no
sooner heard them cry out [ If thou release this Man, thou art not Caesar's
Friend] but his purpose of saving Him vanished.

O INJUSTICE! Was CHRIST ever a Head of Rebels? Did He at any time, provide
Arms and Ammunition, or levy Soldiers? Did not He submit himself to the Roman
Laws, pay Tribute and openly assert Caesar's Right?

TO accuse CHRIST of Sedition, was to call depth of Poverty, Pride and
Ambition; Obedience, Rebellion, and Humility, Vainglory. But Pretenses are
never wanting, and depraved Nature lends a more willing Ear to Calumny, than
Truth.

MAXIM XXXIV. That we ought to weigh the Consequences both of Vice and Virtue.
VIRTUE is laid aside, when the difficulties of it only are considered, and
Vice embraced when the Pleasures it yields are set before us. But a Christian
ought to make very different Reflections.

VIRTUE bears an Impression of GOD, and Vice is the Fruit of the Devil's
Suggestions. The former fills the Soul with Tranquillity, by begetting in it
the Love of GOD and Men; And the latter Galls the Conscience with a thousand
Checks, and brings the Offender into contempt both with GOD and Men.

BUT above all, a good Man expects with joy, the Glory of Heaven, which he is
to possess; whereas the Wicked are continually racked with the fears of future
Torments, which GOD has appointed to be their portion for ever. Who after these
Reflections, can remain doubtful where to choose?

MAXIM XXXV. That we ought to make a careful Scrutiny into our Defects, in
order to our Amendment.
RELIGION invites us to the Study of Perfection; It sets before us GOD and
CHRIST for our Pattern; It furnishes us with infinite Motives to engage us to
it, and gives us to understand, that our Happiness consists in this Perfection.
How is it then that we labor not after it?

WE read, speak, write, discourse it morally, and talk of our Passions and
their Remedies; And yet continue in the same State, still have the same Vices
and Inclinations; And all is, because we do not apply our selves to a
through-search of our Hearts.

OUR Faults can never be amended, unless they be known; nor known, without
enquiry. The Heart, which is so industrious in search after the Frailties of
others, to upbraid them therewith, would be better employed, in examining and
applying Remedies to its own. This is a chief Ingredient toward the attainment
of Perfection.

MAXIM XXXVI. That we ought not to make Custom, or Example, a Plea for our
Faults.
THOUGH Christianity does not oblige us to shun Human Society, yet its chief
aim is, to inculcate to us, that the World is plunged in Sin and
Licentiousness; and therefore that we ought not to imitate its corrupt Manners.

WORLDLY Men find delight in those actions that offend GOD. They provoke one
another, by their Examples, to violate the Divine Laws, without regret or
restraint. But we must reject their impious Maxims, that we may follow the Law
of GOD.

WHAT folly then is it to make these our Patterns? Do we think that the
prescription of their Examples and Customs, can overruled the Divine Right and
Authority over us?

MAXIM XXXVII. That we must avoid Relapses into Sin.
WHAT miserable Wretches are we, to condemn our Repentance, and return to the
Way of Perdition, whence GOD by his Grace has recalled us! What else is this,
but to precipitate our selves into remediless Woes, by a presumptuous contempt
of GOD'S Favors, and our own Salvation?

LET us therefore retain in our Hearts a true sorrow for having offended the
DIVINE MAJESTY, be afraid of the Actions that first prompted us to sin, and
careful to make use of those Remedies GOD has provided for us, to forward and
perfect our Cure.

IS the Health of the Soul of less concern to us, than that of the Body? Or are
the Eternal pains, which GOD will inflict upon them, who suffer themselves to
be carried away with the Violence of their Passions, incapable to affright us
to Him?

MAXIM XXXVIII. That we must not abuse the Long-Suffering of God.
STRANGE and surprising is the Corruption of our Nature! GOD'S Patience, which
so meekly invites us to Repentance, serves but to harden us in our wicked Ways;
The greater his Clemency is toward us, the more we multiply our Transgressions
against Him.

WHILE we cannot be ignorant, that his Patience admits of Bounds, and that the
End of his Mercy is the Beginning of an inexorable Severity. We heap up to our
selves a Treasure of Wrath, in refusing to comply with the Gracious Invitations
of DIVINE LOVE.

WHEN therefore we reflect upon his Forbearance toward us, while we were
disobedient, let us, by no means, thence infer, that we may still continue to
abuse it; but remember, that Patience provoked turns into Fury.

MAXIM XXXIX. That we must not be ashamed of Godliness.
THE most terrible Temptation we are liable to, is to see the Modish Men of the
Age, call the Fear of GOD Superstition, and Devotion Hypocrisy. They endeavor
to persuade us, that none but base and abject Minds are capable of being
besotted with such Chymaera's.

HAD Worldly Men a Heaven to reward our complying with their Opinions, and a
Hell to avenge the Contempt of their Maxims, it were worth our Attention.

BUT alas! What Fools are we? The respect we have for them, proves fatal to us.
It is madness, not to be ashamed of imitating their Crimes, and to blush when
we transgress their Rules, in pursuance of our Duty.

MAXIM XL. That a faint and languishing Piety is a miserable State.
WHAT do we pretend by our remisness, and fainting in the Way of Godliness? Is
not GOD Worthy to be beloved, and served with our best Zeal? Or what Comforts
can we hope to reap from cold Devotion?

TO eat at CHRIST'S Table, be in his Service, and at the same time hide the
Talent he has entrusted us with, and give up our selves to sloth and
negligence; What is this, but a Contempt of his Grace, and a Provocation for
his with drawing it?

THOUGH GOD may seem to bear with those, who are without any impression at all
of his Grace; yet certain it is, that He cannot endure the Lukewarm. The
unconcern'dness these have for Him, forcibly provokes his Aversion. He that
loves truly, looks upon Indifference and Lukewarmness, as High Treason against
Love.

MAXIM XLI. That we must continue in the Exercise of Piety.
JVDAS had been saved, if nothing were required to Godliness, but noble and
daring Beginnings. We must continue in well-doing. He that holds out to the
End, shall be Saved. Without this Perseverance, no Grace, no Glory, no
Salvation is to be hoped for.

LET us not persist in GOD'S Service in the time of Prosperity only, or while
we have no occasion to follow our Passions, or so long as our Heart does not
find ought in our Duty, that thwarts its Inclinations.

LET us with faithfulness and constancy, apply our selves to the Practice of
Godliness. It had been much better for the Damned, never to have entered into
the Way of Righteousness, than being once entered, to depart from it.

MAXIM XLII. That we must make the Holy Scripture the Subject of our continual
Meditation.
IN Prayer we speak to GOD; and in the Scripture GOD speaks to us. Do we think
GOD will hear us when we speak to Him, if we neglect to hear, and carefully
meditate upon what he tells us concerning his Authority over us, and our Duty
toward Him?

THE Scripture contains the most important Truths we can know, the wisest
Maxims we can follow in our Conversation, the greatest Promises we can
conceive; And yet miserable VVretches that we are, we neglect to apply our
selves to the reading of it.

WHAT? If this Privilege were forbidden us, should not we look upon such
Prohibition, as the greatest of our Misfortunes? And while we enjoy that
Liberty of making it the Subject of our Contemplation day and night, shall we
be so unjust, as to read it perfunctorily, and be ignorant of its most
important Precepts?

MAXIM XLIII. That we ought carefully to apply our selves to Prayer.
WE cannot live well, unless we know how to pray well; And there is no
Happiness, but in Conjunction with a Good Life. Holiness is that which pleases
GOD; and fervent Prayer obtains us the Fruits of his Love.

PRAYER is the most easy part of our Duty; Our Needs teach it us; It is the
most August and Honorable, in that it procures us a familiar Converse with GOD
Himself. It is also the most blissful; for it opens us the Treasures of Heaven,
and Communicates to us every Divine Blessing.

SHOULD we be debarred the Practice of it, we should hold it for Tyranny, as it
would be an impediment to our Felicity and Glory. How then can we undervalue
the Duty of Prayer, as an unprofitable thing?

MAXIM XLIV. That we must always have our Holy Baptism before our Eyes.
BAPTISM is the Token of our Entrance into Covenant with GOD. In it GOD has
offered us the Pardon of our Sins, the Guidance of his Grace, and the Hope of
his Glory; And we on our part, have promised to forsake our Iniquities, submit
our selves to his Laws, and be faithful to Him unto Death.

DO we think it just, GOD should remember his Promises, when we forget those we
have made Him in that Holy Sacrament? Does not this Forgetfulness favor of
Contempt, Unbelief; nay, and Rebellion it self?

LET us therefore always set before our Eyes our own Engagements, as well as
our Hopes; our Duty, as well as the Grace GOD freely offers; our Obligations to
live according to the Rules of Christianity, as well as the Glory GOD has
annexed to it.

MAXIM XLV. That we ought to remember the Promises we make to GOD at our
Receiving the Lord's Supper.
WE are from our Infancy, entertained in God's Service, wherein we were engaged
before we knew the Reward. But we do make a solemn Choice of it, in our own
Persons, when we present our selves at the HOLY TABLE.

COMMON Sense alone would not suffer us to do a Thing of such importance,
without a serious consideration of the Duties it lays upon us. It were better
never to participate of this Holy Sacrament, than to do it unprepared and
unprofitably.

THE Sacred Eucharist represents to us the Expiation of our Crimes, and the
Horror of them, the ineffable Love of GOD, and the infinite Obligations and
Ties we have to CHRIST. To approach his Table, without bewailing and forsaking
our Sins, without loving and devoting our selves to Him, is to receive our own
Damnation.

MAXIM XLVI. That Charity is to be preferred before all things.
THERE is nothing more valuable with GOD, than Charity. He became Man, that He
might the more effectually prescribe this Duty to us, and suffered Death, to
give us the most engaging Example of this Divine Virtue.

HE began the Choice of his Disciples with calling two Brothers. And why so?
But to intimate, that Brotherly Love must unite all his Disciples, and Concord
be the Badge of Christianity?

WHAT can we with Justice prefer before Love? Yea, what ought not we to do and
suffer, what Care should not we take, rather than violate the Laws of Charity?

MAXIM XLVII. That we ought to prevent the Petitions of those, who are in
Misery.
THIS poor Wretch is our own Flesh and Blood, our Brother; GOD having made, and
JESUS CHRIST redeemed him. How careful therefore ought we to be, to relieve his
Necessities? GOD Himself is pleased to become accountable to us for our
Liberality, and CHRIST will make it an everlasting Reward.

OUR Brethren's Misery should the more recommend them to us. But if that be too
weak to move our Pity, at least let the Blessed Fruits of Charity, and the
Example of JESUS CHRIST, engage us to the Practice of a Duty so reasonable and
full of Bliss.

MUST the Money we so unjustly hoard up, prove our own Accuser? JESUS CHRIST
has told us he will take the good we do to those who stand in need of it, as
done to Himself; And yet we don't run to prevent their asking. Is this our Love
to Life and Salvation?

MAXIM. XLVIII. That we must be meek in reproving our Neighbor.
GOD assures us, that one of the most considerable Effects of Love is to
reprove our Neighbor, when he sins. And indeed, we have no true Love for him,
if we don't endeavor to divert him from the way that leads to Death. Besides,
this good Office also engages us the more forcibly to our own Duty.

THOUGH it be lawful to use either mild or severe Expressions, according as it
may best suit with the good of our Neighbor; yet Sweetness and Sincerity must
always be predominant in our Hearts toward him; remembering that GOD's Cause is
the Dispute: And He is Love it self.

LET us reprove our Neighbor with all tenderness; and if we do it more
earnestly, at least let nothing of bitterness or passion appear in our Words.
As Charity puts us upon this Duty; so let us by our manner of doing it,
persuade him, it is our Love for him, and not a design of insulting over him,
that is the Motive.

MAXIM XLIX. That Practice is to be preferred before Knowledge or Words.
WE ought, with all earnestness, to meditate upon, and labor to make our
selves thoroughly acquainted with the Law of GOD. We must apply our selves to
the Study of Heavenly Mysteries; and to that End, be frequent in the reading
and Meditation of the Holy Scripture.

IT is our Duty to edify our Neighbor, with our good Discourse, and instruct
him in Piety. What greater joy, than to be able to impart our Knowledge to him!
Which still increases as it is Communicated: And we, at the same time, have the
honor of being employed by GOD, to advance the Salvation of his Children.

AFTER all, What Fruit can we pretend to reap from all our Learning and
Rhetoric, if the Acts of a Spiritual Life be not exerted by us? What an
horrible thing is it to be enlight'ned, and speak like Angels, and yet live
like Devils! Knowledge separate from a good Conscience, does but serve to
aggravate our Crimes.

MAXIM L. That we ought to impute all that is good in us, to the Grace of God.
THERE is nothing but the Devil can make us attribute ought to our selves in
the Work of our Salvation. We are born in Sin, live in Sin, and should die in
Sin, did not GOD'S Grace prevent us.

OUR Call to Faith, is the Work of his Grace; Our Conversion, the Work of his
Spirit, which overcomes our Aversion; Our Perseverance is the Effect of the
same Holy Spirit. The Beginning, Progress and End of our Salvation, are derived
from Him.

LET us Confess the Truth; If we cannot assume ought to our selves, but Misery,
Corruption, Love to Sin, and Enmity to GOD'S Law, we must look upon GOD, as the
Sole Author of our Regeneration, and accordingly ascribe all the Glory of it to
Him.

THE END.

