THE JUDGMENT OF THE Ancient JEWISH Church, Against the UNITARIANS, IN The
Controversy upon the Holy Trinity, and the Divinity of our Blessed Savior.

With a Table of Matters, and a Table of Texts of Scripture Occasionally
Explained.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell; and are to be sold at the Rose and Crown,
and at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIX.

THE PREFACE.
ALTHOUGH the Jews, by mistaking the Prophecies of Scripture concerning the
Kingdom of their Messiah, expected he should have a Temporal Kingdom; and
because our Lord Jesus was not for that, therefore they would not acknowledge
him f^^ their Messiah; yet all things considered, there is no essential
difference between our Religion and theirs. We own the very same God, whom they
formerly Worshipped, the Maker of the World, and their Lawgiver. We receive
that very Messiah whom God promised them by his Prophets, so many Ages before
his coming. We own no other Spirit of God to have Inspired the Apostles,
besides the Holy Ghost, who spoke by the Prophets, and by whose manifold Gifts
the Messiah was to be known, as one in whom all Nations should be Blessed.

This plainly appears in the way and method which both Christ and his Apostles
followed in preaching the Gospel. They endeavored to take off the prejudices
the then Jews labored under, concerning the Nature of the Messiah, and the
Characters by which he was to be known: For they argued all along from the
Books of Moses and the Prophets, and never proposed any thing to their
Disciples but what was declared in those Writings which the Jews acknowledged
as the Standard of their Religion; which may be seen in Christ's Discourse to
the Jews, John v. 46. and to his Disciples after his Resurrection, Luke xxiv.
47, and 44. in the words of St. Peter, Acts x. 43. and of St. Paul, Acts xxvi.
22.

The truth is, in those Sacred Books, although One only God be acknowledged,
under the Name of Jehovah, which denotes his Essence, and therefore is
incommunicable to any other; yet not only that very Name is given to the
Messiah, but also all the Works, Attributes, and Characters, peculiar to
Jehovah, the God of Israel, and the only true God, are frequently bestowed on
him.

This the old Jewish Authors, as Philo and the Targumists, do readily
acknowledge. For in their Exposition of those places of the Old Testament which
relate to the Messiah, they generally suppose him to be God; whereas the Modern
Jews being of a far different Opinion, use all Shifts imaginable to evade the
force of their Testimonies. The Apostles imitated in this the Synagogue, by
applying to Christ several places of the Old Testament, which undoubtedly were
primarily intended of the God of Israel.

But because they sometimes only touch at places of the Old Testament, without
using them as formal Proofs of what they then handled; Socinus and his
Disciples have fancied that those Citations out of the Old Testament, which are
made use of by the Apostles, though they represent the Messiah as being the
same with the God of Israel; yet for all this are but bare Allusions and
Accommodations, made indeed by them to Subjects of a like nature, but not at
all by them intended as Arguments and Demonstrations.

Nothing can be more injurious to the Writings of the New Testament, than such
a Supposition: And there can hardly be an Opinion more apt to overthrow the
Authority of Christ and his Apostles, and to expose the Christian Religion to
the Scorn both of Jews and Heathens. For the bare Accommodation of a place of
Scripture, cannot suppose that the Holy Ghost had any design in it, to intimate
any thing sounding that way, and consequently the Sense of that Scripture so
accommodated is of no Authority. Whereas it is a most certain truth that Christ
and his Apostles did design, by many of those Quotations, to prove that which
was in dispute between them and the Jews.

To what purpose should Christ exhort the Jews to search the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, because they testified of him, John v. 39. if those Scriptures
could only give a false Notion of him, by intimating that the Messiah promised
was the God of Israel? This were to suppose that Christ and his Apostles went
about to prove a thing by that which had no Strength and no Authority to prove
it: And that the Citations out of the Old Testament, are like the Works of the
Empress Eudoxia, who writ the History of Christ in Verses put together, and
borrowed from Homer, under the Name of (...); or that of Proba Falconia, who
did the same in Verses and Words taken out of Virgil.

It follows at least from such a Position, That in the Gospel God gave a
Revelation so very new, that it has no manner of Affinity to the Old, although
he caused this old Revelation to be carefully written by the Prophets, and as
carefully preserved by the Jews to be the Standard of their Faith, and the
Ground of their Hopes, till he should fulfill his Promises contained in it; and
although Christ and his Apostles bid the Jews have recourse to it, to know what
they were to expect of God's promises.

The Christian Church ever rejected this pernicious Opinion. And although her
first Champions against the Ancient Heretics, did acknowledge that the new
Revelation, brought in by Christ and his Apostles, had made the Doctrines much
clearer then they were before, (which the Jews themselves do acknowledge, when
they affirm, that hidden things are to be made plain to all by the Messiah) yet
they ever maintained that those Doctrines were so clearly set down in the Books
of the Old Testament, that they could not be opposed by them, who acknowledge
those Books to come from God: especially since the Jews are therein told, that
the Messiah, when he came should explain them, and make them clearer.

This Observation is particularly of force against those who formerly opposed
the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, and that of our Savior's being God. These
Heretics thought they followed the Opinion of the old Jews. Therefore they
that confuted them, undertook to satisfy them, that the Christian Church had
received nothing from Christ and his Apostles, about those two Articles, but
what God had formerly taught the Jews, and what necessarily followed from the
Writings of Moses and the Prophets; so that those Doctrines could not be
rejected, without accusing the Divine Spirit, the Author of those Books, of
shortness of Thought, in not foreseeing what naturally follows from those
Principles so often laid down and repeated by him.

These old Writers solidly proved to those Heretics, That God did teach the
Jews the Unity of his Essence, yet so as to establish at the same time a
Distinction in his Nature, which according to the Notion which himself gives of
it, we call Trinity of Persons: And that when he promised that the Messiah to
come was to be Man, at the very same time he expressly told the Jews, that he
was withal to be God blessed for ever.

The force and evidence of the Proofs of those Doctrines, is so great, and the
Proofs themselves so numerous, that Heretics could not avoid them, but by
setting up Opinions directly opposite to the Scriptures: On the other side, the
Heretics were so gravelled, that they broke into Opinions quite contrary one
to another, which greatly contributed to confirm the Faith of them whom they
opposed in those Articles, so that it still subsisted; whereas the opposite
Heresies perished in a manner as soon as broacht.

The meanness of Christ, and his shameful Death, moved the Ebionites, in the
very first Age after him, to look upon him as a mere Man, though exalted by
God's Grace to the Dignity of a Prophet. But the Cerinthians, another sort of
Heretics, maintained that the Word did operate in him, though at the same time
they denied the personal and inseparable Union of that Word with this human
Nature.

In the beginning of the Third Century, some had much ado to receive the
Doctrine of the Trinity, by reason that they could not reconcile it with that
of the Unity of God. But Praxeas, Noetus, and Sabellius, who opposed that
Doctrine, were soon obliged to recant: And then from one Extremity, they
shortly fell into another. For being satisfied that the Scripture does
attribute to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, the divine Nature,
which is constantly in the Old Testament expressed by the Name Jehovah; they
undertook, contrary to the plain Notions of Scripture, to maintain, that there
was but One Person in God, which had appeared the same under three differing
Names. Whereas some others did so plainly see the distinction, which the
Scripture makes between the Persons, that they chose rather to own Three
distinct Essences, than to deny that there are Three Persons in God, as the
Scripture does invincibly prove.

Two sorts of Heretics did formerly oppose the Divinity of Christ. Some did
acknowledge, that, as to his divine Nature, he was before the World, and that
by it he had made the World; though Himself, as to that nature, was created
before the World; and these afterward formed the Arian Sect. Others, but very
few, such as Artemas and Theodotus, denied that Christ was before he was born
of the Virgin: They acknowledged in him no other besides the human Nature,
which, said they, God had raised to a very high Dignity, by giving to it a
Power almost infinite: And in this they made his Godhead to consist.

But these two sorts of Heretics were happily destroyed one by the other, for
the Arians on the one side did confound Artemas his Disciples, by proving from
places of Scripture, that Christ was before the Virgin, nay before the World.
And on the other side, Absurdity and Idolatry were proved upon the Arians, both
because they acknowledged more than one divine Nature, and because they
worshipped a Creature; whereas by the Christian Religion, God alone ought to be
worshipped.

Artemas his Disciples were so few, and so severely condemned, even whilst the
Church labored under Persecutions, that their Name is hardly remembered at this
day; which clearly shows how strange their Doctrine appeared to them who
examined it by the Books of the Old and the New Testament.

As for the Arians, they made, it is true, more noise in the World, by the help
of two or three of Constantine's Successors, who by violent Methods endeavored
to spread their Opinion. But that very thing made their Sect odious, and in a
little time quite ruined the credit of it. Within a hundred and fifty years, or
thereabouts, after their first Rise, there hardly remained any Professors of
it; which plainly shows, that they could not answer those Arguments from
Scripture which were urged against them.

I observe this last thing, that Arius's Heresy was destroyed by Proofs from
Scripture for the Eternal Divinity of our Savior, (though it was a long time
countenanced by the Roman Emperors, by the Vandal Kings in Africa, and by the
Kings of the Goths both in Spain and in Italy;) lest any should fancy it was
extinguished only by Imperial Laws, and Temporal Punishments. Besides, that the
first Inventors of that Heresy had spread it before such time as Constantine,
by vanquishing Licinius, became Master of the World. Whoever shall consider
that the Christian Religion had, before Arius, already suffered ten
Persecutions without shrinking under them, will easily see that all the Power
of Constantine, and of his Orthodox Successors, who punished the Arian
Professors, had never been great enough to suppress their Opinion, if it had
not been a Gospel-doctrine: not to say that these Laws, and their Authority,
extended no further than the Roman Empire.

What had happened in those ancient Times, soon after the Christian Church was
established, happened likewise again in the last Century, at the Reformation of
the Western Church. As in those early days there arose many Heresies entirely
opposite one to the other; so in these latter times the very same was seen
among us. For when God raised up many Great Men to reform the Church in this
and our neighboring Kingdoms, there appeared soon after some Men, who being
weary of the Popish Tyranny, both in Doctrine and Worship, did fancy that they
might make a more perfect Reformation, if they could remove out of the
Christian Religion those things which human Reason was apt to stumble at. And
the Roman Church having obtruded upon her Votaries such Mysteries as were
directly repugnant to Reason, they imagined that the Doctrines of the Trinity,
and of Christ's Divinity, were of that number; and thus used all their
Endeavors to prove that they were absurd and contradictory.

Had not these Doctrines been grounded on the Authority of the Books of the Old
and the New Testament, they might easily enough have confuted them. But being
forced to own the Authority of those Books, which they durst not attack for
fear of being detested by all Christians, they fell into the same opposite
Extremes, into which those Heretics of old had fallen, when they opposed these
fundamental Doctrines of Christianity; and thus were as divided: in Opinions
about those matters, as the ancient Heretics had been before them.

For whilst some of them, as Laelius Socinus, and his Nephew Faustus, denied
the Divinity of Christ, and thus revived the Opinion of Artemas and his
Disciples; others seeing how absurd the Answers were that Socinus and his
Followers gave to those places of Scripture, which assert the Trinity, and the
Divinity of Christ, run so far to the contrary of this Socinian Heresy, that
they acknowledged three Gods. And not only the Adversaries of Socinus, but even
some of his Disciples did oppose his Opinion, moved thereto by the Authority of
Scripture. For he held it a fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, that
Christ is to be adored; in which he was a downright Idolater, in adoring Christ
as true God, when he believed Christ to be a mere Creature. But his Disciples
building upon this firm Maxim of Scripture, that God alone is to be adored,
justly concluded against him that he was not to be adored, since strictly
speaking he was but a Creature, and no God.

This Division was plainly occasioned by the strength of Scripture-proofs,
which on the one hand clearly show, that none can be a Christian without
adoring Christ; and on the other positively affirm, that none but the True God
ought to be adored. Thus these two opposite Parties did unwillingly do the
business of the true Church, which ever opposed to the Enemies of the Trinity,
and of the Godhead of Christ, the Authority of the Holy Scripture, which
teaches that Christ ought to be adored, and withal convinces the Arians of
Idolatry, who adored Christ without owning him to be the true God, though they
bestowed on him a kind of a Godhead inferior to that of the Father.

I cannot but admire, that they who within these few years have in this Kingdom
embraced Socinus his Opinions, should consider no better how little success
they have had elsewhere against the truth, and that upon the score of their
Divisions, which will unavoidably follow, till they can agree in unanimously
rejecting the Authority of Scripture. Neither does it avail them any thing to
use Quibbles and Evasions, and weak Conjectures, since they are often
unanswerably confuted even by some of their Brethren, who are more dextrous
than they in expounding of Scriptures.

But being resolved by all means to defend their Tenants, some Chief men
amongst them have undertaken to set aside the Authority of Scriptures, which is
so troublesome to them: And the Author of a late Book, entitled,
Considerations, maintains that the Gospels have been corrupted by the Orthodox
Party, and suspects that of St. John to be the work of Cerinthus.

It is no very easy Task to dispute against men whose Principles are so
uncertain, and who in a manner have no regard to the Authority of Scripture. It
was much less difficult to undertake Socinus himself, because he owned however
the Authority of Scripture, and that it had not been corrupted. But one knows
not how to deal with his Disciples, who in their Opinion seem to be so contrary
to him, and one another.

They do now affirm the adoration which is paid to Christ is Idolatrous, thus
renouncing Socinus his Principles, who looked upon it as an essential piece of
Christianity. So that they can no longer be called Socinians, and themselves
affect the name of Unitarians: And as their chief business seems to be to
accuse the sincerity of Scripture-writers, so the main work of them who
undertake to confute them, must be the establishing both the Sincerity and
Authority of it, which is no very hard task: For even Mahometans, though they
take some of the same Objections, that the Socinians are so full of, against
the Divinity of Christ, yet are so far from accusing Christians of having
corrupted the Scripture, that they furnish us with Weapons against the
Unitarians of this Kingdom, as the Reader will find at the end of this
following Book.

And although there be but small hopes of bringing to right again Men of so
strange Dispositions and Notions, yet they ought by no means to be left to
themselves. They have been often confuted by them that argued from the bare
Principles of Christianity, that is, the Authority of Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, which are the very Word of God. And it has been plainly showed
them that what Alterations soever they have made in Socinus's Opinions, yet
their new Conceits are neither more Rational than his, nor more agreeable to
Divine Revelation.

I say that their Opinions are not more agreeable than his to right Reason. For
when all is done, to affirm, That Christ received from God an Infinite Power to
govern the World, without being essentially God, is to affirm a downright
Contradiction, viz. that without partaking of the Divine Essence he received
one of the Attributes which are Essential to God.

It is true, some Popish Divines allow the Soul of Christ to be all-knowing, by
reason of its immediate Union to the Divine Nature; wherein they do much
service to the Socinians, in holding as they do that a Creature is capable of
receiving such Attributes. But Protestant Divines reject this Notion as
altogether false, as false as many of the Schoolmens Speculations, even the
absurdest of them that are exploded by the Socinians.

They have been also further refuted as to what they aver, that Justin Martyr
was the first that taught the Doctrines of the Trinity, of Christ's Eternal
Godhead, and of his Incarnation.

And at last, that Learned Divine Dr. Bull having observed, that the Jewish
Tradition was favorable to those Doctrines of which the Socinians make Justin
to have been the first Broacher. Howsoever M. N. treats him for this, neither
like a Scholar, nor a Christian, I shall venture his displeasure in making out
this Observation, without meddling at all with his Arguments drawn from the
Fathers, to show clearly, that the like Exceptions of M. N. against Philo, as
being a Platonic, and against the Ancient Jews, and their Tradition, can help
him no way in the Cause he has taken in hand.

The Doctrine of our Church being the same which was taught by Christ and his
Apostles, it will be an easy matter to prove it by the same places of Scripture
by which Christ and his Apostles converted the Jews and the Gentiles over to
the Christian Faith; and by which the Heretics were confuted, who followed or
renewed the Errors which the Jews have fallen into since Christianity begun.

But I will go farther, and prove, that the Ancient Jewish Church yield the
same Principles which Jesus Christ and his Apostles builded upon, and by this
Method it will plainly appear, That the Socinians or the Unitarians, let them
call themselves what they please, must either absolutely renounce the Authority
of Scripture, and turn downright Deists, or they must own those Doctrines of
the Trinity, and the Divinity of Christ, as being taught us by God himself in
the Holy Scriptures, and acknowledged by the Ancient Jewish Church.

THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE Preface. Chap. I. The Design of this Book, and what Matters it Treats of,
Page 1. Chap. II. That in the times of Jesus Christ Our Blessed Savior, the
Jews had among them a common Explication of the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, grounded on the Tradition of their Fathers, which was in many things
approved by Christ and his Apostles, Page 11. Chap. III. That the Jews had
certain Traditional Maxims and Rules for the understanding of the Scripture,
Page 32. Chap. IV. That Jesus Christ and his Apostles proved diverse points of
the Christian Doctrine by his common Traditional Exposition received among the
Jews, which they could not have done, (at least not so well) had there been
only such a Literal Sense of those Texts which they alleged, as we can find
without the help of such Exposition, Page 52. Chap. V. Of the Authority of the
Apocryphal Books of the Old Testament, Page 66. Chap. VI. That the Works which
go under the Name of Philo the Jew, are truly his; and that he writ them a long
while before the time of Christ's Preaching the Gospel; and that it does not
appear in any of his Works that ever he had heard of Christ, or of the
Christian Religion, Page 75. Chap. VII. Of the Authority and Antiquity of the
Chaldee Paraphrases, Page 84. Chap. VIII. That the Authors of the Apocryphal
Books did acknowledge a Plurality, and a Trinity in the Divine Nature, Page 99.
Chap. IX. That the Jews had Good Grounds to acknowledge some kind of Plurality
in the Divine Nature, Page 115. Chap. X. That the Jews did acknowledge the
Foundations of the Belief of the Trinity in the Divine Nature, and that they
had the Notion of it, Page 138. Chap XI. That this Notion of a Trinity in the
Divine Nature has continued among the Jews, since the time of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Page 158. Chap. XII. That the Jews had a distinct Notion of the Word as
a Person, and of a Divine Person too, Page 181. Chap. XIII. That all the
Appearances of God, or of the Angel of the Lord, which are spoken of in the
Books of Moses, have been referred to the Word by the Jews before Christ's
Incarnation, Page 201. Chap. XIV. That all the Appearances of God, or of the
Angel of the Lord, which are spoken of in Moses, have been referred to the Word
of God by the ancient Jewish Church, Page 214. Chap. XV. That all the
Appearances of God or of the Angel of the Lord, which are spoken after Moses
his time in the Books of the Old Testament, have been referred to the Word of
God by the Jews before Christ's Incarnation, Page 233. Chap. XVI. That the
ancient Jews did often use the Notion of the (...), or Word, in speaking of the
Messiah, Page 253. Chap. XVII. That the Jews did acknowledge the Messiah should
be the Son of God, Page 265. Chap. XVIII. That the Messiah was represented in
the Old Testament as being Jehovah that should come, and that the ancient
Synagogue did believe him to be so, Page 278. Chap. XIX. That the New Testament
does exactly follow the Notions which the Old Jews had of the Trinity, and of
the Divinity of the Messiah, Page 293 Chap. XX. That both the Apostles and the
first Christians speaking of the Messiah did exactly follow the Notions of the
Old Jews, as the Jews themselves did acknowledge, Page 313. Chap. XXI. That we
find in the Jewish Authors, after the time of Jesus Christ, the same Notions
which Jesus Christ and his Apostles Grounded their Discourses on to the Jews,
Page 327. Chap. XXII. An Answer to some Exceptions taken from Expressions used
in the Gospel, Page 339. Chap. XXIII. That neither Philo, nor the Chaldee
Paraphrases, nor the Christians have borrowed from the Platonic Philosophers
their Notions about the Trinity. But that Plato should have more probably
borrowed his Notions from the Books of Moses, and the Prophets, which he was
acquainted with, Page 413. Chap. XXIV. An Answer to some Objections of the
Modern Jews, and of the Unitarians, Page 365. Chap. XXV. An Answer to an
Objection against the Notions of the Old Jews compared with those of the new
Ones, Page 380. Chap. XXVI. That the Jews have laid aside the Old Explications
of their Forefathers, the better to defend themselves in their Disputes with
the Christians. Page 392. Chap. XXVII. That the Unitarians in opposing the
Doctrines of the Trinity, and our Lord's Divinity, do go much further than the
Modern Jews, and that they are not fit Persons to Convert the Jews, Page 413. A
Dissertation concerning the Angel who is called the Redeemer, Genesis XLVIII. Page
433.
THE JUDGMENT OF THE Ancient JEWISH Church Against the UNITARIANS, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Design of this Book, and what Matters it treats of.
IF the Doctrines of the Ever-Blessed Trinity, and of the Promised Messiah
being very God, had been altogether unknown to the Jews, before Jesus Christ
began to preach the Gospel, it would be a great prejudice against the Christian
Religion. But the contrary being once satisfactorily made out, will go a great
way toward proving those Doctrines among Christians. The Socinians are so
sensible of this, that they give their Cause for lost if this be admitted: And
therefore they have used their utmost Endeavors to weaken, or at least to
bring under suspicion, the Arguments by which this may be proved.

It is now about sixty years ago since one of that Sect writ a Latin Tract
about the meaning of the word (...) in the Chaldee Paraphrases, in Answer to
Wechner, who had proved that St. John used this word in the first Chapter of
his Gospel, in the same sense that the Chaldee Paraphrases had used it before
Christ's time; and consequently, that it is to be understood of a Person
properly so called in the Blessed Trinity: which way of interpreting that word,
because it directly overthrew the Socinian Doctrine, which was then, that St.
John by the word (...), understood no other than Christ as Man, it is no wonder
that this Author used all his Wit and Learning to evade it.

The Construction which Socinus put upon the first Chapter of the Gospel of St.
John, was then followed generally by his Disciples. But some years since, they
have set it aside here, as being absurd and impertinent. And they now freely
own what that Socinian Author strongly opposed, That the Word mentioned by St.
John is the eternal and essential Virtue of God, by which he made the World,
and operated in the Person of Christ. Only they deny that Word to be a Person
distinct from the Father, as we do affirm. And whereas Socinus taught, That
Christ was made God, and therefore is a proper Object of religious Worship; now
the Unitarians, who believe him to be no other than a mere human Creature,
following the Principles of Christianity better than Socinus, condemn the
Religious Worship which is paid to him.

As they do believe, that the Jews had the same Notions of the Godhead and
Person of the Messiah which they have themselves, so they think they have done
the Christian Religion an extraordinary service in thus ridding it of this
double Difficulty, which hinders the Conversion of the Jews. Mr. N. one of
their ablest Men, having read Justin Martyr's Dialogue with Trypho, in which
Trypho says, that he did not believe that the Messiah was to be other than Man,
makes use of this Passage of Trypho for proof, that the Doctrines of the
Divinity of the Messiah, and by consequence of the Trinity, were never
acknowledged by the Jews. This he does in a Book, the Title whereof is, The
Judgment of the Fathers against Dr. Bull.

His design being to prove, that Justin Martyr, about 140 years after Christ,
was the first that held the Doctrine of Christ's Divinity, and by consequence
that of the Trinity, without which the other cannot be defended; he found it
necessary to assert,

1st. That since the Jews, by Trypho's Testimony, did own the Messiah to be
nothing more than mere Man, therefore the Jewish Authors, quoted by Dr. Bull
against the Socinian Opinions, must have lived after the Preaching of the
Gospel.

2dly, That the Books that are quoted against them, were written by Christians
in Masquerade, that lived since Justin Martyr's time: And this he applies in
particular to the Works of Philo the Jew, and to the Book of Wisdom.

3die. That since the Jewish Authors could not possibly mention any thing like
the Doctrines of the Trinity, and of the Messiah his being God too, to which
they were such perfect Strangers; whatsoever occurrs in any of the ancient
Jewish Books, that favors those Doctrines, must needs have been foisted in by
Christians after Justin Martyr's time.

Lastly, he supposes, That if any thing, either in the Scripture or Jewish
Authors, sounds that way, it probably came from the Platonics, of whom both
Jews and Christians borrowed many Notions, and mixed them with Christian
Doctrines, to persuade the Heathens the more easily to embrace the Christian
Religion.

Now though it seems unnecessary to dispute any further against him, having
already clearly shown, in my Discussion of Mr. N's Judgment of the Fathers,
that Justin Martyr was not the Broacher of those Doctrines, as Mr. N. pretends;
yet I am willing to give a more full satisfaction to the World about it, by
examining what either Mr. N. or any others have said or can say on this
Subject, and showing that the bold Answers to Dr. Bull's Proofs concerning the
Opinion of the Jews before Christ about those Doctrines, are no better than Mr.
N's supposition, that Justin Martyr was the first that maintained those
Doctrines.

I was particularly induced to undertake this task, in hopes that by examining
this matter to the bottom, I might set these Controversies in their true Light;
showing how little credit some Divines do deserve, who playing the Critics,
have favored the new Jews and the Socinians with all their Might, and abuse
those who upon such ungrounded Authority too rashly believe, that these
Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity came from the School of Plato; when on
the contrary it is certain, that Plato himself, by conversing with the Jews in
Egypt, borrowed of them his best Notions of God.

To do this in the best method I can, I will first of all consider in general,
what the Jewish Tradition was before Christ: Let the Reader give me leave to
use that word as the Fathers commonly use it; not for a Doctrine unknown in
Scripture, but for a Doctrine drawn from Scripture, and acknowledged for the
Common Faith of the Church; and I shall show, That both before Christ, and in
his time, the Jews had a current way of expounding the Old Testament, which
they had received from their Fathers; and that Christ and his Apostles used and
approved this way of expounding their Scriptures in many particulars.

2dly. I will examine the Grounds the Jews went upon, to come to the
understanding of the Old Testament, particularly of that part which contains
the Promises of the Messiah, as they had it in Christ's time, and still have it
to this day.

3dly. I will show by some Examples, That Christ and his Apostles did prove
many Articles of the Christian Doctrine by this Exposition, commonly received
among the Jews; which they would hardly have done, had they had nothing else of
their side, but only the Letter of those places which they quoted.

This being premised in general as a necessary Foundation, I shall particularly
examine the Authority of the Apocryphal Books of the Old Testament, and of the
Books of Philo the Jew that are extant, and of the Targum or the Caldaick
Paraphrases on the Books of the Old Testament; these being the chief Helps by
which we may find out the traditional sense of the Old Testament as it was
received in the Synagogue before Christ's time. This is absolutely necessary to
be done; for without proving the Authority of those Apocryphal Books, of Philo,
and of those Paraphrases, we cannot with any force and weight use their
Testimony in this Controversy, as I intend to do.

This being dispatched, I shall prove clearly, That the Jews before Christ's
time, according to the received Expositions of the Old Testament, derived from
their Fathers, had a Notion of a Plurality of Persons in the Unity of the
Divine Essence; And that this Plurality was a Trinity. And further, That
contrary to what Mr. N. has imagined, the most learned amongst them have
constantly retained those Notions, though perhaps they were divided in their
Opinions about the Messiah his Godhead, and the Doctrine of the Trinity, as we
do apprehend it.

And because, if it be granted that the Word was a Person, that goes a great
way toward proving the Doctrine of the Trinity; And the Socinians affirm, that
it was not the uncreated Word, but a created Angel, that appeared to Men under
the Old Testament-dispensation, and was adored as being God's Representative; I
shall enquire what was the Opinion of the Old Jews concerning these Matters;
and show, that they owned the Word to be a Divine Person; and that it was that
Word that appeared in the Old Testament; and consequently, that nothing is more
false than what some Socinians teach after Grotius (upon the Book of Wisdom,
chapter 18.15.) grounding it upon his Opinion of an Angel's appearing and being
adored; That therefore it was lawful for the Jews under the Old Testament to
worship Angels; but it was first forbidden to Christians under the New; as
namely, by St. Paul, Colos. 11.18.

And that the Socinians may have nothing left them to reply against this, I
shall descend to particulars, and show at large, That according to the Doctrine
of the Old Synagogue, the Jews apprehended the Word as a true and proper
Person; and held, that that Word was the Son of God; That he was the true God;
That he was to be in the Messiah; and that the Messiah was promised under the
Old Testament, as Jehovah; and accordingly the Old Synagogue expected that he
should be Jehovah indeed.

It is of great moment to satisfy the World of these Truths, and to make the
Socinians sensible, that they cannot truly profess the Christian Religion
without owning those Doctrines, to which yet they seem to be so averse.
Therefore I will go farther, and distinctly show, that the whole Gospel is
grounded on those very Notions which the Jews before Christ entertained. That
the first Christians after the Apostles exactly followed them; And that the
Jews themselves, following generally those very Notions upon the chief Texts of
the Old Testament which Christians quote in those Controversies, bear witness,
that they were the undoubted Doctrines both of them and of the Christians
before Justin Martyr's time.

The Men that we have to do with, do very confidently affirm any thing that
comes into their heads, be it never so little probable, so they may thereby
give any plausible Solutions of the Difficulties in which they find themselves
entangled and perplexed: and they are much given to vaunt of their unanswerable
Arguments, so they call them, which are many times but weak Objections, such as
Men of Learning and Wit should be ashamed of.

For this reason I thought it necessary to prevent, as far as it was possible,
all that they can object against my Position of the Opinions the Old Jews held
concerning those Doctrines, which were exactly followed and fully declared by
the Apostles and first Christians. And because I foresee some Objections may
arise, I will show, that nothing can be more absurd, than to imagine, that the
Jews, or the first Christians, borrowed their Notions about the Trinity, or the
Divinity of Christ, from Plato's Disciples; whereas Plato has in truth
followed the Jewish Notions of those things.

After this, I shall make it appear, that however some of the Modern Jews have
changed their Opinions in these Articles, yet the Socinians can make no
advantage thereof, because the Jews have in reality much altered their belief
since Christ's time, and are guilty of great Disingenuity, as is common to all
those who are obstinately set upon the maintaining of erroneous Doctrines.

In fine, I shall plainly show, that the Socinians, to defend themselves
against the Orthodox, have been forced to imitate those Modern Jews, and have
much out done them in changing and shifting their Opinions when they dispute
with Christians.

I hope to manage this Controversy with the Socinians so plainly and fully, as
to satisfy the Reader, That as on the one side they most falsely accuse the
Church of having corrupted the New Testament to favor the Doctrines of the
Trinity, and of Christ's Godhead; So they cannot on the other side get any
ground upon the Jews in their Disputes with them, though they fancy they got a
great way toward their Conversion by rejecting those Doctrines.

In a word, both the Ancient and Modern Jews do so far agree in those things
which make on the Church's side against the Socinians, that if they appeal to
the Jews, they are sure to lose their Cause; which when they have better
considered, they will find it their best way for the maintaining of their
Opinions to abandon the Jews altogether, as Men that understood not their own
Scriptures, viz. the Old Testament, and to reject both, as they have gone a
great way toward it, in rejecting that traditional sense of the Old Testament,
for which it was quoted in the New; and without which it would have signified
little or nothing to those purposes for which it was quoted. And so it will
appear that for all their brags of the Aptness, and even Necessity of their way
for the Conversion of the Jews, they have taken the direct way to harden them,
by giving up that sense of the Old Testament Scriptures which Christ and his
Apostles made use of for the converting of their Forefathers.

But we have the less reason to complain of them for this, when we see how apt
they are to question the Authority of the Books of the New Testament, as often as
they find them so clearly opposite to their Doctrines, that they cannot obscure
the Light of them by any tolerable Exposition. To show that I do not say this
without cause, I shall show some instances in the last Chapter of this Book.

CHAP. II.
That in the times of Jesus Christ our Blessed Savior, the Jews had among them
a common Explication of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, grounded on the
Tradition of their Fathers, which was in many things approved by Christ and his
Apostles.
THE Jews have to this day a certain kind of Tradition received from their
Forefathers, which contain many precepts of things to be done or avoided on the
account of their Religion. This they call their Oral Law; by which name they
distinguish it from the written Law, which God gave them by Moses. They make
five Orders of such a Tradition, which are explained by Moses de Trano in his
Kiriat Sepher, Printed at Venice, Anno 1551. The first is, of the things which
they infer from Moses and the Prophets by a clear consequence, and they are
certainly of the same Authority as the rest of the Revelation, although they
call it a Tradition. We are not such Enemies to Names as not to like such a
sort of Tradition, and we receive it with all imaginable reverence; we like
very well the Judgment of Maimonides who leaves as uncertain whatsoever the
Jewish Doctors speak upon many things, as being without ground when their
Tradition is not gathered from Texts of Scripture, de Regib. c. 12. The second
Order is of the Ceremonies and Rites, which they keep, as coming from Mount
Sinai, but of which there is not a word in the Law. The third Order is of the
Judiciary Laws upon which the two Schools of Hillel and Shammai were divided.
The fourth is of some Constitutions of the Ancients, which they look upon as an
hedge to the Law. The last is of their Customs, which are various in several
places of their dispersion. Though in many things they cannot but see that those
last four Orders of Tradition do not agree with the Law of Moses, or are quite
unknown in it, yet they seem to like it never the worse. Nay, their Rabbis
professedly ascribe a much greater Authority to this Oral Law, than to the Law
of Moses. They say in the Talmud Avoda zara, c. 1. fol. 17. Col. 2. that a Man
who studies in the Law alone without these Traditions, is a Man which is
without God; according to the Prophecy of Azariah, 2 Chr. 15.3. Of this sort
were all the Traditions which were condemned by our Lord Jesus Christ: He
plainly calls them the Commandments of Men, Mat. XV. 9. and has purposely
directed several of his Discourses against them; because even where their
observing these Traditions would not consist with their Obedience to God, as
particularly in the case of Corban, Mat. XV. 3. yet they gave Tradition the
preference, and so as our Savior there tells them, Ver. 9. They made the
Commandments of God of no effect by their Tradition.

The Author of these Traditions, or new Laws, as one may term them, did almost
all of them live since the time that the Jews were under the power of the
Seleucidae; and they were the Leaders of those several Sects that corrupted
their Religion, by adding to it a great number of Observations which were
perfectly new. We have therefore no reason to look upon this sort of Tradition,
as the fountain from whence the Jews in Christ's time took their measures of
the sense and meaning of the Writings of the Old Testament.

But for the Interpreting of their Scriptures, the Jews in Christ's time had
some other kinds of Traditions, much different from those which Christ so
severely condemned. And these I shall explain more particularly, giving some
examples of their use, and also of their Authority.

1. They had by Tradition the knowledge of some Matters of fact, which are not
recorded in their Scriptures; and of other things they had more perfect and
minute accounts, than are recorded in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets.

Particularly Philo the Jew, writing of the Life of Moses, declares that what
he had to say of him, was taken partly out of Scripture, and partly received by
Tradition from their Forefathers De vita Mosis page 468. Edit. Genev. Ib. p
470. F.
. Of this latter sort was the long account he there gives of Moses being
brought up in all the Learning of the Egyptians, for there is nothing of this
in the Old Testament. Therefore when St. Stephen says the same thing, Act. VII.
22. we know that he also had it not from Scripture, but from Tradition.

Hence also it is that St. Paul has gathered the names of Jannes and Jambres,
Magicians that resisted Moses and the Truth, 2 Timothy iv. 8. for their names are
no where in Scripture, but they are in Jonathan's Targum on Exodus i. 15. and
vii. 11. from whence also they are taken into Talmud Sanhedrin (...) c. 9.

Hence also St. Paul knew that the Pot wherein Moses laid up the Manna, was
made of Gold, Heb. ix. 4. which also the Seventy and Philo the Jew [de congr.
quaer. er. gr. page 375. Ed. Gen.] do assure us of. Mechil. fol. 20. Col. 1.
and Tanchumah, fol. 29. Col. 4.
And though the Modern Jews deny this, and say the Pot was of Earth; yet it is
acknowledged by the Samaritans that is was Golden. This must have been from
Tradition, because there is no such thing said in Scripture.

It was from hence that the Apostle had that saying of Moses, when he saw the
dreadful appearance of God upon Mount Sinai, Heb. xii. 21. So terrible was the
sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake. And another that writ
soon after Paul's death, namely Clemens Bishop of Rome, in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, cap. 17. has other like words that Moses said, I am the Steam upon
the Pot. Both these sayings being no where in Scripture, they could not have
known them otherwise than from the Jewish Tradition.

From hence also St. Jude ver. 9. had that passage of the dispute that Michael
the Archangel had with the Devil about the Body of Moses. Which Body, as
Josephus probably says, [ Ant. iv. 8.] if any Relick of it had been kept, would
have drawn the people into Idolatry. That passage, we are told by some of the
Fathers, was taken out of an Apocryphal Book called the Analepsis of Moses,
[Clem. Alex. in Jud. and Origin. peri Archon. iii. 2.] Grotius tells us the
Jews have the like things in their Midrash on Deuteronomy. in the Aboth of R. Nathan,
and in other of their Books.

It was from hence that St. Paul understood that some of the Prophets were sawn
asunder, Origin Respons. ad African.
Heb. xi. 37. though he spoke in the Plural, he meant it only of one, says
Origin, namely of the Prophet Esaias, who was Sawed asunder by the Command of
Manasses, according to the Jewish Tradition. Which also is mentioned by Justin
Martyr, as a thing out of dispute between him and Tryphon the Jew; and it is
taken notice of in the Gemara tr. Jevamot, Chapter iv.

It was from hence that Christ took what he said of the Martyrdom of Zechary
the Son of Berachiah, who was killed between the Temple and the Altar; Orig.
Ib. p. 232, etc.
Mat. xxiii. 35. which Origin there also mentions as a Jewish Tradition, though,
he says, they suppressed it as being not for the Honor of their Nation.

I do not deny, but that there might be some ancient Authors, besides the
Canonical Writers, to keep up the memory of these names of Persons, and other
matters of fact: As for example, Joseph. Ans. l. 10. c. ^^.
that there were eighteen High Priests who Officiated in the first Temple,
although they are not all mentioned in Scripture. But if there were any such
Authors, it is very probable that they were lost in the Captivity, or in the
bloody Persecutions of the Jewish Church, long before the time of our Blessed
Savior and his Holy Apostles. Josephus, who lived in that Age, and writ the
History of the Jews, makes no mention of them, and gives a very lame account of
the things which passed under several Kings of Persia.

2. Besides the Canonical Books, they had Writings of a less Authority, wherein
were inserted by the great Men of their Nation, several Doctrines that came
from the Prophets, which were in very high esteem and veneration, though not
regarded as of equal Authority with the Writings of the Prophets. It is not
improbable that St. Matthew had respect to some Book of this nature, when he
quoted that which is not found in express words in any of the Writings of the
Prophets; That the Messiah should be called a Nazarene, Mat. ii. 23. if he does
not allude to the Idea of the Jews who referred to the Messiah the Netzer, or
Branch spoken of by Isa. xi. 1. So Christ himself may seem to have alluded to a
passage in one of these Books, Joh. vii. 38. where he says, He that believes
on me, as says the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water; for there is nothing perfectly like this in any of the Canonical Books
that are come to our hands.

St. Paul the Apostle, as Jerome [in Ephesians. v. 14.] observes, has cited diverse
such Apocryphal Books, accommodating himself, no doubt, to the Jews, who gave
much deference to their Authority. Thus he did, Romans ix. 21. and perhaps in
some other places of his Epistles, from the Book of Wisdom, which is still
extant in our Bibles. Elsewhere he has Quotations out of Books that are lost,
as, 1 Cor. ii. 9. out of an Apocryphal Book that went under the name of the
Prophet Elias; and Ephesians. v. 14. out of an Apocryphal piece of the Prophet
Jeremy, as we are told by Georgius Syncellus in his Chron. p. 27. A. But the
most express Quotation of this kind, is that which is alleged by St. James iv.
5, 6. For these words, The spirit that dwells in us lusts to Envy, are not
in any Books of the Old Testament; nor are the following words, God resists
the proud, but gives grace to the humble. And yet both these sayings are
quoted as Scripture by the Holy Apostle. Of the first he says plainly (...),
the Scripture says, Then he goes on to the other, and of that he says also
(...), without any Nominative Case but (...) before mentioned, which implies
that the Scripture says this also. Now what Scripture could he mean? for it is
certain, that neither of these sayings is any where else in our Scriptures. He
must therefore mean it of one or other of the Apocryphal Books. And one of the
Fathers that was born within a hundred years after his death, gives us a very
probable guess at the Book that he intended. It is Clement of Alexandria, who
says of the latter Quotation, These are the words of Moses, Strom. iv. p. 376.
meaning in all likelihood of the Analepsis of Moses, which Book is mentioned by
the same Clement elsewhere on Jude v. 9. as a Book well known in those times in
which he lived. Therefore in all likelihood the words also of the former
Quotation were taken from the Analepsis of Moses, and it was that Apocryphal
Book that S. James quoted and called it Scripture.

This can be no strange thing to him that considers what was intimated before,
that the Jews had probably these Books joined to their (...) or Hagiographa,
and therefore they might well be called (...) without any addition. The
Apocryphal Books that are in our Bibles were commonly called so by the
Primitive Fathers. Thus Clement before mentioned, Strom. v. p. 431. B. quotes
the words that we read in Wisdom vii. 24. from Sophia in the Scriptures. And
the Book of Ecclesiasticus is called (...) seven or eight times in his
writings, [ Paed. i. 10. ii. 5. and ver. 8 vis and 10 vis iii. 3. and 11.] So
it is quoted by Origin with the same Title, Orig. in Jerem. Hom. 16. p. 155.
D.] There are many the like Instances to be found in the writings of the
Ancientest Fathers. They familiarly called such Books, The Scriptures, and
sometimes The Holy Scriptures; and yet they never attributed the same Authority
to them, as to the Books that were received into the Canon of the Old
Testament, which, as the Apostle says, were written by Divine Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16.

The same is to be said of the Prophecy of Enoch, out of which St. Jude brings
a Quotation in his Epistle, verse. 14, 15. Grotius in his Annotations on the
place, says, This Prophecy was extant in the Apostles times, in a Book that
went under the name of the Revelation of Enoch; and was a Book of great credit
among the Jews; for it is cited in their Zohar, and was not unknown to Celsus
the Heathen Philosopher, for he also cited is, as appears by Origen's Answer to
him; [ Orig. in Cells. lib. V.] Grotius also shows, that this Book is often
cited by the Primitive Fathers; and he takes notice of a large piece of it that
is preserved by Georg. Syncellus in his Chronicon. And whereas in this piece
there are many fabulous things, he very well judges that they might be foisted
in, as many such things have been thrust into very Ancient Books. But whether
his Conjecture in this be true or no, it is certain that the piece which is
quoted by St. Jude was truly the Prophecy of Enoch, because we have the
Apostle's Authority to assure us of the Historical truth of it.

3. It is clear that the Jews had very good and authentic Traditions,
concerning the Authors, the Use, and the Sense of diverse parts of the Old
Testament. For Example, St. Mat. Chap. xxvii. 9. quotes Jeremy for the Author
of a passage, which he there transcribes, and which we find in Zechary xi. 12.
How could this be? but that it was a thing known among the Jews, that the four
last Chapters of the Book of Zechary were written by Jeremy; Medes Works. p.
709. and 963. and 1022.
as Mr. Mede has proved by many Arguments. It is by the help of this Tradition,
that the Ancient Interpreters have added to the Psalms such Titles as express
their design, and their usage in the Synagogue. Certainly these Titles which
show the design of many of the Psalms, contribute much to make us understand
the sense of those Psalms; which a man that knows the occasion of their
Composing, will apprehend more perfectly than he can do that reads the Psalms
without these Assistances. And for the Titles of several Psalms in the
Septuagint, and other of the Ancient Translations, which show on what days they
were sung in the public Worship of the Jews; as Ps. xxiv. 48, 81, 82, 93, 94,
etc. though these Titles are not in the Hebrew, and therefore are not part of the
Jews Scripture; yet that they had the knowledge of this by Tradition, we find
by Maimonides, who though a stranger to those Translations, De cultu divino
tract. de sacrificiis jugibus. c. 6. Sect. 9.
yet affirms that those several Psalms were sung on such and such days; and he
names the very days that are prefixed to them in the said Titles.

It is from the same Tradition, that they have these Rules concerning the
Psalms: I. This Rule to know the Authors of them; namely, that all Psalms, that
are not inscribed with some other name, are David's Psalms, although they bear
not his name; a Maxim, owned by Aben-Ezra, Praefat. in Psalmos
and David Kimchi; and we see an Instance of this Rule in that Quotation of Ps.
xcv. 7. which is ascribed to David in Heb. iv. 7. II. From hence they have
learnt also another Rule, by which they distinguish between the Psalms spoken
by David in his own name, Tehillim. Rabbat. in Ps. 24. Fol. 22. col. 2.
and as King of Israel; and those which he spoke in the name of the Synagogue,
without any particular respect to his own time, but in a prospect of the
remotest future times. Tehillim. Rab. Ib.
From thence they have learned to distinguish between the Psalms in which the
Holy Ghost spoke of the present times, and those in which he speaks of the
times to come, viz. of the time of the Messiah. So R. David Kimchi, and others
agree that the Psalms 93, 94. till the Psalm 101. speak of the days of the
Messiah. So they remark upon Ps. 92. whose Title is for the Sabbath Day, that
it is for the time to come, which shall be all Sabbath. Manasseh. Ben. Is. in
Exodus q. 102.

By the help of Tradition also, they clear the Text, Ex. xii. 40. where it is
said, That the sojourning of the Children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was
430 years. It would be a great mistake of these words, to think the meaning of
them should be, that the Children of Israel dwelled in Egypt 430 years: For in
truth they dwelled there but half the time, as the Jews themselves reckon, and
all Learned men do agree to it. But the Jews understand by these words, that
the sojourning of the Children of Israel, all the while they dwelled in Egypt,
and in the Land of Canaan, they and their Fathers, was 430 years. Thus all the
Rabbis do understand it, and thus it was anciently explained, by putting in
words to this sense, in the Samaritan Text, and in the Alexandrian LXX. That
they were in the right, we see by the Apostle's reckoning the time to have been
430 years, from the promise made to Abraham at his coming into Canaan, till the
giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai, which was but 50 days after their coming up
out of Egypt.

In like manner from Tradition they filled up that place, Genesis IV. 8. where it
is said, that Cain talked with Abel his Brother, by adding the words which he
spoke, Let us go into the field. This Insertion is not only in the Alexandrian
LXX. but the Samaritans have it in their Bibles, and they had it there in S.
Hierom's time. It is also extant in the Jerusalem Targum. Lib. quoth. det p. 120,
124, 125.
Philo the Jew Philosophises on these words much after the same manner as does
the Targum.

4. It is certain that they have had very common among them the knowledge of
the most illustrious Prophecies of the Messiah. This we may see in the Answer
of the Samaritan Woman to our Blessed Savior, Joh. iv. 25. where she says, I
know that when the Messiah is come, he will tell us all things. For though it
is no where plainly said, yet the Samaritans knew full well, that the Messiah
should explain all things, according to the Traditional sense of that Prophecy
in Deuteronomy. xviii. 15, 18, 19. which has been so constantly referred to the
Messiah, that we find till this day in the Midrash upon Ecclesiast. c. 1.9.
that the last Redeemer shall be like the first, that is, Moses. And in
consequence of this knowledge commonly received among the Jews, Joh. xii. 34.
did they of Christ's time hold for certain, that the Messiah should remain for
ever; which their Posterity not knowing how to reconcile with their Notion of
the Messiah, they fancied that the Messiah should dye after a long Reign, and
leave his Crown to his Children from Generation to Generation.

Hence it was that the Sanhedrin answered Herod without delay, Mat. ii. 5, 6.
that the Messiah should be born at Bethlehem, according to Micah's Prophecy,
though it is not plainly said in the Text of that Prophecy, Micah v. 2. Hence
also it was that John Baptist, Mat. iii. 5, 6. found the people of the Jews so
disposed to repentance, that they might escape God's Judgments threatened on the
Nation at the coming of the Messiah, according to Joel's prediction recited
Act. ii. 26. and that other Prophecy in Malach. iv. 5.

Hence it was that when John the Baptist sent his Disciples to our Savior to
ask him, Whether he were the Messiah or no; our Savior gave them this Answer,
Mat. xi. 4. Go and tell John the things which you hear and see; The Blind
receive their sight, the Lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, the Deaf hear, the
Dead are raised, and the poor have the Gospel preached to them. This is
commonly taken to be a Quotation from Isaiah. xxxv. 1. There some indeed of
these Characters do point out the Messiah; But our Savior did not content
himself with those, but added others that are not in that Text, nor in any
other, but such as no doubt the Jews had at that time in their common Tradition.

This Remark is of great moment to confound the boldness of some Critics, as
Grotius, who suppose that some places in the Apocryphal Books, which show that
they were exactly acquainted with the Ideas of the Prophets upon the Divinity
and the Glory of the Messiah, such as we see in the Book of Wisdom, in
Ecclesiasticus, and in Baruch, have been foisted in by Christians in those
Books, when to the contrary they were to judge that the Jews have laid aside
these Books for that very reason, viz. Because they were a strong proof that
the Apostles did apply the Prophecies of the Old Testament according to the
sense of the Synagogue before Jesus Christ.

It was from hence that our Blessed Savior in the same Chapter, Mat. xi.
showed the multitude, that John Baptist was the Messenger promised by God in
Malach. iii. 1. as he that should be the forerunner of the Messiah, and that
should prepare his way by exhorting the People to Repentance: and he proves
that John the Baptist was so, by the great Effect of his Preaching, in the
Conversion of those that seemed the most corrupt of the Nation.

5. It is as certain, that they had by Tradition sundry Explications of the
Scripture grounded upon Allegories. Philo affirms this positively [ lib. de
Therapeutis, p. 691.] St. Paul gives us several Examples of it. We have one in
Heb. iv. 9. where St. Paul thus argues from the Words of David in Psalm. xcv.
11. There remains therefore a Rest for the people of God. His Argument depends
upon the Jewish Exposition of the six days of the Creation, as foreshewing that
the Age of the World should be 6000 years; and understands the Sabbath, or
Rest, of the times after; founding their Exposition on the Words of the 90th
Psalm, A thousand years in thy sight are as but one day: That is to be seen in
R. Abraham bar Hiya Hannashi Megillat ha Megillat Saar. 2. in Ramban upon Genesis
ii. 2. in Abarbanel Miphaloth Eloh. lib. 1. c. 4. See Menasseh Ben Is. Council.
q. 30. in Genes. and de Creat. Problem XI.

Another Example we have in the same St. Paul, Galat. iv. 24. drawn from Sarah
and Hagar, as being Types of the two Covenants. Philo the Jew [de Cherub. p.
83.] found a Mystery there before St. Paul, as we see in a Book of his that was
much more ancient than that Epistle.

A third Example may be found in the same St. Paul, who uses it Romans v. 14. and
1 Corin. xv. 47. in comparing the first Adam with Jesus Christ, whom he calls
the second Adam. The Jews have the same Idea of the Messiah, as of the second
Adam, who shall raise all his Followers from the Sepulcher, as we see in Pirke
Eliezer, chapter 32.

This method of explaining Scripture ought to be carefully considered, because
it gives us to understand the Reasons why the Jews have regarded the Song of
Songs as a part of Canonical Scripture, and have referred it to the Messiah, as
we see they do in their Targum, in Cant. i. 8. iv. 5. vii. 14. viii. 1, 4. The
same reflection may be made on their acknowledging of the Divine Authority of
the Book of Ruth, wherein their Targum mentions the Messiah, chap. iii. 15. And
the like may be said of Ecclesiastes, certain Texts of which, as chapter i. 18. and
chapter viii. 25. they refer to the Messiah, which otherwise seem not to have much
relation to him.

In truth, one cannot well deny that the Jews had this common knowledge of
great Truths of their Religion, and a Traditional Exposition of great
Prophecies, from their Ancestors, to clear their Ideas thereof, if he considers
attentively these following Remarks.

First, That since their return from the Babylonian Captivity, they were never
guilty of Idolatry: Except, for a little while, in the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes, when some wicked men apostatized, and brought a force upon others,
by which many were driven to Idolatry. But some chose rather to die than to
yield to it, 1 Mac. i. 62, 63. ii. 29, 30, 37, 38. Which is an argument, that
the Rebukes of the Prophets had made great Impression on their Minds, and
raised a great Concern in them for their Religion, and for the study of the
Scripture, which contained the Precepts of it. But it was impossible that in
reading the Writings of the Prophets, and hearing them explained by their
Doctors, they should give no attention to the great Promises of the Messiah,
whose Coming was spoken of by some of the Prophets, as being very near at hand.
See Dan. ix. Hag. ii. Malach. iii.

The Second is, That their Zeal for the Scriptures, and their Religion, was
really much quickened by the cruel Persecution which they suffered from
Antiochus Epiphanes; whose Tyrannical Fury did particularly extend to the Holy
Scriptures, 1 Mac. i. 56, 57. and to whatever else did contribute to the
maintenance of their Religion.

The Third is, That it appears from History, that there were more Writers of
their Nation since the Captivity, than we read of at any time before: so says
Josephus, lib. I. contr. Appion. Especially since they came under the Power of
the Ptolomeys and the Seleucidae, who being Princes of a Greek Original, were
great Lovers of Learning, and did much for the improving of good Letters.

The Fourth is, That learned Men among the Jews, applying themselves to this
business, did write, either at Jerusalem, at Babylon, or at Alexandria, several
Extracts of ancient Books of Morality for the instruction of their People. Such
were the Books of Baruch and Esdras, which seem to have been written in
Chaldee; and those of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, which were written in Greek.

The Fifth is, That the great Business of the Jews in their Synagogues, and in
their Schools, has been ever since to understand the Books of the Prophets,
and to explain them in a Language intelligible to the People; the Knowledge of
the Hebrew being in great part lost during the time of the Babylonian Captivity.

The Sixth is, That it does indeed appear, that this was the proper time in
which the Jewish Paraphrases began first to be formed. They were began and
carried on insensibly; One adding some Chaldee Words in the Margin of his Book,
opposite to the Text, which the People did not understand so well: Another
adding to these some Notes in another place; till at length Jonathan and
Onkelos, or some other Doctor of Jerusalem, gathered together all these
Observations, and made thence those Paraphrases which we have under their Name.

For the Confirmation of this Conjecture, consider, 1. That we find in these
Paraphrases very many Explications, which by no means agree with the Ideas that
the Jews have framed to themselves since the Propagation of Christianity. For
since their Disputes with the Christians, they found themselves obliged in many
particulars to reject the Opinions, and refute the Confessions of their
Ancestors. 2. We see the very same thing has happened among the Christians, and
among the Greeks, that set themselves to write Scholia, or Notes on the
Scriptures: which are only Abstracts of Authors who have written or preached
more at large on these Books. The same thing, I say, happened among Christians in
the VIIIth Century, and the following Ages, when most of their Learning was
reduced within this compass, To compile Glosses, and to collect the Opinion of
those that went before them, upon difficult places; and after that, to form out
of all these Glosses one continued Paraphrase upon the whole Book, as if it had
been the Judgment and Work of one and the same Author. It Is the Character of
all the Books which they call Catenae upon Scripture.

I know well, that some Critics call in question the Antiquity of these
Paraphrases; and have remarked how ridiculous the Miracles are which the Jews
say were wrought in favor of Jonathan the Son of Uzziel. But what does this
make for their doubting the Antiquity of these pieces? Do we question whether
there was a Greek Version of the Old Testament before Christ's time, because we
can hardly believe Aristaeas's History to be true, or because we cannot say
that the Greek Version is delivered down to us in the same purity as it was at
first written? Ought we to suspect St. Chrysostom's Homilies on St. Paul's
Epistles, or those of Pope Gregory the First; because the Greeks have storied
that St. Paul came to inspire St. Chrysostom with the Sense of his Epistles,
while he was meditating an Exposition of them; and because the Latins do relate
the like Fable in favor of Gregory the First?

After all, the Authority of these Paraphrases does still further appear, in
that the Works themselves are spread almost as far as there are Jews in the
World, and are highly esteemed in all places of their Dispersion.

Some may perhaps imagine, that the Jews being fallen into great Corruptions
about the time of our Blessed Savior's coming into the World, must necessarily
at that time have lost much of that Light, which their Ancestors received of
the Prophets, and of those that succeeded the Prophets. They may think, it may
be, that their Nation being become subject to the Greeks, did by insensible
degrees change their Principles, and alter their Expositions of the Scripture,
as they adopted the Ideas of the Greek Philosophers, whose Opinions they then
began to borrow. In short, it may be conceived by some, that the several Sects,
which arose among the Jews long before Christ's time, did considerably alter
the Opinions of the Synagogue, and did corrupt their Tradition, and the Notions
they had received from the most ancient Doctors of their Schools.

In answer to all this. It is certain the Corruption among the Jews was
principally of their Morals; for which, though they had very good Precepts in
their Law; yet the true meaning of them was spoiled and corrupted with Glosses,
which were devised, as I have shown, in later times; and with these, being
stamped with the Name of Tradition, they evaded the force of the Laws. There
were then but very few that had not an aversion to the Greek Learning, and
those few applied themselves to it, while they were in Judaea, with great
Caution and Secrecy, lest they should be looked upon as Heathens. Josephus
witnesses of that, Antiq. l. 20. c. ult. As to what is inferred from the many
Sects among the Jews, the quite contrary is clear. For the opposition of one
Sect to the other, hindered any one of them from becoming Masters of the People
and their Faith in so general a manner, as to be able to corrupt absolutely
their Traditional Notions of Religion.

Moreover, these Sects, all but the Sadducees, who were abhorred by the People,
knew no other way to distinguish themselves and draw esteem, but by a strict
Observation of the Law and its Ceremonies, to which they pretended that the
Rules they gave their Disciples did very much contribute; whence they called
their Traditions the Hedge and the Rampart of the Law.

To conclude, We ought carefully to take notice, 1. That St. John Baptist did
not find it needful to correct the Errors in Opinions that reigned among the
People; but only exhorted them to Repentance for their Sins and immoral
Actions. 2. That one of the chief Concerns of our Lord Jesus Christ in his
Discourses with the Jews, was to purge them of all that Corruption which their
drowsy Casuists had introduced into their Morals; with which he charges the
Scribes and Pharisees in particular. 3. That the Doctrine of the Sadducees
which he refutes on some occasions, had but a few Followers. 4. That the Essens
and their Party, who applied themselves altogether to Piety, and the Study of
the Law, had a great Authority with all the People that loved Religion. This we
may learn from Philo in some Pieces of his Works, especially Lib. quod omnis
Probus sit liber, p. 678. 5. That the Jews, though they have received very
gross Ideas concerning a Temporal Kingdom of the Messiah; and though to support
these Ideas, they have confounded the Sense of diverse Prophecies, endeavoring
to reconcile them to their carnal Notions, and in bringing in new Explications
of the Old Testament; yet have they not been able quite to extinguish their
ancienter Ideas and Principles: Their new Ideas passing for no more at best
than the Opinions of their celebrated Doctors, which another Doctor may oppose
if he will, especially, when he is backed with those that are ancienter and of
greater Authority.

CHAP. III.
That the Jews had certain Traditional Maxims and Rules for the Understanding
of the Holy Scripture.
WHat I have now said concerning the Traditions of the Synagogue, will, I
believe, be scarcely disputed by any Learned Man; I am sure he will have less
reason to oppose it, that considers the Rules, which, as appears to us, were
followed by the Jews in explaining the Prophecies concerning their Promised
Messiah.

1. It is certain that the Jews held this as a Maxim, That all the Prophets did
speak of the Messiah, and were raised up by God for this very end. This we find
more than once in their Talmud; Beracoth. c. 1. fol. 3. Sanhed. c. 11.
and that it was common among them in Christ's time, we see in many places of
the Gospel. No doubt what they did in settling this Rule, was not without a due
and serious Examination of it first. And here we cannot but deplore the
rashness of some Critics among Christians, who instead of making use of the
Confessions of the Old Jews upon places of the Old Testament, which they
referred constantly to the Messiah; whereas some of the Modern Jews endeavor
to wrest them in another sense, not only follow the new ones, but give occasion
by these means to despise Prophecies, and the clearer ones, as things quite
insignificant. What was the Absurdity of Grotius, who in the 53d of Isaiah, by
the Servant which is spoken of absolutely, understands Jeremy the Prophet;
whereas the Old Jews refer that Chapter directly to the Messiah, as you can see
in the Old Midrash Chonen, in the Targum, in the Talmud Sanhed. fol. 98. c. 2.
and that is acknowledged by R. Alshek. in h. l. to be the sense of the ancient
Jews. And indeed they hold as a Maxim, That whenever it is spoken absolutely
of the Servant, the place must be understood of the Messiah, Zohar in Exodus
fol. 225. and by consequence they explained that Prophecy of Isaiah as
concerning the Messiah. I can say the same upon another Maxim of the Old Jews,
which is of great Use, That whatsoever it is spoken of the King absolutely, the
place must be understood of the Messiah, Zohar in Genesis fol. 235. If Grotius had
known it, he never would have related the 72d Psalm, and some others, to
Solomon in his literal sense as he has done, but would have referred it, as it
must be directly to the Messiah. Certainly that shows us, that many of the Old
Jews understood the Prophets much better than, to their shame, such Critics
now do. I wonder many times Divines, who confess they cannot give any tolerable
account of the Song of Songs, and look upon it as a Piece composed by Solomon
upon the occasion of his Marriage with the Daughter of Egypt; whereas the Jews
look upon it constantly as the last Piece he composed after his Repentance; and
we have reason enough to believe, when we compare it with the 45th Psalm and
the 5th of Isaiah, that Solomon spoke then of the Messiah, the Essential Word
spoken of by him, Prove. 8. chiefly when we see the ancient Jews do agree to it.
See Philo de Colon. apud Grot. in Prove. viii. 22. Bresch. Rabba par. 1. the
first Words, and Midrash in shir hash. in Mercessu. But let us come back to our
Subject.

2. I say 2dly, That it is reasonable to judge, that the later Prophets having
considerably cleared the Prophecies of those that went before them, by
diffusing throughout their Writings a much greater Light; they who read the
later Prophets, were not so careless as to neglect these Helps for the
understanding of the more ancient Prophecies, whose sense was otherwise not a
little obscure. In these Cases it was necessary to begin with the Prophets that
writ last, and by their Light to clear the ancient Prophecies. According to
this Method, the Paraphrases ascribe to the Messiah, what we read of the Seed
of the Woman, Genesis iii. 15. and what Balaam prophesied, Numb. xxiii. and xxiv.
And no one can doubt, but that after that great Light that Isaiah gave them
concerning the Messiah and his Unction, in his Prophecy Chap. xi. they referred
to him those words also of Moses, Deuteronomy. xviii. 18. God shall raise thee up a
Prophet like unto me, which is cited by St. Peter, as spoken of the Messiah,
following herein the Principles of the Synagogue, Act. iii. 22.

3. It is not to be doubted but that Experience was a great help toward their
understanding of Prophecies. If it had not been for this, the Jews would have
looked no farther than to Isaac, for the fulfilling of that Prophecy, Genesis
xviii. 18. In thy seed shall all the nations of the Earth be blessed; and
likewise to Solomon, for that which we read 2 Samuel vii. 16. and Psalm. lxxvi.
But seeing the Prophecies were not accomplished in their Persons, nor did
answer to their Characters; and it is impossible that the Prophecies should be
false; the Jews were convinced, as they had reason, that they ought to refer
these Prophecies to the Messiah; as also St. Paul did, according to the way of
his Nation.

4. It is clear there were certain general Characters of the Messiah, which
wheresoever they were found, were commonly thought to denote that that place
should be understood of the Messiah. And it is worth observing, that the Light
still increasing from one Age to the other, and the Characters of the Messiah
being every day more unfolded and opened, 'twas easy for them that studied the
Prophecies to compare one with the other, and from thence to draw Rules to find
out the Ideas of the Messiah, in those Promises which seemed not so distinctly
and evidently to speak of him.

To give some Examples of the Rules which they gathered for their direction in
discovering the Prophecies that relate to the Messiah; I say, that the most
conspicuous Character of him, and that which they most set their hearts upon,
was this, That he should come in the later Times to deliver his People from
their Enemies, and to reign over the whole Earth in great Peace, and
Prosperity, and Glory. This in Gross will be acknowledged by all the Jews in
our Age. But to consider these Matters yet more particularly. It is worthy to
be observed, that by comparing these Texts which speak of the low Estate and
Sufferings of one that is there also described, as being in the highest Glory
and Dignity; they have been convinced, that both these Descriptions are of one
and the same Person; and therefore notwithstanding the Prophetical Descriptions
of the Glory of their Promised Messiah at his coming, they have acknowledged
those Prophecies to concern him also, which speak of his Humiliation; as that
in Zech. ix. 9. where he is represented Riding upon an Ass: so you see in the
Targum and in the Talmud; and that in Isa. liii. where he is said to be loaded
with Griefs, and to be the most despised of Men; as you see in the Targum, in
the Talmud, and in Midrash Conen. To which may be added that of David, Psalm.
xxii. and that of Zech. xii. 10. which treat of the same Matter, and were
referred to the Messiah, as I shall show afterward.

Thus we see, wherever Salvation is spoke of, they refer those Prophecies to
the Messiah, as him who should be the Author of Salvation. It is by this rule
that Isa. lii. and liii. and Hab. iii. are understood of the Messiah.

Thus those places wherein the Subjection and Conversion of the Nations are
foretold, were by them judged, without any hesitation, to regard the Times of
the Messiah. Scadias Haggaon interprets Zech. ix. 9. of the Messiah, because v.
10. his universal dominion is spoken of. And so R. David Kimchi refers to the
Messiah time the place of Zech. ii. 10, 11. Upon this known foundation does St.
Paul build his Interpretation of the Messiah, Heb. i. 10. out of Ps. cii. 25,
etc. and Romans xv. 11. out of Ps. cxvii. 1. And, to be short, all those Psalms
which represent God as reigning over the whole Earth, do relate to the Messiah,
according to the sense of the ancient Jews, as may be seen in the many places
of their Paraphrases, and of their Interpreters; as Rashi Kimchi and R. Joel
Aben Soeb upon the Psalm 99. and 100.

Thus again, when the Scripture foretells the calling of the Gentiles to the
knowledge of the true God, they fail not to understand those predictions of the
times of the Messiah, who should spread true Religion throughout the World.
Hence it is that Isa. ii. is so understood by them. Lib de profug. p. 364. and
lib. de Somn. p. 872. and R. Menach. de Rekarati in Pentat. fol. 18. col. 1.
and fol. 31. col. 1. Edit. Venet. Targum and Talmud in Megillah. and Abarb. in
1 Samuel 2. Sanhed. fol. 99. col. 2. Cited in the Acts.


In this manner did they reflect on the Prophecies that spoke of the Messias's
Priesthood, after that David had enlightened them in Psalm. cx. as may be seen
from the Notions of Philo the Jew, touching the Priesthood of the Word, by an
allusion to the History of Melchisedeck.

So likewise did they own that the Promises of God to reestablish the House of
David, were to be accomplished by the Messiah, and by this rule they affirmed
that the Song of Anna did concern the time of the Messiah, for the words of
that Song do not agree neither to Saul, nor to David, but to the time of the
Messiah. As also they understood in like manner the Prophecy of Amos ix. 11,
15, 16, 17. according to the sense of the Synagogue and the Prophecy of Zechary
vi. 12, etc. Rabboth. fol. 271. col. 4.

They acknowledged according to these rules of Interpretation, that where
Ascension into Heaven, and sitting on God's right hand, was spoken of, they
were spoken of the Messiah; and thus they referred to him Psalm. cx. and Psalm.
xlv. and Psalm. lxviii. and Psalm. xcvii. and what is said Deuteronomy. xxxii. being all
so many Texts insisted by the Writers of the New Testament, as passages which
in the Judgment of the Jews did concern the Messiah.

We ought especially to observe that they never failed to make those
reflections upon those particular Psalms, whereof the Composers, as they
understood them, spoke in the name of the Synagogue, with respect to future
times, and who mention there a Posterity that should partake of the deliverance
there promised. And from this allowed Maxim also, does St. Paul, Heb. i. refer
Psalm. cii. to the Messiah. For this Character is found expressly in v. 22. of
this Psalm; as well as the calling of the Gentiles, and the Subjection of Kings
to God is foretold, ver. 15, 16, 17.

We must take notice of another thing, which is a consequence of what they
observed in some eminent Prophesies, viz. they understood them very rationally,
by the help of those Ideas which they met with in other Prophesies which
otherwise seem not so clearly to concern the same Messiah which is spoken of in
clearer Prophesies. 'Twas according to that rule that they referred the Hymn of
Anna, 1 Samuel ii. 5. to the times of the Messiah, Kimchi in h. l. compares it
with the words of Isaiah, chapter live. Rejoice thou barren that bear not, etc.
'Twas according to that method that they being convinced that the Psalm. xxii.
was to be referred to the Messiah, did refer also to him the Psalm. xli. as it
is referred by St. Paul, Heb. x. the same Ideas of suffering being found in
both Psalms. R. Menach. de Rekam fol. 19. col. 2. in Pentat. It was according
to the same method that they referred to the Sekinah or Messiah all the Psalms
which have the Title, all Shosannin, viz. Psalm. 45.69.80. as we see in the same
R. Menachem fol. 106. col. 2. in Pent. The Song of Songs, as I have observed,
was the Key which made them understand the subject of those Psalms, as the Song
of Isaiah chapter 5. made them to understand the Song of Songs.

I am not ignorant that the greater part of the Jewish Nation being oppressed
with the Roman Yoke, and finding no comfort for it in these Notions, which are
for the most part Spiritual, did therefore about our Savior's time frame to
themselves more carnal notions concerning the Kingdom of the Messiah: Fancying
that he should come as a victorious Prince, to conquer, and to avenge them of
their Enemies. They removed from their thoughts the accounts of his Death, as
contrary to those Glorious descriptions which suited better with their minds.
They expected the Messiah should come to restore presently the Kingdom unto
Israel; and, in a word, following their own Desires and Imaginations, they
confounded Christ's first coming with his second; and then confirmed themselves
in this mistake, partly, because the Prophets seemed to describe the Kingdom of
the Messiah very carnally, partly, because they knew not what to think of a
Celestial or Spiritual Kingdom, such as his should be, who was to sit on the
Throne of God. And these false conceits of theirs, joined with the worldly
Interests of their Leaders, brought them to reject the true Messiah at his
Coming.

But after all, it is certain, 1. That the contrary opinions, concerning the
Spiritual sense of the Prophecies, was the constant ancient Doctrine of their
Nation. 2. That those Jews that were converted to Christianity by the Ministry
of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, were converted upon these Maxims, which were
then the Maxims of the wisest and the Religiousest part of their Nation. 3.
That the Apostles in their Writings, as well as Christ Jesus in his Discourses,
cited the Texts of the Old Testament according to the commonly received sense
of the Synagogue; And in truth the authority of these proofs in that received
sense did not a little contribute to the Conversion of both Jews and Gentiles.

In order to make the Reader of my mind, I entreat him to take in good part my
entering a little further into the examination, of what the most studious Jews
in the Holy Scriptures do commonly propose under the name of Tradition. Let
them be looked upon by some Men as dreaming Authors, that busy themselves in
Enquiries altogether vain and fruitless; yet it is no hard task to vindicate
them from this hard Imputation. 1. I have this to say for them, That that which
appears so fantastical, (because not understood by most of those which have
been accustomed to the Greek Methods of Teaching,) ought not therefore to be
despised and wholly rejected. None but Fools will think this a sufficient
reason why all Pythagoras his Doctrines ought to be contemned; because that he
having been a Scholar of Pherecydes the Syrian, and other learned Men in Egypt
and Chaldea, did borrow thence his way of teaching Theology by Symbols, which
is attainable only by few, and those of no common Capacity.

2. I observe that most of the true Jewish Doctors that followed the Tradition
of their Schools, had this design principally in their eye, to make Men fully
understand the Secrets of God's Conduct for the Restoration of fallen Mankind.
To this in particular they bend their Thoughts, and in this they endeavored to
instruct their Readers, explaining to them, according to this sense, some
places of Scripture, which at first sight seem not immediately to regard so
important a Subject.

3. I observe that oftentimes, where they attribute these Interpretations of
Scripture to a Tradition delivered down to them from their Fathers, it is only
in order to render their Reflections on the Scriptures so much the more
venerable to their Hearers. For it is plain enough in some places, that an
attentive Meditation on the Words might have discovered the same things which
they refer to Tradition.

For Example. They remark that God said concerning Adam, See Reuchlin Cabalae,
l. 1. p. 628.
Genesis iii. 22. And now lest he stretch out his hand, and eat of the tree of
life, and live for ever; therefore God, as it follows, drove him out Paradise.
From hence they infer, that God gave Adam hopes of becoming one day immortal,
by eating of the Tree of Life, which they thought should be obtained for him by
the Messiah. Now it appears that our Blessed Savior did allude to this common
Opinion of the Jews, which was then esteemed as a Tradition, Rev. ii. 7. To him
that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree that is in the Paradise of God.
And this Notion is repeated, Rev. xxii. 2, 14.

Again they remark that God said, Behold, Adam is become like one of us, Genesis
iii. 22. And they maintain that he speaks not this to the Angels, who had no
common likeness to the Unity or Essence of God, but to him who was the
Celestial Adam, who is one with God. As Jonathan has also observed in his
Targum on these words of Genesis, calling him the only-begotten in Heaven. Now
it is plain that St. Paul has described Jesus Christ as this Heavenly Adam, 1
Cor. xv.

They assert that the first Prophecy, Genesis iii. 15. was understood by Adam and
Eve of the Savior of the World; and that Eve, in prospect of this, being
delivered of her first Son, Genesis iv. 1. Reuchl. Ibid. p. 629.
she called him Cain, saying, I have got a man, or this man from the Lord;
believing that he was the Promised Messiah. They tell us farther, that Eve
being deceived in this expectation, as also in her hopes from Abel, asked
another Son of God, who gave her Seth; of whom it is said, that Adam begot
another Son after his own Image, another with respect to Abel that was killed,
not to his Posterity by Cain, for they bear the Image of the Devil, rather than
that of God. They maintain the Name of Enos to have been given Seth's Son upon
the same account, Reuchl Ibid. p. 630, and 631.
because they thought him that excellent man whom God had promised. They make
the like Remarks on Enoch, Noa, and Sem, and Noah's Blessing of Sem they looked
on as an Earnest Wish, that God in his Person would give them the Redeemer of
Mankind.

They affirm that Abraham had not been so ready to offer up his Son Isaac a
Sacrifice, Reuchl Ibid. p. 632.
but that he hoped God would save the World from Sin by that Means; and that
Isaac had not suffered himself to be bound, had he not been of the same belief.
And they observe that it was said to Abraham, and afterward to Isaac, on
purpose to show them the mistake of this Opinion, In thy Seed shall all the
nations of the Earth be blessed. A plain Argument that the Jews anciently
thought that these words did relate to the Messiah, as did also St. Paul, Gal.
iii. 16.

They maintain, Reuchl. Ib. p. 633.
that Jacob believed that God would fulfill to him the first Promise made to
Adam, till God undeceived him by inspiring him with a Prophecy concerning
Judah, Genesis xlix. 10. and by signifying to him; which also Jacob tells his
Sons, that the Messiah should not come but in the last days, v. 1. when the
Scepter was departed from Judah, and the Lawgiver from between his Feet, v. 10.

Reuchl. Ib. p. 633.
They declare that ever since this Prophecy, the Coming of the Messiah for the
Redemption of Mankind has been the Entertainment of all the Prophets to their
Disciples, and the Object of David's and all other Prophet's Longings and
Desires.

Reuchl. Ib. p. 634.
They maintain that David did not think himself to be the Messiah, because he
prays for his Coming, Psalm. xliii. 3. Send out thy Light, i. e. the Messiah, as
R. Solomon interprets it. And from hence they conclude, that he speaks also of
the Messiah in Psalm. lxxxix. 15.

They did think Isaiah spoke of him, chapter ix. 6. So R. Jose Galilaeus praefat.
in Eccha Rabbati, as it is to be seen in Devarim Rabba Paras. (...) at the end
of it; and in Jalk. in Is.. 284. And indeed what he there says could not be
meant of Hezekiah, who was born 10 years before; nor was his Kingdom so
extensive, nor so lasting, as is there foretold the Messias's should be, but
was confined to a small part of Palestine, and ended in Sedecias his Successor
not many Generations afterward.

And it is the general and constant Opinion of the Jews that Malachi, the last
of the Prophets, spoke of him, chapter 4. under the Name of the Son of
Righteousness: for this see Kimchi.

4. It ought to be well considered, that we owe the Knowledge of the Principles
on which the Holy Ghost has founded the Doctrine of Types, to the Jews, who are
so devoted to the Traditions of their Ancestors; which Types, however they who
read the Scripture cursorily, do ordinarily pass by, as things light and
insignificant; yet it is true what St. Paul has said 1 Cor. x. 11. That all
things happened to the Fathers in Types, and were written for their
instruction, upon whom the ends of the World are come, or who live in the last
Times, as the Economy of the Gospel is called, and the last days by Jacob,
Genesis xlix. 1. That is, acknowledged by the Wisemen of the Nation in Shemoth
Rabba Parasha 1, and by Menasseh ben Israel q. 6. in Isaiah, p. 23.

Indeed the Jews, besides the literal sense of the ancient Scriptures, did
acknowledge a mystical or spiritual Sense, which St. Paul lays down for a
Maxim, 1 Cor. x. 1, 2, 3, etc. Where he applies to things of the New Testament
all these following Types; namely the Coming of Israel out of Egypt, their
passage through the Red Sea, the History of the Manna, and of the Rock that
followed them by its Water.

We see in Philo the figurative sense which the Jews gave to a great part of
the ancient History: He remarks exactly, (and often with too much subtilty,
perhaps,) the many Divine and Moral Notions which the common prophetical
Figures do suggest to us.

We see that they turned almost all their History into Allegory. It plainly
appears from St. Paul's way of arguing, Gal. iv. 22, etc. which could be of no
force otherwise.

We see that they reduced to an Anagogical sense all the Temporal Promises, of
Canaan, of Jerusalem, of the Temple; in which St. Paul also followed them, Heb.
iv. 4, 9. quoting these words. If they shall enter into my rest, from Ps. xcv.
11. which words he makes the Psalmist speak of the Jerusalem that is above; and
this also is acknowledged by Maimonides de poen. c. 8.

This Remark ought to be made particularly on the mystical Signification which
Philo the Jew gives of several Parts of the Temple; of which the Apostle St.
Paul makes so great use in his Epistle to the Hebrews. Josephus in those few
words which he has concerning the Signification of the Tabernacle, Antiq. iii.
9. gives us reason enough to believe, that if he had lived to finish his design
of explaining the Law according to the Jewish Midrashim, he would have
abundantly justified this way of Explication, followed by St. Paul, with
respect to the Tabernacle of the Covenant.

It is hard to conceive how the Apostles could speak of things which came to
pass in Old time, as Types of what should be accomplished in the Person of the
Messiah, without any other proof than their simple affirmation: As for
instance, that St. Peter should represent Christ as a New Noah, 1 Pet. iii. 21.
and that St. Paul should propose Melchisedeck as a Type of the Messiah in
respect to his Sacerdotal Office, Heb. vi, vii. unless the Jews did allow this
for a Maxim, which flows naturally from the Principle we have been
establishing; namely, that these Great Men were looked on as the Persons in
whom God would fulfill his first Promise; but that not being completely
fulfilled in them, it was necessary for them that would understand it aright to
carry their View much farther, to a Time and Person without comparison more
august; in whom the Promise should be perfectly completed.

It may be demanded, why the Prophecies seem sometime so applied to Persons
then living, that one would think he should not need to look any farther to see
the fulfilling of them; as namely the prophetical Prayer, as in behalf of
Solomon, which is in Psalm lxxii. as the Birth of a Son promised to Isaiah, chapter
vii. and chapter ix. 6. and where Isaiah seems to speak of himself, when he says,
Isa. lxi. 1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and the like. But it is not
hard to give a reason for this; with which the ancient Jews were not
unacquainted. And it is this, That though all these Predictions had been
directed to those persons, yet they had by no means their accomplishment in
them, nor these persons were in any degree intended and meant in the Prophecy.
To be particular, Solomon was in Wars during the latter part of his Life; and
so he could not be that King of Peace spoken of in the Prophecy; and his
Kingdom was rent in his Son's time, the smaller part of it falling to his
share, as the greater was seized by Jeroboam; so far was the Kingdom of Solomon
from being universal or everlasting, Isai. vii. 14. The Son born to Isaiah,
neither had the Name of Emanuel, nor could he be the Person intended by it; as
neither was his Mother a Virgin, as the word in that Prophecy signifies: And
for the Prophet himself, though the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and spoke
by him, as did it by all the other Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.21. Yet that the Unction
here spoken of, Saadia Gaon Emunoth c. 18 and D. Kimchi in rad. (...)
Isaiah lxi. 1. did not belong to him, but to the Messiah, is acknowledged by
the Jewish Writers, and seems to have been so understood by those that heard
our Savior apply this Prophecy to himself, Luke iv. 22. So that nothing was
more judiciously done, and more agreeable to the known Principles of the
Synagogue, than the Question proposed to Philip by the Eunuch, who reading the
liii. of Isaiah, asked from him, Of whom did he speak, of himself, or of
another?

Again, It may be asked, Why the Prophets called the Messiah, David? and John
Baptist, Elias? Not to trouble the Reader with any more than a mention of that
fancy of some of the Jews that held the Transmigration of Souls; and say
particularly, That the Soul of Adam went into David, and the Soul of David was
the same with that of the Messiah. I say, to pass by that, the true Reason of
such use of the Names of David and Elias, is this; because David was an
excellent Type of the Messiah that was to come out of his Loins, Act. ii. 30,
31. And for John Baptist, he came in the Spirit and Power of Elias, Luke 1.17.
That is, he was inspired with the same Spirit of Zeal and holy Courage that
Elias was formerly acted with, and employed it, as Elias did, in bringing his
People to Repentance and Reformation.

5. We ought to do the Jews that Justice as to acknowledge, that from them it
is, that we know the true sense of all the Prophecies concerning the Messiah in
the Old Testament. Which sense some Critics seem not to be satisfied with,
seeking for a first accomplishment in other persons than in the Messiah. The
Jews meaning and applying those Prophecies to the Messiah in a mystical or a
spiritual sense, is founded upon a Reason that offers it self to the Mind of
those that study Scripture with attention.

Before Jacob's Prophecy, there was no time fixed for the Coming of the
Messiah; but after the giving of that Prophecy, Genesis xlix. 10. there was no
possibility of being deceived in the sense of those Prophecies which God gave
from time to time, full of the Characters of the Messiah. It was necessary, 1.
That the Kingdom should be in Judah, and not cease till the time about which
they expected the Coming of the Messiah. 2. That the lesser Authority, called
here the Lawgiver, should be also established in Judah, and destroyed before
the Coming of the Messiah, which we knew came to pass by the Reign of Herod the
Great, and some years before the Death of our Savior. And indeed the Talmudist
say, that forty years before the Desolation of the House of the Sanctuary,
Judgments of Blood were taken away from Israel. Talm. Jerus. l. Sanhedr. c.
dine. mammonoth. and Talm. Bab. C. Sanhedr. c. Hajou Bodekim. And Raymondus
Martini, who writ this Pugio at the end of the XIIIth Century, quotes Part III.
Did. 3. c. 16.. 46. One R. Rachmon, who says, that when this happened, they
put on sackcloth, and pulled off their hair, and said, Woe unto us, the Scepter
is departed from Israel, and yet the Messiah is not come.

And therefore they who had this Prophecy before them, could not mistake David,
nor Solomon, nor Hezekiah, for the Messiah: Nor could they deceive themselves
so far as to think this Title was applicable to Zorobabel, or any of his
Successors.

In short, there appeared not any one among the Jews before the Times of our
Blessed Savior, that dared assume this Title of Messiah; although the Name of
Anointed, which the word Messiah signifies, had been given to several of their
Kings; as to David in particular. But since Jesus Christ's coming, many have
pretended to it. These things being so, it is clear, that the Prophecies which
had not, and could not have their accomplishment in those, upon whose occasion
they were first delivered, were to receive their accomplishment in the Messiah,
and consequently those Prophecies ought necessarily to be referred to him.

We ought by all means to be persuaded of this. For we cannot think the Jews
were so void of Judgment as to imagine that the Apostles, or any one else in
the World, had a right to produce the simple words of the Old Testament, and to
urge them in any other sense, than what was intended by the Writer, directed by
the Holy Ghost: It must be his Sense, as well as his Words, that should be
offered for proof to convince reasonable Men. But we see that the Jews did
yield to such Proofs out of Scripture concerning the Messiah, in which some
Critics do not see the force of those Arguments that were convincing to the
Jews. They must then have believed that the true sense of such places was the
literal sense in regard of the Messiah, whom God had then in view at his
inditing of these Books; and that it was not literal in respect of him, who
seems at first-sight to have been intended by the Prophecy.

And now I leave it to the Consideration of any unprejudiced Reader that is
able to judge, Whether, if these Principles and Maxims I have treated of were
unknown to the Jews, the Apostles could have made any use of the Books of the
Old Testament for their Conviction, either as to the Coming of the Messiah, or
the Marks by which he was distinguishable from all others, or as to the several
parts of his Ministry. But this is a matter of so great importance, as to
deserve more pains to show that Jesus Christ and his Apostles did build upon
such Maxims as I have mentioned: And therefore any that call themselves
Christians, should take heed how they deny the force and authority of that way
of Traditional interpretation, which has been anciently received in the Jewish
Church.

CHAP. IV.
That Jesus Christ and his Apostles proved diverse points of the Christian
Doctrine by this common Traditional Exposition received among the Jews, which
they could not have done, (at least, not so well,) had there been only such a
Literal Sense of those Texts which they alleged, as we can find without the
help of such Exposition.
IF we make some reflections which do not require a great deal of Meditation,
it is clear, that Jesus Christ was to prove to the Jews, that he was the
Messiah which they did expect many Ages ago, and whose Coming they looked on as
very near. He could not have done so if they had not been acquainted with their
Prophetical Books, and with those several Oracles which were contained in them.
Perhaps there might have been some difference amongst them concerning some of
those Oracles, because there were in many of them some Ideas which seem
contrary one to another. And that was almost unavoidable, because the Holy
Ghost was to represent the Messiah in a deep humiliation and great suffering,
and in a great height of Glory. But after all, the method of calling the Jews
was quite different from the method of calling the Gentiles. They had the
distinct knowledge of the chief Articles of Religion, which the Heathen had
not. They had all preparations necessary for the deciding this great question,
Whether Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, or not. They had the Sacred Books of
the Old Testament, they were acquainted with the Oracles as well as with the
Law. They longed after the coming of the Messiah. They had been educated all
along, and trained up in the expectation of him. They had not only those Sacred
Books in which the Messiah was spoken of, but many among them had gathered the
Ideas of the Prophets upon that subject, as we see by the Books of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus. And indeed we see that Jesus Christ and his Apostles spoke to
the Jews according to the Notions which were received among them. What I say
will clearly appear, if we reflect on some of the Citations made by Christ and
his Apostles from the Old Testament. For although Jesus Christ had in himself all
the Treasures of Wisdom, and although his Apostles were divinely inspired, yet
they ought (...) proportion what they said to the capacity of their hearers.
Their Miracles were to move and dispose them to the receiving of the Truth, but
their proofs and arguments were the proper means to convince their hearers of
it.

1. The Doctrines of the Immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection from the
Dead, being denied by the Sadducees, who required an express Text of Moses for
the proof of those Doctrines, and affirmed that there was not any such to be
found in the Writings of Moses; our Savior proves it against them by these
words, which stopped their mouths, and raised the admiration of the multitude,
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; but God is not
the God of the dead but of the living, Mat. xxii. 32. His proof was by a known
and necessary consequence from that Text out of the Law, which he inferred
according to the received method among the Jews. For the Jews at this day do
gather the same Doctrines from the same words, Vid. Mede his Works, p. 801.
Exodus iii. 6, 15, 16. which Jesus Christ alleged to prove them by. The
astonishment of the people on this occasion did not proceed from the newness of
his argument, as if they had never heard the like before; for they gathered
also the Doctrine of the Resurrection from Moses his Song, as we see in
Josephus de Macchab. p. 1012. But it arose from another cause, to wit, his
giving them such a Spiritual notion of the Resurrection as was not clogged with
the difficulties drawn from that instance of a Woman's Marriage to more
Husbands than one, which the Sadducees justly urged against that gross Idea of
a Resurrection that many of them had, wherein Marriage and other actions of
mortal life should have place.

2. Our Blessed Savior in the same 22th. chapter of St. Matthew. asked the Pharisees
whose Son the Messiah was to be? they answered, the Son of David, i. e. the
Scripture says, he should descend from the Line of David. Against which Christ
raises this Objection, How then does David in spirit, or inspired by the
Spirit, call him Lord? And he alleges for proof that David calls him Lord, the
words of Psalm. cx. 1. The Lord said to my Lord sit thou at my right hand till I
make thy enemies thy footstool. If then David by the Spirit called him Lord,
how is he then his Son? It appears that Jesus Christ in making this Objection,
did take these three things as granted by the Jews at that time. 1. That Psalm.
cx. was the work of the Prophet David. 2. That this Psalm concerned the
Messiah. 3. That the name Adonai is in this place equivalent to the name
Jehovah. There is not any of these things which the Jews will not dispute at
this day. But that their Forefathers did hold that these words were spoken to
the Messiah, it appears by their Midrash on the Psalms, and Saadia Gaon on Dan.
vii. 13. Indeed their Targum justifies all that our Savior said in this place,
not only in acknowledging that this Psalm was composed by David, but also that
it was written for the Messiah, who is therefore instead of Adonai called
Memra, or the Word, according to Fagius his reading, which is most natural to
the place. But that Memra, the Word, denotes the Messiah, shall be shown in the
sequel of this Discourse.

St. Paul has taken the same way, Act. xiii. 24. where he quotes these words
from Isa. lv. 3. I will give you the sure mercies of David. He refers this
passage to the sending of the Messiah, although the Text seems obscure enough for
such a reference. But he does it in pursuance of the explication given of it by
the ancient Jews, who understood this Chapter of the Messiah. So does R. David
Kimchi upon this verse, and Aben Ezra, and Sam. Laniado, and R. Meir Ararma and
Abarvanel. Upon the same ground he applies to the Messiah in the same Chapter,
the words of Psalm. xvi. 10. Thou will not leave thy holy One to see corruption.
He proves that they could not be understood of David, seeing that his
Sepulcher, the Monument of his Corruption, remained till that day. He ought
first to have proved that this Psalm was spoken of the Messiah, and then have
proved that it could not belong to David. But this method was needless, since
he went on this known Maxim among the Jews, That whatever Psalm was not
fulfilled in David, ought to be understood of the Messiah.

Let us proceed to another clear proof of this Proposition: St. Paul in Heb. i.
6. quotes a Text from Moses Song, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 43. according to the LXXth
Version. It Is commonly believed that the Quotation is out of Psalm. xcvii. 8.
but the very words, Let all the Angels of God worship him, are not found in
that Psalm. They are in the Greek of Moses Song without the least alteration,
though it must be confessed they are not there in the Hebrew Text. I will not
dispute, whether the Jews have lost out of their Bibles this part of the
ancient Text, since St. Paul's time. They may in their Vindication show, that
neither the Samaritans have in their Text this Quotation, which is extant in
the LXX. It seems therefore that this Song of Moses was copied separately from
the rest of the Pentateuch, for their convenience who were to learn it by
heart; to which some pious People added a few Verses out of the Psalms that
concerned the same Subject. Which Copy, with the Additions, was translated by
the LXX, because the People had generally committed this to their Memory. What
I conclude from hence is this, That St. Paul made no difficulty to quote words
that were only in the LXX Version, because they contained things conformable to
the ancient Sentiments of the Jews: and following the Genius and Doctrine
prevailing in his Nation, he referrs these words to the second Appearance of
the Messiah, when all the Angels of God shall pay him adoration.

If we read St. Paul's Citation, Gal. iii. 8, 16 of the Promise God made to
Abraham, that in his seed all the nations of the Earth should be blessed, which
he understands of the Promise of the Messiah; we shall quickly judge that he
followed herein the sense of the ancient Synagogue. I know the greatest part of
the Modern Jews do understand it of Isaac: As if God had said, All the Nations
of the Earth shall wish their Friends the Blessing which God gave to Isaac. But
the Ancients understood it otherwise, as we can judge by the Book of
Ecclesiasticus, chapter xliv. 25. They referred it to the Calling of Gentiles by
the Messiah, as we see in Sepher Chasidim,. 961. and to the abode of the
Sekinah or (...), as it is explained by R. Joseph de Carnisol Saare Isider,
fol. 3. col. 4. and fol. 4. col. 1. And so St. Peter supposes it to be spoken
of the Messiah, Act. iii. 25.

We may reflect in like manner on the promise God made the People, Deuteronomy. xviii.
15. To raise them up a Prophet like unto Moses: St. Peter makes use of it as
being spoken of the Messiah, that he should give a new Law, Act. iii. 22. But
the Modern Jews do all they can to evade this Application. Nevertheless, it
appears to have been the Idea of the ancient Synagogue, because we read that
they speak of the Law which was to be given by the Messiah, as of a Law, in
comparison to which all other Law was to be looked upon as mere Vanity. So
Coheleth Rabba in c. ii. and in c. xi.

It is not without some surprise that we read the Application St. Mat. ii. 15.
has made of these words in Hos. xi. 1. Out of Egypt have I called my son; which
seem only to be spoken of the Children of Israel, and not of the Messiah. And
yet in the Book Midrash Tehillim Rabba on Ps. ii. we may see the Jews referred
to the Messiah what is written of the People of Israel, Exodus iv. 22. Which is
an argument that St. Matthew cited this passage from Hosea, according to the
sense the Jews gave it with respect to the Messiah. The Actions of the Messiah
are related in the Law, in the Prophets, and in the Books called Hagiographa
[or in the Psalms.] In the Law, Exodus iv. 22. Israel is my firstborn: In the
Prophets, Isai. lii. 13. Behold my servant shall deal prudently. In the Psalms,
as it is written, The Lord said to my Lord, Psalm. cx. i.

St. Matthew. viii. 17. referrs the words of Isai. liii. 4. to the miraculous
Cures that Christ wrought. And he follows herein the ancient Tradition of the
Jews, which taught that the Messiah, spoken of in this Chapter of Isaiah,
should pardon Sins, and consequently heal their distempers, which were the
effects and punishments of their Sins. From hence it follows, that, according
to their Tradition, the Messiah should be God, even as Jesus Christ did then
suppose, when he healed the Paralytick Man by his own power, Matthew. ix. 6. and
proves that he did not blaspheme in forgiving Sins, which the Jews thought
belonged only to God.

St. Matthew. i. 23. applies the words of Isai. vii. 14. to Christ's being born
of a Virgin. Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a son, etc. This
he did likewise according to the ancient Idea of the Jews, which was not quite
lost in the time of Adrian the Emperor. For R. Akiba, who lived and died under
his Reign, makes the following Reflection on this Prophecy. He had considered
that Isaiah, in the beginning of the following Chapter, received Order from God
to take to him two Witnesses, Uriah the Priest who lived in his time, and
Zechary the Son of Berachiah, who lived not (as he thought) till under the
second Temple. Upon which he says, that God commanded the Prophet to do thus,
to show, that as what he had foretold concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz was true
by the Witness of Uriah, who saw it accomplished; so what he had foretold
concerning the Conception and Delivery of a Virgin, must be accomplished under
the second Temple by the Witness of Zechary, who lived then. See Gemara. tit.
Maccoth. c. 3. fol. 24.

3. We see that Jesus Christ, Joh. iv. 21, etc. alludes tacitly to the Prophecy
of Mal. i. 11. concerning the Sacrifices of the New Testament. This is a matter
at present controverted between Christians and Jews. But Christ delivered the
sense of the Synagogue, as it is evident from the Targum on those words of
Malachy, which applies them to the Times of the Messiah.

4. One would think it were only by way of Similitude that Christ applied to
himself the History of the Brazen Serpent, in saying, Joh. iii. 14. As Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up.
But there appears to be more in it than so. The ancient Jews looked upon the
Brazen Serpent as a Type of the Messiah, so we find by their Targum on Numb.
xxi. 8. which expounds this Serpent which Moses lifted up, by the Word of the
Lord, who is also called God, Wisd. xvi. 7. compared with chap. xv. 1. Although
Philo, while he hunts for Allegories, gives another Idea of it, de Agric. p.
157.

5. It may also seem to be only by way of Allusion, that Christ calls himself
the Bread that came down from Heaven, alluding to the Manna which came down
from Heaven, as we read Exodus xvi. But he that looks into the ancient Jewish
Writers shall find that herein also our Savior followed the common Jewish
Idea. For Philo, who writ in Egypt before Jesus Christ began to preach, tells
us positively that the Word or (...) was the Manna. Lib. quod Deter. pot.
insid. p. 137.

St. Paul, Heb. 1.5. cites God's Words to David concerning one that should come
out of his Loins, 2 Samuel vii. 14. I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son, as if they respected the Messiah. How could he do thus? When on the
one hand he calls Jesus Christ holy, undefiled, harmless, separate from
Sinners; and on the other hand in that Promise to David, God takes it for
granted that that Son of his might be a Sinner, and thereupon threatens in the
very next words, 2 Samuel vii. 14. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with
the rod of men; which suits well with Solomon, but not at all with the Messiah.
The reason is, St. Paul followed the sense of this place, which was commonly
received among the Jews, who as they refer to the Messiah, the Psalm. lxxii, cx.
and cxxxii. where the same Ideas occur, so they must have referred to the
Messiah, whatever is great in this Prophecy; and to others, whatever therein
denotes humane infirmities. And Indeed it was not very hard to give to that
Oracle a further prospect, viz. to the Messiah; 1st. Because Solomon was made
King in the Life of his Father; whereas the Son which God speaks of was to be
born after David's Death. 2dly. Because it is spoken of a Seed not born from
David, but from David's Children. 3dly. Because the Mercy of God was to make
the Kingdom of David last for ever; whereas the Kingdom of Solomon was divided
soon after his Death, and but two parts of twelve were left to Rehoboam his Son.

St. Paul, Gal. iv. 29. alludes to the History in Genesis xxi. 9. as a Type of the
Persecutions which the Jews should exercise on the Christians. Whereon does he
build this? First having proved it his way, that the Christian Church was
typified in Isaac, the Son of the Freewoman, and Israel according to the
Flesh, by Ishmael the Son of the Bondwoman; and having thus brought unbelieving
Israel into Ishmael's place, he proceeds upon the Old Jewish Nation recited in
Baal-Hatturim, that Ishmael should pierce Isaac with an Arrow, which they
illustrate by Genesis xvi. 12. instead whereof the Text says only, that he
laughed at, or mocked Isaac.

We see St. Paul, Romans x. 6. applies to the Gospel those words of Deuteronomy. xxx.
11, 12, 13, 14. which seem to be spoken of the Law given by Moses to the Jews.
But then the Old Synagogue applied these words of Moses to the times of the
Messiah, as is clear from Jonathan's Targum on the place, which is enough to
justify St. Paul's Usage of the words.

We read in the Song of Zacharias, Luke 1.69. that these words are referred to
the Messiah, he has exalted the horn of his Anointed. The very same words are
pronounced by Hannah, the Mother of Samuel, 1 Samuel ii. 10. where the Targum
referrs them in like manner as the sense of the Synagogue.

The same Targum understands of the Messiah that passage 2 Samuel xxiii. 3. And
the lxx have the like Idea with the Targum, which is a farther Confirmation of
the Tradition of the Synagogue.

It is certain this Notion of the Messiah was very common among the Jews;
otherwise they would not have thrust it into their Targums on places where
naturally it ought not to come in. For instance. It is said 1 Kings iv. 33.
That Solomon discoursed of all the Trees, from the Cedar of Libanus, even to
the Hyssop that springs out of the Wall. Now the Remark of the Targum
hereupon is this, And he prophesied touching the Kings of the House of David,
which should rule in this present World, as also in the World to come of the
Messiah.

6. We see our Lord Jesus Christ was careful to instruct the Pharisees of the
two different Characters of the Coming of the Messiah, Luke xvii. 20. Of which
the one was to be obscure, and followed with the Death of the Messiah; the
other was to be glorious, and acknowledged by the whole World. Christ
instructed them in this the rather, to remove their mistakes through which they
confounded his two Comings. Though in truth they were both of them confessed by
the Jews for some time after Christ's ascension into Heaven.

7. We see that Christ himself, Matthew. xxi. 16. and also his Apostle St. Paul,
1 Cor. xv. 27. Ephesians. i. 21. Heb. ii. 6, 7, 8. apply the words of Psalm. viii. to
the Messiah. How could they do it, were it not before the sense of the
Synagogue? Now that such was the sense of the Synagogue, ye see till this day,
if we read what they say in their Rabboth upon the Song of Songs, chapter iv. 1.
and upon Ecclesiastes, chapter ix. 1. that the Children were to make Acclamations
at the Coming in of the Messiah, the second Redeemer, according to those words
of Psalm. viii. 3. Ex ore infantium, etc.

Lastly, We see St. Paul, Romans x. 18. does refer the words of Psalm. xix. 4. to
the Preaching of the Apostles; and says, Their sound went over all the Earth,
and their words to the end of the World. What would an unbelieving Jew have
said to this, that Paul should apply the Psalmist's words in this manner? But
the Apostle was secure against this or any other Objection from the Jews, if he
used the words in the sense of their Synagogue. And that he did so, there is
little reason to doubt. The Encomiums which David gave to the Law of Moses,
they would most readily apply to the Law of the Messiah: And they expected he
should have his Apostles to carry his Law throughout the World. To this
expectation of theirs the Psalmist's words were very applicable. That the
Divine Word is called the Sun, Philo plainly affirms; and if I take R. Tanchum
aright, he understands that it was the Messiah that was called the Sun of
Righteousness, Mal. iv. 2. St. John saw Christ in that figure of the Sun, and
his Apostles as twelve Stars, and that in Heaven, which to him is the state of
the Gospel, Rev. xxi. 1.

According to this figure, in this Psalm, the Sun of Righteousness is described
as a Giant, which rejoices to run a Race, v. 5. And here is a description of
his Course, together with that of his Disciples, and of the manner by which
they made their Voices to be heard. This Idea shocked R. Samuel in a Book he
writ before his Conversion, chapter 18. which he communicated with a Rabin of
Morocco. And whoever considers that Idea of the Writer of the Book of Wisdom
xviii. 5. shall find it is no other than that of this xixth Psalm, mixed a
little with that Idea in the Canticles, which the Old Jews refer to the
Messiah, and with that of the Song of Isaiah v. touching the Messiah, which
served the Jews for a Commentary to understand the Song of Solomon by.

I could gather a much greater number of Remarks on this Head; but having
brought as many here together, as I take to be sufficient for the proving of
what I have said, I think I ought not to enlarge any further. So I come next to
search out the Storehouse, where we may find these Traditions of the Jews,
which Jesus Christ and his Apostles made use of, either in explaining or
confirming the Doctrines of the Gospel.

They must be found in the ancient Books of the Jews which remain among us,
such as the Apocryphal Books, the Books of Philo the Jew, and the Chaldee
Paraphrases on the Old Testament. The Authority of all these ought to be well
established. Let us begin by the Apocryphal Books, some of which Mr. N. has
ridiculed very boldly. Then we shall consider what he has said to Philo, whose
Writings Mr. N. has endeavored to render useless in this Controversy: How
justly, we shall consider in the next Chapters.

CHAP. V.
Of the Authority of the Apocryphal Books of the Old Testament.
ALthough the Protestants have absolutely rejected the Apocryphal Books of the
Old Testament, which the Church of Rome make use of in Controversies, as if
they were of the same authority with the Books of the Law and Prophets,
notwithstanding they keep them as Books of a great antiquity. And we make use
of their authority, not to prove any Doctrine which is in dispute, as if they
contained a Divine Revelation, and a decision of an inspired Writer, but to
witness what was the Faith of the Jewish Church in the time when the Authors of
those Apocryphal Books did flourish. Any body who sees the Socinians making use
of the Authorities of Artemas, or of Paulus Samosatenus to prove that the
Christian Church was in their opinion, must grant the same authority to the
Books of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the like, touching the Sentiment of the
Jewish Church in the age of those Writers.

Grotius, a great Author for the Socinians, was so well satisfied of the truth
of what I advance, that he thought fit to Comment those very Apocryphal Books,
and to show that they followed almost always the Ideas and the very words of
the Authors of the Old Testament. But as he was a Man of a deep sense, seeing
that they might be turned against the Socinian cause, which he favored too
much, he did things which he judged fit to make their authority useless against
the Socinians. And first he advanced without any proof, that those things which
were so like to the Ideas of the New Testament, had been inserted in those
Books by Christians, according to their notions, and not according to the
notions of the Synagogue. 2ly, He endeavored to give another sense to the
places, which some Fathers in the second and third Century had quoted from
these Books to prove the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Divinity of our
Savior.

Now since the Socinian Authors have employed, against the authority of these
Apocryphal Books, the very Solutions which Grotius made use of to lessen their
authority, it is necessary, being resolved to quote them for the settling of
the Jewish Tradition, to show how much Grotius, whose steps the Socinians trod
in, was out in his Judgment.

1. Then I suppose with Grotius, that those Apocryphal Books were written by
several Jewish Authors, many years before Jesus Christ appeared.

The third Book of the Macchabees, which is indeed the first, has been written
by a Jew of Egypt, under Ptolomaeus Philopater, that is, about two hundred
years before the Birth of our Savior: It contains the History of the
Persecution of the Jews in Egypt, and was cited by Josephus in his Book de
Macchabaeis.

The first Book of Macchabees, as we call it now, has been written in Judea by
a Jew, and originally in Hebrew, which is lost many Centuries ago. We have the
translation of it, which has been quoted by Josephus, who gives often the same
acccount of things as we have in that Book. It has been written probably 150.
years before the Birth of our Savior.

The second Book of Macchabees has originally been written in Greek in Egypt,
and is but an extract of the four Books of Jason the Grecian a Jew of Egypt,
who had writ the History of the Persecutions which the Jews of Palestina
suffered under the Reign of Antiochus Epiphanes and his Successors.

The Book of Ecclesiasticus has been written Originally in Hebrew by Jesus the
Son of Syrac, about the time of Ptolomy Philadelphus, that is, about 280. years
before Jesus Christ, and was Translated in Greek by the Grandson of Jesus the
Son of Syrac, under Ptolomy Euergetes. Some dispute if that Ptolomy is the
first or the second, which is not very material, since there is but a
difference of 100. years. R. Azaria de Rubeis in his Book Meor Enaiim, chapter 22.
witnesses that Ecclesiasticus is not rejected now by the Jews, but is received
among them with an unanimous consent; and David Ganz says that they put it in
old times among the (...), that is, the Hagiographes. So in his Tsemac David,
ad A. 3448.

The Book of Wisdom according to Grotius his Judgment is more ancient, having
been written in Hebrew under Simon the High Priest, who flourished under
Ptolomeus Lagus. Grotius thinks that the Greek Translation we have of that Book
was made by some Christian who has foisted into that Book many things, which
belong more to a Christian Writer, than a Jew. He raises such an accusation
against the Translator of Ecclesiasticus. But it is very easy to confute such
a bold Conjecture: First, because that Book was in Chaldaick among the Jews
till the Thirteenth Century, as we see by Ramban in his Preface upon the
Pentateuch, and they never objected such an Interpolation, but looked upon it as
a Book that was worthy of Solomon, and probably his Works. It was the Judgment
of R. Azarias de Rubeis, in the last Century Imre bina, chapter 57.

The Epistle of Baruch and of Jeremy seem to Grotius the Writings of a Pious
Jew, who had a mind to exhort his People to avoid Idolatry. And it is very
probable that it was Penned under the Persecutions of Antiochus, when it was
not sure to any to write in favor of the Jewish Religion under his own name.

The Book of Tobith seems to have been writ originally in Chaldaick, and was
among the Jews in St. Jerome's time, who knowing not the Chaldaick Tongue called
for a Jew to his assistance to render it into Hebrew, that so he might render
it in Latin, as he says in his Preface to Chromatius and Heliodorus. Grotius
supposes the Book to be very ancient; Others believe, but without any ground,
that it was Translated into Greek by the Seventy; So that it would have been
writ more than 250. years before Jesus Christ. Whatsoever Conjecture we may
form upon the Antiquity of it, it is certain it was in great esteem among
Christians in the second Century, since we see that Clemens Alexandrinus and
Irenaeus have followed his fancy of seven created Angels about the Throne of
God, and took that Doctrine for a Truth, although we see no such Idea among the
Jews, who have the Translation of that Book, but do not now consider it very
much.

Grotius thinks that the Book of Judith contains not a true History, but an
Ingenious Comment of the Author, who lived under Antiochus Epiphanes, before
the Profanation of the Temple by that Tyrant, to exhort the Jewish Nation to
expect a wonderful Deliverance from such a Tyranny, which they groaned under:
And we see no reason to discard such a Conjecture, although R. Azarias thinks
Imre bina, chapter 51. that this History was alluded to in the Book of Esdras, chapter
4.15. He judges the same of the Additions to the Book of Daniel, viz. the
Prayer of Azaria, the Song of the Three Children in the Furnace, and of the
History of Susanna, he looks upon them as written by some Hellenist Jew.

So the Additions to the Book of Esther, he judges to be the work of some
Hellenist, who invented the Story, which were afterward admitted among the
Holy Writings, because they were Pious, and had nothing which could be looked
upon as contrary to the Jewish Religion.

Grotius says nothing of the third and fourth of Esdras, and has not judged
them fit to be Commented, probably because they are not accounted in the Canon
of the Church of Rome. And indeed the fourth is only extant in Latin. But after
all a Man must have viewed the third with very little judgment who cannot
perceive, first, that it is certainly the work of an ancient Jew before Jesus
Christ his time. 2ly, That it was among the Jews as a Book of great Authority:
Josephus p. 362. follows the Authority of that third Book of Esdras, in the
History of Zorobabel.

We have not ancienter Writers than Clemens Alexandrinus, St. Cyprian, and St.
Ambrose, who have quoted the 4th. Book of Esdras, so I am resolved not to make
any use of it.

The Antiquity and the Jewish Origin of all these Books that we call
Apocryphal, being so settled, there is nothing to be done but to consider what
is the ground of the Conjecture of Grotius, who pronounces boldly in his
Preface to the Book of Wisdom: Eum librum nactus Christianus aliquis Graece non
indoctus in Graecum vertit, libero nec ineleganti dicendi genere, and
Christiana quaedam commodis locis addidit, quod and libro Syracidae quem dixi
evenit, sed in Latino huic magis quam in Graeco, non quod nesciam post Esdram
explicatius proponi caepisse patientiam piorum, judicium universale, vitam
aeternam, supplicia gehennae, sed quia locutiones quaedam magis Evangelium
sapiunt quam vetustiora tempora.

But to speak my mind plainly, this Conjecture of Grotius is absolutely false
and without any ground. 1. Whence had he this particular account of the Jewish
Faith and Religion in the time of Esdras, so as to be able to judge by it which
was written long after Esdras, and to show that the Notions of these Books are
clearer than the Ideas which were among the Jews before Jesus Christ? He goes
only upon that Principle, that the Jews since they were under the Greek Empire
began to be more acquainted with the Ideas of the Eternal Life, and of Eternal
Punishment, and of the last Judgment, than they were before, which is the
Principle of Socinus, and of his Followers, but that Christians had much
clearer Ideas of those Notions than the Jews had since Esdras his time.

2ly. Is it not an intolerable boldness to accuse those Books of having been so
interpolated, without giving any proof of it, but his mere Conjecture? I
confess there are several various Readings in those Books as there are in Books
which having been of a general use, were transcribed many times by Copists of
different industry, one more exact and more learned than the other. But to say
that a Christian has interpolated them designedly, is a thing which can no
more be admitted than to suppose that they have corrupted the Greek Version of
the Books of the Old Testament, to which those Books were joined in the Greek
Bible as soon as it came into the hands of the Christians.

3ly. To suppose that a Christian has been the Author of the Translation of
some of those Books, is a thing advanced with great absurdity, since there was
a Translation of these Books quoted by Philo and by St. Paul in his Epistles.
Now I would ask from Grotius how he can prove that there was a second Version
of the Book of Wisdom made by a Christian after Jesus Christ? what was the need
of it, since there was one before Jesus Christ? And if any Christian did
undertake such a new one without necessity, how it came to pass that it was
received instead of the Version which was in use amongst the Jews, and was
added to the Books of Scripture, and of the Copies which were in the hands of
Christians?

I need not to urge many other absurdities against Grotius his Conjecture. I
take notice only, 1. That Grotius was far from ridiculing the Book of Wisdom,
as the Socinian Author of the Book against Dr. Bull has done in his Judgment
of the Fathers.

2ly. That the ridiculing of such an Author as the Book of Wisdom shows very
little Judgment in Mr. N. He had better have made use of the Glosses of
Grotius, than to venture upon such rough handling of an Author quoted by St.
Paul, whose quoting him gives him more credit, than he can lose by a thousand
censures of a Man who writes so injudiciously.

3ly. That the very place which Mr. N. ridicules is so manifestly taken from
the Psalm xix. which contains a Prophecy touching the Messiah, and from the
Song of Isaiah, chapter 5. that whosoever reflects seriously upon such a ridiculing
of the Book of Wisdom made by Mr. N. cannot but have a mean notion of his sense
of Religion.

After all let Mr. N. do what he can with the Conjecture of Grotius, I am very
little concerned in his Judgment; First, because the matter which we are to
handle is not the matter which Grotius suspects to have been foisted in by some
Christian Interpreter. 2ly. Because I am resolved to make use in this
Controversy only of those places of the Apocryphal Books in which they express
the sense of the Old Synagogue before Jesus Christ, as I shall justify they
have done by the consent of the same Synagogue after Jesus Christ; and no body
can suspect with any probability of the Old Synagogue that they have borrowed
the Ideas of Christians, and have inserted them in their ancient Books, written
so long time before Jesus Christ's Birth.

CHAP. VI.
That the Works which go under the name of Philo the Jew, are truly his; and
that he writ them a long while before the time of Christ's Preaching the
Gospel; and that it does not appear in any of his Works that ever he had heard
of Christ, or of the Christian Religion.
TO show the Judgment of the Ancient Synagogue in the Points controverted
between us, and the Unitarians, we make great use of the Writings of Philo the
Jew; which if they are his, it cannot be denied, do put this matter out of
Question. Our Adversaries therefore, as it greatly concerns them, do deny that
those Works which bear his name, were written by Philo the Jew.

By whom then were they written? They say by another Philo a Christian, who
lived toward the end of the second Century, and who, as Mr. N. says,
counterfeited the Writings of the famous Philo of Alexandria, who was sent
Ambassador to Caligula by those of his own Nation in the year of Christ 40.

It is easy to refute this Suggestion of theirs. And yet I cannot but
acknowledge it has some kind of color, from that which we read in Eusebius and
Jerome, who tell us, that Philo has given a Character of the Apostolic
Christians in his Book de Therapeutis: To which some have added, that at his
second coming to Rome under Claudius, to be Ambassador at his Court, as he was
before at Caligula's, he then became acquainted with St. Peter the Apostle of
Christ.

I am therefore to prove these Propositions.

1. That those Books we have under the name of Philo, are the Works of a Jew,
of whom there is not the least appearance in his Writings that he knew any
thing of Christianity, nor that he ever heard of Jesus Christ or his Apostles.

2. That it appears by the Books themselves that they were written before Jesus
Christ began to Preach.

3. That there is no foundation for what Eusebius says, and also St. Jerome,
who Copied from Eusebius, concerning Philo's account of a sort of Christians,
whom he describes under the name of Therapeutae.

4. That the History of the Conversation between St. Peter and Philo is a
ridiculous Fable, which Eusebius took upon hearsay, from he knew not whom, or
from an Author, whom he did not think fit to name, for fear it should give no
credit to his Story.

The first Proposition, namely, That these Pieces were written by one that was
a Jew by Religion, this one cannot doubt of, if he considers these following
things.

1. That in all these Pieces of Philo, wherever he has occasion to make use of
Authority, he fetches it only out of the Jewish Scriptures. And those are the
only Scriptures that he takes upon him to explain. He quotes Moses (whom he
usually calls the Lawgiver), as we do the Sayings of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And sometimes, tho very rarely, he quotes other Writings of the Old Testament.
But I dare affirm that in all his Treatises, he cites not one passage from the
New Testament, which thing alone is sufficient to prove that he was no
Christian. For the first Christians used to cite the New Testament with as much
care, and even affection, as the Jews did the Old.

But, Secondly, one had need have an Imagination as strong as Mr. N. to fancy
that a Christian Author in the end of the Second Century could write, as Philo
does, upon most part of the Books of Moses without mixing some touches at least
at the Christian Religion. And yet there is no such thing in all Philo's Works.
He takes it for his business to make the Jews understand their Law, according
to their Midrashim in an Allegorical way, and to teach the Heathens that their
prejudices against the Law of Moses were unjust, and that they ought to
acknowledge the Divinity of this Law, which he explained to them. This is the
end or design of this Author in all his Works.

3dly. It appears that he, according to the opinion of the Jewish Nation, did
expect the Messiah as a great Temporal King yet to come, as is evident from the
Interpretation he gives of Balaam's Prophecy touching the Messiah in his Book
de Praemiis, p. 716.

4thly. In all his Works there is nothing peculiar to Christ that Mr. N. can
alledg, except in what is written of the (...), which is the very thing in
dispute between us and him; but even that does not hinder, but that the Jews
themselves finding every thing in Philo so agreeable to the Notions that their
Ancestors had in his Age, do own them to be the Writings of a Jew, and of Philo
in particular. As we see in Manasseh ben Israel, who in many places alleges
his Authority, In Exodus p. 137.
and shows that his Opinions do generally agree with those of their most
ancient Authors.

The second thing I have to show is, that it appears from the Books themselves
and other wise that many of them were composed before Jesus Christ began to
Preach the Gospel. Christ's Preaching began in Palestine in the year of the
Building of Rome 783. But the Author of the Book, Quod omnis probus sit Liber,
which has always been accounted undoubtely Philo's, does note, that the
obstinate resistance of those of Xanthus in Lycia against M. Brutus, was an
affair fresh in memory, as having happened, (...), not much before the writing
of that Book. Now this which he tells us of the Xanthians, happened not long
after the death of Julius Caesar, who was killed on the 13th. of March in the
year of Rome 709, for Brutus himself was killed at the time of the Battle of
Philippi, which was in Autumn in the year 712. Therefore Philo could not say,
it happened not long since, if he writ so long after as in the year, Urb. Con.
783. when Christ began to Preach; for according to the common manner of
speaking, no man could say a thing happened not long since, that happened
before the remembrance of any man then living.

But if that Book was writ before Christ began to preach the Gospel, much more
were all those Books which we make use of against the Unitarians: for according
to the Order, in which these Books are rankt by Eusebius, this Book, Quod omnis
probus est Liber, was one of the last that Philo writ. The first that Eusebius
names were the Three Books of Allegories; after which he goes on to the Books
of Questions and Answers upon Genesis, and upon Exodus; he tells us besides,
That Philo took pains to examine particular difficulties, which might arise
from several Histories in those Books; and names the several Books that Philo
writ of this sort. This Order of his Books was observed in the Manuscripts,
which Eusebius has exactly followed; and it is agreeable enough to the Jewish
Method of handling the Scripture by way of Questions and Answers, which is
still the Title of many Jewish Books of this Nature.

We may gather the same truth from another part of Philo, which tells us
expressly that he studi'd the Scriptures, Prima aetate, when he was young; and
he complains of being called afterward to public business; and that he had
not now leisure to attend to the study of the Scriptures, as formerly [ Lib. de
Leg. spec. p. 599.] Therefore all his Books before were written in his younger
days, and especially his Three Books of Allegories, which Eusebius places
first before any of the rest.

Josephus in his Antiq. Lib. xviii. c. 10. assures us, That Philo was the Chief
and most considerable of the Jews employed by those of Alexandria, in the
Embassy to Caligula. This man, says he, eminent among those of his Nation,
appeared before Caligula his Death, which was, A. U. C. 793. That is to say, in
the 40th year of our Lord. Now Philo, in the History of his Legation to
Caligula, says of himself, That he was at that time all gray with Age, that is,
70 years old, according to the Jewish Notion of a man with gray hair, Pirke
Avoth. c. 5. Suppose then that he was 70 years old when he appeared before
Caligula, it follows that he was born in the year of Rome 723. Suppose also
that he began to write at 30 years old, it will fall in with the year of Rome
793. That is to say 30 years before Christ preached in Judaea. For Jesus Christ
began not to preach till the year of Rome 783.

The Third Assertion is as easy to be justified. For though Baronius makes much
of that fancy of Eusebius, who, to prove the Antiquity of Monastic Life, held
that Philo's Therapeutae were Christians; and who was herein followed by St.
Hierom without Examination; yet others of the most Learned Papists, as
particularly Lucas Holstenius, and Hen. Valesius have confessed, that herein
Eusebius was mistaken. Indeed one need only read the Book de Therapeutis it
self, or even the first period of it, to be convinced that those whom Philo
there describes, were the Jews of the Essen Sect, and the Essens were, as
Josephus plainly shows in the account he gives of them, as much Jews by
Religion, as the Pharisees were. Photius, who was a better Critic than
Eusebius, has very well corrected his mistake, and shown, That the Book de
Therapeutis describes the Life of a Sect of the Jews, and not of the
Christians. It is a surprising thing that Eusebius should commit such a
mistake, because he himself in his Books de Praep. Evang. does cite a long
passage from Porphyry taken out of Josephus, in the transcribing whereof
Eusebius could not but see many thing related of the Essens, such as Philo
brought into his account of the Therapeutae.

But to this it may be Objected; does not Photius report that Philo being at
Rome in Claudius his time, met with St. Peter there, and contracted a
friendship with him, which occasioned his writing that Book de Therapeutis, as
of the Disciples of St. Mark, who was himself the Disciple of St. Peter? Does
not Eusebius fix this meeting of Philo with St. Peter to the reign of Claudius,
when he says he read in full Senate his Book, Entitled, The Virtues of Caius
Caligula; (Tho it was the scope of that Book to show the impiety of that
Monster that would be worshipped as a God) for which Philo was so much admired,
that not only this but his other pieces were ordered to be put into the public
Library, as pieces of such great value, that they were worthy to be preserved
for ever?

I know all this, and do believe that Eusebius did not invent all this History.
But if there be any truth in it, they might be those Books of Philo, which he
writ against Flaccus (who died A. D. 38.) and the account of his Embassy to
Caius, with three other Treatises containing the Sufferings of the Jews under
Caius, now lost, that were put in the Public Library. For I cannot imagine,
that the Roman Senate should lay up in their public Archives his other pieces,
which regarded only the Laws of the Jews.

But as for that which he tells us, that Philo saw St. Peter at Rome, and there
made an acquaintance with him, it is a mere dream of Eusebius, who fancying
that his Book de Therapeutis was written in praise of the first Christians of
Alexandria, and that they were Disciples of St. Mark, did go on to imagine,
that he might possibly have some conversation with St. Peter, and St. Mark, and
so came to write in commendation of these first Christians. This meeting of St.
Peter and Philo at Rome, in Claudius his time, (howsoever Eusebius fancied it
as a thing that would give some color to his Opinion concerning the
Therapeutae) could not be true, because, as it appears by the Writings of the
New Testament, St. Peter was as far from being at Rome in the 42d. year of our
Lord, that is, in the second year of Claudius, who succeeded caligula, that he
did not leave Judaea or Syria till after the Death of Agrippa (the same that
imprisoned St. Peter, and) who died in the fourth of Claudius. All the Learned
now a days know that St. Peter came not to Rome before the first year of Nero
(if he came thither so early) i. e. A. D. 55. at which time it is necessary
that Philo who was all Gray A. D. 40. and consequently was then about seventy
years of age, should be full eighty five years old, which is an age very unfit
for travel or business, or even for living so far from ones own home, as Rome
was from Alexandria.

This shows what credit may be given to this report in Photius, that Philo was
a Christian, but afterward turned Apostate. So it is, all Errors are fruitful,
and from one Fable there uses to arise many more.

As for Eusebius he is the less to be excused for writing what he does of St.
Mark's Gospel, which he says was first approved by St. Peter at this time of
his being at Rome, and then made use of by St. Mark at Alexandria for the
converting of those Jews whom Philo describes under the name of Therapeutae.
When as Eusebius shows us himself elsewhere in his History, he had so great an
Authority as that of Irenaeus to assure him, that St. Mark's Gospel was not
written till after St. Peter's Death. [ Eusebius. Hist. v. 8.] All that can be
said for him, is only this, that when he was writing this passage of Philo, he
did not think of what he had writ before. Indeed if he had thought of it, he
had not been that man we take him for, if he had suffered it to pass, as it
stands now in his History.

I thought it was proper to enter into this disquisition concerning the
Writings of Philo, and the time when they were written, that I might leave no
doubt in the minds of my Readers, concerning the Authority of Philo, whom I
intend to produce as an authentic Testimony of the Opinions of the Synagogue
before our Lord, in the matters disputed between us and the Unitarians.

Proceed we to the Chaldee Paraphrases.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Authority and Antiquity of the Chaldee Paraphrases.
I Shall have occasion, in many points, to cite the Paraphrases of the Jews
upon the Books of the Old Testament; and perhaps it may appear strange to some,
that I oftentimes cite them without distinguishing between those which pass for
ancient, and those which are reputed by Critics altogether modern. Therefore I
think my self obliged once for all to give the reasons of my doing thus, and to
satisfy my Reader thereupon.

I shall not spend time to discover the Original of these Paraphrases. It is
enough to mind the Reader, that the Jews having almost forgot their Hebrew in
the Babylonian Captivity, 'twas needful for the People's understanding the Holy
Scriptures, which were read in the Synagogue every Sabbath Day, that some
persons skilful both in the Hebrew and Chaldee should explain to the People
every Verse in Chaldee, after that they had read it to them in Hebrew. The Jews
make this Practice as ancient as the times of their return from the Babylonian
Captivity, Neh. viii. 8. as one may see in the Talmud, Title Nedarim, chapter 4.

The Jews all agree, that this way of Translating the Scriptures was made by
word of mouth only for a long time. But it is hard to conceive that they which
interpreted in that manner did write nothing for the use of Posterity. It seems
much more probable to believe, that from time to time these Interpreters writ
something, especially on the most difficult places, and those which were least
understood.

The first, according to the Jewish Writers, Magill. c. 3.
who attempted to put into Writing his Chaldee Version of the Prophets first
and last according to the Jewish distinction, (except Daniel) or rather, who
interpreted the whole Text in order, was Jonathan the Son of Uzziel; who also
not contenting himself always to render the Hebrew, word for word, into
Chaldee, does often mix the Traditional explication of the difficultest
Prophecies with his simple Translation.

The Jews seem to agree that this Jonathan lived a 100. years before the
destruction of Jerusalem; that is to say, he lived in the reign of Herod the
Great, about thirty years before the Birth of our Lord. And some Critics
believe our Savior does cite his Chaldee Paraphrase Luc. iv. 18. in quoting
the Text Isa. lx. 2. Thus much may at least be said for it, that all that which
is there cited, does agree better with his Targum, than with the Original Text.

Onkelos a Proselyte, was he according to their common account, who turned the
five Books of Moses into Chaldee. This Work is rather a pure simple
Translation, than a Paraphrase; notwithstanding it must be allowed, that in
diverse places he does not endeavor so much to give us the Text word for word,
as to clear up the sense of certain places, which otherwise could not well be
understood by the people. This Onkelos according to the common opinion of the
Jews, saw Jonathan, and lived in the time of that ancient Gamaliel, who was
Master of the Apostle St. Paul, as some would have it.

We find in Megillah, c. 1. that he Composed his Targum under the Conduct of R.
Eliezer, and of R. Josua, after the year of our Lord 70, and that he died in
the year of our Lord 108, and that his Targum was immediately received into the
public use of the Jews; what other Targums there were on the five Books of
Moses, having almost wholly lost their credit and their authority.

As to the other Sacred Books which the Jews call Cetouvim, or Hagiographes,
they ascribe the Targums of the Psalms, the Proverbs, and Job, to R. Joseph
Caeeus, and affirm that he lived a long time after Onkelos. And for the Targums
of the other Books, they look on them as works of Anonymous Authors. However
the most part of these Targums have been Printed under the name of Jonathan, as
if he had been Author of them all.

There are moreover some scraps of a Paraphrase upon the five Books of Moses,
which is called the Jerusalem Targum; and there is another that bears the name
of Jonathan upon the Pentateuch, and which some Learned Jews have said to be
his. As does R. Azaria (Imrebinah, c. 25.) and the Author of the Chain of
Tradition, p. 28. after R. Menahem de Rekanati, who cites it under the name of
Jonathan, following some Ancient MSS. These Targums ordinarily exceed the
bounds of a Paraphrase, and enter into Explications, some of which are strange
enough, and appear to be the work of diverse Commentators, who among some good
things have very often mixed their own idle Fancies and Dreams.

Beckius nineteen years ago, published a Paraphrase on the two Books of
Chronicles, of which also there is a MSS. at Cambridge. This deserves almost
the same Character with these Paraphrases I spoke of last. For the Author of
this, as well as those before mentioned, does often intermingle such
Explications as taste of the Commentator, with those which appear to have been
taken from the Ancient Perushim, or Explications of the most Eminent Authors of
the Synagogue. A Man must be mighty credulous if he gives credit to all the
fables which the Jews bring in their Talmud to extol the authority of Jonathan
his Targum, and he must have read these Pieces with very little attention or
judgment, who should maintain that they are entirely and throughout the Works
of the Authors whose names they bear, or that they are of the same antiquity in
respect of all their parts.

Onkelos is so simple that it seems nothing, or very little, has been added to
him, and he has been in so great esteem among the Jews, that they have commonly
inserted his Version after the Text of Moses, verse for verse, in the Ancient
Manuscripts of the Pentateuch. And from thence we may judge if there is any
ground for the Conjecture of some Jews who would persuade us that it is only an
Abridgment of the Targum of Jonathan upon the Pentateuch. Certainly Jonathan
his Targum upon the Pentateuch must be of a very dubious origin, since we see
that the Zohar cites from it the first words which are not to be found in it,
but in the Targum of Jerusalem, (fol. 79. col. 1. l. 17.) It is uncertain if
the Targum of Jerusalem has been a continued Targum, or only the Notes of some
Learned Jew upon the Margent of the Pentateuch, or an abridgment of Onkelos,
for it has a mixture of Chaldaick, Greek, Latin and Persian words, which
shows it has been written in latter times according to the judgment of R.
Elias Levita.

Jonathan, who explained the former and the latter Prophets, has not been so
happy as Onkelos, for it seems those that Copied his Targum have added many
things to it, some of which discover their Authors to have lived more than 700
years after him; one may also see there a medly of different Targum, of which
the Targum on Isai. xlix. is a plain instance.

As to the Targums on all the other Holy Books which the Jews call the first
Prophets, it is visible that all their parts are not equally ancient. Those
which we have on Joshua and Judges are simple enough and Literal. That on Ruth
is full of Talmudical Ideas. The same judgment may be made of those on the two
Books of Samuel. Those which we have on the two Books of Kings, are a little
freer from additions. But that on Esther is rather a Commentary, that collects
several Opinions upon difficult places, than a Paraphrase. In that on Job
attributed to R. Joseph in the Jews Edition at Venice in Folio, Anno 1515.
there are diverse Targums cited in express Terms, as there are also in the
Targum on the Psalms, which bears the name of R. Joseph in the aforesaid
Edition of Venice. One may also observe many Additions in the Targums on the
Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, but especially in that upon the Canticles, all which
have been published under the name of R. Joseph. I have said almost as much of
that on the two Books of Chronicles, which Beckius published about eighteen or
nineteen years ago.

This being so, one may very well ask, with what justice do you ascribe these
Books to those, who as the Jews now say, were the Authors of them? when by
their own confession Onkelos on the five Books of Moses, is perhaps the only
Translator in whom you find none of these marks of corruption, which you
acknowledge in the other Targums you quote. For the other Targums, it may be
said, that we ought to leave them out of the Dispute; unless we would impose
the new Sentiments of the Jews that lived long after Christ's time, under the
pretense of producing the opinions of the ancient Synagogue before Jesus
Christ. One may insist upon it that we are to quote the Books of Onkelos only,
and lay the other aside as Books of no authority, since we do confess, that
they are full of Additions, in which there are many Fables and Visions borrowed
from the Talmudical Jews.

I might hope to satisfy any reasonable Reader, that sticks at this
difficulty, by telling him: First, in few words, that I will scarce ever cite
any of these Targums, but when they say the same thing that Onkelos does. And,
secondly, that these as well as Onkelos are owned by the Jews. And it cannot
with any color of reason be imagined, that the Jews since Christ's time have
adopted Books contrary to their Religion, and used them in their common
reading, as true Versions of the Law and the Prophets. It is certain that the
Jews many Centuries ago have taken them for such. And therefore these Books in
whatsoever time they were written, are sufficient testimonies of the Opinions
of the Synagogue.

But I have something more considerable to offer for the establishing of the
Authority of these Paraphrases, as well as of that of Onkelos in our dispute
with our Unitarians, against whom we shall have occasion to make use of the
Testimony of these Paraphrases. For this one needs only examine these
Paraphrases with an ordinary attention. I pray therefore the Reader to consider.

1. That whatsoever has been said in general, for the necessity that there was,
for the making of these Chaldee Paraphrases, the same does also confirm the
antiquity of all these Paraphrases; if not, as to every part of them, yet at
least, as to the main of these Paraphrases, such as we now have them almost on
every Book of the Old Testament.

2ly. We see in the Misna a clear mention made of some Targums upon the Law and
the first Prophets, Megillah, cap. 4. Sect. 9, and 10. which must be Onkelos
and Jonathan.

3ly. We read in the Gemarah of Sabbath, cap. 16. fol. 115. col. 1. an account
of the Targum upon Job which Raban Gamaliel (the Grandfather to R. Judah, who
compiled the Misna) had read. Now if the Paraphrase on the Books of Job was in
common use so anciently; who can doubt, but that they had the like Versions
also on the Books of Moses, and on the Prophets? Nay we see that Jesus Christ
upon the Cross cites the xxii. Psalm according to the Chaldee Paraphrase, and
not according to the Hebrew. This he did, that he might be understood by them
that were present at that time; from whence it follows that the Jews in Judea
had a Paraphrase of the Book of Psalms, and that that Paraphrase was already
received among them, before the time of our Blessed Savior.

I know some Critics will not allow the Misnah which speaks of the Targums to
be so ancient as I do. Their great reason is, that this Book is cited by none
of the Fathers who lived just after it was written, and that it is mentioned by
no body before Justinian the Emperor his time. But this Objection proceeds
only from an oversight of these Critics, who have not observed, that although
I should grant, what they suppose to be true, it would not weaken the Authority
of the Misnah, when the Author of the Misnah does witness the antiquity of the
Targums; because the Misnah is not a Book of a common form, but a collection of
many old Decisions, as the Book of Justinian, which is called Digestum, which
is not Justinian his work, but his Collection; or as the Book of Gratian, which
is called Decretum, which is nothing but the Compilation of Canons, or
Decisions of Fathers, who lived six or seven hundred years before Gratian. That
has been judiciously remarked by Paul Archbishop of Burgos in the Preface to
his Scrutinium, and in this judgment he follows Maymonides in his Preface upon
his Jad Kazaka. And indeed we must observe that almost all the famous Rabins
which are mentioned in the Misnah are the very Men which are mentioned by St.
Com. on Isa. 8.14.
Jerome as the great Authors of the Judaick Traditions.

If the Learned Men do not like the Conjecture of R. Elias Levita upon the
Targum of Jerusalem, but would have it to be the rest of an entire work upon
the Pentateuch; Let them examine how it came to pass that the Jerusalem
Paraphrase on the Pentateuch is almost all lost. So that there remain only some
few bits of it here and there on some Texts; and then they will find that
perhaps it is not lost, but that it subsists in great measure in that which is
under Jonathan his name on the Pentateuch. Whence it is probably that in some
MSS. it bears the name of the Targum of Jerusalem, and in other's the name of
Jonathan's Targum: It is easy to judge how this came to pass. The Jerusalem
Targum differed from that of Jonathan but in some places; or perhaps it was the
very Targum of Jonathan which was augmented from time to time by diverse
Explications. Then when the Jews came to make their Paraphrase no longer than
their Text, that they might have the Text and the Paraphrase both together in
their Bibles, they did not give themselves the trouble to transcribe the
Jerusalem Paraphrase all at length; But they contented themselves with
transcribing those parts where it appeared to have some difference from that of
Jonathan; and this they did after so scrupulous a manner, that they transcribed
the Passages of the Jerusalem Targum, that agree in the sense, and differ only
in the words, as well as those that have a different sense from that of
Jonathan.

I know very well that the Jews speak of several Paraphrases, besides that of
Jonathan on the Prophets, and that of Onkelos on the Books of Moses. As for
instance, they speak of a Targum of R. Joseph, who they say, has translated the
Books of the Prophets.

But as to this it ought to be considered: 1. That it was the Jews Custom to
teach their Scholars these Paraphrases not from a Book, but from their memory,
and by heart; and so the Scholars might very well ascribe to their Masters,
that which they had learnt from their mouths, and their verbal instructions, as
well as if it had been delivered to them in writing. 2. That the same places,
which are quoted from the Paraphrase of R. Joseph on some Books of the
Prophets, are to be found in express terms in Jonathan's Paraphrase, which the
Jews esteem more ancient than Onkelos who writ on the Law. 3. R. Joseph, whom
they quote, does himself cite the Chaldee Paraphrase, as being of Authority in
his time, and therefore it was not his work. And this appears from his
Confession, that he could never have understood the words of Isai. viii. 6.
without the help of the Chaldee Paraphrase, Gemara, chapter xi. tit. Sanbedr. fol.
95.

But notwithstanding the antiquity of these Paraphrases, I own they contain
Additions very new, which show that after they were written, they were in such
places enlarged with the Glosses of Doctors that applied themselves to the
Study of the Law, and took pains to show how one part of it depended upon
another; of which we find nothing in Onkelos, which is almost a verbal
translation of the Hebrew Text into Chaldee. And thus, 1. we find in many
places the connection of one History with another, which is very often the
imagination of a Rabbin who fancied what he pleased, and fathered it upon
Moses. 2. We find Explications in these later Targums different from the former
ones yet added to the former with an impudence not to be endured, and this in
several places. 3. We there find long Narrations, which have no other
foundation, than their method of explaining Scripture by the way of Notarikon,
(as they call it) as where we read of the five Sins of Esau which he committed
on the same day in which he sold his birthright to Jacob; and in pursuance of
their manner of explaining Scripture by Gematria, of which Rittangel on Jetzira
has given some examples, p. 31, 32, 33.

But all this makes nothing against the authority of those places in the
Paraphrase, where they do little more than render the Text out of Hebrew into
Chaldee. In them there was no occasion to show any more than the sense of the
words, such as the Paraphrasts had received by Tradition from their
Forefathers. Whereas the Authors of those Additions thereby made a show of
Learning out of the common road, and gave themselves the pleasure to see their
own fictions come into such credit, that they were received as the Oracles of
God. But beyond that, we must take notice, that, as on one hand those Targums
have been enlarged by so many Additions, so on the other hand they have been
altered in many places, and new Ideas substituted to the old. To show the
alteration which was made in those Targums by Modern Jews, we can remark a
thing which has been often taken notice of by Buxtorf, in his Lexicon Talmud,
viz. that there are many places cited from those Targums 500 years ago by the
Author of Aroule; that are not to be found in them as they are now in Print. So
we can prove clearly that new Ideas have been put in instead of the old,
chiefly upon the points controverted between Jews and Christians. For in many
places where St. Jerome in his Comments upon the Prophets brings the common
explication of the Jews as agreeing with the explication of Christians, we find
the Targum brings an explication quite different from what it was to be
according to St. Jerome's account.

It appears by this the Jews have done in their Books the same thing which
Papists have done in the Books of the Fathers. They have added many things to
help their Cause, and they have cut out many places which might have done great
service to Truth.

As for the Additions then I will scarce cite any of them, but when it is
evident that they speak the sense of the Ancients; and truly whatever one may
say of the Corruptions of these Jewish Paraphrases, I will maintain that it is
as easy for an attentive Reader to distinguish these Corruptions from the
ancient Text (which it seems Arias Montanus had a design to do in a particular
Treatise) as it is for one that looks on an old Pot or Kettle to tell where the
Tinker has been at work, and to distinguish his Clouts from the Original metal.
The ancient pieces have a sort of simplicity, that makes them to be valued, and
which, easily shows their antiquity. The Additions are the rambling fancies of
bold Commentators, which they devised in later times as occasion required, and
thrust them upon the ancient Paraphrasts who lived in those times when there
was no such occasion, nor could they foresee that there would be any such in
aftertimes.

As for example, we do not find that the Jews before Christ's time ever spoke
of two Messiah; the one the Son of David, who was to reign gloriously; the
other a suffering Messiah, the Son of Joseph, of the Tribe of Ephraim. The
reason is plain, for they had no occasion for that fancy of a suffering
Messiah. That arose upon their Disputes with the Christians, who proved that
the Sufferings of Christ were no other than what the Messiah was to suffer
according to the Prophecies of Scripture. At first the Jews tried other ways to
avoid the force of these Prophecies, but when no other would do, they came to
this, to devise another Messiah the Son of Joseph, and to give him the
Sufferings which the Scripture attributes to the Messiah the Son of David.

In a word, all these Conceits, of which the greatest part of these Additions
do consist, do so evidently demonstrate their Novelty, that when one is
acquainted with a little of the History of the World as well as that of the
Jews, it is scarce possible that he should take them for the Text of Jonathan,
or of the ancient Paraphrasts. Besides all this, in the Modern Paraphrases
themselves we find very often these words, Another Targum, and sometimes yet,
Another Targum, which shows that the following words are not the ancient
Targum, but are the Additions of some Modern Authors, whom the Copyers of the
Paraphrasts have joined as a new light to the ancient.

Whether the Jews's inserting such things into their Paraphrases, has been out
of fondness of these Discoveries which appeared to them new; or whether they
have found it turn to account, to insert these Additions in the Body of their
ancient Paraphrases, thereby to enhance the value of them; or whether they
thought, by publishing them under the Names of those ancient Commentators whose
Authority is so venerable, to wrest from the Christians all the advantages they
might draw from any thing in their Paraphrases; the things that they added
being oftentimes contrary to what the Ancients did teach; is a secret among the
Jews; but a secret little worth, since the Providence of God has preserved the
Apocryphal Books, and the Books of Philo, which can give us so much light into
the knowledge of what is ancient, and what is modern, in these Paraphrases.

I will add nothing upon this matter, but this, that we see in the most ancient
Books of the Jews, as in the Books called Rabboth, Mechista, and in their old
Midrashim almost all composed before the 7th. Century, and in the Talmud of
Babylon, the same Ideas, and the same Doctrine which we meet in the Apocryphal
Books, and in Philo's Writings. And those Ideas have been constantly followed
by the most considerable part of the Jews, those very Men who have their name
from their constant sticking to the old Tradition of their Forefathers.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Authors of the Apocryphal Books did acknowledge a Plurality, and a
Trinity in the Divine Nature.
HAving finished our General Reflections on the Traditional Sense of the
Scriptures, which was received among the Jews before the time of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of the Books wherein we can find such a Tradition, it is time we
should come to the chief matter we designed to treat of. The Question is,
Whether the Jews before Christ's time had any notion of a Trinity. For the
Socinians would make us believe, that Justin Martyr having been formerly a
Platonist, and then turning Christian, was the first that invented this
Doctrine, or rather adopted it out of the Platonic into the Christian
Divinity; and that neither the Jewish nor the Christian Church had ever before
conceived any Notion of a Trinity, or of any Plurality in the Divine Essence.

The Doctrine of the Trinity supposes the Divine Essence to be common to three
Persons, distinguished from one another by incommunicable Properties. These
Persons are called by St. John, 1 John v. 7. the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit. There are Three (says he) that bear Witness in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Spirit; and these Three are One.

This Personal distinction supposes the Father not to be the Son, nor the Holy
Ghost, and that the Son is not the Father, nor the Holy Spirit; Revelation
teaching that the Son is begotten of the Father, and that the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father and the Son, or from the Father by the Son. And this
distinction is the foundation of their Order, and of their Operations.

For although the Unity of the Divine Nature makes it necessary that these
three Persons should all cooperate in the Works of God ad extra, as we call
them, nevertheless there being a certain order among the Persons, and a
distinction founded in their Personal Properties, the Holy Scripture mentions
an Economy in their Operations; so that one work ad extra is ascribed to the
Father, another to the Son, and a third to the Holy Spirit.

But this distinction of Persons, all partaking of the same common Nature and
Majesty, hinders not their being equally the Object of that Worship, which
Religion commands us to pay to God.

I touch this matter but very briefly, because my business is only to examine
whether the Jews had any notion of this Doctrine. And our Opinion is this, that
though the Gospel has proposed that Doctrine more clearly and distinctly, yet
there were in the Old Testament sufficient notices of it, so that the Jews
before Christ's time did draw from thence their Notions concerning it.

On the contrary the Socinians maintain, that this Doctrine is not only alike
foreign to the Books of the Old and New Testament, but that it was altogether
unknown to the Jews before and after Christ, till Justin Martyr first brought
it into the Church.

In opposition to which, I affirm for truth, 1. That the Jews before Jesus
Christ, had a notion of a Plurality in God, following herein certain Traces of
this Doctrine that are to be found in the Books of Moses, and the Prophets.

2. That the same Jews following the Scriptures of the Old Testament did
acknowledge a Trinity in the Divine Nature.

I begin the Examination of this Subject by considering the Notions of the
Authors of the Apocryphal Books. Now one cannot expect that these Authors
should have explained their mind with relation to the notions of a Plurality,
and of a Trinity in the Godhead, as if they had been Interpreters of the Books
of the Old Testament. But they express it sufficiently without that, and speak
in such a manner, that no body can deny that they must have had those very
Notions, when it appears that their Expressions in speaking of God, supposes
the Notions of a Plurality in the Godhead, and of a Trinity in particular. Let
us consider some of those Expressions.

1. They were so full of the notion of a Plurality, which is expressed in Genesis
i. 26. that the Author of Tobith has used it as the Form of Marriage among the
Jews of old, Let us make unto him an aid. So Chap. 8.6. Thou made Man, and
gave him Eve his Wife for an helper and stay; of them came Mankind: Thou have
said, It is not good that Man should be alone; Let us make unto him an aid like
unto himself; whereas in the Hebrew it is only, I shall make.

2ly. We see that they acknowledge the Creation of the World by the Word of God,
and by the Holy Ghost; as David, Psalm. xxxiii. 6. So the Book of Wisdom, Chapter
ix. 1. O God of my Fathers, and Lord of mercy, who has made all things with
thy Word, or more properly by thy Word, as it is explained in the 2. verse. and
ver. 4. he asks Wisdom in these words, Give me Wisdom that sits by thy
Throne. And v. 17. Thy counsel who has known? except thou give Wisdom, and
send thy Holy Spirit from above. Where he distinguishes the (...), or Wisdom,
and the Holy Spirit, from God, to whom he directs his Prayer. And so the Book
of Judith, chapter xvi. 13, 14. I will sing unto the Lord a new Song. O Lord, thou
art great and glorious, wonderful in strength, and invincible. Let all
creatures serve thee, for thou speak, and they were made, thou did send
forth thy Spirit, and it created them, and there is none that can resist thy
voice.

3ly. They speak of the Emanation of the Word from God: Those are the words of
the Book of Wisdom, chapter vii. 25. For she is the breath of the power of God, and
a pure influence flowing from the glory of the Almighty; therefore can no
defiled thing fall into her. That description of Wisdom deserves to be
considered, as we have it in the same place, ver. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. For
Wisdom which is the worker of All things, taught me; for in her is an
understanding spirit, holy, one only, manifold, subtle, lively, clear,
undefiled, plain, not subject to hurt, loving the thing that is good, quick,
which cannot be let, ready to do good. Kind to man, steadfast, sure, free
from care, having all power, over-seeing all things, and going through all
understanding, pure, and most subtle Spirits; For Wisdom is more moving than
any motion; she passes and goes through all things, by reason of her
pureness. For she is the brightness of the everlasting Light, the unspotted
mirror of the power of God, and the image of his Goodness. And indeed St.
Paul, Heb. i. 3. has borrowed from thence what we read touching the Son, that
he is the brightness of God's glory, and the express Image of his Person. So
the Book of Ecclesiasticus says, chapter xxv. 3. That it is come out of the mouth
of the most High.

4ly. There are several Names in Scripture which serve to express the second
Person, the Son, the Word, the Wisdom, the Angel of the Lord, but who is the
Lord indeed. Now those Authors use all these Names to express a second Person.

For they acknowledge a Father; and a Son, by a natural consequence: Thus the
Author of Ecclesiasticus, chapter li. 10. I called upon the Lord the father of my
Lord, in the same way as David speaks of the Messiah, Psalm. ii. and Psalm. cx.
and as Solomon in his Proverbs, chapter viii. 25. as of a Son in the bosom of his
Father, and chapter xxx. 4. What is his Sons name, if thou can tell?

They speak of the (...) as the Creator of all things, so the Author of Wisdom,
chapter ix. 1. O God of my Fathers, and Lord of mercy, who has made all things
with thy word. Or more properly by thy Word. And so they call that Wisdom the
Worker of all things, Wisd. chapter vli. 22.

They speak of the Wisdom in the same words as Solomon does, Prove. iii. and chapter
viii. 22. where he expresses the true notion of Eternity. And indeed they
attribute to her, to have been eternal, Ecclus. chapter iv. 18.

They refer constantly to God himself, that is, to the (...) of God, as we
shall hereafter show at large, what is attributed to the Angel of the Lord in
many places of the Books of Moses, as to have delivered the Israelites from the
Red Sea, so Wisd. chapter xix. 9. They went at large like horses, and leaped like
lambs, praising thee, O Lord, who had delivered them. Again, to have had his
Throne in a cloudy Pillar, Ecclus. xxiv. 4. To have been caused by the Creator
of all things to rest and to have his dwelling in Jacob, and to have his
inheritance in Israel, Ibid. v. 8. and so to have given his memorial to his
Children, which is the Law commanded for an heritage into the Congregation of
Jews, Ib. 23.

So they attribute to him to have spoken with Moses, Ecclus. chapter xlv. 5. He
made him to hear his voice, and brought him into the dark cloud, and gave him
commandments before his face, even the Law of life and knowledge, that he might
teach Jacob his Covenants, and Israel his Judgments.

Again, to come down from Heaven to fight against the Egyptians, Wisd. chapter
xviii. 15, 16, 17. Thine Almighty Word leapt down from Heaven, out of thy Royal
Throne, as a fierce man of war into the midst of a land of destruction. And
brought thine unfeigned Commandment as a sharp sword, and standing up filled
all things with death, and it touched the Heaven, but it stood upon the Earth.

So they maintain that the Angel who appeared to Joshuah, chapter 5. was the Lord
himself, so the Author of Ecclesiasticus, chapter xlvi. 5, 6. He called upon the
most high Lord when the enemies pressed upon him on every side, and the great
Lord heard him. And with hailstones of mighty power he made the battle to fall
violently upon the Nations, and in the descent [of Bethoron] he destroyed them
that resisted, that the Nations might know all their strength, because he
fought in the sight of the Lord, and he followed the mighty one. They refer the
Miracles wrought by Elias to the (...), as you see in Ecclesiasticus, chapter
xlviii. 3, 4, 5. By the Word of the Lord he shut up the Heaven, and also three
times brought down fire. O Elias, how wast thou honored in thy wondrous deeds!
and who may glory like unto thee! Who did raise up a dead man from death, and
his soul from the place of the dead by the Word of the most High.

As there is nothing more common in the Old Testament than to call the (...)
the Angel of the Lord, because the Father sent him to do all things under the
Old Dispensation, so one can see that there is nothing more ordinary in the
Apocryphal Books, than to speak of an Angel in particular, to whom is
attributed all things, which could not be performed, but by God.

Three things prove clearly that they did not conceive a created Angel, but an
Angel who is God.

1. Because they have this Maxim, according to the constant Divinity of the
Jews, built upon Scripture, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 9. that God did take Israel for his
Portion among all the Nations of the World, as if he had left other Nations to
the conduct of Angels; so Esth. chapter xiii. 15.

2ly. Because they refer to the (...) some Histories of the Old Testament,
which the Jews till this day refer to an Uncreated Angel, or to the (...) or
Shekina or Memra da Jehova, as I shall prove afterward. We see that Wisd. chapter
xvi. 12. For it was neither herb, nor mollifying Plaster that restored them to
health, but thy Word, O Lord, which heals all things. So Wisd. chapter xviii. 15,
16, 17. Thine Almighty Word leapt down from Heaven, out of thy Royal Throne, as
a fierce man of war, into the midst of a land of destruction, and brought thine
unfeigned commandment as a sharp sword, and standing up filled all things with
death, and it touched the Heaven, but it stood upon the earth. I thought fit to
repeat this place here, to make Mr. N. ashamed, who has exposed those Ideas,
and laughed at them, which I believe he would not have done if he had reflected
upon two things; one is, That this (...) who is spoken of, is that very man of
war mentioned in Moses his Canticle, Exodus xii. 3. and in Ju^lith, chapter ix. 7.
The other is, that St. Paul has followed the Notions of the Book of Wisdom,
speaking of a sharp sword, which is to be understood not of the Gospel, but of
the (...), Heb. x. 12. But Mr. N. was in the right to laugh at such an
authority, which destroys to the ground the Unitarians Principles; for nothing
can be more clear, than that this Author acknowledges a Plurality in God; that
the (...) must be a Person, and a Person equal to the Father, being set upon
the Royal Throne.

3ly. Because they bring such appearances of that Angel, which show they
conceived him as the God who ruled Israel, and who had taken their Temple for
the place of his abode. And on the contrary, they speak of God, whom they
considered as dwelling in the Temple, in the same words which are used in
Scripture, when it is spoken of the name of God, Exodus xxiii. 21. and 1 Samuel
viii. 16. of the Angel of the Covenant, Malach. iii. 1. and such expressions.
So you see in the 1. Book of Esdras, chapter ii. 5, 7. If therefore there be any of
you that are of his people, let the Lord even his Lord be with him, and let him
go up to Jerusalem that is in Judea, and build the House of the Lord of Israel;
for he is the Lord that dwells in Jerusalem. And chapter iv. v. 58. Now when this
young man was gone forth he lifted up his face to Heaven, toward Jerusalem, and
praised the King of Heaven. And Judith chapter v. 18. and chapter ix. 8. and 2 Macch.
i. 25. The only giver of all things, the only just, Almighty and Everlasting,
thou that deliveredst Israel from all trouble, and did choose the fathers, and
sanctify them. And chapter ii. 17. We hope also that the God that delivered all
his people, and gave them all on heritage, and the Kingdom, and the Priesthood,
and the Sanctuary. And chapter xiv. 35. Thou, O Lord, of all things, who have need
of nothing, was pleased that the Temple of thine habitation should be among us.

I can add 4ly, that they distinguish exactly the Angel of God from the
Prophets, although they are called by the same name of Angels or Messengers,
and they distinguish him from Angels, which as creatures they exhort to praise
God, as in the Song of Azaria, v. 36. O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the
Lord, praise and exalt him above all for ever. Such a distinction appears in
the 1. of Esdras, chapter i. 50, 51. Nevertheless, the God of their Fathers sent by
his Messenger to call them back, because he spared them and his Tabernacle
also. But they had his Messengers in derision; and look when the Lord spoke
unto them, they made a sport of his Prophets. So in Tobith, chapter v. 16. So they
were well pleased. Then said he to Tobias, prepare thy self for the journey,
his father said, Go thou with this man, and God which dwells in heaven,
prosper your journey; and the Angel of God keep you company. Just according to
the Prayer of Jacob, Genesis 48.16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil
bless the lads. And that very Angel is called God by Jacob in the verse before.
So in Ecclus. chapter xvli. 17. For in the division of the Nations of the whole
earth, he set a ruler over every people, but Israel is the Lord's portion. So
in the Epistle of Jeremy, v. 5, 6. But say ye in your hearts, O Lord, we must
worship thee. For mine Angel is with you, and I my self caring for your souls.
Where in the Greek that caring for their souls is referred to the same Angel.
So 2 Mac. xi. 6. Now they that were with Maccabeus heard that he besieged the
holds, they and all the people with lamentation and tears besought the Lord
that he would send a good Angel to deliver Israel.

To show that the Jews before Jesus Christ had such a notion of the (...) who
was to save his people, we must take notice of two things: the first is, that
the Author of the three Books of Maccabees speaks of God at the end of his Book
in the same terms which are used by Jacob, Genesis xlviii. 15, 16. and are to be
referred to the (...), not to a created Angel, as I have explained it in a
particular discussion of that very place of Genesis.

The second is, that the Greek Interpreters of Scripture have used such method
in translating some places of the Prophets, which shows they understood that
the Messiah should be the very Angel of the Lord who is called the Counselor,
and that the Angel of the Lord was the Lord himself. Two examples will show
that clearly; the first is in that famous Oracle of Isaiah, chapter ix. 6. they
have these words, (...), the Angel of the Great Counsel, whereas in the Hebrew
it is said, he shall be called the admirable (...) (which is the very Word that
the Angel of the Lord gives to himself, Judge. xiii. 18.) the Counselor of the
mighty God; and it is clear that they did understand these words of the
Messiah, who is spoken of as the Son of David, v. 7. in the same words which
are used in Psalm lxxii. The other example is in this other famous place of
Isai. lxiii. 9. they have translated neither an Angel, but himself saved them;
as if they had read (...), instead of (...), which we read now. Some of the new
Jews are mightily entangled in explaining that place, but it appears that these
Interpreters of Isaiah looked upon the face of God to have been God himself,
which is the reason of their translation, and shows that they understood the
face of the Lord, which is so often spoken of by Moses, to be the (...), which
is Jehovah. I can add a reflection upon their Version of the 3d of Daniel, v.
25. Species quarti similis filio Dei, as says Aquila a Jew, who lived under
Hadrian, but the ancient Greeks had translated it similis Angelo Dei, as says
an old Scholion, related by Drusius in Fragmentis, p. 1213. which shows that
the ancient Hellenist had the same Notion of the Angel of God as of the Son of
God. But all those things shall be more cleared, when we come to the authority
of the other Jews, which we are to produce.

Some perhaps may think that the Book of Ecclesiasticus supposes the Wisdom
which we maintain to be eternal, to have been created; and so says that
Author, chapter 1. (...), and chapter xxiv. 9. But I take notice of three things, 1.
That such an Objection may be good in the mouth of an Arian, but not at all in
the mouth of a Socinian, and much less in the mouth of an Unitarian of this
Kingdom, after their Writers have owned that the (...) or Word of God signifies
the essential virtue of God. 2ly, That the Author of Ecclesiasticus follows in
that expression the very words of the Greek Version of Proverbs, chapter viii. 22.
in which it answers to the word possessed, which is not (...), but (...). 3ly,
That the word (...), although we should suppose it to be the true reading, has
a very large signification; and indeed Aristobulus a Jew of Alexandria, who
lived about the same age of the Authors of those Apocryphal Books, and whose
words are quoted by Eusebius de Praep. Ev. L. vii.. 14. p. 324. declares that
the Wisdom which Solomon speaks of in the Book of Proverbs was before the
Heaven and Earth, and the very Author of Ecclesiasticus calls it positively
eternal, chapter xxiv. 18.

There is another Objection which is backed by the authority of Grotius, who by
the (...), or Wisdom, understands a created Angel, but I shall show afterward
the absurdity of that opinion of Grotius; and his error is so plain that Mr. N.
and the Unitarian Authors have been ashamed to follow his authority in this
point, daring not to maintain that the (...) in the first of St. John signified
an Angel, which they would have done, if they could have digested the absurdity
of Grotius his Notions upon that place of Wisdom, chapter xviii. 15.

As for the Holy Ghost, that they acknowledged him for a Person, and for a
Divine one, there is as much evidence from the same Apocryphal Books.

1. I have noted they attributed to him the Creation of the World, as you see
in Judith, chapter xvi. 14. Thou did send forth thy Spirit and it created them;
which is an imitation of David's Notions, Psalm. xxxiii. 6.

2ly. They call him the mouth of the Lord; so in the 3d Book of Esdras, chapter i.
28. and 47, and 57. Howbeit Josias did not turn back his chariot from him, but
undertook to fight with him, not regarding the words of the Prophet Jeremy,
spoken by the mouth of the Lord. And 47. And he did evil also in the sight of
the Lord, and cared not for the words that were spoken unto him by the Prophet
Jeremy from the mouth of the Lord.

3ly. They speak of the Bina, or Understanding, by which is to be understood
the Holy Spirit, from Prove. iii. and viii. So in Eccles. c. i. 4. Wisdom has
been created before all things, and the understanding of prudence from
everlasting. So the Book of Wisdom, chap. i. 4, 5, 6, 7. For into a malicious
soul wisdom shall not enter; nor dwell in the body that is subject unto sin.
For the Holy Spirit of discipline will flee deceit, and remove from thoughts
that are without understanding, and will not abide, when unrighteousness comes
in. For Wisdom is a loving spirit, and will not acquit a blasphemer of his
words; for God is witness of his reins, and a true beholder of his heart, and a
hearer of his tongue. For the Spirit of the Lord fills the world, and that
which contains all things has knowledge of the voice.

4ly. They acknowledge him as the Counselor of God which knew all his Counsels.
So you read in the Book of Wisdom, chapter ix. 17. And thy counsel who has known,
except thou give wisdom, and send thy Holy Spirit from above?

5ly. They speak of him as of he that discovers the secrets of God; so Ecclus.
chapter 39.8. He shall show forth that which he has learned and shall glory in the
law of the covenant of the Lord. And chapter 48.24, 25. He says of Isaiah, He saw
by an excellent spirit what should come to pass at the last, and he comforted
them that mourned in Sion. He showed what should come to pass for ever, and
secret things or ever they came.

6ly. They acknowledge him to be sent from God, Wisdom, chapter ix. 17. And thy
counsel who has known, except thou give wisdom, and send thy Holy Spirit from
above?

After all, if we consider what Notions they had of the Messiah which was
promised to them, we shall find that they had much nobler Ideas than those
which are now entertained by the last Jews, and more like to them which we find
among the Prophets.

1. It is clear that they looked upon him as the Person which was to sit upon
the Throne of God; the Title of my Lord which is given by the Author of Ecclus.
chapter li. 10. shows that beyond exception by so clear an allusion to the Psalm.
cx. and ii. which both speak of the Messiah.

2ly. They did not look upon it as an absurd thing to suppose that God is to
appear in the earth, as you see in Baruch, chapter iii. 37. Afterward did he show
himself upon earth, and conversed with men. For they refer that either to his
appearance upon Sinai, or to the Incarnation of the (...).

3ly. They suppose another coming of the Messiah, and then the Saints are to
judge the Nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall
reign for ever. Wisd. chapter iii. 8. which words have been borrowed by St. Paul, 1
Cor. vi. 2.

4ly. They acknowledge such Appearances of God, as we have an example in 2 Macc.
chapter xi. 6. and chapter xxi. 22, 23. Now when they that were with Maccabeus heard
that he besieged the holds, they and all the people with lamentation and tears
besought the Lord that he would send a good Angel to deliver Israel.

5ly. They speak of the Appearances of God as an (...), which is the very word
used by St. Paul for the first and second Appearance of Jesus Christ. So the 2.
of Macc. chapter xv. 27. and 34. So every man praised toward the even that glorious
Lord, saying, Blessed be he that has kept his own place undefiled. So that
fighting with their hands, and praying unto God with their hearts, they slew no
less than thirty and five thousand men; for through the appearance of God they
were greatly cheared.

6ly. They expected at the second coming of the Messiah such a manifestation of
his Glory as in the Consecration of the Temple. So 2 Macc. chapter ii. 8. Then
shall the Lord show them these things, and the glory of the Lord shall appear,
and the cloud also as it was showed under Moses, and as when Solomon desired
that the place might be honorably sanctified.

I believe these Proofs are sufficient to demonstrate, 1. That there was before
Jesus Christ's time a Notion of Plurality in the Godhead. 2ly, That they
believed that such a Plurality was a Trinity. 3ly, That they looked upon the
Son or the (...), and the Holy Ghost, as not created Beings, but as Beings of
the same Divine Nature with the Father, by an Eternal Emanation from him, as
having the same Power, and the same Majesty.

But these Ideas of the Apocryphal Books will appear more clear, when we take
them in conjunction with the explication of the like Notions among other Hebrew
Writers, which I shall now consider more particularly. And withal those places
of Scripture on which they ground their Explications.

CHAP. IX.
That the Jews had good Grounds to acknowledge some kind of Plurality in the
Divine Nature.
AFter what I have quoted from the Authors of the Apocryphal Books which are in
the hand of all people, to prove, 1. That the Jews before Jesus Christ had a
Notion of a Plurality in God, following herein certain Traces of this Doctrine
that are to be found in the Books of Moses and the Prophets; And, 2ly, that the
same Jews did acknowledge a Trinity in the Divine Nature; I will proceed to
consider in particular the Grounds which they build upon to admit such Notions.

I begin with the first of those two Articles, which is, That the Style of God
in the Jewish Scriptures gave them a Notion of a Plurality in God. To establish
this Proposition I do not intend to gather all the Texts of the Old Testament,
which might be brought to prove a Plurality in the Divine Nature; nor will I
answer the several Solutions which the Unitarians have invented to darken this
truth, which they oppose.

It shall suffice me to do two things: 1. To show that the Style of God in
Scripture, and of the Sacred Authors, leads one naturally to the Notion of a
Plurality of Persons in the Divine Essence. 2. That this Style made the like
Impression on the Jews before Jesus Christ, as was made by it anciently, and is
still made on it by the generality of Christians. So that the Jews generally
have acknowledged, that the Divine Nature, which is otherwise perfectly one, is
distinguishable into certain Properties, which we call Persons.

For the proof of the first Point, to wit, that the Scriptures of the Old
Testament suppose a Plurality in God; I make these following Reflections.

1. Moses, the chief End of whose Writings was to root out of the minds of Men
the conceit of Polytheism, does yet describe the Creation of the World in words
that insinuate a Plurality. In the beginning (says he) Bara Elohim, the Gods
created, Genesis i. 1. He might have said, Jehovah Bara, Jehovah being the proper
name by which God made himself know to Moses, and by him to his People, Ixod.
iii. 15. or he might have said, Eloah Bara, and so he had joined the Singular
Number of Elohim, which signifies God, with the Verb Bara, which is also the
Singular Number, and signifies created. But Moses uses the Plural word Elohim
with a Verb of the Singular Number, and he repeats it thirty times in the
History of the Creation only, although this word denotes a Plurality in the
Divine Nature, and not one single Person.

Had Moses joined always the Noun Elohim, which is Plural, with a Verb or
Adjective in the Singular, we might have judged, that by calling God by a name
in the Plural, he had followed the corrupt custom which then obtained among the
Heathens, of speaking of the Gods in the Plural, and that he designed to
rectify it by expressing the single action of God by a Singular Verb or
Adjective.

But here this Excuse will not serve; for, 1. he had the word, Eloah, God, in
the Singular, which he uses Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15, 17. and in other places: He had
also several other Names of God, which he uses in other places, all of them
Singular, and consequently any of them had been fitter for his use to root out
Polytheism. 2. Moses himself sometimes joins the Noun Elohim with Verbs and
Adjectives in the Plural. There are several examples of this in his Books, and
more in the other Sacred Writers that imitated him in it, you may see it in
Genesis xx. 13. and xxxv. 7. Job xxxv. 10. Jos. xxiv. 19. Psalm. cxlix. 1. Eccles.
xii. 3. 1 Samuel vii. 23. Es. live. 5. which shows the impudence of Abarbanel, who
to elude the force of this Argument, maintains that the word Elohim is a
Singular. In Pent. fol. 6. col. 3.

6. Another Reflection on the Style of Moses, which ought to be every where
Singular, and yet intimates a Plurality, is this, That Moses in the History of
the Creation brings in God speaking to some one, thus, Let such a thing be
made, and it follows, it was made; and again, God said -- and -- God said --
This expression is repeated no less than eight times within the compass of one
Chapter, which is a thing very surprising in so concise an History. For to whom
did God then speak? to whom did he issue out his Orders? or who was he that did
execute them? There were then neither Men nor Angels to obey him, nor to hear
him speak.

3. There is no one that reads the account of Man's Creation, but, if he
considers what he reads, is struck with these words of God, Genesis i. 26. Let Us
make man after our Image and likeness. These words in the Plural Number denote
plainly a Plurality. Let US make, and OUR Image, are too lively Characters of
Plurality to be passed over without particular regard.

4. We may make the same reflection on those words, Genesis iii. 5. which point
out a Plurality of Persons, And you shall be as Gods; and a little after, Adam
is become as one of Us? ver. 22. We find a like example, Genesis xi. 7. where God
says, Let Us go down and confound their Language. Again, Genesis xx. 13. When God
caused me to wander from my Father's house; the Hebrew is, when the Gods caused
me to wander. Again, Genesis xxxv. 7. Jacob built an Altar, and called the place
El-Bethel, because there God (or Gods, as it is in Hebrew) appeared unto him.

All this is contained within one Book only, that of Genesis. We meet with the
same Notion in these words of Deuteronomy, chapter iv. 7. Who have the Gods so nigh
unto them?

We may trace the Idea of Plurality still further in the following Books; as in
Joshua, xxiv. 19. And Joshua said, You cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy
God -- where in the Hebrew it is, the Holy Gods. So Solomon, Prove. xxx. 3. I
neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the Holies, instead of the
Holy. And Eccl. xii. 1. Remember thy Creators.

Upon the whole we should remark, 1. That this Plurality is expressed in
several passages of the Old Testament, and not in one place only.

2. That there is no kind of speaking, by which a Plurality in God may be
signified but is used in the Old Testament. A Plural is joined with a Verb
Singular, Genesis i. 1. In the beginning the Gods created Heaven and Earth. A
Plural is joined with a Verb Plural, Genesis xxxv. 7: And Jacob called the name of
the place Beth-El, because the Gods there appeared to him: A Plural is joined
with an Adjective Plural, Jos. xxiv. 19. You cannot serve the Lord, for he is
the holy Gods. 2 Samuel: vii. 23: What one nation in the earth is like thy people,
like Israel, whom the Gods went to redeem for a people to himself. So Eccles.
v. 8. There be higher than they, Heb. (...), which stands for Gods, God being
called the Most High. And in Eccles. xii. 1. Remember thy Creators in the days
of thy Youth. In conformity to which manner of speaking, Isaiah says, chapter live.
5. For thy Makers are thy Husbands, the Lord of Hosts is his name. A Verb in
the Plural is joined with a name in the Singular; as you read, Eccles. ii. 12.
as it has been observed by R. Bachaie in Parash bresch. fol. 11. col. 2. of the
Edit. in fol. from which he infers that God and the house of his Judgment are
expressed there; for by the King which is there spoken of he does not
understand Solomon, but God; as they do in the Targum upon 1 Chronicles. iv. 23.
which has been followed by R. Bachaje, Ibid. fol. 11. col. 3. and by Lombroso
in his Heb. Bible, you have the same remark of St. Jerome upon Jer. xxiii. 36.
when you read (...) the Living Gods, and from which he draws an argument for
the Doctrine of the Trinity.

3. That though there is but one only Jehovah, yet in the Holy Scripture we
meet with several Elohim to whom the Title of Jehovah is given; this we see in
a hundred places in the Law, where the words are Jehovah Eloheka, i. e. the
Lord thy Gods, which does certainly deserve to be considered.

This also we more particularly see in the History of the destruction of Sodom,
Genesis 30.24. where it is written, That Jehovah rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah
brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of Heaven. There is Jehovah, and Jehovah;
and if they do not make two, I know not what will express a Plurality. But we
shall have more to say of this afterward.

I have given in short some Marks of a Plurality in the Divine Nature, which
may be gathered out of the Writings of the Old Testament: For the fuller
satisfaction of my Reader, I am next to show that the ancient Jews made the
same Reflections, and formed the same Notions that we have of the Divine
Nature. To do this with the more clearness, I shall observe this Method: 1. To
show what were their Reflections on the Unity of the Divine Nature. 2. To show
what their Reflections were on those passages of the Scripture which note a
Plurality in the Unity of the Divine Essence.

As to the first, Philo, who left a great many Pieces behind him, is best able
to instruct us; and he asserts that the Nature of God is incomprehensible, i.
e. that we cannot form a just Idea of it. Alleg. 1. p. 43. F. G. De Profug. p.
370. C.

That God's Providence and Existence are known to us; but as to his Essence, we
are altogether ignorant of it. De Mund. p. 889. D.

And having in several places of his Writings observed, 1. That Moses, the
Lawgiver of the Jews, made this his chief End to destroy the Notion of
Polytheism. He then, 2. Affirms, that though it is said, God is one; yet this
is not to be understood with respect to Number. Alleg. L. III. p. 841. Not that
Philo would have it thought that there is more than one God, but hereby he
intimates the Unity of God to be transcendent, to have nothing common with that
of other Beings which fall under Number.

3. And indeed he acknowledges a Generation in God. If you ask him what he
begets, he will tell you --

4. That God begets his Word. Who is therefore said to be not unbegotten like
God, and yet not begotten like his Creatures? Quis rerum Divin. haeres. p. 398.
A. And on account of this Generation, he calls him the Firstborn of God. De
Agricult. p. 152. De Confus. Ling. p. 267.

Again, he will tell you, that God begets his Wisdom, De Temul. p. 190. E. And
that his Wisdom is the same with his Word. Alleg. 1. p. 39. F. following, no
doubt, Solomon's Notion, Prove. viii. 22. But did he own that this Generation
was made in time?

No: For, 5. He asserts, that this Generation was from all Eternity; For he
says, the Word of God is the Eternal Son of God. De Confus. Ling. p. 255. D.
p. 267. C.

6. When he would explain, in what respect, or for what reason God is called in
Scripture, The God of Gods; he says not, that it is in respect of the Angels,
whose God he is, and who sometimes are called Elohim, or Gods, even by Philo
himself. De Opif. p. 4. F. But he says it is in relation to his two Powers,
Lib. de Victim. off. p. 661. G. which would be a ridiculous thing, had he
thought these two Powers were no other than two Attributes of God.

Indeed Philo is so far from thinking them mere simple Attributes, that he
maintains, 1. That these Powers made the World, or by them God created the
World. De Victim. off. p. 663. F. de Confus. Ling. p. 270. B. de Plant. Noae.
p. 176. E. Quis rer. div. Haer. p. 393. G. 2. That these eternal Powers
appeared, acted, and spoke as real Persons, and in a visible and sensible
manner. Lib. de Cherub. p. 97. D. De Sacr. Ab. p. 108. B. C. Quod Deus sit
immutab. p. 229. B. p. 241. C. D. p. 242. B. de Plant. Noae. p. 176. D. E. Quod
rer. div. haer. p. 393. G. De Somn. p. 457. G. de Mund. p. 888. B.

He also maintains, that the two Cherubins which were over the Ark, were the
Symbols of the two eternal Powers of God. De Vit. Mos. III. p. 517. F. Quis
rerum Divin. Haer. p. 393. G.

These are in general, the Notions which the Jews had of a Plurality in the
Divine Essence, which is otherwise single and one. I shall hereafter show, that
the very same Notions are spread throughout the ancient Targums, as far as the
Nature of the Works, which for the most part are only naked Translations of the
Hebrew into Chaldee, does give occasion to the Authors of these Targums to
explain themselves on these Heads.

Now let us go on to examine the Foundations on which the ancient Jews grounded
this Notion of a Plurality in God: For it is not to be imagined that they would
have believed thus without some Authority for it in the Books of the Old
Testament, upon which alone they pretended to found the Doctrines of their
Religion.

Secondly then, As to the first Words of Moses. In the beginning the Gods
created: I must own that Philo, writing in Greek, did not express his Notion of
Plurality in expounding this Text: For he followed the Version of the LXX,
which reads (...) in the Singular, instead of the Hebrew Elohim in the Plural.
But then he more than hints that this Reflection was common among the Jews,
seeing that he rarely speaks of God without mentioning his two Powers, as I
have newly observed to you. And in one place he gives this reason why the Name
(...) is used throughout the History of the Creation; because that was the
Appellation of one of God's Powers by which he made the World: (...). de Plant.
Noae. p. 176. D. E. Which shows evidently, that the Notion of Plurality did
still remain among the Greek Jews, when the Plural Elohim, which was the Ground
of it, was taken away by their Translators, for a reason that I shall shortly
mention.

But to show that the word Elohim in the Plural has always made this impression
on the Minds of the Jews, we must observe, 1. That long before Justin Martyr's
time, there was a sort of Men who imagined that the Angels did create the
World, grounding it upon this place, compared with those other Texts where the
Angels are sometimes called Elohim, as Psalm. viii. 6. and Psalm. xcvii. 7. Such
was the Opinion of Menander, the Scholar of Simon Magus in particular.

2. That the Talmudists themselves were so persuaded of a Plurality expressed
in the word Elohim, as to teach in Title Megilla, c. 1. fol. 11. That the LXX
Interpreters did purposely change the Notion of Plurality, couched in the
Hebrew Plural, into a Greek Singular; as they did also on Genesis 1.26. and xi. 7.
lest Ptolom. Philadelph. should conclude, that the Jews, as well as himself,
had a belief of Polytheism. That was taken notice of by St. Jerome in his
Preface to the Book De Quaest. Hebr.

3. That however the Construction of a Noun Plural, with a Verb Singular, may
render it doubtful to some, whether these words express a Plurality or no; yet
certainly there can be no doubt in those places, where a Verb or Adjective
Plural are joined with the word Elohim; and such places, as I already have made
appear, are often to be found in the Writings of the Old Testament. That the
word Elohim is to be understood Plurally, this the Jews, since Christ's time,
have acknowledged to be agreeable to their sense of the word. For in 1 Samuel
xxviii. 13. where the Witch of Endor says, I see the Gods ascending, (...)
they conclude that there were two persons that appeared to her, and so they
think Moses and Samuel to be the Persons. Midrash Sam. Rabbatha, cap. 27. and
Tanchuma fol. 63. col. 2.

It is natural for Christians to conceive, that where it is said so often, Genesis
i. And God said, there God spoke to his Word, by which St. John writes that all
things were made, Joh. i. 3. Socinus will not have it that St. John speaking of
the Word or (...) does mean it of the first Creation, but of the second. His
Disciples here being convinced that this cannot be maintained, have forsaken
him in it, and do now agree in what he denied. But then they suppose the Word
signifies no more than the virtue and power of God; and therefore by this
Phrase, Let it be done, and it was so, no more is imported, than God's exciting
of himself to do this or that thing, or that God said to himself, Let such a
thing be done, and he did it accordingly.

But if this Evasion can satisfy an Unitarian, as it easily may one that
cannot maintain his opinion without it; yet it cannot satisfy an impartial
Reader. For this we have the judgment of the ancient Synagogue, which looked on
the Word of (...), as a true Cause and Agent, to whom God spoke, and who by an
infinite power wrought the several works of the six days.

Now that this was the judgment of the ancient Synagogue, and consequently that
they acknowledged a Plurality in God, will be evident to any one that will be
at the pains to consult Philo and the ancient Targums.

For Philo, he has drawn so full a System of the (...), as to leave himself
nothing more to add on that Subject. According to him, it is the (...) in whom
were represented the first Ideas of all things, and who afterward stamped the
impressions of them on matter: Whence he is called (...), De opif. p. 4. G. and
p. 24. C. It is the (...) that created the World, as I shall have occasion to
show from several parts of his Works, in the following part of this Discourse.

And for the Targums, to cite all the passages in them that confirm this truth,
would be a trouble next to that of transcribing those Books. I shall therefore
collect only some of the principal places. Jonathan on Isa. xlv. 12. declares
his opinion, that the Word created the Earth; and again on Isa xlviii. 13. Thus
Onkelos assures, that the Heavens were made by the Word of the Lord, on Deuteronomy.
xxxiii. 27. And he almost constantly distinguishes the (...) as another Person
from the Father, of which I shall in the following Chapters produce many proofs.

Indeed in this Paraphrase of the History of the Creation, he uses not the Word
Memra, which in Chaldee answers to that of (...) in Greek. Nor was there any
need, since he used all along the Verb Amar, from whence comes the Noun Memra,
and so interprets the Text word for word, which seems to be his chief design in
this Paraphrase.

And here I must take notice of one thing which is of great moment in this
Question, viz. that the Jews make a great difference between that word Vajomer,
which is found in the History of the Creation, and this word Vajedabber; the
first having a natural and necessary relation to the Memra, and the last
signifying no more than the speech of God or of any Man. R. Menach. de Rekan.
in Pent. fol. 124. col. 2. and fol. 152. col. 1, 2.

But Onkelos does three things which are equivalent to it: the one is, that
instead of Elohim, he uses the word Jehova, which the Jews read Adonai, because
it has the Vowels of the word Adonai; and both the word Adonim, which is the
Plural out of Regimen, so as God uses it in speaking of himself, Mal. i. 6. and
the Vowels of the word Adonai in regimen, which they put under the Letters of
Jehova, being also Plural, both these things do express a Plurality in God as
much as the word Elohim did in the Hebrew Text.

The second is, that he does render the words, in the beginning, not by the
Chaldaick word which answers to the Hebrew, but by another which signifies the
first (...) and not by (...), as it is observed by all the Jewish Writers who
make the same reflection upon the Translation of the Targum Jerusalami, in
which we read not in the beginning, but (...) by the Wisdom. As you see in a
Comment upon the Targums, Printed at Amsterdam not long ago, where he follows
those Notions as the ancient and the common Doctrine of the Synagogue.

The third is, that in the sequel of his Paraphrase, he uses the word Memra, as
signifying a Person by whom God acts and speaks in all his Appearances to Men.

That these words, Let us make Man after our Image, etc. have made a like
impression on the ancient Jews, appears clearly from the pains they take to
explain them. I am sure Philo was convinced, that they note a Plurality, when
he, writing on this Text, maintained that God had fellow-workers in the
Creation of Man. De opif. p. 12. B. E. It is true he sometimes advances that
God spoke these words to the Angels, or to the Elements; and he has been
followed herein by some Jews after Jesus Christ, as we see in the Explication
of them in Bresh. Rab.. 8. and in Jalkut.. 12, 13. wherein they pretend that
God consulted the Angels also in the Creation of the World; although according
to the Talmudical Jews the Angels were not created till the second or the fifth
day; and such a consultation between God and his Creatures is rejected with
scorn by Abarbanel in Pental. Fol. 19. Col. 4.

But it is to be observed, that Philo's reason for this Exposition, was to give
the better account of the Original of Sin, which after the manner of diverse of
the Philosophers, with whom he was much conversant, he searched for in the
matter of which Man was composed in respect of his Body, as may be seen in the
place which I have now quoted.

For in other places he maintains: 1. That God took his (...) or Word, for his
fellow-worker. De Opif. p. 24, and p. 25. 2. That Man was created after the
Image of the (...), or Word. De Plant. Noae. p. 199. D. But he says nothing of
the Image of Angels, or of Matter, which yet he ought to have spoken of, had he
writ coherently and suitably to that other Explication.

I say it again, that in many of his Pieces he asserts, The Word made Man, and
after the Image of the Word was Man created, which he shows very largely.
Alleg. 11. p. 60. C. D. De Plant. Noae. p. 169.

3. He maintains, that God spoke this to his Powers, as may be collected from
his Exposition of this Text. De Confus. Ling. p. 270. A. C. and as he says
expressly, Lib. de Profug. p. 357. G. (...) -- That is, he shows that Man only
was formed by God with fellow-workers; for Moses tells us that God said, Let us
make Man after our Image, implying a Plurality in the expression, Let Us make.
God therefore speaks here to his Powers.

4. He expresses himself in so particular a manner on this head, as to leave no
doubt concerning his opinion of this place. It is in his first Book of
Questions and Solutions, which is now lost, all but a fragment preserved by
Eusebius. Praep. Evang. vii. 13. p. 322, 323. His words are these: (...). Why does
God say in the Image of God made I Man, and not in his own Image, as if he had
spoken of another God? This Scripture-expression is for wise and good reasons,
for nothing mortal can be fashioned after the Image of the Supreme God and
Father of all things, but of his Word or (...), who is the second God. For the
rational part of Man's soul, ought to receive its impression from the Word or
Reason of God, because God himself who is Superior to his (...), is vastly
beyond the nature of all Rational Beings; and consequently it was not fit that
any created Being should be made after his likeness, whose Nature does subsist
in the highest degree of Excellence.

To speak next of the ancient Targums, they are not unacquainted with this
Notion, which they show as far as the nature of their Versions would permit.
God made Man by his Word, says the Jerusalem Targum, Genesis i. 26. and the same
thing Jonathan teaches, Es. xlv. 12.

The Jerusalem Targum, Genesis i. 1. does indeed say, God made all things by his
Wisdom, but then he shows that this is but another name for the (...), by
saying elsewhere, ver. 27. the (...) or the Word of the Lord created Man after
his Image.

I know that in Jonathan's Targum on Genesis i. 26. God is brought in as speaking
to the Angels, when he said, Let Us make Man. But he who reads this and the
following verse in the Targum of Jonathan, and compares them with the Jerusalem
Targum, will soon see that these are not the words of the ancient Paraphrast,
but an Addition made to them by the Jews since Christ's time. What I have said
above is a convincing proof of it.

The Socinians cannot avoid being shockt a little with the expression, Genesis
xix. 24. The Lord -- rained from the Lord out of Heaven. Menasseh ben Israel
confesses the place too hard for him, unless by the Lord who is on Earth, you
understand the Angel Gabriel, who, as God's Ambassador, bears the name of God.
q. 44. in Genesis. But the ancient Jews found no such difficulty in it, as he
and the Socinians do at present find.

For Philo the Jew holds, De Abr p^ 290. B.
that it was the (...) that rained fire from Heaven, de Somn. p. 449. F. As he
otherwhere says, it was the (...) that confounded the Language at Babel.
Again, Philo says in his History of Sodom, God and his two Powers are spoken
of.

The Targum of Onkelos, though it speaks of Angels in this 19th. Chap. yet it
treats one as Jehova who rains fire from Heaven, v. 24. and thus it Paraphrases
the Text, The Jehova rained from before the face of the Jehova from Heaven.

3. This Notion of Plurality must have sunk deep into the minds of the Jews,
seeing they have constantly read the word Jehova, which is singular, with the
Vowels of the word Adonai, which is Plural, instead of Adoni, which is
Singular: And this notwithstanding their dispute with the Christians, whom they
accuse of Tritheism. I am not ignorant that this manner of reading Jehova was
long in use before the Birth of Jesus Christ. But this it is that renders my
Remark the more considerable. For all the other names of God, which represent
him by some one of his Attributes are Singular, as well as the name Jehova is
Singular, which is the proper name of God; And yet the Jews all agree to
forbear rendering the name Jehova by any of his many Names that are Singular,
but interpret it by that of Adonai, whose Plural Vowels make Jehova to signify
Plurally, as much as to say my Lords; and that for this reason, as it seems,
because there is more than one in the Godhead, to whom the name Jehova is given
in Scripture.

It is clear how sensible the Jews have been that there is a Notion of
Plurality plainly imported in the Hebrew Text, since they have forbidden their
common people the reading of the History of the Creation, lest understanding it
literally, it should lead them into Heresy. Malmon. Mor. Neboch. p. 11. c. 29.
The Talmudists, as I before noted, have invented this excuse for the Seventy,
as to their changing the Hebrew Plural, into a Greek Singular; they say it was
for fear Ptolomy Phil. should take the Jews for Polytheists. And to this they
have added another Story, that Moses himself was startled at God's speaking
these words, Let Us make Man, in which he thought a Plurality was expressed,
and that he remonstrated to God the danger which might arise thereby; and at
length resolved not to write them, till he had God's express order for it,
which God did give him, notwithstanding the danger that Moses represented might
follow. Beresh. Rab.. 8.

Another thing relating to this Head, which deserves our consideration, is
this; That the Samaritans who were originally of the same Religion with the
Jews, but receive only the five Books of Moses, have shown that they had in the
Apostles times the same Notions that are met with in Philo of a Plurality in
God. We have a proof of it, Act. viii. 9. where we read that Simon Magus had
bewitched that people, giving out that himself was (...), some great one; he
did not say what, but gave them leave to understand it their own way. And how
did they take it? This follows v. 10. They said, (...), this person is the
great power of God. This they would not have said, if they had not believed,
that besides the great God, there was also a person called (...) I say a
Person, for I suppose Mr. N. cannot think they took Simon Magus to be only an
Attribute.

But looking yet nearer into this Text, I conceive it is plain, that they
understood there was more than one (...), for as it is in the Text, they said
this is the great (...), which seems to imply that they believed there was
another power less than this. It seems yet plainer in another reading of the
Text, which I take to be the true reading, for we find it not only in the now
vulgar Latin, but also in Irenaeus, i. 20. which shows it was the current
reading in his time, and we find it also in several Manuscripts, some of which
are of the highest esteem with Learned Men, as namely, the Alexandrian in the
King's Library, and the ancient Manuscript of Lions in the Cambridge Library:
In all these the words are, (...). This person is the power of God which is
called the great power. For their calling him the power of God, what that means
we cannot better learn than from Origin, who speaking of Simon, and such others
as would make themselves like our Lord Jesus Christ, says, they called
themselves, Sons of God, or the Power of God; which he makes to be two Titles
of one and the same signification. [ Orig. cont. Celsum, lib. 1. p. 44.] And
both these Titles are given to the (...) by Philo in more places than we can
number. For their calling him the Great Power of God, which implies that there
was another power besides; this also perfectly agrees with the Notions of
Philo, who so often speaks of the two Powers of God, describing them as true
and proper Persons.

We have a farther proof of the Samaritans having these Notions, in the account
which their Countryman Justin Martyr has given us of the honor they had for
Simon Magus in his time, which was about eighty years after the writing of the
Acts of the Apostles. It may seem very strange that when the charms of that
Magus, wherewith he had bewitched that poor people, were so entirely dissolved
by Philip's Preaching and Miracles, that not only they but the Impostor himself
had embraced the Christian Religion, yet after this he could so far bewitch
them a second time as to raise himself in their opinion from being the great
power of God, (as they called him before) to be, in their new style, the God
above all power whatsoever. Yet that was the Title they gave him in Justin's
time, as he shows in his Dialogue with Tryphon, [Justin. Dial. cum Tryph. p.
349. G.] elsewhere Justin says [ Apol. 11. p. 69. E.] of Simon, they confess
him as the first God, and as such they worship him. This Notion of a first God
is manifestly the same with that of Philo, who called the (...) the second God.
[ Eusebius. Prep. Evang. vii. 13. p. 323.] But if the Samaritans in the Apostles
time took Simon to be the (...), or second God, as I have shown it more than
probable that they meant it by calling him the Great power of God, Who should
be the second God now, since Simon was so advanced in their opinion, that now
they accounted him to be the First? Justin shows in the place before
mentioned [ p. 69. E.] that in his time as they called Simon the first God, so
they called his Companion Helen, the second God. His words are, (...), what is
that? one may easily guess; for certainly the first emanation from the (...) is
the (...). And so according to Justin himself, the (...) signifies. For in the
same Book he interprets it of the (...), [ Apol. 11. p. 97. b.] So that as the
second God was the (...) in Philo's account, so was Simon's Companion the same
in the opinion of the Samaritans.

This poor bewitched people were almost Singular in this opinion in Justin's
time; for he says, then there were but few of their way in other Nations. And
Origin who wrote within sixty years after, says, That when he wrote, there
were of Simon's Sect scarce thirty at Samaria, and none any where else in the
World, [ Orig. cont. Cells. 1. p. 44.] Possibly there might remain some of them
till those times when other Writers give other accounts of their Opinions, and
possibly their Opinions might vary, so that those later accounts are not to be
much heeded; we cannot be certain of any thing concerning them, but what we have
from Justin Martyr, who lived when they were at the highest, and writing as he
did to the Emperor an Apology for the Christians, and acquainting him with the
Errors of his Countrymen at Samaria, which as he more than intimates was not
without some hazard of his being torn in pieces by the Mobb, [ Just. Dial. cum
Tryphon. p. 340.] we may be very sure he would write nothing of them, but what
was so evidently true that it could not be denied by any that lived in those
days.

But from the account that Justin Martyr gives of them, together with what we
read in the Acts of the Apostles, I think it is sufficiently proved, that the
Samaritans held a Plurality in the Divine Nature; which not a little confirms
that which I undertook to prove of the Jews having these Notions in the times
of Christ and his Apostles.

I shall not insist longer on the Arguments which confirm a Plurality in the
Divine Nature, because I shall touch on some of them again in the Sequel of
this Discourse, where I shall show that those places of the Old Testament, that
speak of the Angel of the Lord, are to be understood not of a created Angel,
but of a person that is truly Jehova; and that this has been acknowledged by
the ancient Jews; which alone is proof enough of this Notion's being
sufficiently known by that Nation, to which God committed his Sacred Oracles,
Romans ix. 6.

Pass we now to the second Article, that the Jews did so acknowledge a Plurality
in God, as that at the same time they held that this Plurality was a Trinity.

CHAP. X.
That the Jews did acknowledge the Foundations of the Belief of a Trinity in
the Divine Nature; and that they had the Notion of it.
IN pursuance of the Method laid down in the foregoing Chapter, I am now to
show these two things: 1. That there are in the Scriptures of the Old Testament
so many and so plain Intimations of a Trinity in the Divine Nature, as might
very well move the Jews to take them for a sufficient ground for the Belief of
this Doctrine. 2. That these Intimations had that real effect on the Jews, that
as they found in their Scriptures a Plurality in the One Infinite Being of God;
so they found these Scriptures to restrain this Plurality to a Trinity; of
which they had, though much more darkly and confusedly, the same Notions that
are now among Christians.

1. To show that there is ground for this Doctrine in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament; I might show this oftentimes in these Scriptures where God is spoken
of, there is some kind of intimation given of Three in the Divine Nature: But
of this I shall only touch upon it; my intention being chiefly to show, That
there are Three that are called God in the Old Testament, and to show who they
are.

I need not prove it of the Father, since it will not be denied that he is
called God, by them that will deny it of any other. But I shall show that
sometimes the Son is called so, whether by that name of the Son, or of the
Word, or some other name, without mention of the Spirit. Next I shall show that
the Spirit is spoken of as God; even he is mentioned without the Son. And
lastly, That the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, are all Three mentioned as
God, and all Three spoken of together in some Texts of the Old Testament
Scriptures.

To keep to this order, I am first to show that there is some kind of
Intimation of a Trinity, in places where God is spoken of in these Scriptures.
I shall name but two or three Texts of many; for I call it but an Intimation,
and it may amount to thus much, that we find the Name of God repeated three
times over; for it was certainly no vain Repetition. Thus in the Blessing of
Israel, Numb. vi. 24, 25, 26. The Lord bless thee and keep thee; The Lord make
his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; The Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee and give thee peace. So Isa. xxxiii. 22. The Lord is our
judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king, he will save us. So Dan.
ix. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do -- defer not for thy
own sake, O God.

The like Intimation we find in those words of the Prophet Isaiah, which do
both show a Plurality in the Divine Nature, and restrain it to a Trinity. Isa.
vi. 3. The Prophet heard the Seraphims cry one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of hosts. These are Titles which taken together can belong to no one
but God; and the Repetition of them shows something in it which cannot but seem
Mysterious, especially to any one that considers those other words of God
speaking in the same Chapter, ver. 8. Who will go for us? words which clearly
note a Plurality of Persons, as also in Hos. xii. 4, 5. and in some other
places.

To show who these are, we must consider those places of the Old Testament
where the Son and the Holy Spirit are distinctly spoken of as several Persons.

The Son is expressly spoken of by David, (who himself was a Type of the
Messiah, and is so acknowledged by the Jews), Psalm. ii. 7. The Lord said unto
me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. That the (...), who, as has
been already proved, is called Wisdom according to the Jewish Notions, is the
Son of God by Eternal Generation, himself shows, Prove. viii. 23, 24. The Lord
possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old; I was set up
from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth was; when there were no
depths, I was brought forth. So in Prove. xxx. 4. Who has established all the
ends of the earth? What is his name, or what is his Son's name? The Son can be
understood of no other than of that Eternal Wisdom that assisted in the
Creation, as was before mentioned.

Elsewhere the Son or the Word is spoken of according to the Jewish Expositions
of such Texts, where he is not named, and yet he is called God and Lord; as
Psalm. xlv. 7. O God, thy God has anointed thee. And Psalm. cx. 1. The Lord said
unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thy enemies thy footstool.

It was the same Son who appeared oftentimes under the Character of the Angel
of the Lord, though he was not a Created Angel, but the Lord Jehovah himself.
This I only mention here, being to treat of it largely in some of the following
Chapters.

That the Spirit is spoken of as a Person in Scripture, none can be ignorant
of, that reads but the beginning of Genesis, where in the 2d Verse he is named
the Spirit of God, and said to have his part in the Work of the Creation. The
Jews could not make this Spirit to be an Angel, because they all agree the
Angels were not yet created, when the Spirit moved upon the face of the Waters.
Nor was the Spirit of God a mighty Wind, as some render it in that place; for
as yet there was no Air, much less Exhalations, till this Work was past. But
that Moses meant a Person, sufficiently appears by that which follows, Genesis
vi. 3. Where God says, My Spirit shall not always strive with man. It was the
Holy Spirit of God that inspired the holy Patriarchs to give those Admonitions
and Warnings to the wicked World of Mankind before the Flood, by which he
strove to bring them to Repentance. It was the same Divine Spirit whose
Operations the Israelites were sensible of, in his inspiring the Seventy
Elders, Numb. xi. 25, 26.

The Psalmist, no doubt, thought of those words of Moses in the beginning of
Genesis, when he said, in speaking of the Works of the Creation, Psalm. xxxiii.
6. All the hosts of them were made by the Spirit of his mouth; and this Spirit
he sensibly knew to be a Person; for thus he says of himself, 2 Samuel xxiii. 2,
3. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his Word was in my tongue.

Lastly; In some places of the Old Testament there are plainly Three Persons
spoken of together, and especially in the beginning of Genesis, where it ought
to be remembered, that the word Elohim, Gods, does naturally import a Plurality.
[ R. Bechai in Genesis chap. i. 1. and others quoted in the former Chapter.] Now
there can be no Plural of less than Two in number, and therefore at least God
the Father, and the Word, are to be understood in the first Verse; the second
Verse adds the Spirit of God, as it has been just now mentioned. And it is very
natural to think that God spoke to these Two, the Word and the Spirit, in Verse
26. of that Chapter, when he said, Let Us make man after Our Image; as also
afterward, Genesis iii. 22. Behold the man is become as one of Us: And again,
speaking of the Builders of Babel, Genesis ix. 7. Let Us go down and confound
their Language: This must be to Two at least; for had he spoke to One only, he
would have said in the Singular Number, Come thou, and let us confound their
language: The manner of speaking plainly imports a Plurality; and they could be
no other than those Three which were spoken of in the first Chapter.

As Moses brings in these Three Persons into his History of the first Creation,
so does the Evangelical Prophet in speaking of the Mission of Christ, Isa. xi.
1, 2, etc. The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, i. e. upon the Messiah,
according to the received Opinion of the Jews, Isa. xlviii. 16. The Lord has
sent Me and his Spirit. Again, Isa. lix. 19, 20, 21. When the enemy shall come
in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him,
and the Redeemer shall come unto Sion. Again, Isa. lxi. 1. The Spirit of the
Lord Jehovah is upon Me, because the Lord has anointed me. They are the words
which Christ applied to himself, Luke iv. 18.

It may not be amiss here to answer an Objection against the use that we have
made of those Texts wherein God says WE and US in the Plural; which manner of
speaking, the Jews cannot but see does denote a Plurality. R. Kimchi on Isa.
vi. 8. makes that Observation: But then he fancies it is spoken with relation
to Angels, whom God is pleased to call in by way of Consultation.

In the Text Isa. vi. those whom God consults with are to send as well as he;
and those in Genesis i. 26. are to make Man as well as he. And surely God would
not join the Angels with himself in the sending of his Prophets; much less
would he give Angels a share in the Glory of making Man, the Masterpiece of
the Creation. Angels are Creatures as well as Man, and were but a Day elder
than he, according to some of the Jews; a Week older than he they could not be:
And at the making of Man it is believed with very good reason, that those
Angels were not yet fallen, whom we now call Devils. It seems not very likely,
that as soon as they were made God should call them into Council for making of
another of his Creatures; much less that he should make them Creators together
with himself; especially when this gives them a Title to the Worship of
Intelligent Beings, such as Man; who if this had been true, ought to have
worshipped not only Angels but Devils, as being his Creators together with God.
But the Truth is so far on the contrary, that as at first Man was made but a
little lower than the Angels, so there is a Man since made Lord both of Angels
and Devils, whom they are to worship: This I know our Unitarians will now deny.
But to come to an end of this matter; It is certainly below the Infinite
Majesty of God, in any of his works whatever to say to any of his Creatures,
Let us make, or, Let us do this or that. And for that idle Fancy of a
Consultation, it is not only absurd in it self, but it is contrary to the holy
Scripture, that asks Isa. xl. 13. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or
who has been his Counselor? Which in effect is a flat denial that there is
any Creature to be called into Consultation with God. And therefore whoever
they were to whom God said this, Let us make, or, Let us do this or that, they
could be no Creatures, they must be uncreated Beings like himself, if there
were any such then in being. But that then at the Creation such there were,
even the Word and the Spirit, has been shown from the beginning of that
History, I think beyond contradiction.

Thus we have collected a number of Places from the Old Testament, which speak
of a Trinity, and consequently do reduce the Plurality which we proved before,
to a Trinity in the Unity of the Divine Nature. We see there Three distinct
Characters of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. We see the Generation
of the Son expressed, and the Mission of the Holy Spirit upon the Son, when he
came to live in our Nature. We see the number Three still observed in begging
Pardon of Sins, of Blessings, and in returning Praises to God, intimating there
were Three from whom all good things come, and who are therefore the Objects of
Prayer. It remains that we enquire whether the like Inferences which we draw
from these Texts, were made by the Jews before Jesus Christ; which is the
second Particular of our proposed Method.

I shall not repeat here what in the preceding Chapters I proved, That both
Philo and the Chaldee Paraphrasts had such Notions of the Unity of God, as were
not repugnant to his Plurality. The Reader cannot have forgotten already a thing
of such importance. My business now is to show that the Ancient Jews plainly
own Two Powers in God, which they distinguish from God, and yet call each of
them God; the one being the Son of God, the other the Holy Spirit, who is
called the Spirit of God.

Notwithstanding that I take the Chaldee Paraphrasts to be ancienter than
Philo, yet I choose to begin with Philo's Testimonies rather than theirs, for
three Reasons. First, Because he writ in the way of Treatises, and therefore
much larger and clearer than they did that writ only in the way of Translation
or Paraphrase, adding nothing of their own but only sometimes a very short Note
on the Text: And therefore their Writings are much likelier to be explained by
his, than his by theirs. 2dly. Because the Passages in Philo for the Existence
of the (...) as a Person coeternal with the Father, are so evident, as to leave
the Socinians no other way of answering them, but to deny with Mr. N. that the
Books that contain them were written by Philo the Jew. 3dly. A third Reason is,
because these Passages of Philo being written at Alexandria, and abounding with
Expressions used by the Apostles when they speak of Jesus Christ as the (...),
will contribute to explain some of the Quotations we shall take out of the
Paraphrases in use at Babylon and Jerusalem. These three great Cities Babylon,
Jerusalem, and Alexandria, were the three great Academies of the Jews, till the
destruction of the Temple under Vespasian. So that whatever was received among
the Jews in these three Cities before our Savior's time, may well pass for the
Opinion of the Jewish Church at that time.

Let us proceed then to some of those Passages in Philo the Jew, wherein he
declares that there are Two such Powers in God, as we call Two Persons; and no
one shall make sense of those Passages, that calls them otherwise.

1. In general, he acknowledges that God has Two Chief Supreme Powers, one of
which is called (...), God, the other (...), Lord. De Abrah. p. 286, 287. F. De
vit. Mos. iii. p. 517. F.

2. That these Two Powers are Uncreated, [ Quod Deus sit immut. p. 238. A.]
Eternal, [ De Plant. Noae, 176. D.] and Infinite or Immense, and
Incomprehensible, [ De Sacr. Ab. p. 168. B.]

3. On many occasions he speaks of these Two Powers; as De Cherub. p. 86. F. G.
87. A. De Sacr. Ab. p. 108. A. B. De Plant. Noae, p. 176. D. E. Quod Deus est
immut. p. 229. B. De Confus. Ling. p. 270. E. 271. Lib. de Prof. p. 359. G. and
especially p. 362, and p. 363. B. C. D. Quis rerum divin. Haer. p. 393. G. p.
394. A. C. De Somn. p. 457. F. De Monar. p. 631. A. B. C. De Vict. Offeren. p.
661. B. De Mund. p. 888. B.

4. In particular; Though he does not directly name these Two Powers, yet it is
clear that by the first he means the (...); for he says it is the Power by
which all things are created, or to which God spoke when he made Man: Which two
Characters are ascribed to the (...) by Philo in many of his Tracts. The other,
which we call the Holy Spirit, is often acknowledged by Philo, [Lib. Quod Deus
sit immut. p. 229. B.]

5. These things being considered, he says, it appears how God is Three, and
yet he is but One: He shows how this was represented in that Vision to
Abraham, Genesis xviii. where it is said, Verse 1. That Jehovah appeared to him.
And Verse 2. Abraham looked, and behold Three men stood by him: Yet he spoke
but to One, Verse. 3. saying, My Lord, if now I have found favor in thy sight,
pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant, etc. This Vision according to the
Literal Sense he expounds of the (...) and Two Angels, as I have quoted him
elsewhere V. Phil. All. 11. p. 77. E.
. But he says here was also a Mystery that lay under this Literal Sense, like
to Sarah's (...), so the LXX. calls the Cakes that were hid under the Embers:
According to this Mystical Sense, he says, here was denoted, (...), the Great
Jehovah, with his Two (...), of which one is called (...), and the other (...).
These are Philo's words, [ De Sacrif. Ab. and Cain, p. 108. B.] (...). God
attended with his Two Supreme Powers, Principality and Goodness, being himself
but One in the middle of these Two, makes these Three Appearances to the seeing
Soul, which is represented by Abraham. That these words did not drop from Philo
by chance, the Reader may see in another place, where he speaks purposely of
this matter. [ De Abrahamo p. 287. E.] (...), etc. In the middle is the Father
of all things, on each side of him are the Two Powers, the oldest and the
nearest to the (...), or Jehovah; whereof one is the Creative Power, the other
is the Royal Power: The Creative Power is called God, the Royal Power is called
Lord. He therefore in the middle, being attended by these Powers on each side
of him, represents to the seeing Faculty the appearance of sometimes One, and
sometimes of Three. Philo after all, warns his Reader that this is a Mystery,
not to be communicated to every one, but only to them that were capable to
understand and to keep it to themselves: By which he shows that this was kept
as a Cabala among the Jewish Doctors: for fear, if it came out, the People
might misunderstand it, and thereby fall into Polytheism.

As for the Targums, they likewise are very clear in this matter. For besides
the Lord Jehova without any addition, they speak of the Word of the Lord, or
the Shekinah of the Lord, and that so often, that it will be endless to quote
all the places: some of them however must be cited, to put the thing out of
dispute.

1. Where ever the words Jehovah and Elohim are read in the Hebrew; There
Onkelos commonly renders it in his Chaldee Paraphrase, the Word of the Lord, as
Genesis xxviii. 20, 21. xxxi. 49. Ex. ii. 25. xvi. 8. xix. 17. xxxii. 20. Lev: xx.
23. xxvi. 49. Numb. xi. 20. xiv. 9. xxiii. 21. Deuteronomy. i. 30, 32. ii. 7. iii. 12.
iv. 24, 27. v. 5. ix. 3. xx. 1. xxxi. 6, 8.

The Targums commonly describe the same Person under the Title of Shekinah,
which signifies, the Divine Habitation.

The Origin of that expression is in the Hebrew word which we find in Genesis ix.
27. and is repeated in many places of the Old Testament. I acknowledge freely
that in some few places of the Targums it seems to be employed to express the
Holy Ghost; so that Eliah in his Dictionary, and some others who have followed
him, and transcribed his Book in their Lexicons, takes the Shekinah and the
Holy Ghost to be the same. But after all I believe that Eliah has been
mistaken by not being fully acquainted with the Ideas of the most learned of
his people. And indeed we see that the most famous Writers of the Synagogue put
quite another sense upon the Targums, and decide that question against Eliah.
looking upon the Memra and the Shekinah as the same. So does R. Moses
Maimonides, R. Menachem de Rakanaty, and Ramban, and R. Bachaye.

It is very easy to be satisfied that these famous Authors are in the right:
For if you consider the places where Philo the Jew speaks of the (...), you
shall see that they are in the Targum explained either by the Memra da Jehova,
or by the Shekinah. And on the contrary if you except very few places you shall
find that the Targums employ the term of Holy Ghost as the proper name which we
have in the Original. And even to this day the Jews do oftener call the Spirit
as by his proper name Ruach hakkodesh, the Holy Spirit.

That the Targumists had the same Notions of these two that Philo had, is, I
think, plain, if we compare what Philo says of the two Powers of God, [ De
Plant. Noae. p. 172.] (whereof as we showed before he has one on each side of
himself) with what we read, of the two Hands of God, in Jonathan and the
Jerusalem Targum on Ex. xv. 17. The like expressions are to be found in other
places, too many to be here collected; but we shall consider them afterward.

The mean while, we cannot but take notice, how that Doctrine of the Trinity
past current among the Jews of the ancient Synagogue, though they were as
zealous Asserters of the Unity of the Godhead as our Socinians can pretend to
be at this day. No doubt the ancient Jews could have found as many
Contradictions in these two Doctrines of Trinity and Unity, as the Socinians
do, if they had not been more disposed to study how to reconcile them together,
being satisfied that both these Doctrines were part of the Revelation which God
had made to their Fathers.

We cannot say so altogether of the Modern Jews, who are very much alienated
from the Doctrine of the Trinity, by seeing much clearer Revelations of it in
the New Testament, and especially since they are treated with disputes against
the Christians, that make Christ to be the Messiah, or second Person in the
Trinity, which they can by no means endure now to hear. This has set them to
hunt for ways to avoid the Evidence of these Texts that speak of a Plurality in
the Divine Nature, and in this pursuit they forsake their ancient Guides, and
strangely entangle themselves, and contradict one another.

Some of them flatly deny that any of those Plural words do denote any
Plurality in God, but say, they ought to be understood as if they were written
in the Singular.

Others confess, that truly they do denote a Plurality. But that Plurality
consists of God and his Angels, whom he joins with himself as his Counselors.
Ask but what instance they have in Scripture of such a strange way of speaking,
which makes God and his Angels as it were Fellows and Companions, they
presently alledg that one passage of Dan. iv. 17. This matter is by the decree
of the Watchers, and the Demand of the Holy Ones. Now these Watchers, and these
Holy Ones, say they, are the Holy Angels. But admit they are Angels, all that
is said of them in this Text, will not prove what they infer from it. For, 1.
the thing that they would prove is false and contrary to Scripture, Es. xl. 13.
which expressly denies, that God has any Companions or Counselors, as has been
already shown.

2. The nature, of the Works consulted on in those Texts to which they would
apply this, is such, as is infinitely above the power of any Creature, such as
the Creation of Man, and the confounding of Languages, etc.

3. In this very Text their most Learned Commentators R. Saadia Gaon, and Aben
Ezra, do not find any such Consultation of God with his Angels, as these Jews
imagine; they do indeed find that these Watchers and Holy Ones, are the Holy
Angels; but they say for the Decree (...), they pronounce it from the mouth of
God, and it is called their Decree, because they are the Ministers of God to do
whatever he commands them. Thus Jer. i. 10. that Prophet is said to be set over
Nations and Kingdoms to destroy and to throw down, to build and to plant; not
that God shared that power with his Prophet, or took him into Council for such
things, but only that he by the appointment of God, as his Minister, was to
declare the Sentence and Judgment of God for the doing of such things.

4. This appears in the very Decree here spoken of, which concerns a revolution
in a great Empire: But the disposal of Kingdoms is that which properly belongs
to the Eternal Wisdom of God, as Solomon declares, Prove. viii. 15, 16. and not
to Angels any farther, than they are employed by God for the publishing, or for
the executing of his Sentence.

But after all this, though I have admitted it that the Angels are here called
Watchers, and Holy Ones, yet I am rather of opinion that these words do not
signify Angels, but the three Persons in the Trinity. My reason is, because
however that Notion of (...), being Angels has obtained among the Jews, I do
not find them called so any where in the Old Testament Scriptures. But God is
often said to watch over his People, Genesis xxxi. 49. Psalm. vii. 6. and cxxvii.
1. Jer. xxxi. 28. and xliv. 27. and even by this Prophet, Dan. ix. 14. And for
the other word that is here joined with the Watchers, viz. the Holy Ones,
however this may be used of Angels elsewhere, yet here it is certainly used of
God in this Chapter, v. 8, 9, 18. and that in the Plural, as it is in Josh.
xxiv. 19. and yet as there in Joshua the Holy Gods in the Plural are the same
with the Jehovah in the Singular Number; so here the Watchers and the Holy Ones
in the Plural are the same with the Watcher and Holy One in the Singular, v.
13. and the Decree of the Watchers and Holy Ones in this verse, is called the
Decree of the Most High, v. 24. and it is he whom Nebuchadnezzar glorifies as
the sole Author of his abasement, and also of his restoration. I hope the
Reader will easily pardon this digression, if he thinks it is one: It seemed
necessary that I should consider this Text at large, because it is as far as I
know, the only place in Scripture which is brought by the Jews to color that
Interpretation with which they think to elude the force of our Arguments.

After all that I have alleged from Philo, and the Paraphrases, I do not
pretend to affirm that they had as distinct Notions of the Trinity as we have;
nor do I deny but that sometimes they put a different construction on the Texts
which we have cited in proof of this Mystery; Nay, I own that their Ideas are
often confused when they speak of these things, and particularly they refer
sometimes that to the second Person which should be ascribed to the third, and
that to the third which properly belongs to the second; Nay, more, I acknowledge
that Philo by the Spirit, Genesis i. 2. understands the Wind, [ de Gig. p. 223.]
which is something strange; seeing the Greek Interpreters whom he followed read
(...), i. e. the Spirit of God, and not simply the Spirit, which might have
stood for Wind here, as it does in some places of the Old Testament.

But Philo's Error is easily accounted for; He fell into it by endeavoring to
accommodate Moses his Notions to the Notions of the Philosophy, that makes four
Elements of all things. And probably for such a reason some of the Targums
might come into the same Interpretation. But for the other ancient Jews they
expounded this Spirit, not by Wind, but by that Spirit which was to rest on the
Messiah in Isaiah's Language, Isa. xi. 1. See Bresh. Rabba in Genesis i. 2. And
truly Rashi on these words affirms, that the Throne of Glory was in the Air,
and that it warmed the Heavens by the Spirit of the Goodness of God blessed for
ever. Where by the way the Spirit of Goodness is the same with the latter of
Philo's two Powers above mentioned. De Sacr. Ab. 108.

Those among the Jews who take the Spirit of God for the Will of God, as R.
Abr. does in Tzeror hammor, and some mentioned in the Book Cozri, [p. 5. p.
329.] are not far from this Opinion: And this is the sense Maimonides gives to
those words, The Spirit of the Lord, in explaining of Isa. xl. 13. [ Mor. Neb.
i. 40.] It appears from Psalm. xxxiii. 6. That the Hosts of Heaven were made by
the Spirit of his mouth; words which no Jew has yet interpreted of the Wind.

I know Philo expresses his thoughts obscurely, speaking of the two Powers of
God, [ de Cherub. p. 86.] he says, that the Word joins these two Powers, which
he afterward calls his Principality and his Goodness.

But this can raise no prejudice against our Position. It shows indeed that our
Author, who had gathered his Notions, as other Jews did, from reading the Books
of the Old Testament, together with their Traditional Interpretations, was not
so much a Master of them, as to make them always consist with one another.
Others perhaps will say, he was not always constant to himself; nor am I
concerned to have it granted that he was so. We look not on him, nor any of
these Writers to be inspired; but esteem them only as Eminent Divines of the
old Jewish Church, and consequently as subject to several weaknesses and
oversights, which are common to the greatest as well as to the meanest men.
Even the most Learned Men in all Ages, though they agree in the truth of
certain Doctrines, are yet often divided in their ways of expressing them; and
also in their grounding them on this or that place of Scripture.

For the Jews since Christ's time, we are less concerned what they say, because
when they had once rejected their Messiah the Lord Jesus Christ, they soon
found that if they stood to their Traditional Expositions of Scripture, it
could not be denied, but he whom they had rejected was the Word the Son of God,
whom their Fathers expected to come in our Flesh; but rather than yield to
that, they would alter their Creed, and either wholly throw out the Word the
Son of God, or bring him down to the state of a created Angel, as we see some
of them do now in their ordinary Comments on Scripture. And so they deal with
the Shekinah likewise, confounding the Master with the Servant, as we see that
some few perhaps one or two Cabalists have done in their Books.

In consequence of this alteration, they are forced to acknowledge, the
Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, worshipped a created Angel; and have left
themselves no way to excuse them from Idolatry therein, but by corrupting their
Doctrine concerning Religious Worship, and teaching that it is lawful to pray
to these Ministering Spirits, which is effectually the setting up of other Gods,
plainly contrary to the first Commandment of their Law. Some of themselves are
so sensible of this, that they cannot deny it to be Idolatry. Which is
certainly the more inexcusable in the Jews, because on other occasions they
constantly affirm, that when God charged the Angels with the care of other
Nations, he reserved to himself the sole Government of his people Israel, Deuteronomy.
xxxii. 8, 9. And therefore it must be a grievous sin in them to worship Angels,
howsoever they should imagine it might be permitted to other Nations.

After all this they have not been able so totally to suppress the ancient
Tradition, but that in their Writers since Christ's time there appear some
footsteps of it still: And that it is so I am next to show, that
notwithstanding their aversness to the Christian Doctrine, they yet have a
Notion distinct enough both of a Plurality and Trinity in the Divine Nature,
which will be the whole business of my next Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
That this Notion of a Trinity in the Divine Nature has continued among the
Jews, since the time of our Lord Jesus Christ.
TO begin with the Jewish Authors who have writ Medrashim, that is, a sort of
Allegorical Commentaries upon Scripture, and the Cabalistical Jews, whom their
people look upon as the wisest Men of their Nation, viz. those that know the
truth more than all others, among them this truth passes for undoubted.

I know very well that the method of those Cabalistical Men, who seek for
Mysteries almost in every Letter of the words of Scripture, has made them
justly ridiculous. And indeed one cannot imagine an occupation more vain or
useless, than the prodigious labor which they undergo in their way of
Gematria, Notarikon, and Tsirouph.

But besides that Vice is not so general among the Jews, I am fully resolved to
lay aside in this Controversy all such remarks; my design being only to show
that the ancient Tradition has been kept among those Authors, who have their
Name from their firm adherence to the Tradition of their Forefathers.

So I am not willing to deny that some of the Books of those Cabalistical
Authors, which the Jews, who are not great Critics, look upon as very ancient,
are not as to all their parts of such an antiquity as the Jews suppose them to
be. But I take notice that those who attack the antiquity of those Books are
not aware that notwithstanding some additions, which are in those Books, as for
example in the Zohar, and in the Rabboth, the very Doctrine of the Synagogue is
to be found there, and the same as it is represented to us by the Apocryphal
Authors, by Philo, or those who had occasion to mention the Doctrine of the
Jews.

After all, let us suppose that almost all those Books have been written since
the Talmud, and that the Talmud was written since the beginning of the seventh
Century, that could not be a prejudice against the Doctrine which the Jews
propose as the ancient Doctrine of the Synagogue; But to the contrary it would
be a strong proof of the constancy of those Authors in keeping the Tradition of
their Ancestors in so strange a dispersion, and among so many Nations; chiefly
since in the Articles, upon which I shall quote their Authorities, they so
exactly follow the steps of the Authors of the Apocryphal Books of Philo the
Jew, and of their ancient Paraphrast, who had more penetrated into the sense of
Scripture.

I say then, that both the Authors of the Midrashim and the Cabalistical
Authors agree exactly in this, that they acknowledge a Plurality in the Divine
Essence, and that they reduce such a Plurality to three Persons, as we do.

To prove such an assertion, I take notice first, That the Jews do judge as we
do, that the word Elohim, which is Plural, expresses a Plurality. Their
ordinary remark upon that word is this, that Elohim is as if one did read, El
hem, that is, They are God. Bachaje a famous Commentator of the Pentateuch, who
brings in his work all the senses of the four sorts of Interpreters among the
Jews, speaks to this purpose upon the Parascha Breschit. fol. 2. col. 3.

2ly. It is certain that they make use of the word (...), to express those
Persons, as they use to express the two first human Persons, viz. Adam and Eve.
Thus speaks of them the same Bachaje, Ibid. fol. 13. col. 2.

3ly. They fix the number of three Persons in the Divine Essence,
distinguishing their Personal Characters and Actions, which serve to make them
known.

4ly. They speak of the emanation of the two last from the first, and that the
last proceeds by the second.

5ly. They declare that this Doctrine contains a Mystery that is
incomprehensible, and above human reason, and that in such an unsearchable
secret we must acquiesce with the Authority of the Divine Revelation.

6ly. They ground this Doctrine upon the very same Texts of Scripture, which we
alledg to prove the several Positions of ours, which deserves a great deal of
consideration.

And indeed those things being so, we must necessarily conclude, either that
they mock their Readers, or that they do not understand what they say, or one
must acknowledge that the consequences and conclusions, which Christians draw
from the Scriptures to this subject of Trinity, are not so easy to be avoided
as the Socinians believe.

Let the Reader reflect upon each of those Articles, while I shall bring him
witnesses to establish them.

I know that they pretend commonly the name of Elohim, which is Plural, is
given to God to express his several Virtues: But beyond that, they maintain
that Scripture has affected this style of Plurality because of those two, the
Cochma or Wisdom, and the Bina or understanding which are spoken Prove. 3.19.
where Solomon reflects upon the Author of the Creation, and they alledg upon
this Subject, the place of Ecclesiastes, chapter xii. 1. where Creators are
mentioned. Bachaje in Pentat. fol. 4. col. 2. and col. 4. and R. Joseph de
Karnitol in Saare Tsedec. fol. 7. col. 2.

As they study in a special manner the History of the Creation, and consider
very nicely every expression thereof, they take notice that the Jerusalem
Targum has translated those words in the beginning, Bereshit, God created
Heaven and Earth; by these, God created by his Wisdom, which is called the
beginning, Prove. viii. and so that Onkelos has not translated the word
Bereschit, by the word Kadmita, which signifies the beginning of time; but by
the word Bekadmin, which signifies the ancient or the first, which is the Title
they give to Wisdom, according to the same place of Solomon, which I have
quoted. This is the Notion of the Book Habbahir, of the Zohar, of the Rabboth,
whose words are related at large by R. Menachem de Rekanati in Pentat. fol. 1.
col. 1, and 2. of the Venice Edit. by Bombergue.

They maintain the Wisdom which is spoken of by Solomon to be the cause by
which all particular Beings have been formed, and they call it the second
number, which proceeds from the first, as from his spring, and brings from it
the influx of all blessings. This is the Doctrine of R. Nechouniah ben Cana,
and of the Author of Rabboth, which R. Menachem quotes at large, Ibid. fol. 1.
col. 1.

They teach that because God has created by his Wisdom, as the Soul acts by
her Body, they cannot say there was not an absolute and perfect unity in the
work of the Creation. This is the Doctrine of the Zohar, followed by R.
Menachem de Rekanat. Ibid. col. 2.

And indeed they acknowledge not only that Wisdom to have been the efficient
cause of the Word, but they acknowledge also the Bina, as such an efficient
cause with God; from hence they pretend that God has founded the World by his
two Hands, as it is said by Isa. chapter xlviii. 13. so Bachaje in Genesis fol. 3.
col. 2.

And this Notion agrees exactly with what is said by Moses that the Spirit of
God moved it self upon the face of the Abyss. For it was not of a created wind,
but of a Divine and Increated Being which Moses speaks there, and which is
spoken of by David, Psalm. xxxiii. 6. as it is acknowledged by Leo Hebraeus
Dial. de Amore, and by Menasseh ben Israel Council. in Genesis Q. 2.. 7. and by
many others.

It is to be noted, as the first Christians make use of the word Number, when
they speak of the Divine Wisdom, acknowledging that it differs in Number, but
not in Substance from the Eternal Father; So Justin does against Tryphon; and
do acknowledge some degrees between the Three Persons: So does Tertullian in
some places; and afterward they have made use of the word Person: So the
Ancient Jews have among them the same Terms, which shows they had the same
Ideas: They speak of the Sephiroth, that is, of the Numbers in the Godhead;
they speak of the several Madregoth, which is Degrees; they speak of Prosopin,
which is Persons, as I have shown before.

They cannot express their mind more distinctly, than when they distinguish, 1.
He and Thou, which is the Characteristical distinction of Persons, and when
they apply these Pronouns to the Persons which they conceive in the Godhead: So
they say that Thou belongs to Wisdom, and He to the God which is absconded. R.
Menach. Ibid. fol. 22. col. 2. and fol. 45. col. 1.

They give to them their Characteristical Names; so they make the name Anochi
to belong to God absconded; they refer the name of any to the Shekinah or
Memra, which is the same to them, as I shall show afterward. See R. Menach. in
Pent. fol. 149. col. 4.

They refer to these Persons the Consultations and Speeches of God, as directed
to many; as, Let us make man, which contains a deep Mystery, as says Bachaje;
(but which others would elude, by maintaining that God speaks to Angels): So
does R. Menach. de Rek. fol. 35. col. 4. So they conceive that when it is said
in Scripture that God speaks with his Heart, then God speaks with his Shekinah:
It Is their Remark upon Genesis xi. Let us come down. R. Men. fol. 27. col. 2. and
fol. 28. col. 2. So they acknowledge distinctly in these words, Genesis xix. 24.
And Jehovah rained upon Sodom from Jehovah; that those Two Jehovah are Two
Persons, which they call expressly Two Prosopin. R. Menach. fol. 11. col. 1. and
fol. 63. col. 4. So in the History of the Tower of Babel. Ibid. fol. 28. col. 3.

They distinguish exactly the Characteristical Actions which belong to these
Persons. So they attribute to the God absconded, to have acted in the Creation
by his Wisdom, and by his Understanding. R. Menach. fol. 1. from Breschit
Rabba; and that according to Solomon, Prove. iii. and to David, Psalm. xxxiii. 6.

They say that this Wisdom is called the Beginning, although she is but the
second Sephira, because beyond her they can know nothing, the first Sephira
being unknown to all Creatures. It Is the Doctrine of the Book Jetzira, and of
the Zohar related by R. Men. fol. 1. col. 3. They maintain that it is the
Shekinah or Wisdom which rules the World, according to Solomon's words, Prove.
viii. R. Men. fol. 35. col. 1.

I shall show in one of the next Chapters, that they refer to the Shekinah or
Memra, almost all the Appearances of God which are mentioned in Scripture,
according to the Ideas of the Targum. That can be seen in the Comments of
Ramban and of Bachaje upon the Pentateuch. I quote here only R. Menachem,
because he brings the very Words of the Authors who lived before him; so that
his Authority is not alone, but upheld by the Consent of old Authors.

Now he and his Authors teach constantly, That 'twas the Shekinah which
appeared to Adam after his Sin, and made him some Clothes, fol. 59. col. 4.
That it appeared to Abraham, fol. 35. col. 2. That it appeared to Jacob at
Night, fol. 36. col. 2. And to the same upon the Ladder, fol. 41, and 42. That
it appeared to Moses, Exodus iii. fol. 55. col. 2. And to the People upon Mount
Sina, fol. 56. col. 2. That it spoke to Moses, and gave the Law to the People,
fol. 57. col. 2, and 3. fol. 58. col. 1. and fol. 84. col. 1. and col. 2.

There are many other special Acts which they refer constantly to the Memra or
Shekinah; as you may see in the same Comment of Menachem. I shall only point at
some of them; not to enlarge too much in this Chapter.

So they give to the Shekinah the Character of Ruler and Conducter of the
Animals of Glory, who receive their Virtue from the Shekinah, and live by his
Glory, fol. 65. col. 2. and fol. 66. col. 4. According as we read in Ezekiel. i.
13. So R. Menachem, following the Zohar, fol. 5. col. 3. and fol. 8. col. 1.

They call the Shekinah the Adam of above, after whose Image Adam was created:
And they give to him the Titles of Exalted and Blessed, which they give only to
the True God, R. Men. fol. 14. col. 3. They say, That 'twas he to whom Noah
offered his Sacrifice, Ibid. fol. 27. col. 1. and fol. 34. col. 4.

They pretend that the Shekinah is the Bridegroom of the Synagogue, according
to the Idea of God by Isaiah lxii. 3. R. Men. fol. 15. col. 1. And that God
having committed to Angels the Care of other Nations, the Shekinah alone was
entrusted with the Care and Conduct of Israel, fol. 28. col. 3. and fol. 153.
col. 2.

They pretend that he has been in Captivity with their Fathers, R. Men. fol.
17. col. 2. and col. 4. and fol. 51. col. 2. That he has smote the Egyptians,
fol. 56. col. 4. without the help of Angels, although the Angels attended him
as their King, fol. 59. col. 1. and col. 2. and fol. 61. col. 3.

They pretend that the Temple was built to the Honor of the Shekinah, fol. 63.
col. 1. and fol. 70. col. 2. And that it was to him, and not to the Ark, that
the Levites said, Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, Thou and the Ark of thy
strength, Psalm. cxxxii. 8. fol. 121. col. 4.

In a word, they look upon the Shekinah as the Living God, fol. 2. col. 1. The
God of Jacob, R. Men. fol. 38. col. 3. And they acknowledge him to be that very
Angel whom Jacob looks upon as his Redeemer, his Shepherd, and whom the
Prophets call the Angel of the Presence, and the Angel of the Covenant, Ibid.
fol. 73. col. 1. and fol. 83. col. 4.

They are no less positive, when they speak of the Third Sephira, which they
call Binah, and which we take justly to be the Holy Ghost. For they teach that
it proceeds from the First by the Second; and who can conceive that the Spirit
of God is not God? And it is also the Doctrine of the Zohar, and of the Book
Habbahir, related by R. Menachem, fol. 1. col. 3. The very Book of Zohar says,
That the word Jehovah expresses both the Wisdom and the Binah, and calls them
Father and Mother, R. Men. fol. 3. col. 3. and fol. 10. col. 4.

This Idea is grounded upon what is said, Thou art our Father, which they refer
to the Shekinah, fol. 22. col. 2. and col. 3. And they call her upon that
account the Mother of Israel, and her Tutor, R. Men. fol. 62. col. 3. fol. 64.
col. 4. That Idea of the Holy Ghost as a Mother, which R. Menachem has, fol.
114. col. 2. is so ancient among the Jews, that St. Jerome witnesses that it was
the name which the Nazarenes gave to the Holy Ghost, Hicronym. in Ezekiel. xvi. in
Isa. viii. and in Matthew. xiii.

They speak of the Spirit as of a Person, when they look upon a Man as a
Prophet, who is sent by God, and by his Spirit, Isa. chap. xlviii. R. Menach.
fol. 34. col. 2. and fol. 56. col. 1. And by whom the Holy Ghost has spoken;
fol. 122. col. 2. And who for that reason is called the mouth of God, fol. 127.
col. 4. (Which is now turned by some other Jews, as signifying only a Created
Angel; as you see in Bachaje, at the end of the Parasha Breschith, fol. 18.
col. 1.) So they speak of the Holy Ghost as being the mouth of God, fol. 127.
col. 4. And that the Angels have been created by the Mouth of God, fol. 143.
col. 3.

I acknowledge that sometimes some of them seem to take the Shekinah for the
Holy Ghost, and the Holy Ghost for the Shekinah, although they commonly call
one the Second Sephira, and the other the Third, viz. the Binah, that is to be
seen in R. Men. fol. 80. col. 2. So some of them refer to the Binah the Title
of King of Israel, which occurs so often in Scripture: See Men. fol. 132. col.
3. Although it is the common Name of the Shekinah, fol. 113. col. 1. Some other
refer to the Shekinah the Name of the Spirit of God, which is mentioned Genesis i.
1. So says the Author of the Book Jetzira, in R. Menachem, fol. 3. col. 2.

But if some are mistaken in their Ideas, I can say that they are very few, and
almost not worth taking notice of. And indeed if we consider a little what is
the general Sense of those Authors about the Emanations which are spoken of in
Scripture, as by which the Divine Nature is communicated to the (...) or
Shekinah, and to the Holy Ghost, we shall know evidently that they had as
distinct a Notion of a true Trinity, as they have of the Plurality of Persons
in the Unity of the Divine Essence.

And first the Author of the Zohar, and the Author of the Book Habbahir,
pronounce that the Third Sephira proceeds from the First by the Second; and R.
Men. follows their Doctrine, fol. 1. col. 3.

2dly. They attribute equally the Name of Jehovah to the Second and the Third
Sep^^^a, viz. the Wisdom, and the Binah, or Understanding. So does the Zohar in
R. Men. fol. 3. col. 3. and fol. 10. col. 4.

3dly. They propose the manner in which Eve was Taken from Adam, as an Image of
the manner of Emanation of the Wisdom from the En soph, that is, Infinite, Ib.
fol. 105. col. 3. and fol. 14. col. 1.

4thly. They propose the Image of the two Cherubims who were drawn from the
Ark, to give the Idea of the Two last Persons; for the distinction of the
Cherubims was evident, although there was an Unity of them with the Ark. So R.
Men. fol. 74. col. 3.

But we must add some of their Expressions upon this matter, so much
contradicted by the Socinians.

And first, R. Menachem, with the Jewish Authors suppose that not only the
Three Persons, which they call Sephiroth, are spoken of in the History of the
Creation, but that they are also expressed in the first Command of the Law. See
him, fol. 66. col. 3. and fol. 68. col. 1.

2dly. They acknowledge those Three Sephiroth, and attribute to every one his
Operations, Ibid. fol. 139. col. 4.

3dly. The Author of Zohar is a Voucher of great Authority; and he cites these
words of R. Jose (a famous Jew of the second Century), where examining the
Text, Deuteronomy. iv. 7. Who have their Gods so near to them? What, says he, may be
the meaning of this? It seems that Moses should have said, Who have God so near
them? But (says he) there is a Superior God, and there is the God who was the
Fear of Isaac, and there is an Inferior God; and therefore Moses says, The
Gods so near. For there are many Virtues that come from the only One, and all
they are one.

See how the same Author supposes that there are Three Degrees in the Godhead,
in Levit. col. 116. Come and see the Mystery in the word Elohim, viz. There are
Three degrees, and every degree is distinct by himself; and notwithstanding,
they are all One, and tied in One, and one is not separated from the other. And
again, in Exodus col. 75. Upon the words of Deuteronomy vi. 4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord
our God is one Lord; they must know that those Three (viz. (...)) are One unum;
and that is a Secret which we learn in the Mystery of the Voice which is heard:
The Voice is One unum, but it contains Three Modes, viz. the Fire, the Air, and
the Water. Now these Three are One in the Mystery of the Voice, and they are
but One unum. So in this place, Jehovah, our Lord, Jehovah, are one unum.

You have this Remark of the same Author in Genesis fol. 54. col 2. de Litera,
That the Three Branches of that Letter denote the Heavenly Fathers, who are
there named Jehovah, our Lord, Jehovah.

R. Hay Hagahon, who lived Seven hundred Years ago, said there are Three Lights
in God; the Ancient Light, or Kadmon; the Pure Light, or (...); the Purified
Light, or (...); and that these make but One God: And that there is neither
Plurality nor Polytheism in this. The same Idea is followed by R. Shem Tov. in
his Book Emunoth, part. 4. cap. 8. p. 32. col. 2.

See again R. Hamay Hagaon in his Book (...) of Speculation cited by Reuchlin,
p. 651. Hi tres qui sunt unum inter se proportionem habent ut (...) unum uniens
and unitum. He said before (...) sunt principium and medium and finis, and haec
sunt unus punctus and est dominus universi.

R. Joseph ben Gekatilia, and the other Cabalists are in effect for three
Elohims when they treat of the three (...), or three first Sephiroth. For they
agree that the three first Sephiroth were never seen by any body, and that
there is no discord, no imperfection among them.

The Note of this R. Joseph Gekatilia is very remarkable. The Jews, says he,
have been under the severity of judgment, and shall continue so till the coming
of the Messiah, who shall be united (says he) with the second Sephirah, which
is Wisdom, according as it is written Isa. xi. 2. And the Spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom, etc. And he shall cause the Spirit
of Grace and Clemency to descend from the first Sephirah, who is called, (...)
the Infinite; and he follows in that Rabbi Solomon Jarchi, who says upon Isa.
xi. that the Cochma which is the second Sephira shall be in the middle of the
Messiah.

In a word this Notion of Plurality and Trinity expressed in the Writings of
Moses and the Prophets has not only been observed by the Jews, but they have
found and acknowledged it as well as the Christians to be a great and profound
mystery. And for the explaining of it the Jews have employed very near the same
Ideas that the Christians use in speaking of the three Persons of the Blessed
Trinity. For they conceive in God (...) Faces, and (...) Subsistences, which we
call Persons, as one may see in Sepher Jetzirah.

Moreover, we may observe, 1. That when they speak of the three first
Sephiroth, they understand the same thing by them, as we do by three
Personalities, three Modes of Existence, active or passive Emanations or
Processions, which are the foundation of the Personalities.

2ly. That though they hold ten Sephiroth in all, yet they make a great
difference between the three first Sephiroth, and the seven last. For they
regard the first as Persons, but the last as Attributes, according to which God
acts in the ordinary course of his Providence, or according to his several
dispensations toward his Creatures. Hence they call the seven last, Middoth,
or Measures, that is to say, the Attributes and Characters which are visible in
the Works of God, namely, his Justice and Mercy, etc. And this is confessed in
plain words by the great Cabalist R. Menachem de Rekanati: Tres primariae
numerationes, quae sunt intellectuales, non vocantur mensurae, i.e. they are
not Attributes, as are the seven last which he explains under that Notion.
Rittangel has already quoted that place in his Notes upon Sepher Jetzira, p.
193.

It may be objected, that the ancient Jews were ignorant of the Names of
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which Names the Christians give to the three
Persons in the Deity. But this, if it were true, would not weigh much with a
reasonable mind. For who can doubt but a new Revelation may distinguish those
Notions clearly by proper and suitable Names, which the Jews by what Revelation
they had, knew but more confusedly. And yet to remove the Objection wholly, it
is certain the ancient Cabalists were acquainted with the Names of Father, Son
and Holy Ghost.

They gave the Name of Father to the first of their Sephiroth, whom they called
En Soph, i. e. Infinite, to express his Incomprehensibility. This we have in
Zohar, from whence it is easy to conclude that they must own the Son also, the
Name of Father being relative to the Son. But further they knew that second
Person by the name Coema Wisdom, even that Wisdom by which the Word was
created, etc. according to Prove. 3.19. The Lord by Wisdom has founded the
Earth. This Notion was so ancient among the Jews, that the Jerusalem Targum
has rendered the first verse of Genesis thus, The Lord created by his Wisdom.
The Christians called him the Word, and Wisdom, alluding to diverse places,
especially Psalm. xxxiii. 6. and Prove. viii. 14. The Jews commonly call him
(...) the second Glory, and the Crown of the Creation. Rittanget. brings their
Authorities for this in Seph. Jetzira p. 4, and 5.

They knew the third Person by the name of Binah, or Intelligence, because they
thought it was he that gave Men the knowledge of what God was pleased to reveal
to them. In particular, they called him the Sanctifier, and the Father of
Faith: nor is any thing more common among them than to give him the name of the
Spirit of Holiness, or the Holy Spirit.

The same Doctrine is to be found in several other Books of the Cabalists which
are known to most Christians, because they are Printed; and the same thing is
to be found in their Manuscripts, which are more rare, because the Jews have
not yet Printed them. Of this sort is Iggereth Hassodoth, cited by Galatinus,
whose Authority is vindicated by Plantavitius Bibl. Rabb. p. 549. Of this sort
also is the Manuscript called Sod Mercava Eliona quoted by Ritt. p. 35. where
are mentioned the three Modes of Existence in God. Notwithstanding which they
are all unanimous, that the Lord is one, and his Name is one.

If you would know on what foundations it was that the Cabalists built this
Doctrine, you need but look over the Texts on which they have reflected, and
you will find them almost all the same with those that were quoted to the same
purpose by the Apostles and Apostolical Men in their Writings.

Particularly if you would know their opinion to whom it was that God did speak
at the Creation, Genesis i. 26. R. Juda will tell you God spoke to his Word.

If you would know of them who is the Spirit of whom we read, Genesis i. 2. that
he moved on the face of the Waters. Moses Botril will inform you, it is the
Holy Spirit.

If you would learn of them to whom it was that God spoke, Genesis i. 26. saying,
Let Us make Man. Moses Botril tells us that these words are directed to the
Wisdom of God.

If you would know what Spirit it was that is spoken of, Job xxviii. 12. Again
Moses Botril will tell you, it is the Holy Spirit.

If you would know of whom they understand those words in Psalm. xxxvi. 6. They
say plainly that they are spoken of that very Trinity.

If you would know what they think of that Wisdom, Psalm. civ. 24. R. Moses
Botril describes it to you as a Person, and not an Attribute.

If you would know to whom that is to be referred, which we read of, Isa. xl.
14. R. Abraham ben David will tell you, to the Three Sephiroth.

All this is to be found in their several Comments on the Book Jetzira, which
were printed at Mantua in the last Century, A. D. 1562. and 1592. and have been
quoted in Latin by Rittangelius.

But it may be said, That the Jews have adopted this Doctrine inconsiderately,
without reflecting upon the Absurdity of it. For how is it possible to conceive
such Emanations in God, who is Immutable and Eternal; and such an Idea of
Plurality and of Trinity in God, who is over and above all Ideas of Composition?

But I answer, 1. All these they have considered, and yet have owned this
Distinction in the Divine Essence, as a Truth not to be contested. But assert
these Three Sephiroth, which they call sometimes Spirits, to be Eternal and
Essential in God; which they say we ought not to deny, because we cannot easily
conceive it: For the Divine Nature is Incomprehensible, far exceeding the
Limits of our narrow Understandings: And the Revelation God has given us does
no more put us in a capacity to judge of the nature of the things revealed,
than the borrowed Light of the Moon, which is all that the Owls can behold,
does render them able to judge of the Sun's far more glorious Light. Such are
the Thoughts of R. Sabtay in Rit. on Jetz. p. 78, 79, 80. Such are the
Reflections of R. Menach. who cites Job xxviii. 7. to this purpose; and the
Caution of the Jewish Doctors, who forbid to undertake the Examination of
things that are incomprehensible.

2. They have expressed their Notions of this matter much after the same manner
as the Thomists have done theirs. The Book Jetzira, chap. 1. distinguishes in
God, Sopher, Sepher, and Sippour; which R. Abraham explaining, says they answer
to Him that understands, to the Act of Understanding, and to the Thing
understood.

All this is still the more remarkable, 1. Because the common Jews have well
nigh quite lost the Notion of the Messiah being God; and they generally expect
no other than a mere common Man for their Redeemer.

2. Because the main Body of the Jews are such zealous Asserters of the Unity
of God, that they repeat every day the words of Deuteronomy. vi. 4. The Lord our God
is One Lord. It is a Practice which though now they have turned against the
Christians, yet doubtless was taken up first in opposition to the Gentiles,
whose Polytheism was renounced in this short Confession of the Jewish Faith.
And hence it is that they do so much celebrate R. Akiba's Faith, who died in
Torments, with the last Syllables of the word Echad in his Mouth, which
signifies the Unity of God.

3. Because the Jews at the same time dispute against the Christians Doctrine
of the Trinity; as does R. Saadia, for instance, in his Book entitled Sepher
Emunah, chap. 2.

4. Because from the beginning of Christianity some Rabbis have applied
themselves to find out other Senses of those Passages which the Christians urge
against them. This we see in Gem. of Sanhedr. chap. 4. sect. 2.

And yet notwithstanding all this opposition, the Cabalists have past and do
still pass for Divines among the Jews, and the Targumists for Inspired Men.

Nor is it to be imagined that these Notions of the Cabalistical Jews are new
things, which they picked up since their more frequent Converse with the
Christians: For we find them in the Book Zohar, the Author of which is reputed
one of the chief Jewish Martyrs ( Jebhamoth, tr. 1. fol. 5. col. 2.), and to
have lived in the Second Century. I know some have suspected that this Book is
a counterfeit, and falsely fathered on R. Simeon, whose Name it bears. The Zohar
was not known, say they, till about the time of R. Moses Bar Nachman: So says
the Book Juchazin, p. 42. and R. D. Ganz in Tzemach David, p. 106. But we find
these Notions in the beginning of the Rabboth, which Books they will have to be
more Ancient than the Talmud. Furthermore, we see in the Gemara of Sabbath,
that R. Simeon was dispensed with the necessity of his being present at Prayers
in the Synagogue, because he and his Scholars were at work upon the Study of
the Laws; which supposes that he was writing some such Comments as we have now,
although it is probable that they have been increased in following Ages.
Besides, who can imagine that in all places the Jews should have adopted
Opinions unknown to their Religion, and in effect destructive of those Points
for which they then zealously contended, if they had not been convinced of the
Truth of such a Doctrine?

And now give me leave to propose one Argument to the Unitarians, which I
believe they will not be able to answer, and adhere to their new-advanced
Position, That the Nazarenes were the true Primitive Christians, and the only
Depositaries of the Apostolic Doctrine. It is a Passage taken from the Gospel
of the Nazarenes, as cited by St. Jerome on Ezekiel. xvi. Where after noting that
the word Ruach, Spirit, in the Hebrew Tongue is Feminine; he adds, In Evangelio
quoque Hebraeorum, quod lectitant Nazaraei, Salvator inducitur l^quens, Modo me
arripuit Matter mea, Spiritus Sanctus. This Passage of the Nazarene's Gospel
would never have been understood, if we had not known that the Jews call the
Holy Spirit Imma, Mother, as well as Binah, Understanding; as we see in Zohar
and other Cabalists. And perhaps from hence Philo de Temul. calls (...), the
Mother of the World.

Nor are we to fancy that the Talmudists oppose the Cabalists herein. No;
Maimonides, who is a Talmudist, agrees in this with the Cabalists; as appears
from his Book de fundament. legis, chapter 2. and Mor. Neb. p. 1. chapter 68.

Lastly, Nor is it to be urged against what I have said, that the Jews have
formal Disputes against the Doctrine of the Trinity, as Saadiah Sepher Emunoth,
chapter 2. and Maim. Mor. Neb. p. 1. c. 71. For we may remember, 1. That all their
Disputes with the Christians are built on this wrong bottom, That the
Christians are Tritheists, and deny the Unity of the Deity. 2. That almost all
those who dispute against the Christians on this Head, contradict themselves in
their Writings that are not Polemical, but are drawn up in cool Blood, out of
the heat of dispute; of which Saadiah Haggaen, as I have showed before, is a
Proof. 3. The Study of their Rites having been the great business of the Jews
for many Centuries, it has happened that their greatest Authors have applied
themselves but little to the Study of the Traditions concerning their
Doctrines. In Maimonides, one of the greatest Men the Jews ever had, we have a
plain Example of it: He tells us, That it was toward the declension of his
Life before he could turn himself to study their Traditions; and he laments his
Misfortune, in that he could not begin this Study sooner. This is related by R.
Elias Chaiim, who says he had it from a Letter of Maimonides to one of his
Scholars.

I have said before, that these Notions of the Cabalist Jews are received in
all parts of the World where the Jews are found in any numbers: And I say it
not without good reason: For 1. The Rabboth are Books received wherever there
are Jews: Now this Book begins with the Notion of a Second Person. 2. For the
Cabalists, they are dispersed with the other Jews; and in all places where
Learning is cultivated, and Study encouraged, there they are to be found. 3. We
may well infer the Universality of this Tradition, from the several different
Authors that have written alike on this Subject, without any Consent or
Communication together that we know of.

R. Saadiah Hagaon writ in Babylon in the Tenth Century. He was an Egyptian by
Birth, and the Translator of the Pentateuch into Arabic, and wrote a bitter
Book against the Christians (which has been printed at Thessalonica, and since
at Amsterdam) where he disputes against the Christians Trinity; yet he teaches
not only the Unity, but this distinction from everlasting in the Deity.

R. Moses Bar Nachman in the Thirteenth Century, and R. Judas the Levite writ
in Spain, and yet we see how they agree in their Notions with the Cabalists
which flourished other-where.

R. Aaron writ at Babylon, and yet his Notions are as exactly like those of
Spain, as if he had trod in their Steps.

R. Moses Botril writ in France, and he teaches the same things. He that would
see the Places at large, may consult their Comment on the Book Jetzira.

It is now time to return to the Judgment of the Ancient Synagogue, and to
consider how it agrees or differs with us in the other Matters we have in hand.

CHAP. XII.
That the Jews had a distinct Notion of the Word as of a Person and of a Divine
Person too.
A Great part of the Dispute we have with the Socinians, depending on the true
meaning of the first Chapter of St. John's Gospel, where the (...) is spoken
of, as being he that created the World, and was at length made Flesh, and whom
we Christians look upon as the promised Messiah, I think I cannot do the Truth a
greater service, than in clearing this Notion of the (...), and showing what
thoughts the ancient Jews had concerning it.

Socinus confesses that the (...) is a Person, for he owns that St. John did
describe the Man Christ Jesus by the (...), and attributed to him the Creation
of the Church, which is according to him the new World. But here in England the
followers of Socinus will not stand by this Exposition, but understand by the
(...) that virtue by which God created Heaven and Earth, as Moses relates, Genesis
i. They obstinately deny this Virtue to be a Person, i. e. an Intelligent
Subsistence, and rather look upon it as a Divine Attribute, which they say was
particularly discovered in the Mission of Jesus Christ for the Salvation of
Mankind.

It cannot be denied us that St. John being one of the Circumcision did write
with an especial respect to the Jews, that they might understand him, and
receive benefit by it; and therefore it cannot be doubted but that when he
called Jesus Christ the (...), he used a word that was commonly known among the
Jews of those times in which he lived.

Otherwise, if he had used this word in a sense not commonly known to the Jews,
he would have signified to them the new Idea he had affixed to it. But he gives
not the least intimation of any thing new in it, though he uses the word so
many times in the very beginning of his Gospel. It is certain therefore that he
used it in the sense wherein it was then commonly understood by the Jews.

Now the Idea the Jews had of the (...), was the same they had of a real and
proper Person, that is, a living, Intelligent, free Principle of Action. That
this was their Notion of the (...), or Word, we shall prove by the Works of
Philo and the Chaldee Paraphrases.

To begin with Philo, He conceives the Word to be a true and proper cause. For
he declares in about a hundred places, that God created the World by his Word.
He conceived the Word to be an Intelligent Cause. Because in him, according to
Philo, are the Original Ideas of all things that are expressed in the Works of
the Creation. De Opif. p. 3. G. and 4. C.D.


He makes the Word a Cooperator with God in the Creation of Man, and says that
God spoke those words to him, Let Us make Man, Genesis i. 26. It may be added,
that he calls the Word the Image of God, and makes Man the Image of this Image
Lib. Quis rer. Divin. Haer. p. 400. E. F.
.

These are some of the Characters that represent the Word as a true Person.

But there are others no less demonstrative of this Truth: As, 1. where Philo
asserts, that the (...) is begotten of God, Alleg. ii. p. 76. B. Which can
agree only to a Person. And, 2. where he proves that the Word acted and spoke
in all the Divine Appearances that are mentioned in the Old Testament, which
certainly supposes a Person. 3. Where he describes the Word as presiding over
the Empires of the World, and determining the Changes that befall them, Lib.
quod Deus sit Immutab. p. 248. D. 4ly. Where he brings in the Word for a
Mediator between God and Men, Quis rer. Div. haer. p. 393. that renders God
propitious to his Creatures, de Somn. p, 447. E. F. That is, the Instructor of
Men, Ib. p. 448. and their Shepherd, alluding to Psalm. xxiii. 1.

The Chaldee Paraphrases are full of Notions and Expressions relating to the
Word, conformable to those of Philo touching the (...). So that he must wink
hard who does not see that in their sense the word is truly a Person.

And, 1. they almost always distinguish the Memra, or Word of the Lord, which
answers to Philo's (...), from the word Pithgama, which signifies a Matter or a
Discourse, as (...) does in Greek.

2. They ascribe the Creation of the World to the Word.

3. They make it the Word that appeared to the Ancients under the name of the
Angel of the Lord.

4. The Word that saved Noah in the time of the Flood, and made a Covenant with
him. Onkelos on Genesis vii, and viii

5. They say that Abraham believed in the Word, which thing was imputed to him
for Righteousness. Onkel, on Genesis xv. 6.

6. That the Word brought Abraham out of Chaldea, Onk. on Genesis xv. 7. and
commanded him to Sacrifice, Genesis xv. 9. and gave him the Prophecy, related v.
13.

7. That Abraham swore by the Word, Onk. on Genesis xxi. 23.

8. That the Word succored Ishmael, Genesis xxi. 21. and Joseph in his Bondage,
Genesis xxxix. 2, 3.

The like Notions has Onkelos in his Targum on Exodus.

1. It is the Word's assistance, that God promises Moses, Exodus iii. 12. iv.
12. xviii. 19.

2. It is the Word in whom Israel believed, as well as in Moses, Exodus xiv. 32.

3. It is the Word that redeems Israel out of Egypt, Exodus xv. 2.

4. It is the Word against whom Israel murmured in Sin, Exodus xvi. 8.

5. It is the Word before whom the People marched to receive the Law, Exodus
xix. 17.

6. It is the Word whose Presence is promised in the Tabernacle, Exodus xxx. 6.
xxxvi. 42. which is repeated Numb. viii. 29.

7. It is the Word between whom and Israel the Sabbath is made a Sign, Exodus
xxxi. 13, 17. and so Lev. xxxvi. 46.

8. It is the Word whose Protection was promised Moses when he desired to see
God, Exodus xxxiv. 22.

Much the same has Onkelos on Leviticus and Numbers.

1. It is the Word whose Commandments the Israelites were to observe carefully,
Lev. viii. 35. xviii. 30. xxii. 9. Numb. ix. 19. xx. 23.

2. It is spoken of the Word, that he will not forsake the People, if they
continue in their Obedience, Lev. xxviii. 11.

3. By the Word God regards his People, Ib.

4. The Majesty of the Word did rest among the Israelites, Numb. xi. 20.

5. It is the Word whom Moses exhorts the Jews not to rebel against, Numb.
xiv. 9. xx. 24.

6. They believed in the Word, Number. xiv. 11. xx. 12

7. The Word meets Balaam, Numb. xxiii. and opens his Eyes, xxii. 31.

The same things, or the like, we find in Onkelos on Deuteronomy.

1. The Word brought Israel out of Egypt, and fought for them, Deuteronomy. i. 30.
iii. 22. viii. 2. xx. 1.

2. The Word led Israel in the Pillar of a Cloud, Chapter i. 32.

3. The Word spoke out of the fire at Horeb, V. 34, 36. Moses was Mediator
between the Word and his People, V. 5.

5. Moses Exhorts the Jews to obey the Word, xiv. 18. xv. 5. xxvii. 14. xxviii.
1, 3, 15, 45, 62. xxx. 8, 19, 20.

6. The Word conducts Israel under Joshua to the Land of Canaan, xxxi. 6, 8.

7. The Word created the World, Chap. xxxiii. 27.

So agreeable, as you see, are the Notions of Onkelos, to those of Philo,
though the one writ in Egypt, the other in Palestine, and both before the time
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But besides Onkelos on the Pentateuch, we have two other Paraphrases, the one
which is very diffuse is said to be Jonathan's, the other which is called the
Jerusalem Targum, and is short, and as it seems imperfect. The Reader may soon
judge by comparing them, whether they differ from Philo and Onkelos, or no.

The Jerusalem Targum says, That God Created the World by his Wisdom, which he
grounds on the word Bereshith, Genesis i. 1. And Philo means the same things, when
he calls the (...), the first Emanation, de Confus. Ling. p. 267. B.

The same Targum says, the Word made Man after his Image, Genesis i. 27.

Jonathan's affirms the Garden of Eden was planted by the Word for the Just
before the Creation of the World, Genesis ii. 8.

And both Jonathan's and the Jerusalem Targum say, the Word spoke to Adam in
the Garden, Genesis iii. 9. the Word lifted up Enoch to Heaven, Genesis v. 24.

Jonathan's affirms that the Word protected Noah, and shut the Door of the Ark
upon him, Genesis vii. 16.

That the Word threw down the Tower at Babel, Genesis xi. 6.

And both have it, That God promised Abraham that his Word should protect him,
Genesis xv. 1.

Jonathan's makes it the Word that plagued Pharaoh for Abraham's sake, Genesis
xii. 17.

The Jerusalem Targum says, it was the Word that appeared to Abraham at the
Door of the Tent, Genesis xviii. 1. And that the Word rained Fire from before the
Lord, Genesis xix. 24.

And both that Targum and Jonathan's say, That Abraham taught his People to
hope in the Name of the Word of the Lord, Genesis xxi. 33.

The Jerusalem Targum makes Abraham say, The Word of the Lord will prepare a
Sacrifice, Genesis xxii. 8. And asserts that Abraham invoked the Word, and called
him Lord in his Prayer, Genesis xxii. 14.

Jonathan's Targum brings in Abraham swearing by the Word of the Lord, Genesis
xxiv. 3. And God promising his Word should succor Isaac, Genesis xxiii. 24, 28.
repeated Genesis xxxi. 3, 5, 42. xxxii. 9.

The same Targum says, That the Word of the Lord made Rachel bear a Child, Genesis
xxx. 22. Which is consonant to what Philo says, That the (...) caused Isaac to
be born, Alleg. l. 2. p. 77.

According to this Targum the Word sent Michael to save Thamar, Genesis xxxviii.
25. The Word went down with Jacob into Egypt, Genesis xlvi. 1, 2, 3, 4.

The Word succors Joseph, Genesis xlix. 25. Which Joseph acknowledges, Genesis l. 20.

We may trace the same Notions in their Targums on Exodus.

According to Jonathan's, The Word built Houses for the Midwives that feared
God, Exodus i. 21.

The Word caused that miraculous Heat which disposed Pharaoh's Daughter to go
and bathe her self in the Nile, Exodus ii. 5.

It was He that spoke, and the World was made, according to Jonathan's Targum;
or the Word of the Lord, according to the Jerusalem Targum, that spoke to
Moses, Exodus iii. Which clearly shows that they made use of the word Memra, to
express what is so often repeated, Genesis i. And God said.

It is the Word who, as God promised Moses, was to be his Mouth, Exodus iv. 12,
15.

According to the Jerusalem Targum, the Word appeared to Abraham by the Name of
the God of Heaven; and the Name of his Word was not declared to the Patriarchs,
Exodus vi. 3.

The Word of the Lord slew the Firstborn of Egypt, Exodus xii. 29.

The Word of the Lord has appeared on Three remarkable Occasions: First, At
the Creation of the World: Secondly, To Abraham: Thirdly, At Israel's departure
out of Egypt: And a Fourth time he shall appear at the coming of the Messiah.
Thus Jonathan, and Targ. Jerusalem, Exodus xii. 42.

The Word wrought Miracles by Moses, Exodus xiii. 8.

The Word raised up those Israelites which were killed by the Philistines, that
left Egypt Three Years before the Departure of their Brethren out of Egypt,
Exodus xiii. 17.

For the neglect of the Commands of the Word were the Israelites killed, Exodus
xiii. 17.

It is the Word that looked on the Host of the Egyptians, and to him the
Israelites cried, Exodus xiv. 24, 31.

It is the Word that gives the Law concerning the Sabbath, Exodus xvi. 25. and
he against whom Israel murmured, ver. 8.

The Israelites hear the voice of the Word, Exodus xix. 5. who speaks, v. 9. and
pronounces the Law, xx. 1. being the same that redeemed Israel from Egypt, Ib.
and Lev. i.

God promises to send his Word with his People, and Israel is strictly enjoined
to obey him, Exodus xxiii. 20, 21, 23.

The Word punishes Israel for the Golden Calf, Exodus xxxii. 35.

The Word talks with Moses in the Tabernacle, and the People worship him, Exodus
xxxiii. 9, 11. Lev. i.

It is the Word whose Appearance is promised Moses, Exodus xxxiii. 19. and the
Word is distinguished from the Angels that attend him, Exodus xxxiii. 23.

It is the Word to whom Moses prays, and who is called the Name of the Lord,
Exodus xxxiv. 5.

The Word makes Statutes, Lev. xxiv. 11. Numb. xxii. 18. according to the same
Jonathan.

It is the Word of whom the Jerusalem Targum understands what is spoken by
Jonathan of the Face of the Lord, Numb. ix. 8.

By the order of the Word of the Lord the Israelites Encamp, Numb. ix. 19, 23.

It is the Word to whom Prayer is made upon removing the Ark of the Covenant,
Numb. x. 35, 36.

The Word spoke to all the Prophets before Moses, Numb. xii. 6.

The Word gives Answer, Numb. xiv. 20.

The Word sent fiery Serpents, and those that were healed, were healed by the
Name of the Word of the Lord, Numb. xxi. 6, 9, 10.

It is before the Word that the Idolatrous Isralites were hanged, Numb. xxv. 4.

It is the Word that wrought Wonders in the Desert in behalf of Israel, Deuteronomy.
i. 1. iv. 34. vi. 22. and whom the Israelites provoked, Deuteronomy. i. 1.

The Word multiplied Israel, and fought for them, yet they believed not in him,
Deuteronomy. i. 10, 30, 32. and iii. 2. both in Jonathan, and the Jerusalem Targum.

The Word punished Israel for the Business of Peor, Deuteronomy. iv. 3.

The Word sits on a raised Throne, and hears the People's Prayers, and speaks
from the midst of the fire, and gives the Law, Deuteronomy. iv. 7, 12, 33. v. 23, 24,
25.

Moses is a Mediator between the Word and the People, Deuteronomy. v.

It is by the Name of the Word that Israel ought to swear, Deuteronomy. vi. 13.

The Word was to drive out the Nations before Israel, Deuteronomy. xi. 23.

The Word chose the Levites for his Service, Deuteronomy. xxi. 5. and the whole People
of Israel, Deuteronomy. xxvi. 18.

The Word protected Jacob from Laban, Deuteronomy. xxvi. 5.

The Word destroyed Sodom, Deuteronomy. xxix. 23.

The Word swear to the Patriarchs, Deuteronomy. xxxi. 7.

The Word shall Judge the People, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 36.

The Word says of himself, that he was, is, and is to come, v. 32, 39.

The Word takes Moses up to Mount Abarim; and Moses prays to him for a Sight of
the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 49.

The Word shows Moses the Generations of the Great Men of Israel, Deuteronomy. xxxiv.
1.

The Word said, he had sworn to give Israel the Land of Canaan, xxxiv. 4.

To conclude, Moses dies according to the decree of the Word of the Lord; that
is to say, the Word recalls his Soul with a Kiss; and with a huge Train of
Angels Inters his Body; being the same Word that had appeared to him, and sent
him into Egypt, and by so many Miracles redeemed Israel from thence, Deuteronomy.
xxxiv. 5, 6, 10, 11, 12.

There is no need of making any profound Reflections on these many places of
Philo, and the Chaldee Paraphrases, to convince the Reader, that the Jews
before Jesus Christ did regard the Word as a true and real Person. The
consequence is easily drawn by him that looks them over but with half an eye.

I know the word Memra in Hebrew is sometimes taken in another sense, as well
as that of (...) is in the Greek. But all the Personal Characters of Action, of
Commanding, of Speaking, of Answering, of giving Laws, of Issuing out Decrees,
of being prayed to, of receiving Worship, and the like, are so expressly given
that Word we now Treat of, as render it absurd to take it for any thing else
but a Person.

Let us next enquire into the Nature of this Person, according to the same
Testimonies of the ancient Jews, whether it be Angelical, or Divine, and
consequently whether this Person be truly God.

I propose this, not that I think there is any necessity of proving it after
all that I have already observed from the ancient Jews touching the Word; but
for the clearer manifestation of the absurdity into which our Adversaries fall,
in their striving to force another sense upon the word, as the more knowing Men
among them cannot but see, when they consider these Proofs with attention.

He who writ against Vechnerus Endeavors in general to persuade us, that in
those places of the Targums where the Memra is spoken of, it is used to express
the Divine Providence over the Faithful of ancient times; or else in particular
it signifies the Attributes of God, his Affections or Actions, his Miracles,
his Appearances, his Inspirations, and the like. This he repeats in several
parts of his dissertation, and at the end of his work he trys to apply it to
several Texts in the Targum.

One might reasonably doubt whether he himself were satisfied with his own
performance in this. I have two great reasons to think he was not. The first
is, that it seems he never consulted Philo's Notions of the (...) before he
made this Judgment, notwithstanding that he could not but see them in Grotius
on St. John's Gospel, which he quotes; and he could not but know how much they
were insisted upon by those Writers whom he pretended to answer. They do indeed
so distinctly and clearly establish the Personality of the (...), that they
render useless and unsuitable all the Interpretations he has found out for the
Texts in the Targums.

The second is, that he himself, though he fitted his Interpretations to diverse
passages in the Targum, thereby to break the force of them when turned against
him, is yet forced to acknowledge, that sometimes the word Memra signifies a
Person properly so called, according to our sense of it. The several places
where the Word is said to create the World, give him much trouble to elude
them. And though he endeavors to rid his hands of them, by asserting the Word
does there signify the Power of God; nevertheless he lets you understand that
if you are not pleased with that Solution, you may have his consent to take it
in the Arian sense of the word, for a created God, by whom, as by a real and
Instrumental cause, God did truly create the Universe.

This is the strangest answer that could be returned to so great an Objection.
For he must have lost his Reason, who imagins that God can make a Creature
capable of creating the Universe. Grant this, and by what Character will you
distinguish the Creature from the Creator? By what right then could God
appropriate, as he does very often in the Old Testament, the work of the
World's Creation to himself, excluding any other from having to do in it but
himself? Why should God upon this score forbid the giving worship to the
Creature which is due to the Creator? The Arians who worship Jesus Christ,
though they esteem him a Creature, and those Papists who swallow whole the
Doctrine of Transubstantion; they may teach in their Schools that a Creature
may be enabled by God to become a Creator. But for us, who deny that any thing
but God is to be adored, as Philo did before us, de Decal. p. 581. de Monarch.
p. 628. We reject all such vain conceits of a Creature being any way capable to
receive the Infinite Power of a Creator.

There are other places also which he found he could not easily evade, so at
length he consents that the Memra does often denote a Person in the Language of
the Targums; as where we read, the Word spoke, and the Word said. But what kind
of Person? An Angel, a Created Angel in his Judgment, that speaks in the Name
of God. And thus he thinks the Word is to be understood in those Paraphrases,
when they ascribe to the Word the leading of Israel through the Desert.

The Reader may judge how many Texts this Answer will fit, by reviewing what
has been said in the two foregoing Chapters. He will find I have there
prevented this Answer, and showed that Philo and the Targums did not take this
for a created Angel, but for a Divine Person; who was called an Angel in
respect of the Office he discharged according to the Economy between the three
Persons of the Blessed Trinity; and of whom the Targums generally make express
mention in places where the Hebrew Text has Jehovah Elohim, or the Angel of
the Lord; and sometimes where it has simply the Name Jehovah.

However, to leave no doubt in this matter, we will undertake to prove further,
that the Word does not signify a Created Angel in Philo, or in the Targums,
but a truly Divine Person.

It is true, that Philo sometimes calls the Angels (...) in the Plural. But
elsewhere he speaks of the (...) singularly in terms that express his
acknowledgment of him for the Creator of Angels, and consequently for God: This
he does in his Book de Sacrif. Abel. p. 202. where he declares him to be the
Word that appeared to Moses, and separates him from the Angels, which are the
Hosts of God.

Again, he describes the (...) under the Name of (...), as true God, as Creator
of the World, Lib. de Temulentia, p. 190. D. 194. B. But the Angels after
another manner, de Plant. Noae, p. 168. F. G. de Gigant. p. 221. E. de Mundo,
p. 391.

It is true, he calls the Word an Archangel, de Conf. Linguar. p. 267. B. But
in the same place he calls him the firstborn of God, the Image of God, the
Creator of the World, p. 258. A. And in another place, the Son of God, that
conducted Israel through the Wilderness, Quis rer. Divin. Haeres, p. 397. F.G.

He was so far from taking the Word to be an Angel, that he affirmed, the Word
used to appear to Men under the form of an Angel; thus says he, the Word
appeared to Jacob, de Somn. p. 465. D. And to Hagar, p. 466. B. We are to
observe this carefully, that we may make Philo agree with Philo. For one while
he says an Angel appeared to the Patriarchs, and another time he says the
(...) appeared to them; his design being to acquaint us that the (...) is named
an Angel, because he appeared as an Angel in these kinds of Manifestations of
himself.

Now as to the Targums, they likewise understand by this Angel a Person that is
truly God. For,

1. Could they ascribe the Creation of the World to the Word, as they do, and
yet think him to be a Creature? Could they profess him the Creator of Mankind,
without asserting his Divinity? Could they think him to be no better than an
Angel, and yet make him to be Worshipped by Men, whom they know to be little
lower than Angels? Could they imagine him to have given the Law on Mount Sinai,
and not reflect on the Preface of the Law; wherein the great Lawgiver says, I
am Jehovah, thy God that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt? The Word is not
so often called an Angel in the Targums, as he is set forth with these
Characters of God; as the Reader may see especially in Jonathan's Targum, and
in that of Jerusalem, Exodus iii. 14. xii. 42. and in many other places.

2. The Targums always distinguish the Word from the Angels; representing them
as Messengers employed by the Word, as the Word himself is often described as
God's Messenger. Thus the Targ. on 1 King. xix. 11, 12. on Psalm. lxviii. 13,
18. on 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 21.

They say the Word was attended with Angels, when he gave the Law, Targ. on 1 Chronicles. xxix. 11. and when he assisted at the Interment of Moses. Jonathan on
Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 6.

3. The Targums represent the Word, as sitting on a High Throne, and hearing
the Prayers of the People. Jon. on Deuteronomy. iv. 7.

4. Jonathan says expressly, that the Word that spoke to Moses, was the same
who spoke and the World was made, and who was God of Abraham, Exodus iii. 14,
15. vi. 4. So then if he who was the God of Abraham, was only an Angel that
Personated God, then he who created the World was a created Angel; which, as I
have showed, is absurd.

5. It is impossible to explain otherwise what the Jews so unanimously affirm,
that God revealed himself face to face to Moses; which is more than he granted
any Prophet besides, unless the Word that appeared to Moses was true God, and
not a mere Angel. See Onk. on Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 10, 11. and the other Targums.

But what? say they, may not an Angel bear the Name of God, when he sustains
the Person of God? was not the Ark called Jehovah, because it was a Symbol of
his Person?

Does not Jonathan on Numb. xi. 35, 36. say to the Ark, Revelare Sermo Domini
and redi? This is indeed a Notion which the Socinians have borrowed of Abenezra
on Exodus iii. and Joseph. Albo de fund. c. 8. And so they pretend that the
Pillar of Cloud is called the Lord, Exodus xiii. 21. xiv. 19. that the Ark is
called the Lord, Numb. x. 35. that the Angel is called the Lord, Judge. vi. 15.
The Name being given to the Symbol, viz. the Ark; and to the second Cause,
namely, the Angel; because of their representing God.

But to the great displeasure of our Modern Jews, and Socinians, that borrow
their Weapons, we have still enough of the ancient Jewish Pieces left, to show
their quite contrary Sentiments in these matters.

For, 1. they (as has been already observed) believed that the Angel spoken of
in Judge. vi. 15. was the Word; and that this Word created the World, as has
been largely proved.

2. Just the reverse of what our Moderns say, did the Ancients hold, as we
gather from Philo. For instead of an Angel's taking the place of God, he says,
the (...) took the place of an Angel. De Somn. p. 466.

As to the Ark, it is folly to imagine that because God promised to dwell and to
hear Prayers there, and enjoined Worship toward it, therefore the Ark was
called Jehovah. The ancient Jews spoke not to the Ark, but to God, who resided
between the Cherubims. This is plainly expressed in those words of Jonathan,
Numb. xi. 35, 36. Revelare Sermo Domini, etc. where the words are not addressed
to the Ark it self, but to him that promised to give them some Tokens of his
Presence; namely to the Word, who created the World, who redeemed Israel from
Egypt, who heard their Prayers over the Ark, and who had shut up therein the
Tables of the Law, which he had given them on Mount Sinai.

And thus the Targum on 1 Chronicles. xiii. 6. David and all Israel went up to
remove the Ark of the Lord, that dwells between the Cherubims, whose Name is
called on it; or as 2 Samuel vi. 2. Whose Name is called by the Name of the Lord
of Hosts, that dwells between the Cherubims. In short, the Scripture never
gives to any Place or Creature the Name Jehovah in the Nominative Case, either
singly, or joined with any other Noun in apposition: But either in an Oblique
Case, as (...), or with a Verb Substantive understood, as Jehovah Nissi,
Jehovah Shamma. What the Socinians have to say more against this, the Reader
may see fully answered by Buxt. Hist. of the Ark, c. 1. And the Reader shall
have a full Satisfaction upon it, out of the following Chapters.

It remains therefore certain, That the Word mentioned in Philo and the
Paraphrases, is not an Angel, but a Divine Person; (...), as Philo calls him
many times; and if the Expression be allowable, (...), as he speaks in Eusebius.
Praep. vii. 13. p. 322, and 323.

But we must now go on to that which will remove all difficulties from this
Subject, and convince the Reader, if any thing can do it, That the Jews looked
upon the (...) as a Divine Person. I speak of the Appearances of an Angel who
is called God, and worshipped as God under the Old Testament: And I thought fit
for this very reason to enlarge more upon this Subject, to prevent at once all
the Objections of the New Jews, and of the Unitarians.

CHAP. XIII.
That all the Appearances of God, or of the Angel of the Lord, which are spoken
of in the Books of Moses, have been referred to the Word by the Jews before
Christ's Incarnation.
SOME of the late Jewish Commentators that have had Disputes with the
Christians, particularly those whose Comments are collected in the Hebrew Bible
printed by Bomberg at Venice, do oppose this Proposition with all their Might.
They have laid it down for a Rule, That wherever God is said to be present,
there all the Celestial Family is with him; i. e. the Angels, by whose Ministry
(as they say) God has ordinarily acted in his Appearances to men. So says
Rabbi Solom. Jarchi on Genesis xix. 24. Whereas those Old Jews who followed the
Tradition of their Forefathers, being not biassed by the Spirit of Dispute,
understood it of the Cochma and Bina, viz. of the Wisdom and of the Holy Ghost;
as we were admonished by R. Joseph de Karnitol in his Saare Tsedec, fol. 25.
col. 4. and fol. 26. col. 2.

This Collection of Commentators being of great use for the interpreting the
Scriptures, several Divines that have applied themselves to the Study of the
Rabbis Comments, have been led by them unwarily into this Opinion. The
renowned Grotius fell into this Snare, and has had but too many Followers. We
have no cause to wonder that Papists do the same, being concerned, as they are,
to find Examples in the Old Testament, of Religious Worship paid to Angels, the
better to cover their Idolatry.

But in truth, the Modern Jews do in this quite abandon the Ancient Sentiments
of their Fathers: And they who follow the Modern Jews herein, do weaken (I
hope, without thinking of it) the Proofs of the Godhead of Jesus Christ, by
yielding up to the Modern Jews, as an agreed Point between them and the
Christians, that which is quite contrary to what the Apostles and Primitive
Christians supposed in their Disputes with the Jews of their Times; and which
our later Jews themselves would never have submitted to, if they had known any
other way to avoid the Arguments that were brought against them out of their
own Scriptures.

It behooves us therefore to give their just Force to those Arguments that were
used by the Apostles and Fathers, and to recover to Truth all her Advantages,
by showing how bad Guides our Modern Jews are in the matters now before us; and
how they have deviated from the constant Doctrine of their Ancestors, to find
out ways to defend themselves against the Christians.

I affirm then for certain, That the Appearances of God, or of any Angel that
is called Jehovah, or the God of Israel, or that is worshipped, spoken of in
the Old Testament, were not referred by the Ancient Jews to created Angels, who
personated God. And further, I maintain, That generally the Ancient Jews
referred these Appearances to the Word, whom they distinguished from Angels, as
they do God from the Creature; and thereby justified the Patriarchs in paying
him that appeared to them Divine Worship and Adoration.

To prove this, I must return to Philo's Opinion, which I have had occasion to
allege in several places. I would willingly spare my self the Trouble, and my
Reader the Nauseousness of repeating the same things. But this is a matter of
such Importance, as necessarily obliges me, by a particular Enumeration of
Passages, to produce Philo's Judgment in this Point, as I have done in the
former. He is indeed so ample, and so much ours in his Testimony concerning the
Dignity of the Angel that appeared to the Fathers, as more he could not well
be, if we had hired him to depose on our side.

In general, he asserts, That it was the Word that appeared to Adam, Jacob, and
Moses; although in the Books of Moses it is only an Angel that is spoken of, [
De Somn. p. 461.]

It was the Word that appeared to Abraham, Genesis xviii. 1. according to Philo;
for he says, It was the Word that promised Sarah a Son in her Old Age, and
that enabled her to conceive and bring forth, [ Lib. 11. Alleg. p. 77. E.]

It was the Word that appeared to Abraham as an Angel, and that called to him
not to hurt his Son, when he was about to sacrifice him, [ De Somn. p. 461. A
-- E.

It was the Word that appeared to Hagar, [De Cherub. p. 83. C. De Profug. p.
352. De Somn. p. 446. B.]

It was the Word that appeared so many times to Jacob, although he be called
the Angel that delivered him out of all his Trouble, Alleg. 11. p. 71. D. E.]
It was the Word that appeared to Jacob in Bethel, [Lib. de Migr. Abr. p. 304.
E. p. 305. A. De Somn. p. 460. G.] And afterward directed him how to manage
Laban's Flock, [De Somn. p. 461. F.] and advised him to return to the Land of
his Kindred, [De Somn. p. 460. G.] It was the Word that appeared to Jacob in
the form of an Angel, and wrestled with him, [De Somn. p. 454. E.] and changed
his Name to Israel, [De nom. mut. p. 819. C.]

It was the Image of God, which in other places is the same with the Word, that
appeared to Moses in the Bush, [De Vit. Mosis, 1. p. 475. E.] It was God that
called to him at the same time, [De Somn. p. 461. D.] Even the Word, [p. Ib.
A.] Whom Moses desired to see, [Alleg. 11. p. 61. A. De Sacr. Ab. p. 102. A. C.]

It was the Word who led Israel through the Wilderness, Exodus xxiii. [De Agric.
p. 152. B.] He was the Angel in whom God placed his Name, [De Migr. Abr. p.
324. E. F.] That Word which is called the Prince of Angels, and who was within
the Cloud, [Quis rer. Divin. Haer. p. 397. F. G.] and is called (...), [De Vit.
Mosis, p. 534. G.] And this Angel was he that appeared to Moses and the Elders
of Israel on Mount Sinai, Exodus xxiv. [De Confus. p. 261. E. De Somn. p. 447.
C.] It was the Word whom those Jews rejected, that said, Let us make a Captain
and return into Egypt, Number. xiv. 4. [Alleg. 11. p. 71. B.]

It was the Word that governs the World, that appeared to Balaam like an Angel,
[De Cherub. p. 87. F. G. Quod Deus sit immut. p. 248. G. 249. A.]

It was the Word by whom Moses when he was to dye was translated, [De Sacr.
Abr. p. 162. C. D.

II. Let us come next to the Chaldee Paraphrases, and see how they render those
Texts that speak of the Divine Appearances in Scripture; and let the Reader
take these Remarks along with him: 1. That whatsoever he finds in those
Paraphrases, he may be assured that it was the General Sense of the Jewish
Church in Ancient Times. 2. That any Judicious Writer can justly suspect those
who first published those Targums, to have cut many parts of them, to favor
the new Method of their last Writers, which I have explained in the beginning
of this Chapter.

The first Appearance of God to Man was when having created our first Parents,
Genesis i. 27. He blessed them, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
replenish the earth, Genesis i. 28. He that gave them this Blessing was he that
created them, as we read in the Jerusalem Targum on Genesis i. 27. The Word of the
Lord created Man in his own Image. For his giving them the Blessing, we have it
in that Targum on Genesis xxxv. 9. We have these following words, O Eternal God,
thou have taught us the Marriage-blessing of Adam and his Wife; for thus the
Scripture says expressly, And the Word of the Lord blessed them, and the Word
of the Lord said to them, Be ye fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

God appeared again to our first Parents after their Sin, Genesis iii. 8. Where it
is said, that they heard the Voice of the Lord God walking in the midst of the
garden. Now as Philo said to us, that it was the Word of the Lord that appeared
to Adam; so both Onkelos and Jonathan have it, that Adam and his Wife heard the
Voice of the Word of the Lord God walking in the garden. Likewise in the
Jerusalem Targum, ver. 9. it is said, The Word of the Lord called to Adam, etc.
And again, ver. 10. Where Adam makes this Answer to God, I heard thy Voice in
the garden; both Onkelos and Jonathan have it, I heard the Voice of thy Word in
the garden.

In the History of the Deluge, we see that there was a Revelation to Noah the
Preacher of Righteousness, to build the Ark, and to warn others while that was
preparing, 1 Pet. iii. 20. But who gave Noah that warning? Jonathan says, That
the Lord said this by his Word. And the Jerusalem Targum, It was the Word of
the Lord that said this. And accordingly Jonathan has it in Genesis vi. 6. That
the Lord judged them by his Word; and said, I will destroy them by my Word.
Likewise for the saving of Noah, Genesis vii. 16. all the Paraphrasts attributed
this to the Word: The Jerusalem Targum says, The Word of the Lord spared Noah.
And Genesis viii. 1. Jonathan has it, That the Word of the Lord remembered Noah.
Lastly, according to Onkelos and Jonathan, The Lord said by his Word, I will
not again curse the ground any more for man's sake, Genesis viii. 21.

After the Flood, God appeared often to Abraham. Now according to Jonathan on
Genesis xv. 6. a Promise being made unto Abraham, that his Seed should be as the
Stars of Heaven for Number, Abraham's believing in the Word of the Lord, was
accounted to him for Righteousness: Therefore it was the Word of the Lord that
came to him in a Vision, ver. 1. and that made him that Promise, ver. 5. It
follows, ver. 7. that he said to Abraham, I am the Lord that brought thee out
of Ur of the Chaldees. Who said this to Abraham? Even the Word of the Lord,
according to Jonathan's Targum; for there is no other Nominative Case of the
Verb in his Paraphrase. You see the same upon Abraham's dividing the Beasts, in
order to his making a Covenant with God; it was done at God's Command, who
thereupon did appear between the Pieces to Abraham, and did solemnly enter into
a Covenant with Abraham, Genesis xv. 9, etc. Now says the Jerusalem Paraphrase on
Exodus xii. 42. It was the Word of the Lord that appeared to Abraham between the
Pieces. And according to Onkelos and Jonathan, Exodus vi. 8. It was by his Word
that God made this Covenant with Abraham.

We must take notice that he that appeared then to Abraham, says, I am El
Shaddai, which is here translated, The Almighty God: For according to Onkelos
on Genesis xlix. 25. in the Blessing of Jacob to his Son Joseph, these Names, The
Word of God, and El Shaddai, are of the same Extent: Thus it runs according to
Onkelos, The Word of the God of thy Father shall help thee; and El Shaddai
shall bless thee: Where plainly El Shaddai is the same that is called, The Word
of the God of thy Father.

As Philo taught us that the Appearance of God to Abraham, mentioned Genesis
xviii. 1. was an Appearance of the Word, Alleg. 11. p. 77. E. where he calls
one of the Three Angels that appeared to Abraham the (...), the Word of God;
and Josephus L. 1. Ant. c. 12. calls him God: So the Jerusalem Paraphrase has
it in the end of the next Verse; The Word of the Lord appeared to Abraham in
the Valley of Vision, as he sat warming himself in the Sun, because of his
Circumcision. Elsewhere the same Paraphrase quotes these Words as being the
Words of Scripture; saying on Genesis xxxv. 9. The Scripture has declared, and
said, And the Word of the Lord appeared to him in the Valley of Vision.
Jonathan also in his Paraphrase on Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 6. has these words, The Lord
has taught us to visit the Sick, in that he revealed himself by the Vision of
his Word to Abraham, when he was sick of the cutting of Circumcision.

When God gave him a Command for the sacrificing of his Son, Genesis 22.2. then,
as Abraham was doing it, the Angel of the Lord called to him out of Heaven, and
told him, Now I know thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son,
thine only Son from ME. This last word plainly shows that this Angel was God
himself, even the same that spoke to Abraham, and gave him that Command, ver.
1, 2. And that Command was given by the (...), the Word, according to Philo, as
it has been already shown. The Jerusalem Paraphrase has the same on ver. 8.
where, upon Isaac's enquiring for the Lamb that was to be sacrificed, Abraham
answers him, My Son, the Word of the Lord will prepare me a sheep. And so
when Abraham found that the Word did provide him a Sheep, and accepted of that
for a Sacrifice instead of his Son, Abraham worshipped, and prayed to the Word
of the Lord, saying (among many other things), Thou, O Lord, did speak to me,
that I should offer up Isaac my Son. In the other Targums, ver. 16, 17. where
the Angel of the Lord calls to Abraham out of Heaven the second time (which
last word shows that this Angel was God himself, for it was God that called
to him out of Heaven the first time, as it has been already shown), and says
to Abraham, By my self I have sworn, says the Lord, because thou have done
this thing, and have not withheld thine only son from me, From me, is in the
Samaritan and LXX.
therefore in blessing I will bless thee, etc. There both Onkelos and Jonathan
have it, By my Word I have sworn, says the Lord. What should be their meaning
in this? For the manner of speaking, Thus says the Lord, it was properly used
by the Word appearing here as an Angel, and not according to his own Natural
Being: But for the Form of the Oath, where, according to the Hebrew Text, chap.
xx. God swore by Himself; the Paraphrasts render it, that God swore by his
Word; and well they might, who understood that the Word was God. And indeed
these Targums show elsewhere, That where this Form of Swearing was used, it was
the Word of the Lord that swore, and held himself obliged to perform what was
sworn: Compare Exodus vi. 8. with Deuteronomy. xxvi. 3. And Numb. xiv. 30. with Deuteronomy.
xxxi. 7.

We read of an Angel appearing to Hagar in the Wilderness, Genesis xvi. 7. He bid
her return and submit to Sarah her Mistress, ver. 9. telling her withal what a
numerous Issue she should have by the Child she now went with, and what sort of
man he should be. But as this Angel spoke in the Style of God, saying, I will
multiply thy seed exceedingly, ver. 10. So she owned it was the Lord that spoke
to her, and she said to him, Thou God see me, ver. 13. It Is clear that it was
God himself that appeared, tho he is called an Angel in the Text. And therefore
not only Philo calls him the (...) in those places abovementioned, but the
Targums likewise show that he was the Word of the Lord, according to the Sense
of the Jewish Church; for so Jonathan renders ver. 13. She confessed before the
Lord Jehovah, whose Word had spoken to her. And the Jerusalem Targum; She
confessed and prayed to the Word of the Lord who had appeared to her.

Again, an Angel called to Hagar out of Heaven, Genesis xxi. 16. But he also said
to her that which no created Angel could say; speaking of her Son Ishmael, I
will make him a great Nation, ver. 18. Philo says that it was the (...). And
who performed it? 'Twas God the Word, according to the Targums: For whereas the
Text says, ver. 20. God was with the Lad; it is thus rendered both by Onkelos
and Jonathan, The Word of the Lord was his Support or Assistance.

We read also of Two Divine Appearances to Isaac; one in Gerar, Genesis xxvi. 2.
and the other at Beersheba, ver. 24.

In the former of these places, Isaac being ready to have gone down into Egypt,
God bid him continue in Canaan, and gave him a Promise in these words, Genesis
xxvi. 3. I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee and thy Seed I
will give all these Countries, and I will perform the Oath which I swear unto
Abraham thy Father. So then, he that appeared now to Isaac, is the same that
swore this to Abraham; so much we learn from this Text: But according to the
Targums, it was God the Word that swore all this to Abraham: Elsewhere they
also tell us, That it was the Word that swore as well to Isaac as to Abraham,
that he would give them the promised Land, Exodus vi. 8. xxxii. 13.

At the second Appearance that God made to Isaac, Genesis xxvi. 24. he told him, I
am the God of Abraham thy Father: But as the Jerusalem Targum on Genesis xxii. 16.
says, That Abraham worshipped and prayed to the Word of the Lord: So according
to Jonathan's Targum on Genesis xxvii. 28. Isaac prayed for his Son Jacob in these
Words, The Word of the Lord give thee of the Dew of Heaven: And in the same
Targum on Genesis xxxi. 5. where Jacob says, The God of my Father has been with
me; Of thy Father; so the Samaritan and LXX.
it is rendered, The Word of the God of my Father; or, The Word being the God of
my Father.

Amongst the Divine Appearances to Jacob, those two at Bethel were more
remarkable than the rest; one at his going to Padan-Aram, Genesis xxviii. 13. the
other at his Return from thence, Genesis xxxv. 9. where it is said expressly, that
then God appeared to him the second time.

The History of the first of these is given us at large, Genesis xxviii. 13, --
16. Jacob himself gives this account of the last to his Son Joseph, Genesis
xlviii. 3, 4. God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and
blessed me, and said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply
thee, etc. That it was the Word that appeared to him, we have shown already
from Philo in several places; and that this was the Sense of the Jewish Church
in his time, we have reason to believe: For as to this first Appearance; in the
Introduction, ver. 10. where the Text speaks of Jacob's setting out from
Beersheba to go to Haran, there both Jonathan and the Jerusalem Targum tell us
of the Sun's making haste to go down before his time, because the Word had a
desire to speak with Jacob. Again, in the Conclusion of this History, Genesis
xxviii. 20, 21. Where Jacob vowed a Vow, saying, If God will be with me, etc.
then shall the Lord be my God: Here we read in Jonathan's Targum, That Jacob
vowed a Vow to the Word, saying, If the Word of the Lord will be my help, etc,
then shall the Lord be my God. Why should the Paraphrast say, That Jacob made
this Vow to the Word; and not rather, to God, as it is in the Hebrew Text; but
that they believed that it was the Word that appeared to him? And this being
so, we cannot be to seek who that Angel was that spoke to Jacob, Genesis xxxi. 11.
for he declares, ver. 13. I am the God of Bethel -- where thou vowedst a Vow
unto me. We see in the Targum on Genesis xxviii. 20. That it was the Word to whom
Jacob vowed a Vow at Bethel; therefore according to this Targum it must be the
Word that is called an Angel in the place next before mentioned.

The second time that God appeared to Jacob was in his Return from Padan-Aram,
Genesis xxxv. 9. and it is expressly said in the Jerusalem Targum, The Word of the
Lord appeared to Jacob the second time, when he was coming from Padan-Aram, and
blessed him; which is as clear a Testimony as can be desired for our purpose.

Whosoever will reflect with some attention upon those Appearances of God to
Jacob, and compare them with what we read Genesis xlviii. 15, 16. and with what
Hosea the Prophet says, chapter xii. concerning the Angel who was God, could not
but take notice of two things: The first is, that the (...) which is called an
Angel was God indeed. The second is, that the wrestling of that Angel with
Jacob was a preparation for the belief of the Mystery of the Incarnation by
which the Apostles were made able to say, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handled of the Word of Life, this is our Message, 1 John i. 1.5. But
we must go on upon such important a Subject.

CHAP. XIV.
That all the Appearances of God, or of the Angel of the Lord, which are spoken
of in Moses his time, have been referred to the Word of God by the ancient
Jewish Church.
WE read of no other Appearance of God, or of an Angel of the Lord, till that
which Moses saw on Mount Horeb, Exodus iii. 2. There we read that the Angel of
the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a Bush. This is
the only place where Moses calls him an Angel that now appeared. Elsewhere he
always calls him God, as particularly v. 4. where he says that upon his
turning aside to see why the Bush was not burnt, When the Lord saw this, God
called to him out of the midst of the Bush, and said to him, I am the God of
thy Father, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, v.
6. whereupon Moses says of himself, that he hid his face, for he was afraid to
look upon God. After this he goes on still calling him God, as we read almost
in every verse; so ver. 16. He says God commanded him to go to the Elders of
Israel, and say to them, The Lord God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, appeared to me. God would not have him
tell them that which was not true, and therefore we may be sure that it was not
a Created Angel, but God that appeared to him. But why then should Moses once
call him an Angel? as we see he did in the second verse. A created Angel he
could not be, for the reasons now mentioned; he must therefore be God, and yet
he must appear as an Angel that came on a Message from God. This is what Philo
says in one word, He was the (...), or Word, who is both God, and the
Messenger of God, as we have shown from him in several places.

As for the Targums the matter is clear, for when Moses was sent to the
Children of Israel, to tell them that their God had appeared to him, and sent
him to bring them forth out of Egypt, and that Moses asked him his Name; and
that God said unto Moses, tell them, I AM THAT I AM, or in fewer words say, I
AM, has sent me unto you; that which here God calls himself, is the sense of
the Name Jehovah, that signifies the Eternal Being. Now see how this is
rendered in the Jerusalem Targum. There we read, that the Word of the Lord said
to Moses, He that said to the World, let it be, and it was, and shall say, Let
it be, and it shall be. Here Moses asked God, and the Word answers his
question. But certain it is, that he that answered the question, was the same
that he had been speaking with all this while; even the same that appeared to
him in the Bush.

Moses being thus employed by the Word of God, as his Messenger to the Children
of Israel, for the discharge of his Ministry, had both his Instructions and
Credentials from the Word, according to the Targums.

For the first of these, God appeared to him oftener than to any before him. R.
Akiba, who lived since Christ's time, says that Moses acted as Mediator
between the Gevura, that is, the Word of God, and the People of Israel; and
observes, that God spoke to him 175 times. They were times without number that
God spoke to him, from off the Mercy-seat, upon the Ark of Testimony, from
between the two Cherubims, Numb. vii. 89. But those which R. Akiba reckons,
were Appearances upon extraordinary occasions. In both these Appearances
ordinary and extraordinary, it was the Word of God that spoke to Moses
according to the Targums; Thus of God's speaking to him from the Mercy-seat to
appoint my Word for thee, as God promised there according to Onkelos and
Jonathan on Exodus xxv. 22. xxx. 36. So Numb. vii. 89. Jonathan says it was the
Word that spoke to him. And thus likewise in those Occasional Appearances, both
Jonathan and the Jerusalem Targums tell us, once for all, Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 10. The
Word of the Lord knew Moses (...) speaking to Moses, as often as Moses spoke to
him on any occasion. For his Credentials were as we see, Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 11. All
the Signs and Wonders which the Lord sent him to do, or according to the
Targums which the Word of the Lord sent him to do, in Egypt, to Pharaoh, and
his Servants, and all his Land; and in all that mighty Land, and that great
terror, which Moses showed in the sight of all Israel.

For the Acts of his Ministry, they were chiefly these three: 1. His bringing
the People out of Egypt. 2. His giving them Laws and Statutes, and Judgments
from God. 3. His Leading them through the Wilderness to the Confines of Canaan.
In each of these was the Word that appeared to him according to the Targums.

His bringing the People out of Egypt is wholly ascribed to the Word, by
Onkelos and Jonathan on Deuteronomy. xx. 1. and by Jonathan on Deuteronomy. xxiv. 18. The
People were commanded to teach this to their Children, that it was the Word of
the Lord that did all those Signs and Wonders in Egypt, says Jonathan on Exodus
xiii. 8. It was the Word that sent all those Plagues on Pharaoh, and his
Servants, and all the Land of Egypt, says Jonathan on Deuteronomy. xxviii. 6. and
xxix. 2. Especially, it was the Word that gave that stroke which finished the
work, according to the Jerusalem Targum, Exodus xii. 29. namely, It was the Word
of the Lord that appeared against the Egyptians at midnight; and his right hand
killed the firstborn of the Egyptians, and delivered his own firstborn the
Children of Israel.

After this, the Word of the Lord led the People through the Desert to the
Red Sea, says the same Targum on Exodus xiii. 18. The Word of the Lord being
their Leader, in a Pillar of Fire by night, and of a Cloud by day, says
Onkelos on Deuteronomy. i. 32, 33. And when the People being come to the Red Sea, and
seeing Pharaoh with his Army behind them, were in a rage against Moses, and he
cried to God, Exodus xiv. 15. according to the Jerusalem Targum, the Word of the
Lord said to Moses, How long do thou stand and pray before me? -- Bid the
Children of Israel come forward, and do thou reach out thy Rod, and divide the
Red Sea; He did so, and according to the Jerusalem Targum on Deuteronomy. i. 1. The
Word divided the Sea before them. So that the Children of Israel went into the
midst of the Sea on dry ground, Exodus xiv. 22. the Egyptians following them.
And at morning, v. 24. according to the Jerusalem Targum, The Word of the Lord
looked upon the Army of the Egyptians, and threw upon them Bitumen, and Fire,
and Hail out of Heaven; and v. 25. The Egyptians said, Let us fly from before
the People of Israel, for this is the Word of the Lord that gets them victory;
But their flight was in vain, for by the Word of the Lord, the waters were made
heaps, according to Onkelos on Exodus xv. 8. And according to him also, when God
spoke by his Word, the Sea covered them, v. 10. Thus, as the whole work of the
People of Israel's Deliverance out of Egypt, so every part of it, has been
ascribed to the Word of the Lord by the Targums.

For the giving of the Laws, by which they were to be formed into a Church and
Kingdom; First, immediately after their coming out of the Red Sea, Exodus xv.
25. according to the Jerusalem Targum, the Word of the Lord gave them Precepts
and Orders of Judgments; particularly, as Jonathan has it, the Word of the Lord
gave them there the Law of the Sabbath, and that of Honoring Father and
Mother, and Judgments concerning Bruises and Wounds, and for the Punishment of
Transgressors. Afterward, when they were come into the Wilderness of Sinai,
Exodus xix. 3. the Text says, Moses went up to God, and the Lord called to him
out of the Mount, saying, Thus shall thou say to the House of Israel, etc.
there Onkelos says, according to one of Clark's various Readings, Moses went
up to meet the Word of the Lord, Exodus xix. 8. Moses returns with the People's
Answer to the Lord, then, v. 9. according to the Jerusalem Targum, the Word of
the Lord said to Moses, Go to the People, and sanctify them to day and to
morrow, and let them wash their Clothes, and be ready against the third day,
for the third day the Lord will come down in the sight of all the People upon
Mount Sinai. Accordingly the People having prepared themselves, on the third
day, according to Onkelos, Exodus xix. 17. Moses brought the People out of the
Camp to meet the word of God; Yet the People only saw Thunder and Lightning,
and the Mountain smoking, and felt the Earth quake under them: They also heard
the noise of the Trumpet, which so affrighted them, that they removed and stood
at a distance, and said to Moses, Speak thou to us, and we will hear, but let
not the Word from before the Lord speak with us, lest we die, Exodus xx. 19.
according to Onkelos, in one of Clark's various Readings. Moses therefore
according to Jonathan on Deuteronomy. v. 5. Stood between them and the Word of the
Lord, to show them the Pithgama, the matter and words that were spoken to him
from the Lord. What they were, we read Exodus xx. 1, etc. where, according to
the Jerusalem Targum, the Word of the Lord spoke the tenor of all these words,
saying, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the House of Bondage; then follow the Ten Commandments, commonly called the
Decalogue. That it was God the Word that spoke this to the People, the ancient
Church could not doubt, as we see in the Book of Deuteronomy, where Jonathan
tells us, that thus Moses minded his People of what they had heard and seen at
the giving of the Law, Deuteronomy. iv. 33. Is it possible that a People should have
heard the voice of the Word of the Lord, the Living God, speak out of the
middle of the fire, as you have heard, and yet live? Again, v. 36. Out of
Heaven he has made you hear the voice of his Word, -- and ye have heard his
words out of the midst of the fire. Again, he puts them in mind of the fright
they were in, Deuteronomy. v. 23. After ye had heard the voice of the Word out of the
midst of the Darkness on the Mount burning with fire, all the Chiefs of you
came to me, and said, Behold the Word of the Lord our God has showed us the
Divine Majesty of his Glory, and the Excellence of his Magnificence, and we
have heard the voice of his Word out of the midst of the fire, why should we
die? as we must, if we hear any more of the voice of the Word of the Lord our
God; for who is there living in flesh, that hears the voice of the Word of the
Living God speaking out of the middle of the fire, as we do, and yet live?
Again, Deuteronomy. xviii. 16. he minds them of the same thing in some of the same
Words. Many more such Quotations might be added, but these are sufficient, to
prove that it was the undoubted Tradition of the ancient Jewish Church, That
their Law was given by the Word of God, and that it was he that appeared to
Moses for this purpose.

As the Word gave the Law, it was he that made those many Appearances to Moses
throughout his whole Conduct of the People of Israel through the Wilderness.

To begin with that Divine Appearance, which was continually in sight of all
the People of Israel for forty years together throughout their whole Travel in
the Wilderness; namely, the Pillar which they saw in the Air day and night.
Where this Pillar is first spoken of, namely, at the coming of the People of
Israel up out of Egypt, there it is expressly said, That the Lord went before
them in the Pillar of Cloud by day, and fire by night, Exodus xiii. 21.
Afterward indeed he is called the Angel of God, Exodus xiv. 19. where we read
that the People being come to the Red Sea, and being there in imminent danger
of being overtaken by the Egyptians, by whom they were closely pursued, the
Angel which had gone before the Camp of Israel all day, removed at night, and
went behind them. -- That this Angel was God, it is certain, not only because
he is called God, Exodus xiii. 21. xiv. 24. Numb. xii. 5. But also because he
was Worshipped, Exodus xxxiii. 10. which was a sure Proof of his Divinity. Being
therefore God himself, and yet the Messenger of God, it must be that this was
the (...), or Word; and that this was the Tradition of the ancient Church, we
are taught not only by Philo in the place above mentioned, Quis rer. Div.
haeres: p. 397. F.G.
but also by the Jerusalem Targum on Exodus xiv. 24. and Jonathan on Exodus
xxxiii. 9. and by Onkelos on Deuteronomy. i. 32, 33. as has been mentioned.

When the Children of Israel after the first three days march, found no other
Waters but what were too bitter for them to drink; at which they murmured,
Moses cried unto the Lord, who thereupon showed him a Tree, which they threw
into the Waters, and thereby made them sweet, Exodus xv. 25. Here was a Divine
Appearance, and it was of the Word of the Lord according to the Jerusalem
Targum.

A Month after their coming out of Egypt, for want of Bread they murmured
against Moses and Aaron; at which God showed himself so much concerned, that he
made his Glory appear to them in the Pillar of Cloud, Exodus xvi. 7, 10: That
according to the sense of the ancient Church, this was the Shekinah of the
Word, has been newly shown, both from Philo, and from all the Targums; and the
same we find here in this place, v. 8. where Moses tells them, your murmurings
are not against us, but against the Word of the Lord, according to Onkelos and
Jonathan.

When, Exodus xvii. 8, etc. the Amalekites came against this poor people that
had never seen War; and smote the hindmost of them, God not only gave his
people a Victory over them, but also said unto Moses, write this for a Memorial
in a Book, -- That I will utterly put out the Remembrance of Amalek from under
Heaven, Exodus xvii. 14. See how Moses performs this, v. 15. In the place where
they had fought he set up an Altar inscribed, Jehovah Nissi, The Lord is my
Standard; meaning that it was the will of God they should be in perpetual War
against Amalek; and this reason for it he enters in his Book, v. 16. according
to Jonathan, for the Word of the Lord has sworn by his Glory, that he will have
war against Amalek for all Generations.

The next Divine Appearance we read of, was at the giving of the Law on Mount
Sinai; whereof enough has been already said, and we must avoid being too long.
For which reason we omit much more that might be said of the following
Appearances in the Wilderness, which are all ascribed to the Word in one or
other of the Targums. But I ought not to omit to take notice of some special
things.

So for their places of Worship, God promised according to the Jerusalem
Targum, Exodus xx. 24. Wheresoever you shall mention my Holy Name, my Word shall
appear to you, and shall bless you; and the Temple is called, the place which
the Word of the Lord your God will choose to place his Shekinah there, according
to Jonathan's and the Jerusalem Targums on Deuteronomy. xii. 4. Especially at the
Altar for Sacrifice, which was before the Door of the Tabernacle, God promised
Moses, both for himself and the People, according to Onkelos and Jonathan on
Exodus xxix. 42. I will appoint my Word to speak with thee there, and I will
appoint my Word there for the Children of Israel. Above all, at the Mercy-seat,
where the Ark stood, God promised to Moses, according to those Targums on Exodus
xxv. 22. xxx. 36. Numb. xxvii. 4. I will appoint my Word to speak with thee
there. And in sum, of all the Precepts in Leviticus, it is said at the end of
that Book, according to those Targums on Levit. xxvi. 46. These are the
Statutes, and Judgments, and Laws which the Lord made between his Word and the
Children of Israel.

When they entered into Covenant with God, obliging themselves to live according
to his Laws; Hereby they made the Word to be their King, and themselves his
Subjects. So Moses tells them, Deuteronomy. xxvi. 17. according to the Jerusalem
Targum, You have made the Word of the Lord King over you this day, that he may
be your Glory. And v. 18. The Word of the Lord is become King over you in his
own Name, as over his beloved and peculiar people. In consequence hereof, as
being their King, he ordered them by his chief Minister Moses, to make him a
Royal Pavilion or Tabernacle, and to set it up in the midst of their Camp. Both
that, and all the furniture of it, he ordered Moses to make according to the
Pattern showed him in the Mount, Exodus xxv. 40. Especially for the Presence of
the great King, there must be an Apartment in the inner part of the Tabernacle
separated from the rest with a Veil Embroidered with Cherubims, Exodus xxvii.
31. which part was called the Most Holy Place, or the Holy of Holies, Exodus
xxvi. 33. There was to be placed the Ark overlay'd with pure Gold, and having a
Crown of Gold round about it. In the Ark were contained the Tables of the Law.
Upon it was placed the Mercy-seat, overshadowed with the Wings of two Cherubims
that stood on the two Ends of the Mercy-seat, Exodus xxxvii. 9. looking each of
them toward the other, and both of them toward the Mercy-seat. This Provision
being made for the place of his Shekinah, the Word, which showed it self before
in a Pillar of Cloud by day, and fire by night, that stood over the Camp; now
from thence came to take possession of his Royal Seat in the Tabernacle over
the Ark; from whence, out of the void space between these Cherubims, it was,
that the Word used to speak to Moses, and to give him Orders from time to time
for the Government of his People, according to the Paraphrasts on Exodus xxv.
22. xxx. 36. Numb. xvii. 4. and especially Numb. vii. 8, 9. as has been above
mentioned. Henceforward, throughout their whole Journey through the Wilderness,
the Pillar was constantly over the Tabernacle, and the People attended his
motion. But whenever he gave the Commandment, then the Pillar removed, and
showed which way the Camp was to go. Upon notice of that, then Moses first gave
the word, in a set form of Prayer, which we have in the first six verses of the
lxviii Psalm. The first verse of it is Numb. x. 35. in these words, according
to the Jerusalem Targum, Arise now Oh Word of the Lord in the might of thy
strength. According to Jonathan's Paraphrase, Appear now Oh Word of the Lord in
the strength of thy wrath. In both the Targums it follows, as in the Hebrew
Text, and the enemies of thy people shall be scattered, and they that hate thee
shall flee before thee. When they had performed their Journey according to the
will of their King, which they knew by seeing the Pillar stand still, then
Moses used the Form for the resting of the Ark, Numb. x. 36. according to the
forementioned Targums, Return now Oh Word of the Lord to thy people Israel,
make the Glory of thy Shekinah dwell among them, and have mercy on the
Thousands of Israel. This being said, the Priests (who carried the several ^ins
of the Tabernacle) took down their Burdens, and set up all things as before;
and the Pillar returned to its place over the midst of the Tabernacle.

In this State of Theocracy, their keeping of God's Laws is called by their
Targums, The believing and obeying of the Word; their breaches of his Laws are
called, their despising and rebelling against the Word. Of the use of both
these manners of speaking there might be given more instances than can be
easily numbered.

The Targums likewise ascribe to the Word both the rewarding of their
Obedience, and the punishing of their Transgressions. On their Obedience,
according to the Targums, it was the usual promise, that the Word should be
their help or support, Numb. xxiii. 8, 21. that he should bless them and
multiply them, Deuteronomy. xxiv. 19. that he should rejoice over them to do them
good, Deuteronomy. xxviii. 63. xxx. 9. They were told that he would be a consuming
fire to their enemies, Deuteronomy. iv. 24. particularly, that he was so to the
Anakims, Deuteronomy. ix. 3. That it was he that delivered Og into their hands, Deuteronomy.
iii. 2. That it was he that would cast out all the Nations before them, Deuteronomy.
xi. 22.

On the other hand, according to the sense of the ancient Church, it was the
Word that punished them for their disobedience, and also it was he that forgave
them upon their Repentance. Of both these kinds there are many remarkable
instances, as particularly, of the punishing of their disobedience, according
to Jonathan on Exodus xxxii. 35. It was the Word that destroyed the people for
worshipping the Calf that Aaron made. For their lusting at Kibroth-hattaava,
Moses told them whom they provoked by it, Numb. xi. 20. according to Onkelos
and Jonathan, You have despised the Word of the Lord, whose Shekinah dwells
among you. Their refusing to go forward toward the promised Land upon the Spies
evil report of it, Moses tells them, according to those Targums, Deuteronomy. i. 26.
It was rebelling against the Word of the Lord. Afterward, when they would go up
contrary to order, Numb. xiv. 41. Moses asks them, Why do you transgress the
decree of the Word of the Lord? In their murmuring at Zalmona, Polyglot. Vol.
IV.
Numb. xxi. 5. according to Onkelos in one of Clerk's various Readings, They
spoke against the Word of the Lord, and against Moses. Wherefore v. 6.
according to the Jerusalem Targum, The Word of the Lord sent fiery Serpents
among the People. Upon their Whoring with Baal-Peor, Numb. xxv. 4. according to
the Jerusalem Targum, The Word of the Lord said to Moses, take all the heads of
the people, and hang them up before the Lord. In short, according to the
Targums on Deuteronomy. xxviii. 20, 21, 22, etc. It was the Word of the Lord that
would send all his Judgments and Curses that are there denounced against
impenitent Sinners.

But on the other hand, according to those Targums, the Word had the dispencing
of pardon to them that were Qualified for it. So when Moses begged pardon for
his People that had sinned beyond mercy, if it had not been infinite, Numb.
xiv. 20. according to the Jerusalem Targum, the Word of the Lord answered him,
and said, behold I have forgiven, and pardoned according to thy word. And in
case, upon the inflicting of God's Judgments above mentioned, God's People
should be thereby brought to repentance; It was promised, Deuteronomy. xxx. 3.
according to Jonathan's Targum, that then the Word should accept their
repentance according to his good pleasure, and should have mercy on them, and
gather them out of all Naons, etc. So likewise c. xxxii. 36. according to the
same Targum, it is promised that the Word of the Lord by his mercy should judge
the judgment of his people, and should repent him of the evil that he had
decreed against his Servants. It were easy to add many more such Instances out
of the Targums, but these are abundantly enough to show the sense of the
ancient Church, what they thought of him that so often appeared to their
Fathers in the Wilderness, and spoke to them by his Servant Moses.

When Moses understood that God was not willing he should live to bring his
People into the Promised Land; thereupon he besought God to send him a
Successor, in these words, according to Jonathan's Targum, Numb. xxvii. 16. Let
the Word of the Lord, who has dominion over the souls of men, -- appoint a
faithful man over the Congregation of his People. God having appointed Joshua
in his stead, Moses gave him this Charge in the hearing of the People, Deuteronomy.
iii. 21, 22. according to Onkelos and Jonathan, Thy eyes have seen what the
Lord has done to Og and Sihon, so shall he do to all the kingdoms where thou
art to pass; therefore fear them not, for the Word of the Lord your God shall
fight for you. The same he repeated afterward to all the People, telling them
first, Deuteronomy. xxxi. 2, 3. according to Jonathan, The Word of the Lord has said
to me, Thou shall not pass over this Jordan, but the Lord your God, and his
Shekinah will go before you, Josh. iv. He adds, And Joshua will go over
before you, as the Lord has spoken: And for all your Enemies, ver. 5. The Word
of the Lord shall deliver them up before you; therefore says he, ver. 6.
according to Onkelos, Fear them not, for the Word of the Lord your God goes
before you; he will not fail nor forsake you. After this he calls to Joshua,
and says to him before them all, ver. 7. according to Jonathan, Be strong and
of a good Courage, for thou must go with this People into the Land which the
Word of the Lord has sworn to their Fathers that he would give them -- and the
Shekinah of the Word of the Lord shall go before thee, and his Word shall be
thy help; he will not leave thee nor forsake thee; fear not therefore, neither
be dismayed. He repeats it again from God to Joshua, ver. 23. according to
Onkelos and Jonathan, Thou shall bring the Children of Israel into the Land
which I have sworn to them, and my Word shall be thy help.

It was the same day, that together with this Charge, Moses gave to Joshua his
Prophetical Song, Deuteronomy. xxxi. 22, 23. And the selfsame day, xxxii. 48. God bade
him Get thee up into Mount Nebo, and dye: After which Moses staid no longer
than to give the Tribes of Israel his Blessing before his Death, xxxiii. 1.
That being done, he went up to Mount Nebo, xxxiv. 1. There, according to
Jonathan, It was the Word of the Lord that gave that Satisfaction to his Bodily
Eyes, to see all the Land of Canaan before they were closed: So ver. 5. Moses
the Servant of the Lord died there -- according to the Word of the Lord. He was
translated by the (...), De Sacr. Abr. p. 162. C. D.
according to Philo. It was certainly the current Tradition of the Church in
his Age, that his Soul was taken out of his Body by a Kiss of the Word of the
Lord, as Jonathan renders it; or according to the Jerusalem Targum, at the
Mouth of the Decree of the Word of the Lord.

After his Death, Joshua entered into the Government, ver. 9. and according to
the Jerusalem Targum, the Children of Israel obeyed Joshua, and they did as the
Word of the Lord had commanded Moses.

Besides all these Divine Appearances to Moses and the Children of Israel,
there are also some few that were made to Balaam on their account, and are
therefore recorded in the same Sacred History. Where these are first mentioned,
Numb. xxii. 9. both Onkelos and Jonathan have, That the Word came from before
the Lord to Balaam, and said what follows in that place. So again the second
time, ver. 20. according to the same Targums, The Word came from before the
Lord to Balaam by night, and said to him what follows in that second place.
It is plain that so far the Ancient Jewish Church took these Appearances to
have been made by the Word.

But what Opinion had they of the Angel's appearing to Balaam, ver. 22.? Others
may ask what they thought of the Dialogue between Balaam and the Ass that he
rode upon, occasioned by the Fright that the Beast was in at the Angel's
appearing to him. All this, as Maimonides More Nebochim 11. p. 42.
says, happened only in Vision of Prophecy: But that it was a thing that
really happened, we are assured by St. Peter, who tells us, 2 Pet. ii. 16. God
opened the mouth of the dumb beast to rebuke the madness of the Prophet. As it
cannot be doubted that Balaam was used to have Communication with Devils that
spoke to him in diverse manners; so there is reason to believe they spoke to him
sometimes by the mouth of dumb Beasts; and if so, then to hear the Ass speak
could not be strange to him. And why God should order it so, there is a reason
in Jonathan and the Jerusalem Targum: The Reader may see other Reasons
elsewhere Muis Varia, p. 95.
, but they are not proper for this place. But we are here to consider, whether
this that appeared to Balaam was a created Angel or no. It appears by the
words, ver. 35. to have been the Lord himself that appeared as an Angel to
Balaam; for thus he says to him, Go with the men, but only the word that I
shall speak to thee, that thou shall speak. Now it does not appear after this,
that any other spoke to him from God, but God himself. Therefore Philo says
plainly, that this Appearance was of the (...), as has been already shown. And
that this was the Sense of the Church in his Age, we may see in the two
following Appearances to Balaam; where as well as in the two that were before
this, the Targums say, It was the Word that met Balaam, and spoke to him. Thus
both Onkelos and Jonathan, on Number. xxiii. 4, and 16.

CHAP. XV.
That all the Appearances of God or of the Angel of the Lord, which are spoken
after Moses his time in the Books of the Old Testament, have been referred to
the Word of God by the Jews before Christ's Incarnation.
THUS far it has been our business to show, that it was the Word that made all
those Appearances, either of God, or of an Angel of God that was worshipped, in
any part of the five Books of Moses. We have been much larger in this than was
necessary for our present occasion. But whatsoever may seem to have been too
much in this Chapter, it is hoped the Reader will not wish it had been spared,
when he comes to reflect upon the use of it, to prove that the Word was a
Person, and that he was God. At present there will be some kind of amends for
the prolixity hitherto, in the shortness of what we have to say in the
following part of this Chapter. For being now to treat of those Divine
Appearances that are recorded in the other Books of Scripture after the
Pentateuch, we shall find those Appearances fewer and fewer, till they come
quite to cease in the Jewish Church. For when once the (...) was settled as the
King of Israel between the Cherubims, He is not to be looked for in other
places. And of those Books of Scripture in which the following Appearances are
mentioned, we have not so many Paraphrases as we have of the five Books of
Moses. One Paraphrase is all that we have of most of the Books we now speak of.
But after all, we have reason to thank God, that that Evidence of the Divine
Appearances of the Word of God has been so abundantly sufficient, that we have
no need of any more. So that of the following Appearances of God, or of a
Worshipped Angel, it will be enough to show that the ancient Jewish Church had
the same Notion that they had of those already mentioned out of the five Books
of Moses.

We read but of one Divine appearance to Joshua, and that is of one that came
to him as a man with a drawn-sword in his hand, calling himself the Captain of
the Lord's Host, Josh. v. 13, 14. Some would have it that this was a created
Angel: But certainly Joshua did not take him to be such, otherwise he would not
have fallen down on his face and worshipped him, as he did, v. 14. Nor would a
created Angel have taken it of him without giving him a present reproof, as the
Angel did to St. John in the like Case, Rev. xix. 10. xxii. 9. But this Divine
Person was so far from reproving him for having done too much, that he
commanded him to go on, and do yet much more, requiring of him the highest
acknowledgment of a Divine Presence that was used among the Eastern Nations, in
these words, Loose thy Shoo from off thy foot, for the ground whereon thou
stand is holy. Now considering that these are the very same words that God
used to Moses in Exodus iii. 2, 3. We see a plain reason why God should command
this to Joshua. It was for the strengthening of his faith, to let him know
that, as he was now in Moses's stead, so God would be the same to him that he
had been to Moses. And particularly with respect to that trial which required a
more than ordinary measure of faith, the difficulty of taking the strong City
of Jericho with such an Army as he had, without any provision for a Siege, the
Lord said unto him, Josh. vi. 2. See I have given Jericho into thy hand. None
but God could say and do this; and the Text plainly says, It was the Lord. And
that the Lord who thus appeared as a Warrier, and called himself Captain of the
Lord's Host, was no other than the Word, this was plainly the sense of the
ancient Jewish Church; as appears by what remains of it in their Paraphrase on
Josh. x. 42. xxiii. 3, 10. which says, It was the Word of the Lord that fought
for them; and v. 13. which says, It was the Word which cast out the Nations
before them.

And indeed this very judgment of the Old Synagogue is to be seen not only in
their Targums till this day, but in their most ancient Books, as Rabboth fol.
108. col. 3. Zohar par. 3. fol. 139. col. 3. Tanch. ad Exodus 3. Ramb. ad Exodus
3. Bach. fol. 69. 2. The learned Masius in Josh. v. 13.14. has translated the
words of Ramban, and he has preferred his Interpretation, which is the most
ancient amongst the Jews, to the sense of the Commentators of the Church of
Rome.

Of Divine Appearances in the Book of Judges, we read of one to Gideon, that
seems to have been of an Angel of God, for so he is called, Judge. vi. 11, 12.
And again, v. 20, 21, 22. In this last place it is also said that Gideon
perceived he was an Angel of the Lord, (i. e.) He saw that this was an Heavenly
Person that came to him, with a Message from God. And yet that he was no
created Angel it seems by his being oftener called the Lord, v. 14, 16, 23, 24,
25, 27. And Gideon in that whole History never addressed himself to any other
but God. The Message delivered from God by this Angel to Gideon, ver. 16. is
thus rendered in the Targum, Surely my Word shall be thy help, and thou shall
smite the Midianites as one man. The Word that helped Gideon against the
Midianites, was no other than he that appeared to Joshua with a Sword in his
hand, Josh. v. 13. That was now the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, Judge.
vii. 18, 20. And what the Ancient Jewish Church meant by the Word of the Lord
in this place, one may guess by their Targum on Judge. vi. 12, 13. Where the
Angel saying to Gideon, The Word of the Lord is thy help; he answered, Is the
Shekinah of the Lord our help; whence then has all this happened to us? It is
plain by this Paraphrase that they reckoned the Word of the Lord to be the same
with the Shekinah of the Lord, even him by whom God so gloriously appeared for
their deliverance. And indeed they could hardly be mistaken in the Person of
that Angel, who says that his Name is Pele, the Wonderful, which is used
Isaiah ix. amongst the Names of the Messiah, which Name the Jews make a shift
to appropriate to God, exclusively to the Messiah.

The Angel that appeared to Manoah, Judge. xiii. could seem to have been no
other than a created Angel; but the Name which he takes of Pele, the Wonderful,
shows that he was the Word of the Lord, or the Angel of the Lord, l. lxiii. 8.

In the first Book of Samuel we read of no other such Appearance, but that
which God made to Samuel, 1 Samuel iii. 21. and that was only by a Voice from the
Temple of the Lord, where the Ark was at that time, ver. 3, 4. The same word
(...) signifies a Temple and a Palace, and so the Tabernacle was called in
which the Ark was then in Shiloh. There it was that God revealed himself to
Samuel by the Word of the Lord, ver. 21. But that in the Opinion of the Ancient
Jewish Church the Word of the Lord was their King, and the Tabernacle was his
Palace, where his Throne was upon the Ark between the Cherubims; and that from
thence the Word gave his Oracles; all this has been so fully proved before in
this Chapter, that to prove it here again would be superfluous; and therefore I
take it for granted, that in their Opinion it was the Word of the Lord from
whom this Voice came to Samuel.

In the Second Book of Samuel we read how upon David's Sin in numbering the
People, ^^d sent the Prophet Gad to give him his choice of Three Punishments,
either Three Years Famine, or Three Months Destruction by Enemies, or Three
Days Pestilence throughout all the Coast of Israel. This last being a Judgment
from Heaven, that falls as soon upon the Prince as the Peasant, David made
choice of it rather than either of the other; saying withal, Let me not fall
into the hands of Man, but into the hands of the Lord; for great are his
Mercies, 1 Chronicles. xxi. 13. Thereupon God sent a Pestilence upon all the Coasts
of Israel, by which there fell Seventy thousand Men, 2 Samuel xxiv. 15. And to
represent to David's Bodily Eyes an extraordinary Instance, as well of God's
Justice in punishing Sinners, as of his Mercy to them upon their Repentance and
Prayer, God made him see an Angel standing between the Earth and the Heaven,
having a drawn Sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem to destroy it, 2 Samuel xxiv. 16, 17. And 1 Chronicles. xxi. 16. And when at this Sight David fell upon
his face, and prayed, as it follows, ver. 17. God said to the destroying
Angel, It is enough, stay now thy hand: Then the Angel came down, and stood by
the Floor of Ornan the Jebusite, (on which Place God designed that Solomon
should build his Temple, and declared it to David upon this occasion.) There,
according to the Angel's Order by the Prophet Gad, David now built an Altar,
and sacrificed thereon; upon which the Lord commanded the Angel, and he put up
his Sword into his sheath, 2 Samuel xxiv. 17. This was no other than a Created
Angel, whom God that employed him in that Service, appointed to appear in that
manner, for all those purposes beforementioned.

What the Ancient Church thought of all this Passage of History, we may easily
guess by what has been already shown, of their ascribing all Rewards and
Punishments to the Word, that had the Conduct and Government over God's People.
And though it seems that Care has been taken to conceal this Notion of theirs,
as much as was possible, in the Targums of the Books now before us; yet here is
a Passage that seems to have escaped the Correctors, by which we may perceive
the Church's Sense here was agreeable to what we find of it in all other
places. For in 2 Samuel xxiv. 14. where we find in the Text that David said, ver.
6. Let us fall now into the ^^nd of the Lord, for his Mercies are great; the
Targum thus renders these words, Let me be delivered into the hand of the Word
of the Lord, for great are his Mercies. It was therefore the Word of the Lord
into whose hands David fell: It was his Angel by whom the Judgment was
executed: And it was also his Mercy by which the Judgment was suspended and
revoked. The Targum on this Text sufficiently shows that all this was the Sense
of the Jewish Church.

In short, the Ancient Church considered the Word as being their Sovereign Lord
and King of the People of Israel. All those Kings whose Acts are described in
the Two Books of Kings, they looked upon as his Lieutenants or Deputies, that
held their Title from and under him by his Covenant with David their Father.
This Solomon declared in these words, 1 Kings viii. 15. Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, who by his Word made a Covenant with David my Father. Whatsoever God
did for his People under their Government, in protecting and delivering them
from their Enemies; they owned that it was for his Word's sake, and for his
Servant David's sake, 2 Kings xix. 34. xx. 6. When they had quite broken his
Covenant, then God removed them from before his Word, and gave them up to be a
Scorn to all Nations, as he threatened he would, 1 Kings ix. 7. according to
their Targum.

In these Books we read of no more but Two Divine Appearances in Solomon's
time, and both these were made to Solomon himself, 1 Kings ix. 2.

The first was at Gibeon, chap. iii. 5. where the Lord appeared to Solomon in a
dream by night, and said to him, Ask what I shall give thee. He asked nothing
but Wisdom; which so pleased the Lord, that he gave him not only that, but also
Riches and Honor above all the Kings then in the Word. The Targum, as it is
come to our hands, does not say, It was the Word of the Lord that appeared to
him, and that gave him all this. But that it was so according to the Sense of
their Church, may be gathered from the Text, which tells us, ver. 15. That as
soon as Solomon was awake, he went presently to Jerusalem (which was about
seven Miles distant) and there he stood before the Ark of the Covenant of the
Lord (which was there in the Tabernacle set up by David his Father;) and he
offered up both Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings, and made a Feast to all
his Servants. The haste in which all this was done, brings us presently to the
Occasion of it; for of all Peace Offerings for Thanksgiving to God, the same
day that they were offered, the Flesh must be eaten, Lev. vii. 15. the Breast
and Right Shoulder by the Priests, all the rest by the Offerer, and those that
he had to eat with him. It is plain therefore that this was a Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving to God. But why should not Solomon have staid at Gibeon, and there
paid this Duty where he had received the Obligation? Especially since there at
Gibeon was the Tabernacle which Moses made by God's Command; and there was the
Brazen Altar which Bezaleel made, 2 Chronicles. i. 2, 3, 4. and Solomon had come on
purpose to Gibeon to sacrifice upon that Altar at that time. The very day
before this Appearance of God he had offered a thousand Burnt-Offerings upon
it, ver. 6. and in that very night did God appear to him, ver. 7. Now Solomon
having found that good Success of his sacrificing at Gibeon, that presently God
appeared to him, and gave him so great a Boon, would certainly have staid there
to have paid his Thanksgiving in that Place, but that he understood that he
that appeared to him was the Word, whose especial Presence was with the Ark at
Jerusalem, as we have abundantly proved. To Him therefore he hastened
immediately to pay his Burnt-Offerings, and Peace Offerings of Thanksgiving to
the Word of the Lord. This we cannot doubt was the Sense of the Ancient Jewish
Church, though it does not appear now in their Targums.

And if it was the Word that made that first Appearance to Solomon, then it
must be He that made the second also; for both these Appearances were of the
same Person. So it is said expressly in the Text, 1 Kings ix. 2. The Lord
appeared to Solomon the second time, as he had appeared to him at Gibeon. But
of this second Appearance, that it was of the Word of the Lord, there is a
clearer Proof than of the former; as the Reader will certainly judge, if he
considers the Circumstances of this second Appearance, and the Words which God
spoke to Solomon on this occasion. First, the time of this Divine Appearance to
Solomon, was when he had finished the building of the House of the Lord, 1
Kings ix. 1. He had brought the Ark into the most Holy Place, even under the
Wings of the Cherubims, 1 Kings viii. 6. The Glory of the Lord had taken
possession of this House, ver. 10, 11. and Solomon had made his Prayer and
Supplication before it, ver. 12, -- 61. Thereupon God appears, and tells him, I
have heard thy Prayer and Supplication that thou have made before me. I have
hallowed this House which thou have built, ix. 3. that is, I have taken it for
my own to put my name there for ever, 1 Chronicles. vii. 12. I have chosen this
place to my self for a House of Sacrifice. This was a plain declaration from
God, that it was of this House that he had spoken by Moses in these words,
Deuteronomy. xii. 5, 11. There shall be a place which the Lord your God shall choose to
place his Name there; thither shall you bring all that I command you, your
Burnt-offerings and your Sacrifices, etc. Now see how those words of Moses are
rendered in Jonathan's Targum on Deuteronomy: There will be a place which the
Word of the Lord will choose to place his Shekinah there: Thither shall you
bring your Offerings, etc. Here the Reader cannot but see that he that appeared
to Solomon, and said to him, I have chosen this place, etc. all along in the
First Person, is the same of whom Moses said all the same things, speaking of
him in the Third Person. And that as it appears in Jonathan's Targum both ver.
5. and ver. 11. of that Chapter, this was no other than the Word, according to
the mind of the Ancient Jewish Church; though in their Targum on 1 Kings ix.
(which also is called Jonathan's, but how truly, the Reader may see by this
Instance) there is not the least mention of the Word upon this occasion.

The Word of the Lord being now in his Resting Place in Solomon's Temple, 1 Chronicles. viii. 41. and having put an end to his Theocracy, by setting up Kings of
Solomon's Race, that came in by Hereditary Succession, and governed after the
manner of the Kings of other Nations; after this, in the Scripture-History of
those Times, while the first Temple was standing, we read of no more such
Divine Appearances as we had formerly.

There is only one to be excepted, namely, that which was made to Elias in a
small still Voice, 1 Kings xix. Of which something ought to be said more
particularly. It may be observed that this was in that part of Israel which had
no Communion with the Temple. It was in Ahab's time, when the Children of
Israel had not only cast off the Seed of David, but seemed to have quite
forsaken the Covenant which God had made with their Fathers by his Servant
Moses. To reduce them to their duty, God had now sent Elias, who was a kind of
second Moses. God showed he was so, by putting him into so many of Moses his
Circumstances. After a Fast of Forty Days, such as none but Moses had ever kept
before him, he comes to Horeb the Mount of God, 1 Kings xix. 8. So called
first, Exodus iii.i. in the History of God's first appearing to Moses in that
place. And as there, ver. 6. Moses hid his Face, being afraid to look upon God;
so did Elias in this place, 1 Kings xix. 13. He wrapped his Face in his Mantle;
and then God spoke to him as he had done at first unto Moses. He that spoke now
was the same that spoke then, as appears by comparing the Circumstances; and he
that spoke then, was God the Word, as we have proved before in this Chapter.
This must needs have been the Sense of the Ancient Jewish Church. And to us
Christians it cannot but look very agreeable, That as when Moses and Elias were
upon the Earth, the Word appeared to them, and spoke with them on Mount Horeb:
So when he was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, Moses and Elias came to him on
Mount Tabor, and spoke with him at his Transfiguration.

Of those Appearances of Angels to Elias, 1 Kings xix. 5, 7. 2 Kings i. And of
the Angel that made that Slaughter in Sennacherib's Army, 2 Kings xix. 35. we
have no more to say in this place; because they seem to have been no other but
Created Angels, and neither of them is called the Word of the Lord in their
Targum.

But we are concerned for that Vision of God which was seen by the Prophet
Micaiah, 1 Kings xxii. 19. although he does not say that God appeared to him,
nor that he saw any thing more of God than a mere resemblance of a King sitting
in State, which was at that time visibly represented before him. For we must
take notice of one thing, which is of some moment, that is, that when he says,
I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven standing by
him on his right hand and on his left, etc. the most Learned Jews conceive that
he saw the Shekinah with the Angels of his Attendance, and that this Vision of
Micaiah is the same which was shown to Isaiah, chapter vi. and to some other
Prophets.

In the Prophetical Books of Isaiah and Ezekiel, there are two Appearances of
God, or of the Shekinah in his Temple, which we are obliged to give some
account of. And of these, as I shall show, we have no reason to doubt but that
it was the Word that appeared to those Prophets according to the sense of the
ancient Jewish Church.

First for that in Isai. vi. 1, etc. The Prophet says, I saw the Lord sitting
upon a Throne, high, and lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple; above it
stood the Cherubims, etc. crying one to another, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy
Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of thy glory: -- and the House was
filled with smoke. That this House was the Temple is expressly said in the end
of the first verse. And the smoke was the token of the Shekinah of God, with
which the Temple was filled now, as it was at his first entrance into it, 1
King. viii. 10, 11. So that here, the Lord sitting upon his Throne, was no
other than God sitting upon his Mercy-seat over the Ark; that is, He was the
Word of the Lord, according to the opinion of the ancient Jewish Church, as has
been abundantly proved before in this Chapter. Of which here is also some
remain in their Paraphrase; for whereas the Prophet speaking still of the Lord
whom he saw sitting on his Throne, v. 1. says, v. 8. Also I heard the voice of
the Lord, saying, whom shall I send? The Targum thus renders it, I heard the
Voice of the Word of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send? We Christians need
not thank them for this, being fully assured as we are by what the Apostle
says, Joh. xii. 41. that this was no other than our Lord Jesus Christ. For
there the Apostle having quoted the words that Isaiah heard from the Lord that
spoke to him, Isai. vi. 9, 10. tells us, These things said Isaiah when he saw
his Glory, and spoke of him. That the Apostle here speaks of the Word made
flesh, is clear enough from the Text. But besides it has been proved by our
Writers beyond all contradiction. See Plac. lib. ii. Disput. 1.


In like manner that which the Prophet Ezekiel saw, was an Appearance of God,
represented to him as a Man sitting on a Throne of Glory, Ezekiel. i. 26, 27, 28.
x. 1. Which Throne was then upon Wheels, after the manner of a Sella Curulis.
They were living Wheels, animated and supported by Cherubims, i. 21. each of
which had four Faces, i. 6. such as were carved on the Walls of the Temple,
xli. 19. In short, that which Ezekiel saw, though he was then in Chaldea, was
nothing else but the Appearance of God as yet dwelling in his Temple at
Jerusalem; but quite weary of it, and now about to remove, and to leave his
dewlling place to be destroyed by the Chaldeans. To show that this was the
meaning of it, he saw this Glorious Appearance of God, first, in his place,
iii. 12. (i. e.) on the Mercy-seat in the Temple, ix. 3. Next, he saw him gone
from his place, to the Threshold of the House. Judges use to give Judgment in
the Gate; so there over the Threshold of his House God gave Sentence against
his rebellious people, v. 5, 6, 7. Afterward, from the Threshold of the House,
x. 4. the Prophet saw the Glory departed yet farther, and mounted up from the
Earth over the midst of the City, x. 18, 19. And lastly, he saw it go from
thence, and stand upon the Mountain on the East Side of the City, xi. 23. That
is, on Mount Olivet, which is before Jerusalem on the East, Zech. xiv. 4. and
so the Targum has it on this place. After this departure of the Divine
Presence, Ezekiel saw his forsaken Temple and City destroyed, and his People
carried away into Captivity, xxxiii. 21, etc. After this he saw no more
Appearance of God, till his People's return from Captivity. And then the Temple
being rebuilt according to the measures given from God, xl, xli, xlii, the
Prophet could not but expect that God would return to it as of old. So he saw
it come to pass in his Vision, xliii. 2. Behold the Glory of the God of Israel
came from the way of the East, (where the Prophet saw it last, at M. Olivet.)
So again, v. 4. The Glory of the Lord came into the House by the way of the
Gate whose prospect is toward the East, And v. 5. Behold the Glory of the Lord
filled the House. So again, xliv. 4. It filled the House now, as it had done in
Solomon's time, 1 King. viii. 11. All along in this Prophecy of Ezekiel, it was
but one Person that appeared, from the beginning to the end. In the beginning
of this Prophecy, it was God that appeared in his Temple over the Cherubims;
and there we find him again in the end of this Prophecy. But that it was no
other but the Word that so appeared in the Temple, according to the sense of
the ancient Jewish Church, has been proved so fully out of their Targums
elsewhere, that we need not trouble our selves about that any farther, though we
cannot find it in the Targum on this Book.

In the Books of Chronicles there is nothing remarkable of this kind, but what
has been considered already, in the account that we have given of the Divine
Appearances in the Books of Kings. And there is no mention of any such
Appearance in any of the other Books that were written after the Babylonian
Captivity, except on the Books of Daniel and Zechariah. Of Daniel the Jews have
not given us any Targum, therefore we have nothing to say of that Book. They
have given us a Targum, such as it is, of the Book of Zechariah, which is the
last we have to consider.

In this Book of Zechariah we read of three Angels that appeared to the
Prophet. The first appeared to him as a Man, i. 8,-10. But is called an Angel,
v. 9. In Zechary's words, The Angel that talked with me: By which Title he is
often distinguished from all others in the same Book, i. 13, 14, 19. ii. 3. v.
5, 6. vi. 4. A second Angel appeared to him also as a Man with a Measuring Line
in his hand, ii. 1. But whosoever compares this Text with Ezekiel. xl. 3, 4, 5,
etc. will find that this, who appeared as a Man, was truly an Angel of God.
Next, the first Angel going forth from the place where he appeared, ii. 3.
Another Angel comes to meet him, and bids him, Run, speak to this young man,
(whether to the Angel Surveyor, or whether to Zechary himself) and tell him,
Jerusalem shall be inhabited, etc. ii. 4. He that commands another should be
his Superior. And yet this Superior owns himself sent from God. But he owned it
in such terms as showed that he was God himself. This the Reader will see more
than once in his speech, which is continued from v. 4. to the end of the
Chapter. It appears especially in v. 8, 9, 11. of this Chapter. First in v. 5.
having declared what God would do for Jerusalem, in these words according to
the Targum, The Lord has said, my Word shall be a wall of fire about her, and
my Glory will I place in the midst of her; He goes on to v. 8. and there he
delivers a Message from God to his People, in these words, Thus says the Lord
of Hosts, After the Glory After the Glory of his Shekinah being returned into
the Temple, when that was rebuilt, they should soon after see Babylon it self
taken, and spotled by their ancient Servants the Persians.
has he sent me to the Nations that spoiled you, etc. Here the sense is
ambiguous, for it seems strange that the Lord of Hosts should say, another has
sent me. But so it is again, and much clearer expressed in v. 9. where he says,
Behold, I will shake my hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their
Servants. This none but God could say: But he adds in the next words, And ye
shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me; which words plainly show that,
though he styled himself God, yet he came as a Messenger from God. This is
plainer yet, v. 11. where he says, Many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in
that day, and shall be my people, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, Thee,
Thou, Thee, are all Feminines in the Hebrew, and therefore all three refer to
Zion.
(Thee, Oh Zion, v. 10.) This again none but God could say: And yet it
follows, Thou (Oh Zion) shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me to
Thee, (Oh Zion.) Here are plainly two Persons called by the name of Jehovah;
namely, one that sends, and another that is sent; So that this second Person is
God, and yet he is also the Messenger of God.

So likewise in the next Chapter, v. 1. the Angel that used to talk with the
Prophet showed him Joshua the High Priest, standing before the Angel of the
Lord, and Satan standing over against Joshua as his Adversary. And v. 2. the
Prophet hears the Lord say unto Satan twice over, The Lord rebuke thee, for
being so maliciously bent against Joshua, that was come out of the Captivity as
a brand plucked out of the fire. He that was called the Angel, v. 1. is here
called the Lord, v. 2. and this Lord intercedes with the Lord for his
Protection of Joshua against Satan. That which gave the Devil advantage against
Joshua was his Sins; which, as the Targum says, were the Marriages of his Sons
to strange Wives. His Sins, whatsoever they were, are here called filthy
Garments; and Joshua standing in these before the Angel, v. 3, 4. The Angel
commands them that stood about him, saying, take away the filthy garments from
him. Here again, by commanding the Angels, he shows himself their Superior.
Afterward, when the filthy Clothes were taken off, this Angel says to Joshua,
Behold I have caused thy Iniquity to pass from thee; words, that if one Man had
said to another, the Jews would have accounted Blasphemy, Mat. ix. 2, 3. For
who (say they) can forgive Sins but God only? But here was one that exercised
that Authority over the High Priest himself. This could be no other than he
that was called of God, a Priest for ever after, the order of Melchizedek,
Psalm. cx. 4. of whom the Jewish High Priest, even Joshua himself, was but a
figure. But he goes farther, adding, I will cloth thee with change of raiment,
that is, according to the Targum, I will cloth thee with righteousness. ver. 5.
And he (...) And he said, Jon. Targ.
said, (again commanding the Angels) Let them set a fair Miter on his head, and
they did so, and clothed him with Garments, and the Angel of the Lord stood by.
Here again he is called an Angel, at last, as he was at first, ii. 3. It is an
Angel's Office to be the Messenger of God; and so he often owned himself to be,
in saying, The Lord sent me. And yet this Messenger of God commands the Angels,
ii. 4. iii. 4, 5. and himself stands by to see them do his commands, v. 5. This
Angel calls Israel his People, and says, he will dwell among them, ii. 10,
11. He takes upon him to protect his People, v. 5. and to avenge them on their
enemies, v. 10. He intercedes with God, iii. 2. He forgives sin, and confers
Righteousness, iii. 4. If all these things cannot be truly said of one and the
same Person; then here are two Chapters together that are each of them half
Nonsense, and there is no way to reconcile them with sense, but by putting some
kind of force upon the Text, whether by changing the words, Socin. in Wiek 1.
ii. p. 565.
or by putting in other words, as Socinus honestly confesses he has done in
his Interpretation. And he says, they must do it that will make sense of the
words. It is certain they must do so that will interpret the words as he would
have it. But he and his followers bring this necessity upon themselves. They
that will set up new Opinions must defend them with new Scriptures. For our
parts we change nothing in the words; and in our way of understanding them we
follow the Judgment of the ancient Jewish Church, that makes all these things
perfectly agree to the (...). This we see in Philo, who often calls the (...)
De Somn. p. 466. B. Eus. praep. vii. 15. (...). Philo L. 1. Quaest. and Sol. as
Philo calls the Father, (...), De migr. Abr. p. 416. B. 418. C. Quis rer.
Divin. haeres, B. p. 397. G. De Somn. p. 457. B. Quod Deus sit immut. p. 249.
B. Quis rer. Divin. haer. p. 397. G.
God; and yet as often calls him an De Somn. p. 463. F. De Prof. p. 364. B.
Angel, the Messenger of God; and our High Priest, and De profug. 466. B. De
Somniis, p. 594. E. Quis rer. Divin. p. 397. G. Vit. Mos. iii. p. 521. B.
our Mediator with God. The same has been showed of the Word elsewhere out of
the Targums. And here in this Targum, though no doubt it has been carefully
purged, yet by some oversight it is said, ii. 5. That the Word shall be a wall
of fire about Jerusalem. And if the Modern Jews had not changed the third
Person into the first, it would have followed, that his Shekinah should be in
the midst of her; as himself says afterward, v. 10, 11. He would dwell in the
midst of her; meaning in the Temple, where the Word of God had his
dewlling place always before its destruction, as has been abundantly shown in
this Chapter, and as we showed from Ezekiel it was promised he should dwell
there again after its Restoration.

CHAP. XVI.
That the Ancient Jews did often use the Notion of the (...), or Word, in
speaking of the Messiah.
I Hope what I have said upon the Appearances of the Word in the Old Testament,
proves beyond exception that the Word, which is spoken of in the ancient Books
of the Jews, is a Person and a Divine one. From thence it is natural to
conclude that St. John and the other Holy Writers of the New Testament who made
use of the word (...), could not rationally give to that word (...), any other
Idea, than that which was commonly received in the Jewish Nation.

Nothing more can be required from me than to refute fully the Unitarians, who
pretend that the Word signifies no more than an Attribute or the eternal virtue
of God, and who to confirm this assertion of theirs observe that in the Targums
the term (...) is never employed when they speak of the Messiah. The Socinian
Author who wrote against Wecknerus insists very much upon this observation.

Let us therefore examine how true that is which he affirms, and supposing it
true, how rational the consequence is which he draws from thence in opposition
to it I lay down these three Propositions, which I shall consider in as many
Chapters: The first is, that in several places of the Ancient Jewish Authors
the Memra or the (...), is put for the Messiah. And so that it is certain that
St. John has followed the Language of the Jews before Jesus Christ in taking
the (...) for a Divine Person that in the fullness of time, as it was foretold
by the Prophets, did assume our flesh, Joh. i. 14.

The second is, that the Jews of old did acknowledge the Messiah should be the
proper Son of God.

The last is, that the Messiah was represented in the Old Testament as being
Jehovah that should come, and that the ancient Synagogue did believe him to be
so.

I begin with the first of these three Articles.

And upon this I must put my Reader in mind, that it should not be a just
subject of admiration, if we could not prove such a thing by many of the Jewish
Books. It is clear that when the Jewish Authors did consider the (...), they
considered him as the true Lord of Heaven and Earth, and chiefly of their own
Nation. Whereas the Messiah is often represented to the Prophets as one that
should appear in a very mean condition; and whatsoever glory is attributed to
him in other places of the Ancient Revelation, which brought them to believe
till the last times that the Shekinah was to be in him; there were some
Characters which could hardly be applied to him as being Personally the Word
himself. Such are his Sufferings described, Psalm. xxii. and Isa. liii. Such is
his riding upon an Ass, and coming to Jerusalem, which they refer constantly to
the Messiah, as you may see in their Ceremonial Book or Aggada of Pesach.

But although we should suppose that the places we are going to cite cannot
expressly convince the Reader of this truth: yet we might establish it by
necessary consequences from them.

For example, It is universally received, that Jacob speaks of the Messiah,
Genesis xlix. 10. Onkelos Paraphrases it, the People shall obey him. And yet, Genesis
xlix. 24. he makes the Word the Governor of the People.

The ancient Jews hold, that the Word delivered Israel out of Egypt, and to the
Word they apply all the Appearances ascribed to the Angel of the Lord. Does it
not follow from hence, that they understood the Messiah by the Word? since they
confess, the Messiah is called the Angel of his Presence, Isa. lxiii. 10. the
Angel of the Covenant, Mal. iii. 1. which words they refer constantly to the
Messiah.

The ancient Jews affirm, that it was upon the motion of the Word that their
Ancestors were to move, and that He ordered them to prepare themselves for a
sight of God. Onk. on Exodus xix. 17. And is not this it which Amos demands of
the People with respect to the Messiah? chapter iv. 12.

The Jews relate that the Temple was built for the Word, as was also the
Tabernacle, where the Majesty of the Word resided. After this, whom could they
understand, but the Word of the Lord, of whom Malachy promised that he should
come to his Temple? chap. iii. 1. which words relate constantly to the Messiah.

The Jews thought him to be the Messiah, that is spoken of by Zech. chapter vi. 22.
And whom else could they think him but the Word, who is named by Zechariah the
East? and the Sun of Righteousness by Mal. iv. 2. Especially since Philo
interprets that place of Zechariah of the (...), De Confus. Linguar. p. 278.
where he speaks of him as of the firstborn of God, and of the Creator of the
World.

The Jews held, that it is said of the Word, God is a consuming fire, Onk. on
Deuteronomy. iv. 24. which renders it natural to understand him what is to the same
sense spoken of the Messiah, Mal. iii. 2. iv. 1.

The Jews believed a promise of the Messiah, Deuteronomy. xviii. 15. But Onkelos notes
here, that the Word shall revenge himself of them that disobey the Messiah.

They maintained with Philo, de Agric. p. 152. B. de Somn. p. 267. B. that the
(...) was the first begotten of God. Could they then imagine that any other but
he was meant in the places where the like Titles are owned even down to our
times to be given the Messiah? as Psalm. ii. 7. lxxxix. 28. lxxii. 1.

They held, as did Philo, that the (...) led the People through the desert, and
referred to him Psalm xxiv. wherein he is called the Shepherd. And could they
do this without reflecting, how often this Title of Shepherd is given by the
Prophets to the Messiah?

They held that the (...) was adored in his Appearances to the Patriarchs, and
could they doubt whether the Messiah, whom all the Kings of the Earth must
adore, Psalm. lxxii. 11. had any affinity with the (...)?

They assert, that the (...) is the great High Priest, Phil. de Somn. p. 463.
F. And how could they deny that the (...) should be the Messiah, when they
constantly ascribed to the Messiah, what we read of his Priesthood, Psalm. cx. 4.

Whom did Isaiah see in that Vision, chapter vi. but the Messiah? And yet the
Targum there calls him the Word of the Lord.

When Isaiah speaks of the Messiah, chapter viii. 14. that the Lord shall be a
stone of stumbling; the Targum reads the Word of the Lord, using it as one of
the Names of the Messiah, The like it does on chapter xxviii. 16. where it is
manifest the Messiah is spoken of.

Isaiah says, chapter xii. 2. Behold God my Savior, I will trust in him. Jonathan
renders him, I will trust in the Word of Salvation, i. e. in the Word the
Savior.

The same Prophet, chapter xli. 4. having called Jehovah the First and the Last, he
attributes to the Word the Title of Redeemer, v. 13, 14, 16. which Title
properly belongs to the Messiah. And so the whole is applied by Jesus Christ to
himself, Rev. i. 8, 17. xxii. 13.

God is called, Isa. xlv. 15. the Savior of Israel; and the same thing is said
of the Word, v. 17, 22, 24. where the Messiah is treated of.

But I foresee these consequences will not seem strong enough to a Socinian.
Let us therefore produce out of Philo and the Targums some places where the
Notions of the (...), and the Messiah, do appear positively the same.

For Philo, 1. He declares that the (...) is the first begotten of God, in
Eusebius. Praep. vii. 13. p. 323. which he had from Prove. viii. 25. Psalm. ii. 7.
But this proves unanswerably that in the judgment of the Old Jews, the Messiah
should be the same Person with the (...), seeing the Messiah is called the
firstborn, Psalm. lxxxix. 28.

2. He explains the last, Zech. vi. 12. by the (...). The Text runs thus, Thus
speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, behold the man whose name is the Branch, (or,
as the Greek has it, the East,) he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall
build the Temple of the Lord. This is understood by the Jews of the Messiah.
But Philo plainly says, that this East here spoken of, is the Word, the
firstborn of God, the Creator of the World. De Confus. Ling. p. 258. A.

This place of Philo deserves a very particular consideration. For it teaches
us what Notion the Jews had of the Messiah before our Lords Ministry; and
discovers the Tricks and Fopperies of the modern Jews, who having a mean
opinion of the Person of the Messiah, have invented quite another sense of the
Memra, so frequent in their Paraphrases, than what the ancient Jews had of it.

Nor is it of less use to confound the Socinians. For it is a proof not to be
denied of St. John's following the Language of the old Synagogue, when he
speaks of the (...) in the first Chapter of his Gospel; and shows that they
have no other answer to the many Testimonies of the Targum objected against
them, but what they borrow of the Jews.

3. Another place of Philo in the same Book, p. 266. F. is much to the same
purpose, where he calls the (...) a Man. We know the Messiah is intimated to be
a Man in many places; as Psalm. xxii. 22. I will declare thy name to my
Brethren. Psalm. lxix. 9. I am become a stranger to my Brethren. Psalm. cxxii. 8.
For my Brethrens sake. For these Psalms do all regard the Messiah. So also
where he is called David, Ezekiel. xxvii. 25. as the Targum and the Modern Jews do
own he is, Hos. iii. 5. and where he is called Solomon, as in the Targum on
Canticles.

But says Philo, the (...) is called a Man, which must be understood either
upon account of his frequent Appearances as a Man, and so he is called, Exodus
xv. 3. or to his intended manifestation in human shape, as a Servant. This
latter is the Notion of Psalm. xxii. above quoted, and of Isa. xlii. 1. Behold
my Servant, which Jonathan refers to the Messiah. And again of Isa. liii. where
the Messiah is represented as a Man afflicted and tormented; which has been
their sense so constantly, that from hence the Jews since Jesus Christ have
taken occasion to assert that the Messiah was Leprous.

As for the Chaldee Paraphrase, it is visible from Isa. xlix. where the Messiah
is spoken of throughout, that the Memra should become the Messiah: These are
the words of Isaiah, v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Listen, O Isles unto me, and hearken
you people from far. The Lord has called me from the womb, from the bowels of
my mother has he made mention of my name, and he has made my mouth like a
sharp sword, in the shadow of his hand has he hid me, and made me a polished
shaft, in his quiver has he hid me, and said unto me, Thou art my Servant, O
Israel, in whom I will be glorified: Then I said, I have labored in vain --
yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. And now says
the Lord that formed me from the womb, to be his servant, to bring Jacob again
to him; tho Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the
Lord, and my God shall be my strength. And he said, is it a light thing that
thou should be my Servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
preserved of Israel? I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that
thou may be my Salvation unto the end of the Earth. Now as Philo has
observed that the (...) is not only called a Man, but Israel. De Confus. Ling.
p. 266. which has a natural relation to this place of Isaiah, so the Targum
expressly ascribes v. 5. as also v. 16. to the Word, which speaks of the calling
of the Gentiles. And so every Jewish Writer confesses that the Restoration of
the Ten Tribes which is foretold there shall be the work of the Messiah.

We read Isa. lxiii. 14. As a beast goes down into the valley, the Spirit of
the Lord causes him to rest, so did thou lead thy people to make thy self a
Glorious name. Where, notwithstanding the Text has the Spirit of the Lord, the
Targum reads the Word, whom it treats as Redeemer, v. 14. that guided them
through the Wilderness, that is in the Heavens, v. 15. and has the name of
Redeemer from everlasting, v. 16.

Indeed, that the Word should become the Messiah, i. e. should reveal himself
in him, according to the judgment of the old Jewish Church, may be gathered
from the method of the Jews in explaining certain places of the Messiah which
they referred to the Word of the Lord. Till now they do agree, that Moses spoke
of the Messiah, Exodus iv. 13. Send I pray thee by the hand of him whom thou will send: R. Meyr Aldabi so interprets it, as he treats of the Messiah, in his
Book Sevile Emunoth, chapter 10. But the Jews formerly referred it to the Word of
the Lord, as we see in Onkelos on Exodus iii. 12. And God said, certainly I will
be with thee, and this shall be a token unto thee that I have sent thee, when
thou have brought forth the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God upon this
mountain. On which words Onkelos observes, that God promised Moses to assist
him by his Word in the trust committed to him, and repeats it on Exodus iv. 12,
15. from which it is to be concluded, that it is whom he intends, v. 13. The
like remarks are made by Jonathan's Targum on the same Texts, from whence the
like inference may be drawn.

I shall only mention a few more places: as, 1. It was the Word that promised
to march among the Israelites, and to be their God, Philo de Nom. mutat. p.
840. this, says Philo in an 100 places, it was the Word that promised Israel
his Presence, says Onkelos on Levit. xxvi. 9, 11, 12. But it is certain the
Word was to manifest himself in the Messiah, (...) in the middle of him, as
says Rashi, whom I have quoted before.

2dly, The Ancient Targums acknowledge that the Messiah should be a Prophet. So
Jonathan owns on Is. xi. 2. The same Isaiah declares, live. 13. That they shall
be all taught of God: which is explained by Jonathan of the Messiah, as also
Is. liii. 5.10, 11, 12. From whence it is evident, that they took the Messiah
and the Word of God to be the same.

3dly, You see that God having said, Hos. i. 7. that he would save his people
by Jehova their God, which is translated by the Targum, by the word of the
Lord, the Jews kept always for a Maxim, that the Eternal Salvation was to come
to them by the Messiah. Rashi refers to that which we read in Isaiah, chapter xlv.
17. and he follows in this the Targum of Jerusalem upon Genesis xlix. 18. where
the Salvation by the Messiah is called by Jacob the Salvation by the Word of
the Lord. It Is upon the same foundation that they refer to the Messiah which is
spoken Isai. xliv. 6. that the Messiah shall be the last King, as he has been
the first, which they infer from Psalm. lxxii. 8. and Dan. ii. 35.44. in Bresh
Rabba ad Genesis xlii. 6. Now it is the very description of the Word of God as you
see in Jonathan's Targum upon Deuteronomy. xxxii. 39. Quando revelaverit se Sermo
Domini ad redimendum populum suum, dicet omnibus populis, Videte quod ego nunc
sim qui sum and fui, and ego sum qui futurus sum, nec alius Deus praeter me.

4thly. Jonathan on Micah vi. 14. has the same Notion. The Text runs, Feed thy
people with thy Rod, the flock of thy heritage, which dwell solitarily in the
wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in Bashan, and Gilead, as in the
days of old. But Jonathan paraphrases it thus, Feed thy People by thy Word, the
People of thy Heritage, in the Age to come; a Term always used to denote the
Times of the Messiah, and consequently shows that the Word shall be in the
Messiah.

5thly. The same Jonathan, who affirms that the Word gave the Law on Horeb, and
made a Covenant with Israel, refers to the Messiah what Philo says of the
Word, Zech. vi. 12. as we see him on Mal. iv. 2.

We might infer the same thing from those Prophecies that speak of God as
anointed, as Psalm. xlv. 7. Of God as sent, Isa. xl. 9. Of God, for the sake of
whom God forgives, Dan. ix. 17. For the Targum in many places applies these
Expressions to the Word, though the Passages themselves are supposed by them to
concern the Messiah.

The same Truth may be also collected from hence, That the Word is clearly
distingu^^hed from God who sends him, and from the Holy Spirit who is to rest
on the Messiah in respect of his Human Nature. Which is a good Argument that
the Word and the Messiah, according to the common Notion of the Ancient Jews,
was to be one and the same Person.

That Sense was so well known in the Synagogue, that you see in Midrash
Tehillim upon Psalm. xxxiii. that the Shekinah which was in Heaven was to leave
them and to be upon the Earth; and that although it was not possible for any
Mortal to see her in this Life, in the future Age, which is the second coming
of the Messiah, she is to be seen by Israel, who are then to live for ever, and
to say as you see in Isa. xxv. 9. Here is your God. And according to Psalm.
xlviii. 15. He is God our God, as it is observed by Tanchuma and many others.

But this I shall show more distinctly, in evincing 2dly, That the Jews who
esteemed the (...) as the Son of God, did likewise believe the Messiah should
be the Son of God.

CHAP. XVII.
That the Jews did acknowledge the Messiah should be the Son of God.
GOD having by a great Number of Appearances settled it in the Minds of the
Jews, That there was a true distinction between the Lord, and the Angel of the
Lord, to whose care they were committed; did afterward more plainly intimate
to them, than he had done to the Ancient Patriarchs, who and what this Angel
was: I mean he gave them Revelation in Scripture concerning the Nature of the
Messiah, in the expectation of whom he had trained them up by so many
extraordinary Appearances.

For this purpose he raised David to the Throne, and made him a Prophet, that
his Dignity might cause attention to his Prophecies, and his Authority
establish the Psalms, which he writ by Inspiration, into a Form of Worship most
acceptable to God. We therefore find in his Psalms all the Passions which the
Promise and hope of the Messiah naturally produce, arising from more distinct
Notions of him than were formerly given. And afterward God raised up other
Prophets until Malachi, who all tread in David's steps, and pursue his Notions,
as far as they concern the Messiah.

It might be gathered from several things in the Writings of Moses, as Genesis
iii. 15. that the Messiah should be more than a man, because he was to destroy
the Works of the Devil; and whosoever did that, must be stronger than he, as
our Savior shows in the Parable of the strong man, Matthew. xii. 29. Because God
respecting the coming of the Messiah, promised to dwell in the Tabernacles of
Sem, Genesis ix. 27. which the Ancient Jews understood of the Shekina, Talm.
Babyl. Joma, fol. 9. col. 2. Because he was to bless all Nations, as was
promised Abraham, Genesis xii. 3. as it is acknowledged by the Author of the Book
Chasidim,. 961. and that could not be done but by the Shekinah dwelling among
them, as the Jews acknowledge it. Because he was to be King of all Nations of
the Earth, as Jacob prophesied, Genesis xlix. 10. and as Balaam foretold of the
Messiah, according to Onkelos, he was to smite the corners of Moab, and destroy
all the Children of Seth; or as Onkelos renders it, to have dominion over all
the Children of men, Number. xxiv. 17.

But it was necessary that the notion of the Messiah should be yet more
distinct. And to this end, there was a constant Succession of Prophets from
David to Malachi, who by their particular Characters of the Messiah excited a
more ardent desire in the Jews, that God would fulfill his promise concerning
him.

Let us enquire a little, by what degrees this Light became more distinct, and
show what impression it caused in the Jews before the coming of our Lord.

I lay it down then as a truth, that the Prophets from David do constantly
represent the Messiah as the proper Son of God, one begotten by a proper, and
not a figurative Generation.

That God has a Son is declared in Solomon's Question, Prove. xxx. 4. What is
his name, and what is his Son's name? For it appears clearly by the description
of God's Works and Attributes, which goes before these words, that this
Question cannot be understood but of the true God, and of his true Son, the
same which is spoken of Prove. viii. 22. as being Eternal, and Verses 24, and
25. as being begotten by God. And indeed although the Author of the Zohar
refers sometimes those words, What is his Son's name? to the People of Israel,
who is called the firstborn of God; nevertheless he gives them their true
sense in referring them to the Messiah, who is spoken of in Psalm ii. in these
words, Thou art my Son, and kiss the Son, Part 3. fol. 124. col. 3.

Philo in his Pieces has preserved the sense of the Ancient Jews in this
matter that this Son was the (...); as where he says, that the Word by whom
they swear, was begotten. All. 11. p. 76. B. that God begat his Wisdom
according to Solomon, Prove. viii. 24. De temul. p. 190. D. which Wisdom is no
other than the (...), Ibid. p. 194. that the (...) is the most Ancient Son, the
Eternal Spirit of God; but the World is the Son of God in time, Quod Deus sit
immut. p. 232. that his Word is his Image, and his Firstborn. De confus. ling.
p. 266. 267. B. that the Word is the Son of God, before the Angels, Quis rer.
div. h. p. 397. F. G. that the Unity of God is not to be reduced to number,
that God is unus non unicus, (...) as the Jews say in their Book of Prayers,
which are the very steps we take to show that an Eternal Generation in the
Divine Nature is no contradiction.

Nothing can be more express for to prove that there is a Son in the Godhead,
than what we read in the Targum of Jerusalem, Genesis iii. 22. The Word of Jehovah
said, Here Adam, whom I created, is the only begotten Son in the World, as I am
the only begotten Son (...) in the high Heaven.

3. The Prophets positively teach the Son of God (who, the Jews thought (as
under the former Head appears) was the (...), the Eternal Wisdom of God) to be
the Messiah. Thus David, Psalm ii. brings in God speaking of the Messiah, Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, 6. V. 8. Kiss the son lest he be
angry, and lest you perish. For thus it ought to be rendered according to
Aben-Ezra, and the Midrash on this Psalm, and the Zohar in the place I have
quoted just now, which Expression is also used by Solomon, Cant. i. 2. Let him
kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, which the old Jews refer to the Messiah
in Shir hashirim Rabba, fol. 5. Col. 2, and 3. and in Midrash Tehillim ad Ps.
lxviii. v. 4.

I confess that we read in Tehillim Rabbathi upon this iid Psalm, a kind of
answer to this place (...) but (...) he does not say, thou art a Son to me, but
thou art my Son; and they pretend that God speaks to the Messiah as a Master to
his Servant. The Inquisitors of Italy take great care to blot out that Answer
in the Books which they give leave to the Jews to keep in their Houses: But it
is a ridiculous fear, for the solution is so absurd, that it is exploded as
soon as you look upon the description of that Son which is in the Book of
Proverbs, Chap. xxx. 4.

I own also, that we find not in the body of Philo's Works any formal
Explication of these words, This day have I begotten thee; from whence we can
directly conclude, that he understood them of an Eternal Generation. But we
find something equivalent to it. For speaking of these words, You who were
obedient to the Lord, are alive this day; he adds, (...). De profug. p. 358. E.

That this is not a simple Conjecture, appears from the manner of Philo's
explicating of himself, as he speaks of the (...) in two places cited by Eus.
Praep. Ev. vii. p. 323. out of Phil. de Agric. 1, and 11. For in the first
place, he calls the (...) the Firstborn of God: And in the other, the Eternal
Word of the Eternal God, begotten by the Father. (...).

The same Title of Son is given to the Messiah, Psalm. lxxii. 17. That this
Psalm was understood of the Messiah by the Ancient Jews, it is acknowledged by
Raschi, who against their unanimous Consent thinks fit to apply it to Solomon;
now the Hebrew word there is Innon, being formed from Nin, which signifies a
Son. Hence it is that the Jews make Innon one of the Titles of the Messiah in
Midrash Tillim on Psalm xciii. and in the Talmud Sanhedrim, c. 11. fol. 98.
col. 2. and in Rabboth, fol. 1. col. 3. And it follows in the Text, that he had
this Name before the Son, that is, before the Creation, as Eternity is
described, Psalm. xc. 2. Prove. viii. 22, 29.

Again Psalm. lxxx. 15. where the Psalmist prays God to look down and visit his
Vine, and the Vineyard which his right hand has planted; the Targum renders
these last words, and the Plant which thy right hand has planted, that is,
King Messiah. The Psalmist goes on in these words, and the Branch which thou
made strong for thy self. The Targum reads them, even for thy Son's sake, and
interprets them, even for the sake of King Messiah. So likewise in v. 17. where
we render the words, Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the
son of man whom thou made strong for thy self, the LXX. have only, on the
Son; and the Targum interprets them of King Messiah.

God says, Psalm. lxxxix. 25, 26. I will set his hand in the sea, and his right
hand in the rivers. He shall cry unto me, thou art my father. The Ancient Jews
refer this to the Messiah, and also many of the Modern Jews finding such
difficulty in applying to Solomon many of the Characters in this Psalm, agree
with the Ancients in their Interpretation.

The following Writers of the Holy Scriptures are as express as David is in
this matter, Prove. viii. 22, 23, 24, 25. is well worth perusing, principally
for this Title given Wisdom, of a Son in the bosom of her Father. Upon which
take Philo's Reflection de Profug. p. 358. A. To the Question, Why is Wisdom
spoken of in the Feminine, he Answers, it is to preserve to God the Character
of a Father; from whom he thought the (...) drew his Nature; as being, as he
elsewhere, de Agric. calls him (...), the Eternal Son of the Everlasting
Father. And nothing is more common amongst the Jewish Writers, than 1. To
maintain that the Shekinah, the Wisdom, and the (...), are the same. 2dly, To
refer to the Messiah, as being the same with the Shekinah, those very Places
which are to be understood of the Shekinah, and to the Shekinah those Places
which are to be understood of the Messiah. If any man cast his eyes upon
Jonathan Targum and the Targum Jerusalami commented by R. Mardochay, and
printed lately at Amsterdam, he shall find that by the common consent of the
Jewish Interpreters, whose words he fully relates, the Wisdom which is spoken,
Prove. iii. and Prove. viii. is the same by which the World has been created.
2dly, That this Wisdom is the same which is called the Shekinah, the Memra, it
is called by Philo the (...). Let him now look upon the Places of the Prophets
which are constantly spoken of the Messiah, and he shall find that they are
referred by the best Authors of the Synagogue to the Shekinah; so that it is
clear they had the same Idea of the Shekinah and of the Messiah, and must have
looked upon the Messiah as he that must have been the proper Son of God. I will
show some Instances of what I advance, to spare the trouble to my Reader.

1st, They maintain that this Wisdom by which God has founded the Earth, as
David tells us, Psalm. ciii. 24. is the same which is spoken by Solomon, Prove.
iii. 19. it is the sense of all the Targums, Midrashim and Cabalistic Authors
upon the first of Genesis, as you see in R. Mardochay, and in Menachem de
Rakanati upon the 1st of Genesis.

2dly, They take indifferently this Wisdom and the Shekinah, or the Memra or
(...), for the same Person, referring to it the same Actions, the same Power,
the same Worship, the same Majesty.

3dly, They understand the Wisdom which rules the World, as it is said, Prove.
viii. to be the same which is spoken of, Prove. iii. 19. and to be the Son of
the living God, the same who spoke by Ezekiel. xxii. 2. see R. Menach. in Pent.
fol. 1. col. 2. from Bereshit Rabba, and from Zohar. Ibid. fol. 2. col. 1. and
fol. 35. col. 1. and fol. 44. col. 1.

And fourthly, They refer many Places to that Wisdom which is the (...), the
Shekinah, and the Son, to the Messiah; for example, it is clear that Psalm xlv.
belongs to the Messiah, as being the Bridegroom of the Church. Now they suppose
that the Shekinah is the Bridegroom of the Synagogue, R. Menach. in Pent. fol.
15. col. 1. and they refer to the Shekinah the place of Isaiah, chap. lxii. 3.
which is nothing but the same Idea of Psalm xlv.

So they refer the Song of Solomon to the Shekinah or (...), R. Menach. de
Rekan in Pent. fol. 58. col. 4. and fol. 76. col. 1. and col. 3. which is
manifestly to be understood of the Messiah, and so they pretend that the Kiss
which is mentioned there, Cant. i. 1. signifies mystically the Shekinah R.
Menach. fol. 44. col. 1.

It is notorious that the Goel, that famous Redeemer which is promised in so
many Prophets to the Synagogue, is the Messiah. Now the constant Idea of the
Jewish Writers is, that the Shekinah is to be that very Redeemer. Rab. Menach.
de Rekanati in Pent. fol. 58. col. 4. and fol. 59. col. 1. and fol. 83. col. 4.
and fol. 97. col. 4.

So that nothing is more evident, than that the Jews, who took the Wisdom to be
the (...), and the proper Son of God, and look upon the Shekinah or the (...),
as being to be the Messiah, must have looked upon the Messiah as being the
proper Son of God.

In Isaiah iv. 2. the Messiah is called the branch of the Lord, no doubt as
properly as he is called the branch of David, Jerem. xxiii. 5. In that day,
says he, the branch of the Lord shall be beautiful and glorious, which is in
Jonathan's Paraphrase interpreted of the Messiah. From which it is natural to
conclude, that the proper Son of God was to be the Messiah, and the Messiah was
to be the proper Son of God.

In Isaiah ix. 6, 7. we read of a Son given, and what are the Characters of
this Son? they follow. His name shall be Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. The Jews long after Christ
understood this place of the Messiah; and Solomon Jarchi, who dyed in the Year
1180. is perhaps the first after R. Hillel that fell from the common
Traditional Sense of his Nation in referring these Titles to God, and not the
Messiah.

But I have taken notice before in speaking of the several appearances of the
(...), that the Angel who appeared to Gideon, and who was the (...), did take
the same name of Wonderful which is given here to the Messiah.

Jeremiah keeps to the same notion of a branch to denote a Son, Jerem. xxiii.
5. xxxiii. 15. and the Targum explains it of the Messiah.

Zachary, chapter vi. 12. does also call him the branch, which not only the Jews
before Christ, as we have shown from Philo, but those after Christ ( Echa
Rabbathi, p. 58. col. 2.) interpreted of the Messiah, as being the Word.

And here let me remark to you a few of Philo's Notions, which may serve for a
Key to the right understanding of the Sentiments of Philo concerning diverse
Prophecies in the Old Testament. One while he says, Lib. de conf. Ling. 267.
that God is one, but without excluding his Word who is his Image and
firstborn, from being one with him. Another time, he calls the Word an
Archangel, a Man, he that sees Israel, etc. Whence comes this, but that he saw
the (...) was sometimes represented as Head of the Angels in respect of his
Divinity, and at other times as a Man with regard to his intended coming in the
Flesh? To this coming he seems to apply the Promise, Levit. xxvi. 11, 12. I
will walk among you, and be your God, De nom. mut. p. 840. C. I am sure the
later Jews, as Ramban upon that place after the Author of Torath Cohanim, do
build here the opinion of a real habitation of the Divinity amongst them in the
times of the Messiah, and that they derive from one of their most ancient
Traditions, that the Salvation of Israel shall be made by God himself which
they prove by Zech. ix. 9. where it is spoken of the Messiah by the confession
of the Jews till this day.

Again, Philo calls the Word of the Lord the Shepherd, and quotes for it, Psalm.
xxiii. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd, De nom. mut. p. 822. and 823. A. De Agric.
in Eusebius. p. 323. Now the Word being the same with the Messiah, c. 13. it is
plain this Psalm was in his days applied to the Messiah, who consequently is
the Lord Jehovah, and the people his sheep. I have before observed the rules by
which the Jews were led to the knowledge of this Truth, and therefore it is
unnecessary to touch again on them.

It suffices to remark here, first that the Synagogue in Philo's time held it a
Maxim, that the name Jehovah expressed the Essence of God. Philo Lib. Deter.
pot. ins. p. 143. C. Secondly, that the name Jehovah was the proper name of
God, the name of the first Cause, and consequently communicable to no Creature.
Philo de Abrahamo, p. 280. a Truth of great moment, which is confessed also by
Manass. ben Israel, q. in Exodus 3. Thirdly, that the (...) whom he takes to be
meant by the Branch in Zech. vi. 12. was to become the Messiah, and therefore
that the Messiah is justly called in this respect the Son of God.

And now it is easy to judge of the sense the ancient Synagogue had of the
Person of the Messiah. It acknowledges this Son and this (...) as a Person
subsisting from all Eternity: Of this, if we had no other, the Text of Mic. v.
2. is a good proof, which the Jews in Christ's time expounded of the Messiah,
Mat. ii. 7. Joh. vii. 42. But the Notions of Philo every where do confirm it.
Eusebius remarks it, De Praep. xi. 15. p. 533. and his Book de Somn. de confus.
Ling. and de prof. p. 466. are full to this purpose.

To conclude, Let it be observed that the Sanhedrim calls the Messiah the Son
of God, Mat. xxvi. 63. and when Jesus applied to himself a Prophecy of the
Messiah in Dan. vii. 13. Hereafter shall you see the Son of Man coming in the
Clouds of Heaven, Mat. xxvi. 64. We are told by St. Luke what they replied,
Then said they all, art thou then the Son of God? Luke xxii. 70. which is an
argument that though the Title of Son of Man did very well express the humble
estate of the Messiah, yet they were not ignorant that the (...) should be the
Messiah, and that the Messiah should be the proper Son of God; such a Son, as
for whom the Clouds, the Chariot of the Divinity, should be prepared to attend
his Triumph, in the time when he should reveal himself from Heaven.

2. That this Notion is so deeply riveted into the minds of the Jews even since
Christ's time, that because the word Anan, the Clouds is spoken of in this
passage of Daniel, therefore they have asserted, in consequence of this
opinion, that the Messiah shall be called by this name. This we see in Targum
on 1 Chronicles. iii. 34. where speaking of the Children of Elioenai, it adds, the
seventh which is Anani is the King Messiah. And thus it is explained in
Sanhedrim, fol. 62. in the Comments of Saadia and Jarchi on Dan. vii. 13. and
in Jalkut on Zech. iv. 7.

But having showed that the Word is God, and that this Word should be the
Messiah, we will now show, that the Jews in conformity to their Scriptures did
believe that the Messiah, as being Jehovah, should appear for the Salvation of
Men.

CHAP. XVIII.
That the Messiah was represented in the Old Testament as being Jehovah that
should come, and that the ancient Synagogue did believe him to be so.
I Have showed, that from David's time the Notion of the Messiah was
considerably cleared by several Prophets, whom God raised up, to exercise and
increase the desires of his people. It is no less certain, that the same
Prophets do describe the Messiah as the true Jehovah, and that the ancient Jews
so understood them.

This we may discern in the earnest longings of the Faithful, so frequent in
all the Writings of the Prophets, and in those several passages of the Old
Testament, which the Jews constantly interpret of the Messiah; although some of
them seem not to be spoken of Jehovah, but of the Messiah, others to be spoken
of Jehovah only, without mention of the Messiah; but all have a particular
regard to that Salvation which the Jews expected from the Messiah.

Jacob blessing his Sons bursts out in Prayer to God, I look for thy Salvation,
O Lord, Genesis xlix. 18. which the Jews by their Targums are taught to understand
of the Messiah. Of him likewise they understand those words of Moses, praying
that God would send him whom he would send, Exodus iv. 13. which words Raschi
himself refers to the Redeemer to come, in h. l. and so Ramban and others. So
they understand David's using this expression, Psalm. lxxx. 2, 3. Stir up thy
strength and come and save us, bring back, O God, and cause thy face to shine
and we shall be saved. The Targum, and Rabbi Solomon Jarchi understand it of
the Messiah bringing back his people from the present Captivity.

The Ground which they built upon, to refer those words to the Messiah, is
clearly seen to those who shall reflect upon the constant Notion of the
Synagogue, which believes:

1. That the Shekinah is Jehovah, a second Jehovah to whom God spoke in saying,
Let us make Man. R. Menach. fol. 8. col. 3. the Jehovah merciful, the Wisdom
which has founded the Earth. R. Men. fol. 145. col. 3.

2ly. That it is the only Ruler of Israel, R. Men. fol. 153. col. 2.

3ly. That it is the Shekinah, to which all the Prayers of the Jews were
directed, R. Men. fol. 159. col. 2.

4ly. That as they look upon the Shekinah as the Angel, the Redeemer, so all
their Ideas of the Redemption, and of their Salvation have a necessary relation
to that Redeemer who is Jehovah; so that all that is spoken of in all the
Prophets, of the Redemption by the Messiah, must by a necessary consequence be
referred by them to Jehovah's being the Messiah, or to the Messiah, as being
Jehovah indeed: Isaiah, chapter lxiv. 1. begs, Oh that thou would rent the
Heavens, that thou would come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy
presence. Who does not see that he speaks of the coming of God in the time of
the Messiah, by an allusion to the time of the coming of God to give the Law
upon Mount Sinai; and now the Jews confess 'twas the Shekinah who gave the Law
upon Mount Sinai. R. Menach. fol. 57. col. 2. and fol. 48. col. 1. and who can
imagine that a meaner person than the same, and the very Shekinah it self,
should raise such desires and such Prayers?

Micah speaks with great assurance, Chapter vii. 7. I will look unto the Lord, I
will wait for the Lord of my Salvation. Again, v. 19. He will again have
compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and will cast all our sins
into the depths of the Sea. So Hab. ii. 3. Though he tarry, wait for him,
because he will surely come, he will not tarry. And chapter iii. 13. Thou wentest
forth for the Salvation of thy people, even for Salvation with thine Anointed:
Thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the
foundation unto the neck.

So Ezekiel. iii. 15, 17. The Lord has taken away thy judgment, he has cast out
thine enemy: the King of Israel even the Lord is in the midst of thee; thou
shall not see evil any more -- The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty:
he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will rest in his love, he
will joy over thee with singing.

So Zech. viii. 13. And it shall come to pass, that as you were a curse among
the heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel; so will I save you, and you
shall be a blessing.

So Mal. iv. 2. But to you that fear my name, shall the Sun of Righteousness
arise with healing in his wings. Which the Jews refer to the Shekinah. R.
Menach. fol. 54. col. 2.

These are the places that have exercised the thoughts of the Jews, and all
these are by their Targum referred to the Word, or to the times of the Messiah,
and most of them (of such a force is Truth) are still applied so, by the
greatest part of their Writers, as may be seen in the famous Book of Ginnath
Eggoz, from which Reuchlin has almost extracted his Books de Cabala.

But especially we ought to remark, 1. That the Targum plainly owns on Psalm.
xlv. 6. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. And ver. 7. O God, thy God
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows; That the Messiah
is God. This Truth is yet more clear in Isa. ix. 6. applied to the Messiah by
Jonathan; and the present Jews cannot satisfy themselves with any answer they
make to it, as appears by their different ways of evasion, and their changing
the very Text to avoid the evidence of it.

2ly. The Targum on Isa. xxviii. 5. has these considerable words, In that day
the Messiah of the Lord of Hosts shall be crowned with joy, instead of the Lord
of Hosts, as it is in the Text.

3ly. The Targum on Jer. xxiii. acknowledges the Messiah to be there treated
of, and yet he is called in this place, the Lord of our Righteousness. See to
the same purpose the Targum on Jer. xxxiii. 14. The learned M. Edzardi has
proved that the same Interpretation of these words of Jeremy has continued
among the Jews from the time of Jesus Christ without interruption till these
latter days; and this he has done from a great number of Jewish Authors, and
even their Liturgies themselves which I have no mind to transcribe. His Book
was Printed at Hamburgh, A. 1670.

4ly. They have been so sensible that the Messiah is represented by the
Prophets as God, that in Psalm. cx. where it is said of the Messiah, that he
shall be a Priest according to the order of Melchisedeck, they refer the
Priesthood of the Messiah to God, or to the Shekinah which is Jehovah. So does
R. Menach. fol. 18. col. 1. and fol. 31. col. 1.

Without that, it is hard to conceive how Philo should so often mention the
(...) as a Priest and Prophet of God, and at the same time believe the (...) to
be God, unless he gathered it from Psalm. cx. 1. where the Messiah, that is
represented as sitting at the right hand of God, and equal to God, is also
described as an High Priest of a new Order; and from Isa. xi. 2. where the
Messiah is promised to receive the Spirit of Prophecy in the highest degree.

I need not cite the Paraphrasts any further on this Subject. What I have
already quoted out of them is more than enough to show how common this Idea was
among their Nation.

For the Jews in the Ages next to these Paraphrases I ought to observe this one
thing of Pirke Eliezer, chapter xiv. There they assert that God descended nine
times, and that the tenth time he shall descend in the Age to come, i. e. in
the time of the Messiah. The first time was in the Garden of Eden. The second
at the Confusion of Tongues. The third at the destruction of Sodom. The fourth
at his talking with Moses on Mount Horeb. The fifth at his appearance on Sinai.
The sixth and seventh where he spoke to Moses in the hollow of the Rock. The
eighth and ninth in the Tabernacle. The tenth will be, when he shall appear in
the times of the Messiah. Such is their ancient Opinion.

The Prophecies that speak of it, as one end of the coming of the Messiah, to
judge his People and the Nations, do constantly ascribe the Name of God, or of
Jehovah, to the Messiah. We see it in Psalm lxxxii. 8. Arise, O God, and judge
the earth, for thou shall inherit all nations. Which is followed by Daniel, chapter
vii. 13, 14. in these words; I saw in the night visions, and behold one like
the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the ancient of days,
and there was given him dominions, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people,
nations and languages should serve him: His dominion is an everlasting dominion
that shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

The Jews confess three things; one is, that Psalm lxxii. is to be understood
of the Messiah; The second is, That in the Vision of Ezech. chapter i. that form of
a man sitting upon the Throne, signifies the true God; the third, That the
Vision of Daniel, chapter vii. is the same in substance with that of Ezekiel. i. So
that the Messiah, as a Man, receives an absolute Empire upon all Nations, and
sits upon a Throne as God. Now it should be the most absurd thing in the World,
to conceive the Messiah as only a Man, when he is invested with such an Empire
which cannot be governed but by a true God, and by Jehovah, whose Character is
represented so often as the Ruler of all Nations; See Genesis xviii. 25.

The Prophecies that speak of Jehovah as the King and Bridegroom of his Church,
are constantly interpreted of the Messiah. For example, where God said to his
People, Hos. ii. 19, 20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, I will betroth
thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
mercies. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know
the Lord. This the Jews generally understand of the Messiah. It Is the judgment
of R. Menachem in Genes. fol. 15. col. 1. where he reflects upon Isaiah, chapter
lxii. 3. And it is agreeable to what is said Psalm. xlv. 7, 9, 10, 11. Thy
throne, O God, is for ever, and ever, the scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter
of righteousness; thou love righteousness and hate iniquity, wherefore, O
God, thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
Kings daughters were among thy honorable women; upon thy right hand did stand
the Queen in gold of Ophir. Hearken, O daughter, and consider, forget thy own
people, and thy father's house. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty;
for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. Whereas the Targum, v. 2. interprets
it all of the Messiah; so R. Meir Arama says, all agree that that Psalm is to
be understood of the Messiah.

We cannot have a better proof that the Messiah should be Jehovah, than Zech.
xii. 10. which the Targum also interprets of the Messiah, and the new Jews
would refer to the feigned Messiah, Son of Joseph. The words are these; I
(Jehovah) will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his
only son.

In Malach. iii. 1. we find this expression, Behold, I will send my messenger,
and he shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom you seek, shall
suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger, or the Angel, of the Covenant,
whom you delight in. Now take notice, that whereas it is said after in the
Hebrew, here he is coming, the Greeks have read (...). Now since it is certain
that he is the Jehovah to whom the Temple is here said to be built and
dedicated, and who is worshipped in it; and since the Jews understand this place
of the Messiah, it must follow that the Messiah is Jehovah.

It is evident, that the Lord, and the Messenger or the Angel of the Covenant,
are the same Person, whose coming is promised to the Jews as a thing very near.
But it is no less evident, that this Angel of the Covenant is the same which is
spoken by Jacob, Genes. xlviii. 15, 16. as the Redeemer, and is named by
Isaiah, chapter lxiii. the Angel of the face. Now all the Ancient Jews agree, that
that Angel, or Messenger, is the Shekinah, or Jehovah himself; as we see in R.
Menachem de Rekanati, fol. 54. col. 2. and fol. 66. col. 2. fol. 72. col. 4.
and fol. 73. col. And they agree all that the Shekinah and Jehovah is the same.
It is a Point agreed by the Talmudist, and by the Cabalist, as it is explained
by R. Menach. fol. 73. col. 3. and fol. 77. col. 4. and fol. 79. col. 3. This
being so, who can deny that the Text of Malachi is an undeniable proof that the
Messiah was to be Jehovah himself, according to the Ideas of the most Ancient
Jews?

If we had not such Confessions of the Jews, 'twill be easy to supply the want
of them, by the help of the general Tradition that reigns among them, and
proves clearly that the Messiah was to be Jehovah himself.

They hold that the Messiah shall be greater than all the Patriarchs, and even
the Angels themselves. Neve shalom, l. 9. c. 5. How can this be, unless he be
truly Jehovah? And whence could they take this Notion, except from Psalm xcvii.
7. where the Angels are commanded to worship him?

It is very easy to reconcile that Idea with the Notions of the old Jews,
touching the Messiah, supposing him to be the Shekinah and Jehovah, and that
this Shekinah or Jehovah was to be the same Person with the Messiah, as they
confess. R. Menach. fol. 73. col. 3. and fol. 77. col. 4. and fol. 79. col. 3.
They teach constantly that Angels receive their virtue from the Shekinah, R.
Menach. fol. 8. col. 1. and fol. 12. col. 1. They teach that the Shekinah is
the God of Jacob, R. Men. fol. 38. col. 3. that he appeared to him at Bethel,
and promised him to govern him without the Ministry of Angels, R. Menach. fol.
41, and 42. They said the Shekinah is the Jehovah who appeared to the
Patriarchs, R. Menach. fol. 56. col. 1. They maintain that the Temple was built
to worship the Shekinah, R. Menach. fol. 63. col. 1. and fol. 70. col. 2. and
fol. 73. col. 4. and fol. 74. col. 2. They maintain on the other side, that
it is not lawful to pay any religious worship to Angels, although sent by God as
Messengers of him, or as Mediators. R. Menach. fol. 68. col. 2. They deny that
the Ancient Patriarchs have paid other worship than a civil one to an Angel,
when he appeared to them, R. Menach. Ibidem col. 3. But it is impossible to
reconcile those Ideas with the Opinion of the Messiah, being only a mere Man.

Indeed, he that will reflect on all these Prophecies, will very hardly think,
that then, when the High Priest demanded of Jesus whether he was the Son of
God, and Jesus answered that he was so; the Jews did understand only that he
made himself a great Prophet. Both the Jews and Socinians own that in this
Answer he made himself the Messiah, which, according to both of them, is more
than a great Prophet, and the High Priest was so sensible of it, that he called
it Blasphemy.

In short, the Angels who are God's Ministers, could not serve nor obey one
that was only, as well as themselves, a Creature. He must be God, to have the
Angels Subjects to him. He must be God, to govern the World, and to discern the
thoughts of the heart, without which he could not be a competent Judge. And
they that imagine a Creature could be made capable to know hearts, and to
exercise those other Acts, which are the Characters of the Divinity, do form to
themselves the greatest Chimera in the World.

It is therefore necessary, that the Ancient Jews, having these Notions of the
Messiah, should have conceived an intimate and close habitation of the Word in
his Person, by which, all these Prophecies should receive their accomplishment,
and all the Promises of God, concerning the Messiah should be perfectly
fulfilled.

The Unitarians conceive they have done a great service to the Christian
Religion, when to court the Jews favor they deny the Divinity of the Messiah,
and condemn as Idolatry the Worship which Christians pay to Jesus Christ. In
this they argue more consistently than Socinus himself, as I have said in my
Preface to this Book. But after all I can say that besides they cannot answer
Socinus his Argument for the Worship of Jesus Christ, they shall not get from
the Jews what they pretend by their opinion: Indeed the Jews would be in the
right to condemn us as Idolaters, if we did worship Jesus Christ as a mere
Creature. But they cannot do that justly, if they reflect seriously upon the
Grounds which we lay for the Adoration of the Messiah.

As it is a thing which I hope shall be of some use to undeceive the
Unitarians, I am willing to add to the foregoing observations upon the Trinity
and Divinity of the World the sense of the Synagogue to this Article. And
indeed it would be unconceivable that the Jews should have believed the Messiah
to be true God, and should not be ready to worship him.

It is a thing which Christians and Jews are agreed upon that there is but one
God, who is to be Worshipped. The Jews and the ancient Christians did agree
that Angels must not be Worshipped. From which it follows that if the Jews
acknowledged that the Messiah is to be Worshipped, they must have acknowledged
him to be God, and vice versa.

Now there are positive Orders of God to Worship the Messiah, as Psalm. ii. 12.
Kiss the Son. Who is that Son spoken in this place, it is the Messiah, as it is
granted by the ancient Synagogue, as we see in Ecclesiasticus, I called upon
the Lord the Father of my Lord. And Tehillim Rabba, with many others, use this
place of Psalm. ii. to the Messiah. So the Breshit Rabba in Genesis xlix. so the
Talmud in Succa, c. 5. Saadias in Dan. vii. 13. with the ancient, witness R.
Salom Jarchi in his Comment.

I know well that the Greek Interpreters have Translated those words of the
second Psalm, (...). But that Version is rejected by the Jews who read now in
their Spanish Translation Printed at Ferrara, Besad hiio pro que non se
insanne, which is the sense of Lombroso in his short Notes upon that place. So
it is understood by R. Abensueb in h. l.

We read in Psalm. viii. 3. From the mouth of babes, etc. It was so well known
that this place was related to the Messiah, that it was used at our Savior's
Entry into Jerusalem, Mat. xxi. 16. Since that time it is related to the
Messiah as we see in the Midrash upon Cant. i. 4. where these very words are
referred to God, whom the Babes of Israel were to bless, which shows plainly
that the praises which are spoken of are praises which are acts of Adoration,
and so in the Midrash upon Eccl. chapter ix. 1.

The same positive order for the Worship of the Messiah is given in Psalm. xlv.
11. He is the Lord, worship thou him. There is no doubt but that Psalm is to be
referred to the Messiah; It is so acknowledged by the Targum, and by all the
Jewish Interpreters. What then can be said against the Worship of the Messiah?
If the Jews of old had denied that the Shekinah was to be in the Messiah, then
it should be rational to conclude that they did not acknowledge the Worship
which is to be paid to him. But they have acknowledged the Divinity of the
Messiah, as we read in Midrash Tehillim in Psalm. x. Stetit Divinitas Messiae
and praedicavit. From whence it follows by necessary consequence that they
thought themselves obliged to worship him.

We have the same Worship of the Messiah settled in Psalm. lxviii. 32. where it
is said that the Princes shall extend their hands to him from Egypt. All the
Jews agree that such a thing is to happen at the coming of the Messiah which we
call the second. So Rashi.

We read the same in Psalm. lxxii. where it is said v. 11. that they shall fall
down and worship him. No body doubts but that Psalm relates to the Messiah.

I have taken notice in the second Chapter of this Book that the Jews refer
constantly to the time of the Messiah all the Psalms from the xc. to the c. Now
in Psalm. xcv. v. 6, and 7. the words seem to be spoken of Jehovah, but they
were understood by the Jews of the Messiah who was to have the name of Jehovah,
as you see in Midrash in Echa. i. 6.

After David what says Isaiah of the Worship of the Messiah? he speaks as
distinctly as can be, chapter xlix. v. 23.

The Jews understand it of the Messiah, whom they look upon as the Redeemer to
whom all people are to make their confession from their heart, as you see in
Breshit Rabba upon Genesis xli. v. 44. where they refer these words to the
Messiah, Isa. xlv. 23. You see the same in Midr. Tehin. in Psalm. ii. 2. these
words, when they have seen his great tribulation, they shall come and shall
worship the King Messiah as it is said Isa. xlix. 23.

Some perhaps shall think they can avoid the strength of this Argument, drawn
from the Worship to be paid to the Messiah, by allowing that it is spoken in
those places which I have quoted of a civil worship to be paid to the Messiah
as a great King.

But it should be in vain for a Socinian to employ such an evasion, because we
find that the ancient Jews have prevented it by giving us instances of all the
several Parts of such a Worship, either Faith, Vows, or Prayers, or Sacrifices,
which cannot be paid but to a true God, and I have quoted so many places upon
that point, that I do not think fit to enlarge more upon it.

I shall then conclude this matter by the solemn Prayer of the Jews in the
Feast of Succoth, where they have these words (...) Ego, and ille, Salva nunc,
p. 53. of the Venice Edit. in 8 o. which words the Jews labor very much to
explain who is that ille, but which the most understanding explain to the two
first Middoth, viz. to the Father and to his (...), as we have shown before.

Having now produced the Sentiments of the old Jews, as to several points that
concern the Trinity and the Divinity of our Lord, we ought next to consider how
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, did follow these
Notions of the Synagogue.

CHAP. XIX.
That the New Testament does exactly follow the Notions which the Old Jews had
of the Trinity, and of the Divinity of the Messiah.
WHoever shall attentively examine the method which our Savior and his
Apostles follow in the New Testament, will find it exactly suited to the
Notions which the Jews had entertained, and which they had from the Writings of
the Prophets.

It was absolutely necessary it should be so, because the Doctrine concerning
the coming of the Messiah, began to be more narrowly inquired into among the
Jews, when they saw Herod who was an Idumean, settled in the Throne of Judaea;
it being at the just time marked out for the coming of the Messiah by Jacob's
Prophecy, Ge. xlix. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shilo come, and unto him shall the
gathering of people be. An Angel therefore appears to the Virgin Mary that was
to be the Mother of Christ, and shows the manner of his Conception, which was
to be by the operation of the Holy Ghost. He names the Child who was to be born
of her, Jesus, and declares that he should be the Son of the Highest, and that
of his Kingdom there should be no end: Alluding to Psalm. ii. and to many other
places of Scripture, where the Messiah is described as one that was to be the
Son of God.

Next the Angel appeared to Joseph, who was upon parting with his betrothed
Wife, the Blessed Virgin, and told him, she should bring forth a Son, and must
name him Jesus, because he should save his People from their sins. Whereupon
the Evangelist says, that this Child was he of whom the Prophet foretold he
should be Emanuel, God with us. He was to do that for his People, which none
but God was able to do, to save them from their sins. How could he show it
better that he was the God of the Jews, to whom Judea belonged as his Country,
and the Jews as his People, as it was foretold, Is. vii. and viii? That God,
whose very Name Habakkuk had named, Hab. iii. 18. the God of my Salvation, so
called, says Jonathan's Targum, because of the wonderful things that God would
do by his Messiah.

Another Angel brings to the Shepherds the news of Christ's Birth; and what
words does he use? He names him the Christ, the Lord, (...) or Jehovah, God's
own proper name, Luke ii.

The Wisemen came from the East to Bethlehem, guided by a new Star, to worship
him; and amongst other Gifts, presented him with Frankincense, which by the Law
was to be offered to God alone: Showing thereby that they owned him for that
heavenly Star spoken of by their Countryman Balaam, Numb. xxiv. 17. And for
that King of whom it was foretold, Psalm. lxxii. 10, 11. The Kings of Tharshish,
and of the Isles, shall bring presents; the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer
gifts: Yea all Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him.

Simeon inspired by the Spirit of Prophecy, said, that Christ was to be a light
to lighten the Gentiles, Luke i. 79. alluding to Isaiah xlii. 6. and lx. 1.
which speaks of the Messiah.

He said further, that this Child was to prove the fall of many in Israel,
according to that Prophecy, Is. viii. 13, 14. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread: And he the Lord
of Hosts shall be for a sanctuary: but for a stone of stumbling, and a rock of
offense to both the houses of Israel; for a gin and for a snare to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. In which place the Prophet speaks of the Lord of
Hosts, and clearly points out the Messiah, or the Word according to Jonathan's
Targum.

And because the Angels had celebrated the Nativity of Christ with their
Acclamations, St. Paul, Heb. i. 6. applies to him what the Jews had added to
the Song of Moses in the LXX. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 43. Let all the Angels of God
worship him, at his coming into the World: which words are also found Psalm.
xcvii. 7. from whence they had added them; as well as some others borrowed from
other places of Scripture, which the Jews understand of the Messiah.

Hitherto a judicious Reader will find no notion, but what is perfectly like to
those of the Old Testament, and of the Writings of the Jews, about those places
of Scripture which call the Messiah Jehovah, or represent Jehovah as him that
should be the Messiah.

Mr. N. who does suspect the Primitive Christians to have added these words,
Matt. xxviii. 19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, to favor the new Doctrine of
the Trinity, might as well at one blow have cut off those places in St.
Matthew, Matthew. i. 20. and St. Luke, Luke i. 79. which do more strongly assert
that Doctrine. For there we find the Highest, the Son of the Highest, and the
Holy Ghost, three Persons as distinct as words could make them: And the Messiah
is as plainly called Jehovah as can be. Both Angels and Prophets either show or
own the Ancient Prophets to have been fulfilled in Christ. There is nothing in
all this that looks like a Collusion.

John the Baptist, Luke iii. 3. preached Repentance, as it is written, Is. xl.
3. The voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make his paths strait; and all flesh shall see the salvation of God; owning the
Messiah to be God and Jehovah. When the Jews took him to be the Messiah, he
told them, that he was not worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoes; that he
was before him; that he shall baptize them with the Holy Ghost, and with fire.
And that he was spoken of, Mal. iii. 1. Now Malachi calls him Jehova, though he
also calls him the messenger of the Covenant, as I observed before.

Christ is baptized by John, who at first refused to baptize him, knowing the
dignity of his Person, whose Forerunner he only was. But God the Father cries
from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; confirming what
he had said of the Messiah, Is. xliii. 10.

The Holy Spirit descended upon him in the form of a Dove, to fulfill the
Prophecy of David, Psalm. xlv. 7. O God, thy God has anointed thee with the oil
of gladness above thy fellows: And that of Is. xi. 2. And the spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him. The three Persons of the Trinity did then so visibly
manifest themselves, that the Ancients took from thence occasion to bid the
Arians, Go to the river Jordan, and you shall see the Trinity.

He was in the Wilderness tempted by the Devil, but the main stress of his
Temptation the Devil laid on these words, if, or rather, since thou art the Son
of God: For, knowing the illustrious Testimony which was given him at Jordan,
and by John the Baptist, Joh. i. 34. I saw, and bare record that this is the
Son of God, He took from thence occasion to tempt him.

In his conversation with Nathanael he begins to discover to him the Mystery of
his being God, by comparing himself to the Ladder which Jacob saw in a Dream,
Joh. i. 51. Hereafter you shall see heaven open, and the Angels of God
ascending and descending upon the Son of man. And I observed before, that Philo
attributed that Apparition to the (...), as the Restorer of intercourse between
God and Man.

At a Marriage in Cana, to show that his Commission was much above the meanness
of his Education and Trade, he spoke something sharply to his Mother, Joh. ii.
4. Woman, what have I to do with thee? Much as he had done, being yet but
Twelve years old, when upon her complaining that his Father and her self had
sought him sorrowing, he gave her this Answer; How is it that you sought me?
wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business, Luke ii. 49?

Soon after he went to Jerusalem, and drove out of the Temple the Sellers and
Money Changers, and told them, Take these things hence, make not my Father's
house a house of merchandise, Joh. ii. 16. The Jews surprised at that
commanding Style, asked him a Sign, to show his Authority: To whom he answered,
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I Will raise it up, ver. 19. foretelling
his Resurrection, and declaring that he was to be the Author of it, v. 21.
which, in the opinion of the Jews themselves, is the proper Character of God,
who has, say they, the Key of the Womb to make it fruitful, the Key of the
Heavens to send down Rain, and the Key of the Grave to raise the Dead out of
it. Beth Israel ex Sanhedrim, fol. 140. col. 3.

To satisfy Nicodemus, a Ruler of the Jews, about the greatness of his Person,
he tells him, contrary to the opinion of some Jews, Pirke R. Eliezer. c. 41.
who believed that Moses had ascended up into Heaven from Mount Sina; That no
man had ascended up thither, but he that was come from thence, even the Son of
man which was there, Joh. iii. 13. But how could he be in Heaven, and have
descended from thence? Because he was the Son of God, whom God had sent to save
the world, v. 17. In which Expressions he alludes to the Prayers of the Old
Jews, before mentioned, where the Church begs, that a Savior would come down
from Heaven, even the true Jehovah. Is. lxiv. 1.

When John's Disciples came to their Master to complain that he whom he had
lately baptized, did himself baptize, and draw the Multitude after him: To give
them a nobler notion of Christ than they had before, he told them plainly, that
he was only the friend of the bridegroom, but that Christ was the bridegroom
himself, Joh. iii. 29. Intimating by that Similitude that Christ was God,
according to the Prophecy in Hosea, chapter ii. 19, 20. I will betroth thee unto me
for ever. This John's Disciples well knew; and that the Messiah was spoken of,
Psalm. xlv. in which he is expressly named God: That Solomon's Song did speak of
him: And the Jews believe to this day, that God was spoken of there by Solomon.
And this has obliged the Holy Writers to give to the Messiah the name of
Bridegroom, and to the Church that of a Bride, as may be seen in St. Paul, and
in the Revelation.

John the Baptist further tells his Disciples that Christ was before him in
Dignity, because he was in being before him, Joh. i. 15, 30. and yet John was
born six Months before our Blessed Savior.

Jesus tells them that he came from above, whereas himself, though inspired and
a Prophet, was only of the Earth: That Christ was come from Heaven, and above
all, That God was his Father, and that he had given all things into his hand,
Joh. iii. 31, 35. showing thereby, that it was he whom God spoke of, Psalm. ii.
8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

Christ said, Luke v. 20, 21, 24. to a man sick of the Palsy, thy sins are
forgiven thee; which the Pharisees taking ill, because as they told him, God
alone could forgive sins; he cured the poor man, to show that he had power to
forgive sins; and consequently, that he was God by their own confession. And he
performed that according to the Prophecies which attribute to God, and to the
Messiah, the forgiveness of sins, Jer. xxxi. 34.

The Jews being angry with him, because he had cured an impotent man on the
Sabbath Day, Joh. v. 16. he tells them, to justify what he had done, My Father
works hitherto, and I work, v. 17. At which words they sought more to kill him,
because he had not only broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his
Father, making himself equal with God, v. 18. What would a good man have done
in this case, one that had been only Man as we are? He would certainly have
declared his abhorrence of such Blasphemy as was contained in these words. But
then he would have told them these were not his words, but theirs. He would
have them understand him aright, by saying, he did not make himself equal with
God, but that in working a Miracle on the Sabbath, he only acted as the
Prophets did, to whom, say the Jews, it was lawful to break some one Precept of
the Law.

But instead of making any such Interpretation, he goes on in the same tenor of
words, and a second time gives himself the title of the Son of God, and tells
them, that whatever his Father did, he might do likewise, v. 19. That he would
raise the dead, to prove himself equal with God, That as the Father raised up
the dead, and quickens them, even so the Son quickens whom he will, v. 21. That
that extraordinary Power was given him by his Father, it being his will that
all men should honor the Son, even as they did the Father, v. 23. He proves
again that he was the Son of God, by the power he had to raise up the dead; As
the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself: And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is
the Son of man, v. 26, 27. He applies to himself what was said in Daniel xii.
2. concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, v. 28, 29. The hour is coming, in
the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth: They that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. He appeals to John the
Baptist, who had testified he was the Son of God, v. 33. At last he bids them
search the Scriptures, v. 39. in which they would find that he was that Son of
Man described Dan. vii. 13, 14. and consequently equal with God: For who can
sit on God's Throne besides the true God, as it is declared Psalm. cx. 1. The
Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies
thy footstool. Which words the Jews understood of the Messiah, agreeably to
other Prophecies, in which he is so often called Jehovah, and the Son of God.

He justified his curing Sick People on the Sabbath Day, because he the Son of
man was Lord of the Sabbath. But how could he be so, but because he was that
Word which had given the Law to the Jews; that Son of God equal with his
Father, who consequently was Master of his own Laws?

He opened the Eyes of the Blind, and made the Lame to walk, to fulfill the
Prophecy, Is. xxxv. 4, 5, 6. Behold your God will come, he will come and save
you; then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf
unstopt: Then shall the lame man leap as a heart, and the tongue of the dumb
sing.

He multiplied the Loaves in the Desert, to show that he was that same Word, to
which the Jews attributed the Miracle of Manna in the Wilderness. He tells the
Jews, to the same purpose, that he was the Bread come down from Heaven, Joh.
vi. 51. upon which it may be observed that Philo maintains that the Word was
Manna, or at least Manna the Type of the Word. Lib. quod deterior. p. 137.

Having wrought so many great Miracles before the Jews, he asked his Disciples,
what People said and thought of him? To which St. Peter answering according to
the People's various Opinions, and at last confessing the Faith of himself and
the other Disciples, that he was Christ the Son of the living God, he commends
this Confession in Peter, though he had before refused to receive it from the
Devil; and tells Peter, that God, even his Father, had revealed it to him, and
therefore it must be true, Matthew. xvi. 16, 17. And so it was, for God had
spoken of it by many of his Prophets, as I showed before, by the very
confession of the Jews.

He shows his Disciples how Elijah was come in the Person of John the Baptist,
Matt. xvii. That therefore himself, to whom John had born witness, was the
Messiah, the true Jehovah, whose Forerunner Elias was to be, according to the
Prophecy, Mal. iii. 1. Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare
the way before ME; and the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his
Temple, even the Messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in, says the Lord
of hosts.

He gives his Disciples the power of Binding and Loosing, that is, of
forbidding some things which Moses had permitted, and permitting some which he
had forbidden; reserving still to himself the power of directing them
infallibly by his Spirit in those Acts of their Ministry; To show that he was
that very God who was to make a new Covenant, as Jeremiah had foretold, chap.
xxxi. 33. And that he had in him the Authority of a Supreme Lawgiver. For, who
can give Laws to men's Consciences but the only true God?

In the Treasury of the Temple he tells the Jews that God was his Father; that
he did nothing of himself, but as his Father had taught him, Joh. viii. 28.
That he had spoke that which he had seen with his Father, v. 38. naming thus
God, his Father, many times, which no Prophet ever had done, nor no mere Man
could do without the highest presumption.

He tells the Jews (who objected to him, that by saying that they who believed
in him should never see death, v. 51. he made himself greater than Abraham, v.
53.) That Abraham had seen his day, and was glad, v. 56. And as they replied,
that what he said was impossible, because Abraham had been dead many hundred
years, whereas himself was not yet fifty years old, v. 57. he answers with a
repeated Asseveration, Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was, I
AM, v. 58. plainly affirming two things, first, that he was the (...) which had
appeared to Abraham, and secondly, that he was God, whose name is, I AM, Exodus
iii. 14. which the Jews apprehending, took up stones to cast at him, v. 59. as
a Blasphemer, who made himself God, and equal with God.

Soon after he restored sight to one that was born blind, and had this
confession from him, which he had before suggested to him, that he was the Son
of God; and accordingly accepted his Adoration, Joh. ix. 35, 38.

He said, he was the good Shepherd, that he gave his life for the sheep, Joh.
x. 11. That he had other sheep whom he would bring into his Fold, v. 16. that
is to say, that both Jews and Gentiles belonged to him. That he laid down his
life for them; and that he had power to lay it down, and to take it again, v.
18. showing by all these Expressions, that he was God, and the Messiah, for the
Title of Shepherd is given to God, Ps. xxiii. 1. and in many other places,
which the Jews understood of the Messiah.

Being in the Temple of Jerusalem at the Feast of the Dedication, the Jews
desired him to tell them plainly whether he was Christ, Joh. x. 24. To whom he
answered from v. 25. to v. 37. I told you, and ye believed not. The works that
I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me: But ye believe not, because
ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me: And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave
them me, is greater than all, and none is able to pluck them out of my Father's
hand. I and my Father are one. Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him.
Jesus answered them, Many good works have I showed you from my Father, for
which of those works do you stone me? The Jews answered him, saying, For a good
work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy; and because thou being a man, make
thy self God. Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are
Gods? If he called them Gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the Scripture
cannot be broken; say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into
the world, thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God? It may be
observed from these last words, that having been already accused of Blasphemy,
because he made himself equal with God, not only he affirms it still, but
proves it besides by an Argument from a lesser thing to a greater. For, says
he, If God names Magistrates Elohim, because they are his Deputies; how much
more may his Son be called so, whom he has consecrated and sent into the World?
Alluding to the Psalms ii. and cx. in both which Psalms mention is made of the
Messiah, as the Son of God, and God.

Some days before his Passion he declared that the death of Lazarus had
happened, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby, Joh. xi. 4. He
affirmed that he had power to raise the dead, v. 25. I am the resurrection and
the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. And
he received Martha's Confession in these words; Lord, I believe, that thou art
the Christ the Son of God, which should come into the world, v. 27.

Having kept his last Passover with his Disciples, he promised them the Holy
Ghost, as another Comforter, Paraclet, or Menahem, (by which last Name the Jews
mean the Messiah) which shows the Holy Ghost to be another Person. He speaks of
this very emphatically, Joh. xiv. 16, 17. I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: Even the
Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him: but you know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in
you. And again, v. 26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance. And John xv. 12, 13, 14, 15. He gives the very same
Notion about him which the Jews had.

He expressed himself so plainly concerning his coming from above, that his
Disciples had no further doubts or difficulties about it. John xvi. 27, 28, 29,
30. The Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed
that I came out from God. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
World. Again, I leave the World, and go to the Father. His Disciples said unto
him, Lo, now speak thou plainly, and speak no proverb. Now are we sure
that thou know all things, and need not that any man should ask thee. By
this we believe that thou came forth from God.

Finding them so well informed in the space of four years Discipline under him,
he puts up a Prayer to God in their behalf, John xvii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Father,
the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may also glorify thee. As thou
have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as
many as thou have given him. And this is life eternal, that they might know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. I have glorified
thee on the Earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do: And
now, O Father, glorify thou me, with thine own self, with the glory which I had
with thee before the World was. He could not more clearly express his eternal
Pre-existence, and show he was the (...) which had appeared to Abraham, but was
before Abraham, because he was God. As Philo affirms it in diverse places which
I have already quoted.

Being by Judas's Treason apprehended, he declared that the Angels were his
Ministers, had he been pleased to make use of their Service, Matt. 26.53.
Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father? And he shall presently give
me more than twelve Legions of Angels. For, what he said about his asking his
Father for them, was, because he was then in a state of Humiliation. He did not
ask, when he came attended with them at his giving of the Law on Mount Sinai,
nor when Isaiah saw his Glory in the Temple, and heard them sing, Holy, Holy,
Holy. They were then in their Duty, which, as the Jews understand, their
Prophets say is to adore the Messiah.

Being brought before Caiaphas, at whose House the Counsel of the Jews was met,
upon Caiaphas his adjuring him by the living God to tell them, whether he was
the Christ the Son of God, Matthew. xxvi. 63. Jesus said unto him, v. 64. Thou
have said: Nevertheless I say unto you; Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Upon
which he was condemned to dye as a Blasphemer. From whence it appears what
notion the Jews had of the Messiah: And that they believed that Son of man
spoken of, Dan. vii. 13, 14. to be the very Son of God; who had a second Throne
set for him, and came with the Clouds of Heaven as God: This being the ordinary
description the Prophets make of him.

Being condemned as a Blasphemer, for taking the Title of Jehovah, and of the
Son of God, the People, by way of mockery, called him the King of the Jews, the
Son of God, and Savior; which justified his Pretension. Luke xxiii. 35, 36,
37, 38. And the people stood beholding, and the rulers also with them derided
him, saying, He saved others, let him save himself, if he be Christ the chosen
of God. And the Soldiers also said, If thou be the King of the Jews, save thy
self. And a superscription was written over him, This is the King of the Jews.
And Matt. xxvii. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. They that passed by reviled him, saying,
Save thy self: If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross. Likewise
also the Chief Priests said, He saved others, himself he cannot save: If he be
the King of Israel, let him now come down from the Cross, and we will believe
him. He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him; For, he
said, I am the Son of God.

He cried upon the Cross with a loud voice, Eli, Eli, Lamma sabachthani, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, Mat. xxvii. 46. These words are the
beginning of the 22th. Psalm, and very agreeable to those words in Psalm. xlv.
where he that is God himself, or the Psalmist for him, does nevertheless call
the Father his God; saying, O God thy God has anointed thee. Accordingly the
Centurion that guarded him, having heard this Cry, and also that with which he
expired, saying, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit; said, Truly this
was the Son of God, Mark xiv. 39.

After his Death, his side was run through, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, Joh. xix. 37. relating to that Prophecy, Zech. xii. 10. which the
Ancient Jews understood of the Messiah. [ Breshit Rabba on Genesis xxviii. and
Rabbi Abenezra on this Text.] And yet the words of that Prophecy come from the
mouth of the Lord Jehovah, Zech. xii. 1, 4. saying, I will pour upon the House
of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and
supplication, and they shall look upon ME whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son.

Being risen from the Dead the third day, as he had foretold, the Angel that
gave the Women the first news of it, called him Lord, that is, Jehovah, Mat.
xxviii. 6. as the Angel had done, who gave the Shepherds the tidings of his
Birth, Luke ii. 11.

Soon after, he appeared to his Disciples, and did constitute them Heralds of
the New Covenant, which he had made with Mankind in his Blood; of which
Covenant Jehovah is said to be the Author, Jer. xxxii. 40. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them: And I will put my fear in their hearts, they
shall not depart from me. Afterward he did promise to send them the Holy
Ghost, Luke xxiv. 46, 47, 48, 49. He said to them, Thus it is written, and thus
it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: And that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name, among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these things. And
behold I send the promise of my Father upon you: But tarry ye in the City of
Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.

Before his Ascension he gave them Symbolically the Holy Ghost, which he was to
send fully upon them forty days after, Joh. xx. 22. He breathed on them, and
said, receive the Holy Ghost.

Thomas not being then present, nor believing what others told him, that they
had seen the Lord Jesus, Christ appeared to him, and so thoroughly satisfied him
of the truth of his Resurrection, that thereupon he remarkably owned him his
Lord and his God, v. 28.

He bids them Baptize in the Name of the Trinity, Mat. xxvii. 18, 19, 20. All
power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. And lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the World. In which
words he visibly relates to many Persons, and where he represents himself as
the Shekinah that was always with the people under his conduct.

Being ready to go up into Heaven, he received their Adorations, Luke xxiv. 51,
52. While he blessed them he was parted from them, and carried up into Heaven:
And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy.

And St. John declares that the end for which he writ his Gospel, was, That we
might believe, that Jesus is Christ the Son of God; and that believing we might
have life through his Name, Joh. xx. 31.

I thought it necessary, thus in short, to sum up the chief Particulars which
the Four Evangelists have observed about the Life of our Savior. To show
plainly and briefly to the Reader, that the Gospel follows the same Notions
which the Old Testament had given of the Messiah, and which the Jews in
Christ's days had generally received. First, That in the Divine Nature there is
a Father, a Son, and a Holy Ghost. Secondly, That the Son, which was the (...),
is the promised Messiah, Thirdly, That the Holy Ghost was to be given by the
Messiah, and to come, being sent both by the Father and the Son, as the Son was
sent by the Father to save the World.

This is a Subject of moment; our Adversaries are Men of Parts and Wit. And
because, to rid themselves of all Difficulties in these Mysteries, they
maintain that the Gospel proposes only this one fundamental Article of Faith,
That Jesus, as man, is the Messiah. It will be convenient to add to what has
been observed out of the Gospels, some more Observations drawn from the
Writings of the Apostles, and the first Christian Writers, to show what Notions
they had of these things: Namely, the very same which are expressed in the
Gospels, and were then acknowledged by the Jews.

CHAP. XX.
That both the Apostles and the first Christians speaking of the Messiah, did
exactly follow the Notions of the Old Jews, as the Jews themselves did
acknowledge.
IT being of great moment to show that the Apostles did not make a new Platform
out of their own heads, when they Preached the Gospel; I will examine several
Hypotheses of Philo, which the Apostles did follow in their Doctrine and
ordinary Expressions, when they spoke of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Philo maintains that the Ideas of the World were in the Word of God; therefore
he calls him the Virtue which made the World, which came out of the True Good,
as its Original. De Opif. p. 3, 4, 5.

That the World was made by the Word. Lib. 2. All. Seq. p. 60. and Lib. quod
Deus sit Immut. p. 255. F. He says, he is Sermo omnium artifex. Lib. Quis rerum
divin. haeres. p. 388. F. That by it as by an Instrument God made the World,
Lib. de Cherubim, page 100. That it is the Word of him who is not begotten,
which made all things. Lib. de Sacr. Abel. page 109. That he is the Wisdom
which created all things, and that the Wisdom is the Word; manifestly alluding
to the 3d. and 8th. chap. of Proverbs. Lib. de Temul. page 190. E.F. and page
144. B. and Alleg. Lib. 1. page 36. F. and de eo quod deterior. page 128.

And these very things are taught by St. Paul, Col. ii. and Heb. i. and by St.
John in the first chap. of his Gospel.

Philo affirms that the Word of God governs the World. Lib. de Cherub. p. 87.
F. G. Lib. de Agric. page 152. And he affirms according to the Notion which
Solomon gives Prove. 8. that he presides over the Revolutions which happen in
Kingdoms. Lib. Quod Deus sit Immut. p. 248.

And this very thing St. Paul affirms, Heb. i. 2, 3. where he says, he is the
heir of all things, and upholds all things; that is, guides and governs them.

Philo says, that the Eternal Word appeared to Abraham. Lib. de Sacrif. Abel.
page 108. And else where he names that Angel or Word Jehovah. Lib. de Confus.
Ling. page 290. In the same sense St. John says that he was the Eternal Word,
though made flesh in time, chap. i. v. 14.

Philo maintains that Wisdom (which according to him is the same with the Word)
was the Rock in the Wilderness. Lib. 3. Alleg. Seg. p. 853. A. In the same
sense St. Paul affirms that the Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. x. 4.

Philo says that it was the Word which appeared to the Jews upon Mount Sinai.
Lib. de Conf. Ling. page 265. D. That God spoke to the Jews when he gave them
his Laws. Lib. de Migr. Abrah. page 309. D. E. F. That himself immediately gave
his Law, Lib. de Decal. page 576. and 592. And Lib. de Praem. p. 705. That he
created the Voice which was heard by the Jews, Lib. de Decal. page 577. F. And
this very thing St. Paul affirms, Heb. xii. 25, 26. where he supposes that
Christ uttered that Voice upon Mount Sinai.

R. Solomon owns that the Messiah is pointed at Psalm. xxxvi. 10. by the Light
of which the Psalmist there speaks: And Psalm. cxix. 105. Isaias likewise means
him, chapter lx. 1. and v. 19, 20. he says that the Lord was to be that Light,
naming him God. Micah also, chapter xii. 18. says that the Lord was to be a Light
to his people. Daniel says, chapter i. 22. that the Light dwells with God. And
Malachi, chapter iv. 2. names him the Sun of Righteousness.

These very Expressions St. John has followed chapter 1. because the Messiah was to
be God indeed; because he was that Jehovah who had gone before Israel, Exodus
xiii. 21. whom the Jews affirm to have been the Word, as we observed before.

If any one desires to know how the Apostles came to apply to the Messiah those
things which the Jews understood of God's Word.: He may for his satisfaction
observe the following things.

Philo owns that the Word was the Eternal Son of God, Lib. Quod Deus sit Immut.
p. 232. F. G. But withal that this Eternal Word is spoken of Zech. v. 12.
Behold the Man whose name is the Branch, or the East acccording to the Greek
Translation, Ibid. He calls him the firstborn, and the Creator of the World,
Lib. de Confus. Ling. page 258.

Now the Jews did unanimously understand that place of Zechary of the Messiah,
as appears by their Targum, by their most ancient Midrashim, and by the consent
of the latter Jews, as Abarbanel, who confutes R. Solomon Jarchi, by whom they
were applied to Zorobabel.

This being so, what could be more natural for the Apostles, than to teach that
the Messiah was to be that Eternal Word; and that that Word was to appear as
the true Messiah?

Another Ground upon which they applied to the Messiah what the Old Jews
understood of the Word was this: The Old Jews did own that the (...) which
guided the Israelites in the Desert, was their Shepherd. Philo de Agric. page
152. From whence they concluded that the 23d. Psalm, The Lord is my Shepherd,
was to be understood of the Messiah, Phil. de Mutat. Nom. page 822, 823.

The Apostles therefore did of course apply to the Word, as him who was to be
the Messiah, those Prophesies which mention the Messiah as the Shepherd, whom
God was to send to his people. Isa. xl. 10, 11. Jer. xxxi. 10. Ezekiel. xxxiv. 11,
12. and chapter xxxiv. 24. Mich. ii. 12. Zech. xiii. 7. For all these places are
understood of the Messiah, by the Ancient Paraphrases, and by the Midrashim.

The Old Jews did own that that Word was God, that he had made the World; and
that he was to be the promised Messiah. Upon this Ground the Apostles applied
to the Messiah those places of the Old Testament, which say that Jehovah made
Heaven and Earth, as St. Paul did, Heb. i. where he applys to Jesus Christ, as
the confessed Messiah, the words of Psalm. cii. 26.

Philo affirms that the Word was the true and Eternal Priest, Lib. de Profug.
page 364, 365. That it was he that divided the Victims, when he appeared to
Abraham, Lib. Quis divin. rerum haer. page 390. A. 399. and 401. That he is
God's Priest, Lib. de Somn. p. 463.

From this common Doctrine it was natural to conclude that the Messiah being
the same with the Word, was to be the High Priest of the New Testament, as St.
Paul explains it at large in his Epistle to the Hebrews.

Philo says that the Word is Mediator between God and Man, Lib. Quis divin.
rer. haer. page 398. A. That he makes Atonement with God, Lib. de Somniis, p.
447. E.F.

From this it was easy to see that the Messiah was to be endued with a Noble
Priesthood, especially David having mentioned it, Psalm. cx. representing the
Messiah, whom the Chaldaick Paraphrase often calls the Word of God, as being a
Priest after the order of Melchisedec. And this St. Paul affirms likewise in
his Epistle to the Hebrews.

Philo says that God having appeared by the Word to the Patriarchs, and to
Moses, spoke by the same Word to the Israelites; and that he was the Prince of
Angels, Lib. Quis rer. divin. haer. page 397. F. G. And the Light and the
Doctor of his people, Lib. de Somn. page 448. calling the Word (...) Dei, de
Nom. Mutat. page 810. E.

It was therefore but agreeably to these Notions, that the Apostles applied to
the Messiah, those places of the Old Testament, where God promised to speak to
his new people, by the Messiah, as Deuteronomy. xviii. 15, 16. which St. Peter, Act.
iii. 22. and St. Stephen, Act. vii. 37. apply to our Savior; and that St. John
calls him the Light of the World, Joh. i.

It is necessary to take notice of these Principles of the Old Jews: First,
that we may well understand the reason for which Jesus Christ and his Apostles
quoted several places as relating to the Messiah, which are meant of Jehovah in
the Old Testament.

Secondly, That we may see for what reason, they supposed, as a thing owned by
the Jews, for whom they writ, that those places related to the Messiah, though
the Jews applied them to the (...).

And, Thirdly, That we may understand how naturally they applied to the Messiah
those places of the Old Testament, which by the confession of the Old Jews,
related to the (...).

And certainly the meanest capacity may apprehend that if under the Old
Testament God acted by the (...), (though that Dispensation was much below that
of the New) much more he was to act under the New, by that same (...), by his
own Son, as St. Paul concludes, Heb. i.

What I said of the Apostles, and the other Writers of the New Testament, that
they exactly followed the Doctrines of the Old Jews, which followed the Divine
Revelation in the Old Testament, may justly be said of Justin Martyr, and of
those who both before and after him writ in defense of our Savior's Divinity.
I need not quote many of them, to show that they went upon the same Grounds
with the Jews before Christ.

It will be enough to examine Justin's Writings; for, he disputed with a Jew,
who received no other Scripture besides the Old Testament, and therefore he
could not convince him, but by the Authority of those Books. And if his method
be well examined, it will be found that he argues all along as the Apostles
did; viz. from the sense received by the Jews; supposing that such and such
places of Scripture, from which he draws consequences, were applied to the
Messiah by them.

Justin having proved that nothing certain can be learned from Philosophy, by
Plato's example, who entertained gross Errors about the Nature of God, and of
the Soul: And declared that he came to the knowledge of the Truth only by the
help of Divine Revelation. He affirms in general that the Christian Religion
which he had embraced, is all grounded upon the Doctrine of Moses and the
Prophets. He does particularly instance in that of our Savior's Person and
Office, though the Jews looked upon it as impious, that Christians, as they
reckoned, trusted in a Man Crucified.

He lays for foundation, that the Scripture speaks of two Comings of Christ;
the one indeed Glorious, mentioned, Dan. vii. and Psalm. cx. and Psalm. lxxii.
But to be preceded by another altogether mean and despicable, as David had also
foretold, Psalm. cx. at the end.

He maintains that the Messiah is clearly described as God, Psalm. xlvii. where
he is called the Lord, our King, and the King of all the Earth. Psalm. xxiv.
where he is called the Lord strong and mighty, and the King of Glory. Psalm.
xcix. where it is said that he spoke to the Israelites in the cloudy Pillar.
And Psalm. xlv. where he is named God's anointed, the Lord God, and proposed as
the object of our Adoration.

He affirms that Christ was to be God, and though the same in nature, yet a
different person from him who made Heaven and Earth: He proves by the several
Apparitions, where a true God is mentioned, appearing to Abraham in the Plains
of Mamre, Genesis xviii. 1. To Jacob in a Dream, Genesis xxxi. with whom he wrestled
in the figure of a Man, Genesis xxxii. and assisted him in his Journey to Padan
Aram. And to Moses he appeared in the Burning-bush, Exodus iii.

He maintains that he was to be God, because he executed the Counsel of God:
Hence he is named by Joshua the Prince of the Army; and an Angel which is the
Lord. And because the Scripture describes him as begotten of God, and called
the Son, the Wisdom of God, and the Word, Prove. viii.

He affirms that God spoke to the Word, when he said, Let us make Man in our
image, Genesis i. 26. And, Behold the Man is become as one of us, Genesis iii. 22.
which also clearly argues a Plurality.

He proves from Psalm. ii. This day have I begotten thee; that his Generation is
from all Eternity.

And from Psalm. xv. that the Church ought to adore Christ, because it is said,
He is thy Lord, worship thou him.

He repeats the same things toward the end of his Dialogue, where he proves
that the Messiah appeared to Moses, Exodus vi. 2. To Jacob, Genesis xxxii. 30. To
Abraham, Genesis xviii. 16, 17. To Moses, Numb. xi. 3. and Deuteronomy. iii. 18. and to
all the Patriarchs and Prophets.

He prevents an Objection, (that this was not a Person, but a Virtue from the
Father, which is called sometimes an Angel, sometimes his Glory, sometimes a
Man, sometimes the Word.) By showing that the Scripture makes out first a real
distinction between the Son and the Father, as between Jehovah and Jehovah,
Genesis xix. 24. 2ly, a true Plurality, as Genesis iii. 22. the Man is become as one
of Us. 3ly, a true Filiation, as Prove. viii. whence he concludes, that he that
is begotten is different from him who begot him.

He answers Mr. N.'s Objection, borrowed from the Jews, who quote those words
of Isaiah, where God says, He will not give his Glory to another. By saying
that the Son is the Glory of the Father, and that in this respect he is not
another Being from him. These words have another sense in the Targum, but which
seems an addition. For they are thus rendered, I will not give my Glory to
another Nation: That is, my Shekinah shall not go from the Jews to another
people.

I shall not mention here that which relates to our Savior's Office,
especially his estate of Humiliation, which Justin proves by Texts taken out of
the Old Testament. I shall only observe: 1st. That he quotes all the places of
Scripture which he uses, as relating to the Messiah by the confession of the
Jews; and thus he shows by the circumstances of those places, which had obliged
the Jews to apply them to the promised Messiah.

2ly. That he confutes the false Explications which the Jews gave to many
places of Scripture; for instance that which understands ( Isa. ix.) of King
Hezekiah; for this mistake was older than Justin; some Jews in his days had
revived it, and the Author of it was not Rabbi Hillel, who lived after Justin,
but he made himself famous by propagating it. That Rabbi by the destruction of
Jerusalem having lost all hopes of the Messiah whom God had promised them, made
this a Maxim, There is to be no Messiah in Israel, because they had him in the
days of Hezekiah King of Judah. Gemara ad Sanhedr. cap. Chelek.

It may be Mr. N. will be something disposed from the method which Justin used
to believe, that he advanced nothing new against Trypho the Jew, who probably
was that famous R. Tarphon, so often mentioned in the Mishnah, but whose Name
the latter Jews have corrupted. But I will if possible go further to convince
him, and prevent all his Objections. To that end I will make it appear that
most places of Scripture which Justin used, were objected to the Jews by the
Christians before Justin's Birth. I prove it thus. Justin was born at soonest
105. years after Christ. But it appears by the Testimony of the Jews, that long
before, their Doctors were divided amongst themselves about the manner in which
those Objections were to be answered, which the Christians made to them, drawn
from the Old Testament.

R. Eliezer, who lived under Trajan, had this Maxim, Study the Law with
diligence, that thou may be able to answer the Epicureans. Beth Israel. fol.
105. col. 3.
R. Jochanan explains that Maxim of R. Eliezer, as regarding not only Heathens,
but chiefly the Jews who had renounced their Religion. And who could these
Apostate Jews be? It is easy to guess, by the Objections which they made to
the Jews, and by the Maxim which R. Jochanan proposes, to prevent the Jews from
being overseen in their disputes with these Jews.

In a word, they were Christians, who proved that there was a Plurality, and a
Trinity, in the Divine Nature; Alleging to this effect against the Jews those
places out of the Law and of the Prophets, where mention is made of God in the
Plural Number.

As Genesis i. 26. Let us make Man in our Image. Genesis xi. 7. Let us go down and
confound their Language. Genesis xxxv. 7. where Elohim, that is, the Gods appeared
to Jacob. Deuteronomy. iv. 7. What Nation has the Gods so near unto them?

2 Samuel vii. 23. What Nation is like Israel, whom the Gods went to redeem.

Dan. vii. 9. Till the Thrones or Seats were set, and the Ancient of days did
sit.

Exodus xxiv. 1. where God bids Moses come up to the Lord.

Exodus xxiii. 21. where God having promised to send his Angel, bids them beware
of him, because he would not pardon their transgressions, for Gods name was in
him.

And Genesis xix. 24. The Lord rained upon Sodom fire from the Lord.

These nine Arguments the Christians made use of to prove a Plurality in the
Godhead. And we find that they were grounded upon the exact quotation of the
Hebrew Text, not the Greek Version. For the Greek leaves room only to few of
these remarks, which shows that Justin, who was born a Heathen, had them from
Men bred among the Jews, who had read the Bible in Hebrew, and had made their
Observations upon the Original Text of Moses, and other Sacred Writers.

Beth Isra. Ibid.
If a Man should ask, how ancient were those Objections about a Plurality in
God. I answer that they were as old as the Preaching of the Gospel amongst the
Jews. For, R. Meir, R. Akiba's Master, had endeavored to answer in his Sermons
the Objection taken out of Genesis xix. 24. now R. Meir was born under Nero, and
Akiba died in Hadrian's days, about 120. years after Christ.

Neither were the Jews agreed in the manner of answering those Objections,
about a Plurality in the Divine Nature.

1st. They thought they might answer most of them by this general Maxim, That
God never did any thing without consulting with his Family above, that is, the
Angels. And this they pretended to prove by these words, Dan. iv. 17. This
matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the Holy
Ones. Which answer was destroyed by what others said, that God spoke of himself
in the Plural Number; that Moses did also speak of God, they having regard to
his Sovereign dignity. Though at the same time they observed that in those
places, Moses joined a Verb in the Singular with that Noun in the Plural, to
assert the Unity of God, and for fear the Reader should think there were many
Gods. Thus when Men dispute against the Truth, what one of them builds up, is
presently pulled down by another.

2ly. They were also divided about the Thrones set, Dan. vii. 9. For to what
purpose many Thrones? if there were but one Person? Beth. Isr. ibid.
R. Akiba maintained that there was one for God, and another for David. He
seems by David to have understood the Messiah. But R. Jose looked upon this as
impious, and affirmed that one of these Thrones was set for God's Justice, the
other for his Mercy. R. Akiba was at last convinced, and received this
explication, which R. Eliezer Son of Azaria hearing, was so far from approving
of, that he sent away Akiba with indignation, and told him, Why do thou
meddle with expounding the Scripture? Go to the army and fight; this he said,
because Akiba had followed Barcosba. As for R. Eliezer himself, he said that
these two Thrones signified only that there was one for God, and a footstool to
it.

3ly. They were hard put to it by the Objections drawn from Exodus xxiii. 21.
about that Angel whom God had promised to guide Israel, in whom God's Name was
to be, and who is called by the Jews, Metatron. For, said the Christians, If
the name of Jehovah was in him, he was to be adored. This the Jews evaded by
altering the Text, and reading with the LXX. Thou shall not rebel against him;
or, Thou shall not change me with him; that is to say, for him. When the
Christians objected that this Angel must needs be God, because God said of him,
he shall not pardon thy transgressions, and the property of God is to forgive
sins, as the Jews did object to Christ; They answered, This is our opinion,
therefore we did not receive him as Ambassador.

4ly. In time they took this prudent method in their divisions, they forbad
their people to dispute with Christians upon those Subjects, unless they were
well used to the Controverversie; Let him dispute with Heretics, that can
answer them; as R. Idith. But if a man cannot answer them, let him forbear
disputing. This was the Counsel or Law of Rab. Nachman, one of the Authors
cited in the Ghemara, de Sanhedrin, chapter 4.. 11. In Beth Israel. For, R.
Eliezer, who lived under Trajan, had observed that the reading of the Old
Testament made the Jews turn Heretics: i. e. Christians; Himself was suspected
to be inclinable that way. So that in after times they preferred much the study
of the Mishna, that is to say, of their Traditions, before that of the Law it
self.

CHAP. XXI.
That we find in the Jewish Authors, after the time of Jesus Christ, the same
Notions which Jesus Christ and his Apostles grounded their Discourses on to the
Jews.
Although what I have said shows clearly that all the Notions which are in the New
Testament are exactly agreeable to those that are in the Old Jewish Church, yet
I believe that I can add some light to it by some particular remarks upon some
places of the New Testament, which are mightily cleared, if compared with the
Ideas of the Jews since Jesus Christ his time. And this (I hope) will serve to
show that the Apostles did advance nothing but what was commonly received by
the Learned Men of the Synagogue, and that they have offered no violence to the
Sacred Context of the Old Testament, but that they quoted it according to its
natural sense; those very Ideas being common till this day among the Learned
Jews, and among those very Men who applying themselves fully to the Studies of
the Holy Scripture, are looked upon as the Keepers and Depositaries of
Tradition. I will bring those remarks without an exact niceness or care as to
their order, choosing, to follow only the order of the New Testament.

If any one would know why St. Matthew, chapter ii. 18. has quoted the words of
Jeremy, chapter xxxi. 15. Rachel weeping for her children because they were not. He
may conceive the reason of such a quotation, if he knows that the Jews do look
upon the Messiah as the servant which is spoken of by Isaiah, chapter liii. See
Zohar, fol. 235, in Genesis, and the Messiah being described there, as a Sheep,
that is called Rachel in Hebrew by the Prophet; they have taken occasion to
apply that Oracle of Rachel's weeping, not to the Wife of Jacob, but to the
Shekinah, which they call Rachel. See R. Menach. of Reka, fol. 41. col. 2. and
fol: 42. col. 4.

No body can read the 5th. of St. Matthew, but he must take notice with what
authority Jesus Christ speaks upon the Mount in that famous Sermon, in which he
vindicates the Law from the corruption of the Pharisees. But I say unto you.
But he will be more sensible of that, if he reflects upon the common Notion of
the Synagogue, in which the proper name of the Shekinah is, (...); as, I the
Lord have spoken. R. Menach. fol. 33. col. 4. and fol. 40. col. 4. and that
'twas the Shekinah which gave the Law upon Mount Sinai. R. Menach. fol. 67.
col. 3. and 68. col. 1. They cannot but take notice of the Title of the
Bridegroom, which is given by John Baptist to Jesus Christ, and which Jesus
Christ assumes, Mat. ix. 15. It is evident that they make an allusion to Psalm.
45. and to the Song of Songs, which is of the same argument. But this will be
clearer to those that know that the Jews maintain that it is the (...), or the
Shekinah, which gave the Law, and then sought after Israel as his Bride, that
St. John Baptist speaks of himself as the Paranymph, and as Moses who said,
that he came out to meet God, Exodus xix. 17. as it is noted in Pirke Eliezer,
chapter 41. and that it is the Shekinah that is spoken of in that Psalm. xlv. under
the name of the King; that the name of the King expressed the Messiah when
absolutely used, Zohar in Exodus fol. 225. and that they acknowledge in this an
inexplicable mystery. R. Menach. fol. 7. col. 3. and fol. 143. col. 4.

Jesus Christ says to the people who followed him, Mat. xi. 29. Take my yoke
upon you, for my yoke is easy. If a Man ponders that expression, he shall find
that Jesus Christ speaks as God. And indeed nothing is more common than to see
the Prophets reproach the Jews that they have cast off the yoke of God. Jer.
ii. 20. and chapter v. 5. But who does not see that he speaks as the very Son of
God, who is spoken of, Psalm. ii. 3. the Shekinah who gave the Law upon Mount
Sinai, and so had the Sovereign Authority to bring Men under his Law, let their
authority be never so great.

We see Mat. xxi. 13. why Jesus Christ speaks of the Temple, as the House of
his Father, and as his own House; and the Jews perceived well enough that he
made himself God. But he did that according to the Notions of the Jews, who
maintain till this day, that the Shekinah, or the (...) are the same, and that
the Temple was dedicated to God, and to his Shekinah. R. Men. fol. 63. col. 1.
and fol. 70. col. 2. and fol. 73. col. 3. and 4. and fol. 79. col. 3.

So in the same Chapter, v. 42. Jesus Christ quotes these words from Psalm.
cxviii. 22. The stone which the builders refused, etc. and applies them to
himself. But he did that, to show them that he was the true Shekinah. For this
is the constant Title that they give to the Shekinah, or to the Messiah. See R.
Menach. fol. 8. col. 2. and fol. 53. col. 1. and 3. He is the Stone, and the
Shepherd of Israel.

How often, says Jesus Christ, Mat. xxiii. 37. would I have gathered thy
Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings: What
signifies that expression? A Jew understands it very well, that Jesus Christ
had a mind to tell them that he was the Shekinah. For it is the common Notion of
the Jews till this day, That the people of Israel is under the Wings of the
Shekinah. R. Men. fol. 107. col. 4.

Jesus Christ speaks to his Disciples, Matthew. xxvi. 53. He shall presently give
me more than twelve Legions of Angels. Those who read those words do not
understand them well, if they do not know, that Jesus Christ speaks as the
Shekinah in the Camp of Israel, and that he has the twelve Legions of Angels
as the twelve Armies of the twelve Tribes, at his Command, and under his
Authority; this is the Doctrine of the Jews. R. Menach. fol. 51. col. 3.

Pilate put upon the Cross the King of the Jews, Providence having ordered it
so, because 'twas the Title of the Shekinah, or of the Messiah, as you find it
often in the Zohar. And Jesus Christ on the Cross, make use of Psalm. xxii. not
only because he would show the accomplishment of that Prophecy, but also
because 'twas the common Idea of the Nation which lasts till this day, that
Psalm. xxii. is to be referred to that righteous, and to the Shekinah which was
promised to Israel as his Savior. R. Men. fol. 62. col. 2.

Jesus Christ promises to his Apostles to remain or be with them till the end
of the world, Mat. xxviii. 20. What is the import of such a promise, but that
he had a mind to tell them, that he was the Shekinah by which God remains in
Israel, according to a promise of the like nature, as it is acknowledged, by
the Jews. R. Men. fol. 85. col. 4.

St. Luke takes notice chapter v. 23. that Jesus Christ proves his right to forgive
Sins by curing the sick of the Palsy; but he does that, to prove that Jesus
Christ was willing to show that he was the Shekinah, because of the power of
forgiving Sins, which the Jews allow to the Shekinah as its proper Character.
R. Men. fol. 84. col. 3.

The same St. Luke says chapter xi. 20. that the people who saw a great Miracle
wrought by Jesus Christ, exclaimed, Here is the finger of God. Why has he made
that remark? Because 'twas a true confession that they acknowledged him to be
the Shekinah. For till this day it is one of the Titles which they give to the
Shekinah, which they look upon as the cause of all Miraculous virtues. R.
Menach. fol. 62. col. 1.

St. John speaking of the Messiah before he was in the Flesh, calls it the
Word, he says that the Word was God, and that it was with God; that all things
were created by it, and that nothing was made without it. This is exactly what
the Jews teach of the Wisdom which is the Memra, the (...), whom they conceive
to have been in the bosom of God, and being so, the Amon, the Son, or as it is
the Omen, the Creator of all things. R. Menach. fol. 1. col. 1, 2. where he
quotes the most authentic Authors of the Synagogue, who agree exactly upon
that Notion.

It is clear that St. John has called him the (...), by relation to the History
of the Creation, in which these words, And God said, are so often repeated. And
indeed till this day the Jews derive the Title of Memra da Jehovah from this
repetition; and they take notice that Moses has made a vast difference between
these words vajedabber, where he speaks to Men in giving the Laws, and the word
Vajomer, which is used in the first of Genesis. You see that remark in Men.
fol. 65. col. 2. and fol. 124. col. 2. and fol. 154. col. 1. and col. 2.

It is visible that the same St. John has affected the term of (...), chapter 1.
v. 14. when he speaks of the (...), supposing that the (...), or Memra, and the
Shekinah are the same, and that is acknowledged by the Jews, who maintain that
the Memra, so many times spoken of in their Targums, is the Jehovah, the Angel
of the Covenant, the Angel Redeemer whom Jacob invoked, Genesis xlviii. 15. this
very Ruler of Israel, to whom they refer all things related in the Books of
Moses. Men. fol. 59. col. 2. And such an expression of St. John is the more to
be remarked, because he manifestly looks upon the words of Jesus Christ to the
Jews, Joh. v. You have not the Word of God dwelling in you, which St.
Athanasius has well judged to be understood of the (...), or the Shekinah, not
of the Doctrine of the Law, as many Interpreters would have it to be understood.

The same St. John says, chapter i. 18. That the Father never appeared; which he
has from Jesus Christ, who says so, Joh. vi. 46. And all that, according to
the Notion of the Jews, who acknowledging the (...), as the Angel that is the
Messenger of God, refer to it all the Appearances under the Old Dispensation,
and have established as a Maxim, That the Shekinah is called Thou, and the God
absconded is called He. R. Men. fol. 22. col. 2.

John Baptist speaks of Jesus Christ as of the Lamb which takes away the sins
of the world, Joh. i. 29. The allusion to the Type of the Paschal Lamb, is
sensible enough, but it is more sensible if we consider two things, which are
commonly taught among the Jews; first, that it is the Shekinah that delivered
Israel out of Egypt. 2ly. That the Shekinah was typified by the Paschal Lamb.
R. Menach. fol. 5. col. 1.

Jesus Christ says, Joh. chapter iii. 13. that he descended from Heaven, which is
the style of the Jews, who acknowledge that the Shekinah, or (...), was he that
descended from Heaven in all the Appearances of God to the People of old, as to
judge Sodom, etc. R. Men. fol. 36. col. 2.

Jesus Christ says, Joh. chapter v. 22, and 26. That God gave all judgment to the
Son, that the Son has the life in himself. All that according to the style of
the Jews touching the (...). For they refer those words to the Shekinah, He
shall judge the world in righteousness. R. Men. fol. 46. col. 1. and fol. 122.
col. 4. And so the Zohar mentions that it is he which is spoken of in these
words, Thou quickens all things, the word Thou being the proper Name of Adonai,
that is, of the Shekinah. R. Menach. fol. 2. col. 1, and 2.

He speaks of himself as of the Manna, and of his coming down from Heaven, and
by that he shows that he was the Shekinah. For the Jews (as Philo witnesses)
had that Idea of the Shekinah's being the Manna, and that it was promised that
he should come down from Heaven as the Manna did. See R. Men. fol. 65. col. 3.
and fol. 137, and 138. col. 3.

He says, Before Abraham was I am, to show that he was the (...), as well as
the Messiah, of whom Micah says, that he was Mikkedem, which expression the
Jews relate to the Eternity of the Divine Essence, from which the (...) or the
Memra proceeds. R. Men. fol. 12. col. 1.

He says to the Jews, Joh. xiv. 6. No man comes unto the Father but by me; to
him to the Jews, that he was the (...). For their Maxim is, That they cannot
approach to the Eternal King in the Sanctuary, but by the Shekinah. R. Men.
fol. 107. col. 2.

Jesus Christ says of his Father, The Father is greater than I; but in these
very words he shows he was the (...), because the Jews believe till this day,
that although the (...) is Jehovah, nevertheless the Father is the Superior
Light, and they call it the great Luminary. R. Men. fol. 135. col. 2.

He says to his Disciples, Joh. xv. 16. Whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father
in my Name, he may give it you; to hint to them that he was the Shekinah, by
whom they were to have access to the Father. The same of whom God said, My Name
is in him, as the Jews acknowledge. R. Menach. fol. 56. col. 3. and fol. 53.
col. 4.

He speaks of the Holy Ghost, Joh. xv. 26. as proceeding from the Father; and
the Jews have this Idea, when they suppose, that the third Enumeration or
Person, which they name Bina, and which they render by the Holy Ghost, as you
see in the famous Book, Saare Ora, proceeds from the first by the second. So
Zohar, and the Book Habbahir, quoted by R. Menach. fol. 3. col. 1.

In the same Chapter he represents his Emanation from the Father as the Jews
conceived the Emanation of the Wisdom, or (...), from the first Enumeration,
from which it draws all the Influxes and Blessings. This is the Doctrine of R.
Nechounia ben Cana, and of the Rabboth quoted by R. Menac. fol. 1. col. 2.

He says Joh. xvii. 21. That all may be one as thou Father art in me, and I in
thee. Just according to the Idea of the Jews, who say of the time of the
Messiah, that God then shall be one, and his Name one, Zech. xiv. R. Men. fol.
135. col. 4.

We see in the Acts of the Apostles, chapter vii. 52. St. Stephen reproaching the
Jews, that they sold the just for Money: What is the Ground which St. Stephen
builds upon? It is clear according to the Jewish Notions, who give to the
Shekinah the name of Just, and apply to him the words of Amos, chapter ii. 6. where
it is spoken of the just sold for Money. R. Men. fol. 17. col. 3. and fol. 19.
col. 2.

St. Paul, Act. xx. 28. says that God has redeemed the Church by his Blood;
and that according the Jewish Notions, whose constant Doctrine is, That the
Salvation of Israel is to be made by God himself, who refer to him Psalm. xxii.
and the place of Zechary, chapter ix. 9. and who pretend that the Shekinah shall be
their Redeemer, R. Men. fol. 19. col. 4. and fol. 58. col. 4. and fol. 59. col.
1.

The same St. Paul, 1 Cor. xv. calls Jesus Christ, the Adam from above; showing
that he followed the Notions of the Jews, who call the Shekinah, the Adam from
above, the heavenly Adam, the Adam blessed, which are the Titles which they
give only to God, R. Men. fol. 14. col. 3.

He makes a long and deep Reflection, Ephesians. v. upon the love of Jesus Christ
to the Church, who gave himself for her Redemption; he considers the Church as
his Wife; and seeks in the first Match between Adam and Eve, a great and a deep
Mystery, and a Type of that between Jesus Christ and the Church. In all these
he follows the Jewish Notions, who look upon the Shekinah as the Bride of the
Church. R. Men. fol. 15. col. 3.

St. Paul, Hebr. vi, and vii. considers Melchisedek as a Type of Jesus Christ,
and that according to the Notion of the Jews who agree that Melchisedek was the
Type of the Shekinah, which they call the King of Peace, and the Just. R. Men.
fol. 18. col. 1. and fol. 31. col. 1.

He calls God, Hebr. x. a consuming fire; and applies to Jesus Christ that very
Idea. But he speaks so, after the Jewish manner, for they believe the power of
judging the World belongs to the Shekinah, and they refer to him what is said
in Exodus, that God is a consuming fire. R. Menach. fol. 6. col. 4. and fol. 8.
col. 3.

He supposes Hebr. xii. that Jesus Christ gave the Law, and spoke upon Mount
Sinai, but this, according to the Jewish Idea of the (...), or Shekinah, which
they believe to have given the Law, and to have appeared then, and to have
spoken with the Israelites. R. Men. fol. 56. col. 2.

Jesus Christ calls himself, Apoc. i. the First and the Last, because Isaiah
has spoken so, chapter xlix. but chiefly according to the Notion of the Jews who
did acknowledge the Word to be the first King, and that he shall be the last;
all Nations being to be subjected to him after the destruction of the fourth,
and last Monarchy spoken of in the iid. and in the viith. of Daniel. He calls
himself King of Kings, Apoc. xix. 16. But exactly according to the Jewish
Notion, which is that such a Title belongs to Jehovah, and to the Shekinah,
that is Jehovah. R. Men. fol. 64. col. 2.

So in the last Chapter of the Revelation, xxii. 2. you see that it is spoken
of the Tree of Life, as of the Eternal Food. What is that Tree of Life
according to the Jewish Notion? They conceive it is the very Shekinah, or (...),
who is the food of Angels, as says R. Men. fol. 65. col. 2. and fol. 66. col.
4. And they give him that Name in relation to the happiness it will cause to
those which shall be saved by him. R. Men. fol. 143. col. 3. and fol. 146. col.
1.

I could easily enlarge much more upon this Article, but it should be more fit
for a Comment upon the New Testament, than for such a Work which we are now
engaged in. What has been said shows sufficiently that the first Christians
followed exactly the steps of the Apostles, and that the Apostles and Jesus
Christ himself followed exactly the Notions of the ancient Synagogue.

CHAP. XXII.
An Answer to some Exceptions taken from Expressions used in the Gospel.
WHat has been said about the Notions which the Writers of the Gospels, the
Apostles and the first Christians had of the Messiah, shows plainly that they
were the same that were then common among the Jews. But because some Objections
are made against what has been said, I will for the satisfaction of the Reader,
examine those which seem most material, and might prejudice which I have
already established.

The first is raised from our Savior's Expressions when he speaks of himself:
It is that which St. Chrysostom T. i. Hom. 32. observes, that although Christ
declared himself to be God, (as appears by his way of speaking all along) and
named himself the Son of God; yet he never actually took upon him the Name or
Title of God, while he lived upon Earth. Which seems very strange, for there
was great reason to expect that he should have expressed himself more clearly
upon so important an Article, on which the Authority of the Christian Religion
does depend.

I answer first, that Christ used that caution for fear of destroying in the
opinion of the Jews the reality of his humane Nature. Had he said plainly, I,
am God, the Jews who in their Scriptures were so much used to Divine
Appearances, might have had just Grounds of doubting the truth of the
Incarnation of the Word. They had looked upon his Flesh as a Phantasm; which
persuasion of theirs would have destroyed the Notion of his Humane Nature.
Therefore to persuade them of the truth of his Humane Nature, he was born as
other Men are, he grew by degrees as other Men do, he suffered hunger and
thirst, was subject to weariness, and to all the other infirmities incident to
a real Man; growing even in Knowledge and Wisdom by degrees, as other Men do. It
was absolutely necessary it should be so, because he was to be like his
Brethren in all things, sin only excepted, as St. Paul says, applying to him
that place of Psalm. xxii. where the Messiah says, he would declare the Name of
God to his Brethren; and of Psalm. xlv. 7. where he mentions his fellows: And
also because he was to be the seed of the woman spoken of, Genesis iii. 15.

And if, for all these real marks, his being a true Man, some Heretics called
the Valentinians, believed his Body to have been only a Phantasm, without any
reality. And others, named the Apollinarians, affirmed that the Word supplied
in Christ the functions of a Rational Soul, though he had really no such Soul;
Had Christ expressly styled himself God, he had given the Jews and Heretics
occasion of fancying that his Humane Nature was not a reality; but that this
last Apparition of God in a Humane Body, was like the old ones, when God
appeared in the form of a Man, and wrestled with Jacob, though it was without a
true Incarnation, the thing being done by a Body made of Air on purpose, or by
the Body of a real Man, but borrowed only for the time, and presently after put
off.

Secondly, Let it be considered that Christ used that caution, that he might
not give the utmost provocation to the Jews, who were much offended to see him
in so mean a condition. For, though they might perhaps have owned such a
despicable Man to be a Prophet, yet they could by no means own him to be the
Messiah, of whom they expected that he should be a Temporal and a great King.
Therefore they could hardly bear our Savior's discourse about the Dignity of
his Person; they took up stones to throw at him, when he told them he was
greater than Abraham, and before Abraham, Joh. viii. They said he had a Devil,
when he told them he had power to raise himself from the dead, and also those
who did believe in him. How then could they have heard from him an express
declaration, that he was God, Maker of Heaven and Earth?

Thirdly, It must be also observed that there being many Prophecies, by the
fulfilling of which the Messiah was to be known; Christ declared himself by
degrees, and fulfilled those Prophecies one after another, that the Jews might
have a competent time to examine every particular. To this end he did for some
years Preach the Gospel; He wrought his Miracles at several times, and in
several places; He wrought such and such Miracles, and not others; imitating
herein the Sun, which by degrees appears and enlightens the World. This might
easily be shown more at large, but that the thing is plain to any that have
attentively read the Gospel. What I have noted is sufficient to show that Jesus
Christ was not to assume the Name of God in the time of his Humiliation,
although he has done the equivalent in so many places, where he speaks of
himself as of the Son of God, the Memra, the Shekinah, the (...), who is God.
2ly. That it was more fit for him to let it be concluded from his performing
all the Ministry of the Messiah as it was by Thomas, Joh. xx. 18. Not that they
knew then and not before that he was he from whom Life, and an Eternal Life
should be expected: Upon which Grotius seems to Ground his Godhead in h. l. but
because then they saw in him a full demonstration that he was the true God, the
(...), from whom the Life of all Creatures is derived, as is said Joh. i.

A second Objection is taken from the word (...), which St. John has used in
the first Chapter of his Gospel, to denote our Savior's Divinity. For if we
hear the Unitarians, First, it is not clear that any other of the Writers of
the New Testament has used it in that sense. And then, the Notion of the word
(...) seems to be grounded only on the Greek Expressions, and not on the Hebrew
Tongue, as it is used in the Original of the Old Testament.

To answer that Objection, I must take notice, 1. That the word (...) was not
unknown to the Jews before Jesus Christ, to express the Shekinah, that is, the
Angel of the Covenant. So we see in the Book of Wisdom, chap. xviii. 15.
Omnipotens sermo, (...), tuus de coelo a regalibus sedibus durus debellator;
and so in some other places of the Book of Ecclesiasticus, as chap. i. 5. (...).

I know that Grotius pretends upon the place of Wisdom, that (...) there
signifies a created Angel; and quotes Philo to confirm his Explication. But I
maintain that no body but Grotius could have advanced such a false Explication,
and be so bold as to quote Philo for it, whose Testimonies which I have quoted
before, are so clearly against him, and distinguish so exactly the Angels from
the (...). I pray the Reader only to remark this, that if the (...) signifies
here a created Angel, then it was the current Notion of the Synagogue
concerning the (...); so that when St. John speaks of the (...) in his first
Chapter, either 'twas only his meaning that such a created Angel was made
Flesh, and the Hellenist Jews could not understand it otherwise; or St. John
was to explain the sense of the (...) according to a new, an unknown, and
unheard signification; that he never did, and so he helped the Arians, and
confounded the Orthodox.

Some body will perhaps excuse Grotius, who says in the Preface to his
Annotations upon this Book, that such a piece has been inserted by a
Christian, who has fobb'd in many other things; and it was the sense of Mr. N.
in his Judgment of the Fathers. But Grotius, who believes the Works of Philo
true, has shut that Door against this Evasion, when he confirms the truth of
that Saying of the Author, by the Authority of Philo the Jew; and it is so
strange an Accusation, and without any ground, that it came in no body's head
before Grotius.

2dly. I answer, That according to St. Athanasius's meaning, Jesus Christ
himself speaks of the (...), when he says, John v. 8. Ye have not the Word of
God remaining in you. And it is true that it cannot be understood of the Law and
Prophecy, which St. Paul affirms to have been trusted to the Jewish Nation. And
it is mighty probable that St. John taking the Shekinah and the (...) for the
same, says that the (...), by an opposition to his Absence from the Jews, who
had rejected his direction and conduct.

I answer 3dly. That many of the Ancient Doctors of the Church did remark, that
St. Luke, Luke i. 2. Acts i. and St. Paul, Heb. iv. 12. used the word (...) in
the same sense, to denote the Second Person of the Trinity; and that therefore
it was not peculiar to St. John to do so.

4thly. I say that the word Davar, in the room of which the Jews since the
Babylonian Captivity do ever use that of Memra, to express the Second Person of
the Trinity, was in use even in David's time; as appears by Psalm. xxxiii. 6.
where the LXX have rendered it by (...); which Version being common among the
Jews, and generally received, St. John could not use a term more proper to
express the Divinity of the Second Person taking our Nature upon him. And if it
is no matter of wonder, that the other Evangelists should give to our Savior
the Name of the Messiah, or that of the Son of God, which were first given him
by David; it ought to be none, that St. John has given him that of (...), which
likewise was given him by David; and does withal so well express the Author of
the Creation, who was this very (...), who said Let such or such a thing be,
and it was: For which reason St. Paul says, that God made the Worlds by him,
Heb. i. 2. and St. Peter, 2 Epist. chap. iii. 5. where he ascribes the Creation
of the World to the (...), or Word, as it is acknowledged by Grotius.

The reason why St. John is more particular in his Expressions about the Second
Person, whom he makes to be the Creator of the Worlds, and then represents as
being made Man; was because the other Evangelists had given so full an Account
of his Birth, and Genealogy, and every thing else that was needful to prove the
Truth of his Human Nature against the Simoniani and other Heretics, that would
make him a Fantasm; that this Evangelist found himself obliged to be the more
express in asserting his Divinity, against the Ebionites, who abused some
places of the other Gospels, to maintain that Christ was a mere Man; and
against the Cerinthians, who affirmed that the Word was not inseparably united
to the Flesh.

Lastly, St. John used the word (...), to express the Unity of God, tho there
be Three Persons in the Divine Nature: Therefore he says that the Word was with
God, and that he was God. He observes that Christ said that he was in the
Father, and the Father in him: That he and the Father were one; as he had
before expressed himself in his first Epist. chap. v. 7. These Three are One;
to show the Unity of the Divine Monarchy, after the manner in which the Jews
did apprehend it; wherein he was followed by the first Christians.

Another Objection, which seems very plausible, and therefore is confidently
made by the Socinians, is grounded upon those places in the Jewish Writers,
where they attribute to the (...) what is affirmed in Scripture to have been
said or done by an Angel, in very many Apparitions; as Exodus iii. 2. and Acts
vii. 30. where St. Stephen, after Moses, affirms that the Angel of the Lord
appeared to Moses in the bush: In which places of Scripture, a created Angel,
not the Son of God, seems to have appeared to Moses. Whereas the Jewish Writers
take this Angel to have been the Word, as I showed before. Which Mistake must
invalidate their Testimony in this case.

Accordingly, some Interpreters, as Lorinus the Jesuit, and others Papists,
suppose him to have been a created Angel, but which represented the Person of
the Son of God, and therefore acted in his Name, and spoke as if he had been
the Lord himself. This Opinion they ground upon two things: First, Because he
is expressly distinguished from the Lord, both by Moses and St. Stephen, who
call him the Angel of the Lord. And Secondly, Because the Son of God never took
upon him the Nature of Angels, as he did that of Men; and therefore cannot be
called by their Name.

This has been thoroughly considered before, to which I might refer the Reader
for an Answer. But to save him trouble, we shall here show him reason enough to
believe that those Texts speak of one that was more than a Creature. First,
Because the Angel is presently named the Lord, or Jehovah, both by Moses and
St. Stephen; even as Genesis xxxi. the Angel which wrestled with Jacob is called
God. Secondly, Because he declared formally, that he was the Lord, when he said
to Moses, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob;
which can never be said of a mere Creature, under whatsoever Commission or
Dignity.

The Prophets did formerly represent God, and they acted as well as spoke in
his Name; but for all this they never spoke as the Angel mentioned by St.
Stephen: They said barely, Thus says the Lord, or Jehovah, I am God, etc.

Likewise Christ represented his Father, as being his Ambassador and his
Deputy; and yet he never took the Name of Father. We read of many Apparitions
of Angels in the New Testament, yet no man can pretend to show that any of them
either spoke or acted as God, though sent by him, and speaking to Men in his
Name. It had been as absurd and as great a crime for them to have done so, as
for a Viceroy, to tell the People whom he is sent to govern, I am your King,
though he does represent the King's Person.

It is true, the Angel mentioned by St. Stephen, is named the Angel of the
Lord; and as true that Christ did not take the nature of Angels on him. He did
this favor only to Men; for them only he humbled himself, and was made like
them in all things, sin excepted; and for this reason he is truly named Man,
and the Son of Man, as well as the Son of God. For Apostate Angels he forsook
them, and left them for ever in their Rebellion.

But it must be observed that the word Angel signifies properly a Messenger,
and denotes rather the Office than the nature of those blessed Spirits, sent
forth to Minister. And consequently their Name may well be given to the Son of
God, who ever had the care of the Church committed to him, and by whom the
Father has communed with Man ever since his fall into sin.

Upon this Ground Malachi, chapter iii. v. 1. names the Son of God the Angel, or
Messenger of the Covenant. Which Prophecy is owned to this day by the Jews, to
speak of the Messiah. Isaiah, chapter lxiii. v. 9. names him the Angel of the
Presence of the Lord, who saved and redeemed the Israelites. According to what
the Lord said to Moses, Exodus xxiii. 23. My Angel shall go before thee. And
Exodus xxxiii. 14. My presence shall go with thee.

The Primitive Christians never doubted, but that the Angel which appeared to
Moses in the Desert, and guided the Israelites, was the Son of God: St. Paul
says expressly thus much, 1 Cor. x. 9. when he affirms that the Israelites
tempted Christ in the Wilderness, by their Rebellions. Lorinus himself, quoting
some places from the most Ancient Fathers, is forced to acknowledge it on Acts
vii. And I showed before, that St. Paul has affirmed nothing upon this Point,
but according to the common Notion of the Jews.

It ought not therefore to seem strange, that St. Stephen does distinguish the
Angel of whom he speaks, from the Lord himself, when he names him the Angel of
the Lord: For the Son is distinct from the Father, and the Son was sent by the
Father: But because they so partake of the same Divine Nature, that they are in
reality but one and the same God, blessed for ever; the Son in this regard
might well say, I am the God of Abraham, etc. and be called the Lord Jehovah.

If it be asked why Moses did rather call him an Angel, than otherwise. I
answer, that he did so, for these two reasons: First, because the distinction
of the Divine Persons was not so clearly revealed under the Old Testament, by
reason that it did not so well suit that Oecomy. Secondly, because God since he
created the World, commonly employing Angels in those works which were not
above their power and capacity; It may very well be that the Son of God, when
he appeared to Men, used the Ministry of Angels, either to form the voice and
the words which he spoke to his Prophets, or to make the Body or the Figure
under which he appeared.

It is objected in the last place, that St. Paul seems to suppose, that an
Angel gave the Law upon Mount Sinai, and not the (...), or the Son of God; and
that that Angel is called God, because he spoke in God's Name. Thus Gal. iii.
19. he says that the Law was ordained by Angels. Heb. ii. 2. that it was spoken
by Angels. And Heb. i. 1, 2. making opposition between the Law and the Gospel,
he says to elevate this last above the former, that God having formerly spoke
to Men by his Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son: which
could not be true, if he had before made use of the (...) to give his Law to
the Jews. The Socinians look upon this Argument as unanswerable. And the truth
is, it has imposed upon many Learned Writers, as Lorinus, Grotius, and others.

But it will be no difficult business to answer it, if it be observed: First,
that it has been always the opinion of the old Jews, that the Law was given by
Jehovah himself: Secondly, that it was likewise their opinion, that Jehovah who
gave the Law was the (...). And 3ly, that it is affirmed by Moses, Deuteronomy. xxxiii.
2. That when the Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir, He came with ten
thousands of Saints; from his right hand went a fiery Law. I say that it is
enough to prove those three things, to convince any Man that when St. Paul says
that the Law was spoken by Angels, (...), he means only that they were present,
as witnesses where it was given; not that they represented God's person.

The first appears by Philo, who affirms that it was God who spoke, when he
gave the Law, de Migrat. Abrah. p. 309. D. E. F. And de Decal. p. 576. D. C.
and p. 593. F. he spoke by a voice which he created. And Lib. de Praem. p. 705.
The Targum affirms the same that Jehovah revealed himself, with multitudes of
Angels, when he gave his Law, 1 Chronicles. xxix. 11.

The second is clear by Hag. ii. 6. where the Lord speaking of the time when he
brought his People out of Egypt, says, that he had shaken the Earth; which
relates to his giving the Law, as appears from Psalm. lxviii. 8. and Heb. xii.
25, 26. where St. Paul applies that place to our Savior. And it is
acknowledged also by the Jews as the Author of Rabboth, fol. 135. col. 3.
Onkelos, Deuteronomy. iv. 33, 36. the People heard the voice of the Word of the Lord
out of the fire. And also Deuteronomy. v. 24. And likewise, Exodus xx. 7. Deuteronomy. v. 11.
and vi. 13. where the third Commandment is mentioned in these words, None shall
swear by the Name of the Word of the Lord.

The third Point is evident according to the constant Maxim of the Jews, that
the Shekinah, or (...), is always accompanied with several Camps of Angels who
attend him and execute his Judgments.

Those things being noted, I maintain that when St. Paul says that the Law
has been Ordained by Angels, (...), Gal. iii. 19. the Text must be rendered
between Angels, as St. Paul has used the word (...), 2 Timothy ii. 2. not to say
by many Witnesses, but among or before many Witnesses.

2ly. That when St. Paul speaks Heb. ii. of the Word that has been spoken by
Angels, he does not speak of the Law, but of the several threatenings which were
made by the Prophets, to whom the (...) sent his Angels to bring back the
People of Israel from their wickedness: And of the several punishments which
fell upon Israel, and were inflicted by Angels as Executors of the judgment of
God.

It must be understood so necessarily; or it is impossible to save St. Paul
from having contradicted himself in the same Epistle: For he supposes. chapter
xii. 25, 26. that 'twas Jesus Christ, that being the (...), shook the Earth, in
which he follows the words of Haggai the Prophet, and of the Psalmist, Psalm.
lxviii. 8. and who can reconcile that with St. Paul, saying, that many Angels
Ordained the Law? Did they all personate God in that occasion? No body has
ever imagined such a thing.

It cannot be objected to me that St. Paul opposes the Person of Jesus to Moses
as it has been done by St. John, chapter i. where he says, that the Law was given
by Moses, but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ. The reason is clear, and it is
because he opposes the Ministry of Reconciliation to the Ministry of
Condemnation: Moses has been the Mediator of the first Covenant, but Jesus
Christ is the Minister of the second, although both Ministries were originally
from God.

I need not spend much time to confute the fancy of those who say that the
Angel of the Lord is named Jehovah, because he was Jehovah's Ambassador. For it
is a Notion which the Unitarians have borrowed from the Modern Jews, such as
Menasseh Ben Isr. in Genesis i. 44. But I have fully proved that it is a new
Notion forged by them to save their new System. It is so certain that the Old
Jews believed that an Angel could not say, I am Jehovah, as we read, Exodus xx.
that even the Talmudists affirm, that Jehovah himself spoke these words, I am
the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; Though they say
that the rest of the Law was spoken by Moses. Shir. Hashirin Rabba, fol. 5.
col. 1.

CHAP. XXIII.
That neither Philo, nor the Chaldee Paraphrasts, nor the Christians, have
borrowed from the Platonic Philosophers, their Notions about the Trinity. But
that Plato should have more probably borrowed his Notions from the Books of
Moses, and the Prophets, which he was acquainted with.
HAving in the foregoing Chapters shown that the Doctrine of the Trinity has
its Ground in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets; and that the ancient Jews
before Christ, did acknowledge it, as appears from many places in the
Apocryphal Authors in Philo, and the Chaldee Paraphrasts, who were exactly
followed by Christ, his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians: It may be seen
how falsely the Socinians pretend that Justin Martyr was the Author of the
Doctrine of the Trinity.

But to put them altogether from this Evasion, I will show that nothing can be
more absurd, than to say, that if Philo was not a Christian, he was at least a
Platonist; and that the Fathers, particularly Justin Martyr brought into the
Christian Religion a Doctrine which they borrowed from Plato.

As to Philo's being a Platonist, I say first, that though this were granted,
yet it would do the Unitarians no good. The reason is, because whatever Notions
the Greeks had of Divine matters, they had from Pherecides, a Syrian, who lived
a long time before Plato, and was Pythagoras's Master. Pythagoras (who
afterward was much followed by the Greeks) traveled into Egypt, into Arabia,
and into Chaldea, after he had had Pherecides to his Master. Plotinus does
ingenuously confess that the three Original Hypostases were not of Plato's
inventions but were known before him; and this he makes out from Parmenides his
Writings, who had treated of this Notion, Plot. Enn. 5. Lib. 1. Now Parmenides
had the Notion of the Trinity from the Pythagoreans, whose Master Pythagoras
had probably borrowed it from the Jews, with whom he conversed in Egypt.

Secondly, I own that Philo was compared by many with Plato, as to his Style,
and that lively Eloquence for which Plato was so admired. One may see by his
Book, Quod omnis probus sit Liber, and many other of his Works, that he was
very conversant in these Greek Authors, both Poets and Philosophers. But he had
been so little acquainted with Plato's Works, that he brings some of Plato's
opinion upon the credit of Aristotle. We see that in his Book, Quod mundus sit,
p. 728, and 729. He never proves his Doctrines by the Authority of Plato. He
Grounds all he says upon the Divine Authority, speaking in the Old Testament,
well reflected upon as you see p. 288. where he speaks of the Three who
appeared to Abraham. A Jew as he was, could not well have suited his Notions
with Plato's. For, Plato believed, for instance, That Matter was Eternal, and
uncreated, which is positively contrary to what Moses says of the Creation of
the World; and as positively rejected by Philo, in his Books of Providence; and
that Matter had a Beginning.

As to the Doctrine of the Trinity, Plato speaks of it so obscurely, that one
may justly wonder, how some Christians formerly made use of his Testimony to
prove it. Probably he had heard of it in Egypt. But what he says about it in
his Parmenides, though quoted by Eusebius, shows that he had not a very true
Notion of it. He speaks of an Eternal and unbegotten Being. He attributes to
that Being, which he calls (...), a first Understanding, and a first Life. And
Proclus does distinguish those three Principles of Plato, as three different
Beings. But Plotinus does not agree in this with Proclus, and affirms that
these Three are but one and the same thing.

The reason why many Christians have so much esteemed Plato, is the nobleness
of his Morals; the Maxims of which are much more elevated and Christian-like,
than those of other Heathen Philosophers.

It is true, Philo seems to have followed Plato's Expressions, when he calls
the Word of God, (...), a second God. But it must be observed, First, that
Philo never owns above one God. And secondly, that he used that expression, to
mark the distinction which is between Jehovah and Jehovah, as I showed already.

Let the thing be considered in its self. It is certain that the Notion of the
Trinity cannot be had from Reason. It must therefore be a Doctrine, either
revealed by God, or devised by Plato, or some other from whom he received it.
But the Platonists are so far from believing their Master to be the first
inventer of it, that Proclus affirms it to be (...), a piece of Divinity
delivered by God himself. And,

Numenius a famous Platonist, who lived under the two Antonines, and was
therefore Justin's Contemporary, expressly maintains that Plato during his
thirteen years stay in Egypt, had learnt the Doctrine of the Hebrews; as
Theodoret tells us in his first Sermon against the Greeks. For, it is certain
that many Jews fled into Egypt, after Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem, and
after the death of Gedaliah.

These two Testimonies are enough to prove that Plato was not the first
Inventer of the Notion of a Trinity.

And that Philo borrowed not his Notions from Plato, may further appear,
because Philo lived at a time when Plato's Philosophy had long ago lost much of
its credit. Aristotle did much lessen it. But it was much more crest-fallen
when the opinions of Zeno and Epicurus prevailed. Zeno's Philosophy spread it
self as far as Rome, although the Maxims of it were barbarous and unnatural.
And in St. Paul's days that of Epicurus was much followed at Athens. That of
the Pyrrhonians got much Ground likewise. So that Plato had but a very few
Disciples left him. In Plato's days there started up at Alexandria a Sect of
Philosophers, the Head of whom was one Polemo, who lived under Augustus: These
freely rejected the most famous Opinions, and picked out what they found most
rational in the several Sects of Philosophers, for which reason they were
called Electicks or Chusers. And one needs but read Philo with Judgment, to
find that he followed this Sect.

It appears that Philo's great design in all his Works, is to show, That the
Jews were infinitely above the Heathens, both as to Virtue and Knowledge: In
which he followed Aristobulus's Notions, who had writ long before him, and was
a Jewish Philosopher. And of this Opinion the Jews are to this day, as may be
seen in Cozri, p. 29, -- and p. 131. And as the Egyptians looked upon the Greeks
as Children in learning, which they were fain to fetch from Egypt; so Philo
calls often the Egyptians, even of the most ancient times, a heavy People, and
who wanted common Sense, by reason of the many gross Errors they entertained,
unworthy of rational Creatures.

In a word, I affirm, that if Plato had any distinct Notions in Religion, he
most certainly had them from the Jews while he sojourned in Egypt, as it is
maintained by Josephus in his first Book against Appion.

As for the Chaldee Paraphrasts, I do not see how they can be suspected to have
had a Tincture of Plato's Doctrine: It must be a mere Fancy to suppose it. Let
those Gentlemen read exactly the Books of Philo, and find therein, if they can,
such an Expression as we have in the Targum upon Hag. ii. 4, 5. I am with you,
says the Lord of Hosts, with the Word which covenanted with you when you came
out of Egypt, and my Spirit which abides in the midst of you. M. N. has been
sensible of that; and therefore he does not accuse them of having been
Platonists; but he accuses the Orthodox Christians in general to have inserted
in the Jewish Books whatever in them is favorable to the Doctrines of the
Trinity, and of the Divinity of the (...). But certainly the Unitarians must
have very little Correspondence with the Jews, to fancy that they are so simple
as to be thus abused. How can it be imagined that the Jews should be such
Friends to Christians, as to trust them with their Books in order to falsify
them? And afterward so sottish, as to spread every where their Books and their
Targums which they falsified? This Supposition is so ridiculous, that I cannot
imagine how any Author can write such a thing, or even conceive and suppose it.

What I said of the Gospel Notions in the 15th Chapter, shows plainly that
neither Christ nor his Apostles did adopt the System of Philosophy which was
taught by the Platonists.

The Angel who declared his Conception, used the word Lord or Jehovah, to
denote his being God: But when he named him Jesus, because he was to save his
People from their sins, which no other could do but God, he intimated that it
was he who was foretold, not by Plato, but by Habakkuk, chap. iii. 8, 13, 18. I
will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. In which place
the Prophet expressly calls God Savior or Jesus, by which Name Christ by Divine
Appointment was named.

In short, a man must be out of his Senses, to find any thing in the Gospel
that savours of Plato's Hypothesis. When the Devils own Christ to be the Son of
God, were they Platonists? When St. Peter owns him to be the Son of God, had
Plato told him this? When he was asked in the Council of the Jews, whether he
was the Son of God, was the question made in a Platonic sense?

It is true, St. Paul has sometimes quoted Heathenish Authors; he was brought
up at Tarsus amongst Heathens; he had read Aratus, whom he quotes against the
Epicurean Philosophers at Athens; and he quotes a place out of the Cretan
Epimenides in his Epistle to Titus, who was Bishop of Crete. But we never find
that he quoted Plato, or used his Testimony.

Christ chose illiterate men for his Apostles; St. John, who speaks of the
(...), had been a Fisherman about the Lake of Tiberias: St. Paul only, and St.
Luke were Scholars. St. Paul was brought up under Gamaliel, a Doctor of the
Law; and St. Luke, who had been a Physician, and was a Learned Man, followed
St. Paul in his Travels, and by his directions writ his Gospel. But it does not
appear that our Savior taught his ignorant Disciples the Notions of Plato; nor
that the Learned ones, as St. Paul and St. Luke, ever used Plato's Authority in
their Preaching. This appears plainly in the Book of the Acts, in which St.
Luke gives an account of it. If at any time St. Paul had a fair opportunity to
make use of Plato's Testimony, it was when he disputed at Athens against the
Stoics and the Epicureans. These last laughing at Miracles, St. Paul wrought
none there to convince them: But he might have quoted places out of Plato's
Republic, to prove the Resurrection, and a Judgment in the Life to come; yet
he quotes never an Author, and was contented to argue the Case by strength of
Reason; and this he did with that force, that he converted one of the Judges of
Areopagus, who probably was an Epicurean, and knew what Plato said in his
Books, and did laugh at it.

This Method of the Apostles was followed by the first Christians; Plato was
not mentioned amongst them, till some Philosophers turned Christians; Justin
Martyr, amongst others. This Justin scorned all other Philosophers as
mean-spirited Teachers; but commended Plato, as being one of a great Genius,
that made him think of God and the Immortality of the Soul, in a more elevated
manner than other Philosophers. But when all is done, How much did he value
Plato? But indifferently: He declares that it was from the Gospel, together
with the Law and the Prophets, that he had the true Notions of the Christian
Religion. He quotes Plato neither against the Heathens, nor against the Jews.
If we had the Book he writ against Marcion, who out of Plato's Writings had
broached his detestable Opinions, we might very probably have seen how little
he valued Plato's Authority. Tertullian, who had read Justin's Book, and who
saw that both the Gnostics and the Valentinians made much of Plato's
Authority; shows plainly how little he valued Plato, when he says he was grown
omnium haereticorum condimentarium, the sauce which all Heretics used to
propagate their Doctrines, by which they corrupted the Purity of the Christian
Religion. And much the same Opinion of Plato had they that opposed the Arian
Heresy; of which it is thought Origin was the first Broacher.

However, I aver, First, That the first Christians were no more Platonists than
the Jews, that is, did not use Plato's Notions in their System of Divinity.
They were so far from* it, that they declared that what they believed about the
Trinity, they had it from the Holy Writers; Justin Apol. 2. Athenagoras p. 8,
9. Theophilus of Antioch, p. 100.

Secondly, It is false that any of the Ancient Christians made any other use of
Plato, than by showing that Plato had borrowed from Moses the Doctrine he
taught; Justin in his Exhortation to the Greeks, p. 18, 22, 24. Clemens of
Alexandria, Strom. l. 4. p. 517. and l. 5. p. 598. Paedag. l. 1. c. 6. Origin
against Celsus, l. 1. p. 16. l. 4. p. 198. l. 6. p. 275, 279, 308. l. 7. p.
351, and 371.

Thirdly, The very Heathen Authors own that Plato borrowed his Notions from
Moses; as Numenius, who (as Theodoret tells us) did acknowledge that Plato had
learnt in Egypt the Doctrine of the Hebrews, during his stay there for 13
years; Theod. Sermon. 1.

If any of the Ancient Fathers have quoted any thing out of Plato concerning
the Trinity, they looked upon it not as Plato's Invention, but as a Doctrine
which he had either from Moses, or from those who had it from him. Not to say,
That, in what manner soever Plato proposed this Doctrine, it is much at one.
For his Notions about it are not very exact; and no wonder, since it was
natural enough for a Greek to mix fabulous Notions with what he had from
others, and they to adulterate it.

The truth which we profess, and draw from a Divine Original in this matter, is
not at all concerned with Plato's Visions. And yet, since the Notion of the
Trinity could not possibly be framed by any mortal Man, Two considerable Uses
may be made of Plato's Notion about it. First, To show, That this Doctrine is
not of Justin Martyr's Invention, since Plato, who lived five hundred Years
before Justin, had scattered some Notions of it in his Books, which he had
probably learned from the Jews, or from some other Philosophers who conversed
with the Jews. And Secondly, To make Men sensible that the greatest Scholars
among the Heathens did not find so many Absurdities in it, as the now Socinians
do.

There is an Objection of greater moment than all the Objections which the
Unitarian Authors can oppose, to my using the Authority of the Judgment of the
Old Synagogue, and I will not dissemble it, although they have not been
sensible of it. It is the Authority of St. Paul, in his Epistle to Timothy and
Titus, where he rejects with an abhorrence the Jewish Fables and Genealogies as
the fruits of the falsely named Knowledge, (...), 1 Timothy vi. 20, 21. which he
compares with a Cancer.

I acknowledge freely that Ireneus, Lib. 1. c. 20. and Tertul. adv. Valentin.
understood those expressions of St. Paul against the Gnostics of their time,
who were come from Simon Magus. And I acknowledge with Grotius upon 1 Timothy i.
4. that by those infinite Genealogies, which are spoken of by St. Paul as
coming from a vain Philosophy, and controverted by some of the Heretic Jews,
Saint Paul had a mind to speak against several Notions of the then new Jewish
Cabbala, which was in truth a mixture of the true Tradition of the Synagogue,
and of the Notions of the Platonists and Pythagoreans, who had borrowed their
Notions from the Egyptians. And I will not insist now too much upon the
judgment of those who think probably enough that the Egyptians had borrowed
their Notions from the Jews.

But after all I maintain that this Objection against this part of the new
Jewish Cabala, which I mention as having such an impure birth, and having been
corrupted amongst the Jews, does not abate the authority of the proofs of the
Trinity, and of the Notions of the Messiah, which I have brought from all the
Jewish Writers, and which has nothing common with those innumerable aeones
which are mentioned by Ireneus and Tertullian, as received by the Valentinians,
and which the Apostle St. Paul has condemned in some of the Doctors of the
Synagogue.

Let us suppose that there had been in the Body of the Synagogue before Jesus
Christ some Sadducees, and some Baithusaei whose Birth the Jews say was as old
as that of the Sadducees, but who seem not so ancient, but to have their Origin
from one Simon Boethus an Alexandrian Jew mentioned by Josephus. Let us suppose
that from the time of the Persecutions of Antiochus Epiphanes, some amongst the
Jews had adopted some Platonic or Pythagorean Notions, What is that to the
Body of the Jewish Nation, which was not included in Palestina or Egypt, but
spread every where?

To the contrary, I maintain justly that when Saint Paul condemns the Jewish
Genealogies, he confirms all my Proofs from the Jewish Writers, who did not
ground their Ideas upon the Doctrine of Pythagoras or Plato; but upon the Text
of the Old Testament. When St. Paul has used the same Notions which are in the
Apocryphal Books, in Philo, and in the Chaldee Paraphrases, which no body
accuses to have used those foolish Genealogies which were found amongst the
Valentinians, and are to be found now amongst some of the Cabbalists; he has
secured my Argument taken from the pure Traditional Exposition of the Ancient
Jews; this is all I have a mind to contend for in this matter, leaving those
Cabbalists, who have mixed some heathenish Notions with the Ancient Divinity of
the Fathers to shift for themselves, and being not concerned in all their other
Speculations, although, since they have quite forgot this impure Origin they
have very much labored to uphold them upon some Texts of Scripture, but not
well understood, and taken in another sense.

CHAP. XXIV.
An Answer to some Objections of the Modern Jews, and of the Unitarians.
THAT the Reader may be fully satisfied of the Truth which I have asserted by
so many proofs taken out of the Apocryphal Books, of the Chaldee Paraphrasts,
and out of Philo the most ancient Jewish Author we have as to expounding the
Scripture; I must solve some difficulties made by the Modern Jews and
Socinians, about the use of the word (...), so frequent amongst the ancient
Interpreters of Scripture.

Moses Maimonides who lived about the end of the Twelfth Century, affirms that
the word Memra, which in Chaldaick is the same as that of (...) in Greek, was
made use of by the ancient Paraphrasts on purpose to prevent Peoples thinking
God had a Body: More Nevoch. Lib. 1. c. 21. He says also, that for the same
reason they often used the words Jekara, Glory; Shekinah, Majesty, or
habitation.

But he does manifestly wrong them: For if it had been so, they would have used
that caution on other occasions, whereas they often render places of Scripture,
where mention is made only of the Lord, by these words, before the face of the
Lord, which are apt to make people fancy God as being Corporeal. Besides, if
what he says were true, they would have used the same caution where ever the
Notion of his being Corporeal might be attributed to God. But it is certain
that in many places, as apt to give that Notion of God, they do not use the
word Memra or (...): And as certain, that in many others, they use it where
there is no danger of fancying God as having a Body. As Genesis xx. 21. Exodus ii.
25. Exodus vi. 8. Exodus xix. 17. Lev. xxvi. 46. Numb. xi. 20. Numb. xxiii. 21.
and in many more, quoted by Rittangel on Jetzira, page 96. and in his Book
Libra Veritatis.

Besides, it is so palpable that the ancient Jews, particularly Philo, have
given the Notion of the (...), as being a Divine Person, that Maimonides his
answer can be no other than an Evasion. Nay it is observable that the word
Davar, which in Hebrew signifies Word, is sometimes explained by that which is
a true Person, in the Books of the Old Jewish Authors, who lived since Christ;
even in those whose authority Maimonides does acknowledge: One of their ancient
Books, namely R. Akiba's Letters, has these words on the Letter Gimel, God
said, Thy Word is settled for ever in Heaven; and this Word signifies nothing
else but the healing Angel, as it is written, ( Psalm. cvii. 20.) He sent his
Word, and he healed them. He must needs mean a Person, namely, an Angel, though
perhaps he might mistake him for a created Angel.

Lastly, The Notion which Maimonides does suggest can never be applied to Psalm.
cx. 1. which is thus rendered by the Paraphrast, The Lord said to his Word:
where the Word does manifestly denote the Messiah, as the ancient Jews did
fairly acknowledge. It is true, that in the common Edition, that place of the
Targum is rendered thus, The Lord said in his Word, or by his Word; but it is a
poor shift: For in his Word, does certainly signify to his Word, or of his
Word, the (...) of the Chaldeans having naturally that double signification; as
appears from many places. Thus it signifies concerning, or of, Deuteronomy. vi. 7.
Jer. xxxi. 20. Cant. viii. 8. Job xix. 18. Psalm. l. 20. It signifies to, in
Hos. i. 2. Hab. ii. 1. Zech. i. 4, 9, 13, 14. Numb. xii. 2, 6. 1 Samuel xxv. 39.

You may to this observation about Psalm. cx. 1. add that of the Text of
Jonathan's Targum on Isa. xxviii. 5. where the Messiah is named in the room of
the Lord of Hosts.

The second Evasion used by Moses Maimonides is More Nevoch. page 1. c. 23.
where he tells us in what sense Isaiah said, that God comes out of his place,
namely, that God does manifest his Word, which before was hidden from us. For,
says he, all that is created by God is said to be created by his Word, as Psalm.
xxxiii. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them
by the breath of his mouth: By a comparison taken from Kings, who do what they
have a mind to, by their word, as by an Instrument. For God needs no Instrument
to work by, but he works by his bare Will; neither has he any Word properly so
called. Thus far Maimonides.

But it is not true, as I showed before, that the Word in the Chaldee
Paraphrase, signifies no more than the manifestation of the Will of God. I have
quoted so many places out of the Apocryphal Books, out of Philo, and out of the
Paraphrase it self, which show the contrary, that Maimonides is not to be
believed upon his bare word against so many formal proofs. It is not true
neither, that Psalm. xxxiii. 6. expresses only the bare act of the Will of God,
as Maimonides does suppose. I showed before that the great Authors of the
Jewish Traditions (which Maimonides was to follow when he writ his More
Nevochim) give another sense to those words, and do acknowledge that they do
establish the Personality of the (...), and of the Holy Ghost; which they do
express by the second and third Sephira, or Emanation, in the Divine Essence.

That which made Maimonides stumble, was that he believed that Christians made
the Word to be an Instrument different from God, which is very far from their
opinion. For they do, as well as Philo, apprehend the Word as a Person distinct
from the Father, but not of a different nature from his; but having the same
Will and Operation common to him and the Father, and this they have by Divine
Revelation.

A famous Socinian whom I mentioned already, being hard put to it, by the
Authority of the Targums, has endeavored in a Tract which he writ (and which
has this Title, Disceptatio de Verbo, vel Sermon Dei, cujus creberrima fit
mentio apud Paraphrast as Chaldaeos, Jonathan, Onkelos, and Targum
Hierosolymitanum) to shake it off, by boldly affirming that the Word of the
Lord, is barely used by them to express the following things: The Decree of
God: His Commands: His inward Deliberation: His Promise: His Covenant and his
Oath to the Israelites: His design to punish or to do good: A Prophetic
Revelation: The Providence which protected good Men. In short, the Word by
which God does promise or threaten, and declare what he is resolved to do: Of
which the said Author pretends to give many instances.

I have already proved how false this is what that Author so positively
affirms, that the term Word is never found to be used by the Paraphrasts, to
denote a Person. The very place which I just now quoted out of R. Akiba's
Alphabet, were enough to confute him. I need not repeat neither what I said,
that supposing all were true which he affirms of the use of the word Memra in
the Paraphrasts, yet he could not but acknowledge that Philo gives quite
another Notion of the (...), namely, as of a real Person; in which he visibly
follows the Author of the Book of Wisdom; The Unitarians of this Kingdom do for
that reason reject Philo's Works as being Supposititious, and written after our
Savior's time.

I say therefore that the sense which he puts upon the Targums, is very far
from the true meaning of the words which they use when they speak of the (...)
in many places. I shall not examine whether in any place of the Targums the
word Memra is used instead of that of Davar, which in Hebrew signifies the Word
or Command of God. Rittangel positively denies it: And the truth is that the
Targums commonly render the word Davar by Pitgama, and not by Memra. To be
fully satisfied of it, one needs but take an Hebrew Concordance upon the word
Davar, and search whether the Paraphrasts ever rendered it by Memra.

But supposing Rittangel should deny the thing too positively, however the
Targumists do so exactly distinguish the Word when they mention him as a Divine
Person, that it is impossible to mistake him in all places, by putting upon
them those senses which the Socinian Author endeavors to affix to them, that
he may destroy the Notion which they give of the Word, as being a Divine
Person. And though I have already alleged many proofs of it, yet this being a
matter of great moment I will again briefly speak to it, to confute that
Author, and those who shall borrow his Arguments.

Let an impartial Reader judge whether any of the Socinian Author's senses can
be applied to the word Memra, in Onkelos his Targum, Genesis iii. 8. They heard
the voice of the Word of the Lord. And Genesis xv. 1, 5, 9. where the Word
appeared to Abraham, brought him forth, and commanded him to offer a Sacrifice
to him.

And suppose that the word Memra should in some places have some of the senses
which the Socinian Author mentions, does it follow that it has not in many
other places the sense we give to it, and which Philo gave to it before Christ?
Let it be granted it signifies sometimes the Command of God, as Genesis xxii. 18.
can it have the same sense in a number of places where mention is made of the
Laws of the Word of the Lord? Let the word Memra be taken sometimes in the
Targums for the Decree of God, can it be taken in that sense in Jonathan's
Targum on Hag. ii. 6. where it is distinguished from that Decree? or in those
lately Printed in the Books of Chronicles, where mention is made of the Decree
of the Word of the Lord, as 1 Chronicles. xii. 23. Were it not a ridiculous
Tautology, if in that place the Word should be said to signify the Decree? The
same may be said of all other places where the Decree of the Word is spoken of,
as 2 Chronicles. vi. 4, 15. xxix. 23. xxxiii. 3.

Supposing that Memra signifies sometimes the Word of God, can it signify so
too, where we read, according to the word of the Memra, 1 Chronicles. xxix. 23. Let
it be granted that the Word signifies sometimes the Oracles of God, can it
signify them also, where it is expressly distinguished from them, as 2 Chronicles.
xx. 20. chapter xxxvi. 12. And from the Law of God in the same place? The truth is,
the Paraphrast does suppose that it was the Memra who gave the Law and the
Oracles to the Jews: And that it was for refusing to offer Sacrifices to him,
that the Jews often fell into Idolatry, 2 Chronicles. xiii. 11. chapter xxviii. 19.
xxix. 19. xxx. 5.

There are so many proofs, that the Paraphrasts mention it in many places in
the very same sense the Old Jews gave to it, who acknowledged the Word of God
to be a Person, that no Man can mistake, unless he does it wilfully. Many of
their Works have been Printed almost two hundred years, and I have produced so
many proofs out of them, that I need not allege any more. I shall therefore
only produce a few out of the two Books of Chronicles, which the Learned
Beckius published about sixteen years ago.

The Targum on those two Books of Chronicles affirms the following things. That
it is the (...) who appeared in most Apparitions in which God appeared to the
Patriarchs: To Abraham, to whom he spoke from between the Victims, Genesis xv. 1 Chronicles. vii. 21. To Solomon, 2 Chronicles. vii. 12. To Phinehas, 1 Chronicles. ix. 20. To
David, 1 Chronicles. xvii. 2. To Solomon, 1 Chronicles. xxii. 11.

That the Angel who hindered Abraham from killing Isaac, was the Word of God, 2 Chronicles. iii. 1.

He plainly distinguishes the Angel from the (...), 1 Chronicles. xiv. 15. and xv.
1. He affirms that the Word sent Gabriel to help Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 20.
whereas David had said he sent his Word and healed them, Psalm. cvii. 20. See
Cosri, page 45.

He affirms that to the Word the Temple was built, 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 1, 3. and 2 Chronicles. vi. 1, 10. and xx. 8. To whom Sacrifices were offered, 2 Chronicles. xxxiii.
17.

David exhorts Solomon in the presence of all the People, and of the Word of
the Lord who chose him King, to keep the Law of God, 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 8, 10. He
says that the Judges judge before the Word, and before the Holy Spirit, 2 Chronicles.
xix. 6.

He affirms that it was the Word who helped David, 1 Chronicles. xi. 9. xii. 18. And
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 20. And Abijah against Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. xiii. 15.

That the faithful seek the Word of the Lord, and his Power, and ever regard
his Face, 1 Chronicles. xvi. 10, 11.

He says the Word decreed with God, 2 Chronicles. vi. 4.

That the Word helps them that trust in him, and destroys the wicked, 1 Chronicles.
xii. 18. xvii. 2. 2 Chronicles. xiii. 18. and xiv. 11. and xv. 2. and xvi. 7, 8. and
xx. 20. and xxv. 7. and xxxii. 8. and xvii. 3. and xviii. 31. and xx. 22, 29.

That the Word drove out of Canaan the Inhabitants of it, 2 Chronicles. xx. 7. and
fought for Israel, 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 8.

That by Solomon's Orders the Word was prayed to, 2 Chronicles. xx. 8.

That Men are adjured by the Name of the Word, 2 Chronicles. xviii. 15. Speak
according to the mouth of the Word, 2 Chronicles. xxii. 7. That it was the Word that
gave Moses leave to show the Tables of the Law, 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 31.

That the Word saved Hezekiah from being burnt in the fire, through which Ahaz
made his other Children to pass, 2 Chronicles. xxviii. 3.

That the Word blessed the People, 2 Chronicles. xxxi. 10.

That the Prophets spoke to Manasseh in the Name of the Word of the Lord, who
is the God of Israel, 2 Chronicles. xxxiii. 18.

That Men repent before the Word of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. xxxiv. 27.

That the Word of the Lord the God of Heaven commanded Cyrus to build him a
Temple, 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 23.

In a word the Author of this Targum leaves no room to doubt, but that by the
Word he understood and meant in many places a Divine Person, a Principle of
Action, such as we conceive him to be. Though in some others he might use the
word Word in those other different Significations, which the Socinian Author
who writ against Wecknerus, was pleased to put upon it.

Another Objection of the same Socinian Author, which seems more plausible is
this, That there are some places in the Targum, where instead of the Holy
Spirit, as it is in the Hebrew, they render it by Memra, or the Word; of which
he gives some instances, as Isa. xxx. 28. Zech. iv. 6. To which may be added,
Isa. xlviii. 16. which in the Hebrew is, the Lord and his Spirit has sent me;
and in the Paraphrase, the Lord and his Word.

I answer, that though in some few places the Targums have a confused Notion of
the thing, yet this ought not to balance the constant style of those Books, in
others, and much more numerous places: It being easy to confound those Notions
before the Gospel Times, when they were not, by much, so clearly apprehended,
as they have been since. Otherwise, the style of the Targums is pretty equal:
And here comes in very naturally Maimonides his observation about the style of
Onkelos his Paraphrase, which he was well versed in. He thinks in his More
Nevochim, p. 1. c. 48. that three or four places of the Targum, in which his
remark about the constant method had no room, might have been altered; and
wishes he could get some Copies of it, more ancient than those he used; and
owns that he did not well apprehend the reason which had obliged the Paraphrast
to render, in some places otherwise than he usually rendered, which yet he did
for great reasons.

One great Objection of the Socinian Author, which he much insists upon, is
that the Christians never quoted the Authority of the Targum against the Jews,
before Galatinus, who lived at the beginning of the 16th. Century. But that
since him, Heinsius, Vechnerus, and some others, followed him in that fancy.

Supposing this to be true, I cannot see what advantage it would be to him. Put
case the Ancients were not capable Scholars enough to peruse the Jewish Books,
can this ever prejudice truth? And ought not they to be received, how late
soever they come, by whose care soever they be vindicated and asserted?

But it is absolutely false that Christians before Galatinus, have nothing of
the Jewish Opinions about this matter. I showed in the vii. Chap. of this Book,
that Ribera and others, which would have these Paraphrases to be written after
St. Jerome, are much mistaken: And consequently this Socinian Author who
followed them, and Vorstius in his Notes on Tsemach David, was also mistaken
about the Antiquity of the Targums. But our Socinian says, if they are so
ancient, how comes it to pass that they have not been quoted by the Christians
that disputed against the Jews in ancienter Times? They were very few of
ancient Christians that writ upon these matters. And of them yet fewer
understood the Chaldee, or even the Hebrew Tongue; most of them rested upon the
Authority of Philo, of the Book of Wisdom, and of other Authors, who were
famous among the Jews before Christ, and who had writ full enough upon this
Subject, as may be seen by what Eusebius quotes out of them. And no doubt those
places of Philo, and those other Jewish Writers, were well known to Clemens of
Alexandria, and to Origin, whose Work Eusebius much followed, as appears by
reading his Books, and as he himself does acknowledge.

The Socinian Author affirms too positively, that Galatinus is the first that
used that Authority of the Targums. He must not suppose a thing which is
absolutely false. Origin, lib. 4. in Celsum, speaks of a Dispute between Jason
and Papiscus, in which says Origin, Christianus ex Judaicis Scriptoribus cum
Judaeo describitur disputans, and plane demonstrans quae de Christo extant and
vaticinia Jesu ipsi congruere, etc. What were those Writings of the Jews, but
the Targums, who had translated Becocma for Breschith, according to the Jewish
Notion which I have explained so many times; and for which St. Jerome reflects
upon Jason, who has quoted the Targums, as if he has read them in Hebrew.

Besides, it appears by Justin the Martyr's Dialogue with Trypho, That in his
time some Jews had already endeavored to invalidate the Proofs taken out of
Scripture in their so frequent Style, about the (...), as we see them in the
Targums. For Justin undertakes to prove, that the Word is not barely an
Attribute in God, nor an Angel, but a Person, and a true Principle of Action.
And this he proves by his Apparitions, and by other Characters and Signs of a
real Person, such as are his executing his Father's Counsels, his being his
Offspring, and his Son, properly so called. Here I must add one thing, which
is, that St. Jerome has expressed the Sense of the Targum in many places,
especially upon the Prophets, which Sense he had no doubt from the learned Jews
whom he had consulted, and they from the Targums. I confess, that Jerome never
made his business to write against the Jews; nor did any other Christian, that
was ever able to make use of the Targums. Some, indeed, of the Fathers took the
pains to learn Hebrew, because the Old Testament was writ in that Language; but
those were very few, and none of them ever troubled himself with the Chaldee.
St. Jerome himself, how skilful soever in the Hebrew, understood not the
Chaldee, as appears by his Writings. The first that set himself to beat the
Jews with their own Weapons, was Raimundus Martini, a convert Jew, who lived
about the Year of Christ, 1260. He writ a Book against them, called Pugio
Fidei, which shows he had well studied their Rabbis, and he makes use of their
Targums to very good purpose. Out of this Book, there was another composed, and
called Victoria adversus Judaeos, by Porchetus Salvaticus, that is said to have
lived in the next Century. Neither of their Books was much considered in those
ignorant times wherein they lived. So that when Learning came more in request,
one might venture to make use of their labors, and set them forth as his own,
with little danger of being discovered. This very thing was done by Galatinus,
who lived about the end of the Fifteenth Century. He did with great Impudence
almost transcribe his Notions, and the Arguments against the Jews out of that
Work of Porchetus, without so much as mentioning his Name. That Socinian
mentions the Pugio in the close of that Book against Vechner, by which it may
be supposed he read that Book of Raimundus above mentioned. Which if he did,
and considered it with Galatinus, he could not but see that this Work of
Galatinus was, as to the main of it, a Stream from that Fountain of Raimund's
Pugio. And if he saw it, he did very disingenuously in making Galatinus the
first among Christians that made use of the Jewish Notions.

The last Objection of the Unitarians (against what I have proved about the
Word's being a Person, from the consent of the Chaldee Paraphrases, when they
speak of the Memra of the Lord, and his Actions) is made by the same Socinian
Author, who affirms, that in the Targums the Memra implies no more than that
God works by himself, because the word Memra is used of Men, as well as of God.

I will not deny but that here and there in the Targums, the word Memra has
that Sense, as Hacspan well observes in his Notes on Psalm cx. and produces
many Instances of it, to which many more might be added.

But when all is done, this Objection, much the same with that of Moses
Maimonides, cannot absolutely take away that force of those Texts where the
Memra is used of God; and to be satisfied of this, it is but making the
following Reflections.

First, That Philo, one of the most famous Jews of Egypt, very well
apprehended, and clearly declared, That by the (...), which answers to the
Hebrew Memra, the old Jews understood a real Principle of Action, such as we
call a Person. Secondly, That the Jewish Authors more ancient than Philo, had
the very same Notion of it, as may be seen in the Book of Baruch, and in that
of Wisdom, the Notions of which Philo has clearly followed in his Book, de
Agric. apud Eusebius. de Proepar. Evang. page 323. And Lastly, That even since
Christ, the Cabalistical Authors followed, and to this day do follow the same
Notion; making use of those places where the Memra and the Cochma, that is to
say, the (...) are mentioned; to make out their second Sephira, as I showed
before.

Neither must it seem strange, that the Jewish Paraphrase should use that word
in various Senses: For the word (...) had many Senses in Greek, and so might
that of Memra have in Chaldee, without prejudicing our Arguments. For the
places which I have quoted are of that nature, that there can be no
Equivocation in them, as any Man will own, that is not resolved to dispute
against truth.

CHAP. XXV.
An Answer to an Objection against the Notions of the Old Jews compared with
those of the new Ones:
A Greater Objection than all these, may be very naturally made by a Judicious
Reader, concerning what I said of the Testimonies of the Jews before Christ,
about the distinction of Divine Persons, and the Divinity of the (...). On the
one side, may he say, you own that the Jews after Christ, have opposed the
Doctrine of the Trinity, as being contrary to the Unity of God; there are plain
proofs of it, even in the second Century. And it is certain that Trypho did not
believe that the Messiah was to be any other than a mere Man, and so did the
Jews believe as it is witnessed by Orig. lib. 2. contr. Cells. page 79. And on
the other side you affirm that the Jews in the old times before Christ taught a
Doctrine much like that of the Trinity; and that all their ancient Authors
affirmed that the Messiah was to have the (...) dwelling in him.

In answer to this difficulty, I cannot say that the Jews have altered their
opinion upon this Subject, since the beginning of Christianity; for to this day
their Cabalistical Doctors, whom they respect as great Divines, do profess the
same which Philo and the Chaldee Paraphrasts did. I cannot say neither that
they are divided into two Sects, the one of which follows these Notions, the
other opposes them: For though the Cabalists are fewer in number than those who
stick to the letter of the Law, and study only to understand the Ceremonies of
it, to which they add the Traditions contained in the Misna, and the Guemarra,
yet it is certain that there is no great controversy between them about those
Doctrines which I have mentioned.

I answer therefore, first by owning that whatever Notions the old Jews had of
these matters, they were neither so clear or distinct but that they were mixed
with diverse Errors, of which there are many instances both in Philo and the
Targums.

Secondly, I maintain withal, that how confused soever some of those Notions
are in those ancient Authors, yet it is certain that those Jews that turn
Christians do it by going upon Principles I have mentioned, namely by following
what is in them conformable to Scripture, and rejecting what is contrary to it.
And I dare affirm that all Learned Jews who sincerely turn Christians, do it by
reflecting upon those old Jewish Principles, which they originally find in the
Old Testament, and afterward to be agreeable with the Principles of
Christianity. This plainly appears in the Dialogue between Justin the Martyr,
and Trypho a Jew. For Justin having quoted those places out of the Old
Testament, in which God calls the Messiah, his Son, the Almighty God, and one
that is to be adored. Trypho answers in these words, I allow that those so many
and so great proofs are enough to persuade, Page 302. B. All the difficulty he
makes, is about the Application which Christians and Justin in particular, made
to Christ, of those places of Scripture. For it appears that Trypho applying
Psalm. cx. and Isa. ix. to Hezekiah, was of the same opinion with Hillel, who
afterward affirmed that Hezekiah was the promised Messiah, and that no other
was to be expected.

Thirdly, I say farther, that the Jews prepossessed with the opinion of the
Messias's coming to have a Temporal Kingdom, and offended by the mean
Circumstances of Christ and his Apostles, did reject Christ's Revelation, and
were thereby hindered from seeing, how conformable it was with their old
Notions. This will not seem strange to one that considers the force of their
prejudices, and what was done by their Ancestors in a like case. For these
killed the Prophets, no doubt finding much contradiction at first, as they
imagined, between the old Prophecies and the new ones, for which cause they
rejected the new Prophets, and put the Authors of them to death: Though
afterward they were forced to receive those very Prophecies, the Authors of
which they had put to death, as going upon the same Grounds with the old
Prophecies, the Truth and Authority of which they acknowledged.

Fourthly, I say, that the Jews who lived immediately after Christ, endeavored
to represent his being put to death, as a just and legal Act; for though the
Synagogue had Excommunicated him, yet he had continued to teach to draw his
Disciples from observing the Law; so that they pretended that he was a false
Prophet; that he wrought his Miracles by the power of the Devil; and that he
had been justly punished, according to the Law, Deuteronomy. xiii. 5. and xviii. 20. To
this end, before the destruction of Jerusalem they sent to their Synagogues all
the World over, Men of great Authority, to make them receive and subscribe the
Anathema which they had drawn up against Christ and his Disciples; as Justin
the Martyr tells us in his Dialogue with Trypho, page 234. E. To which Anathema
it seems St. Paul alludes Heb. vi. 6. And 1 Cor. xvi. 22. as may be seen in the
very place of Justin now quoted, and in page 266. E.

In the fifth place, I say, that soon after the Preaching of the Gospel they
begun to defame our Savior horribly, about the manner of his Birth, as may be
seen in a Book called Toledoth Jesu, which was known long before Origin: And
about his Life and Conversation, as may be seen in the Talmud. They likewise
defamed the Apostles, as Magicians, who labored to draw off the People from
observing the Law. And though such Calumnies were very gross, and visibly
false, yet they found credit with their people to make them cry down
Christianity; as it is usual in such cases. Thus when Papists impute to
Protestants, that they believe thus and thus, though their Accusations are
visibly false, and themselves are forced to acknowledge it, yet at the same
time they prevail with their People, and turn them quite from the Protestants.

I say in the sixth place, that afterward they yet more horribly traduced our
Savior, accusing him to have trained up his Disciples to Idolatry, and to have
himself been guilty of it. This they took occasion to do, from the
superstitious respects some Christians had for the Cross; which made them give
out, that Jesus Christ having been Excommunicated by his Master, and refused
the Absolution which he begged of him; thereupon he had withdrawn himself from
him, and brought up his Disciples after his example, to worship ^ Brick, by
which they understood the figure of a Cross. Sanhedrin, fol. 107. and Sota,
fol. 47.

Lastly, It may be observed, that the many Heresies which arose in aftertimes
among Christians concerning our Savior's Person and Natures, gave the Jews
very great prejudices against the Gospel. The Arians for two hundred years;
then the Nestorians, and Eutychians, but chiefly the Tritheists, visibly taught
Doctrines contrary to truth. In particular the Writings of John Philoponus, who
was a Tritheist were much perused by the Mahometans and Jews, because they
begun to study Philosophy, (at which John Philoponus was very good) as
Maimonides tells us, More Nevochim, page 1. chapter 71. Now this Heresy destroying
the Unity of God, which is the fundamental Article of the Jewish Religion,
could not but give the Jews just matter of horror and detestation for
Christianity.

Besides, the Jews themselves confess that in their dispersion they have lost
the knowledge of many of the Mysteries of their Religion. One cannot think how
it could be otherwise, if one considers, 1. The long time they have been
dispersed, which confounds the most distinct, and darkens the clearest matters.
2. Their extreme misery in so long a captivity, which subjected them to so many
different Nations, and many of them such as had a particular hatred both of
their Nation and Religion. 3. But chiefly if one considers that those Mysteries
were communicated only to a few Learned Men, and kept from the knowledge of the
common people; as Maimonides does acknowledge, and proves by many Reflections
worth considering, in More Nevoch. p. 1. chapter 71.

After this, the Jews having still great aversion to Christians, it ought not
to seem strange that the Cabalists should be so few in number among them; and
that most of the Jewish Doctors should follow in their Disputes against
Christians, Explications and Notions contrary to Scripture, about the Trinity,
and the Divinity of the Messiah. For, even before Christ there were amongst
them many Errors crept amongst some of them, about those matters; so that they
that lived after Christ did easily follow the worst Explication, and prefer it
before the better, in the heats of their Disputes against Christians.

Neither is it to be wondered at, that the same Men should maintain contrary
Propositions, and defend them equally in their turns, as they come ta have to
do with different adversaries. The Papists are a remarkable instance of this;
when they dispute and write against the Eutychians, to prove the Truth of
Christ's Human Nature, one would admire at the strength and soundness of their
Arguments: But when they are upon the manner of our Savior's existence in the
Sacrament, as to his Flesh and Blood, nothing can be more contrary to their
former Positions, than what they affirm on this occasion; they destroy quite
what they said before, and one would think they had forgot themselves.

The Jews do perfectly like the Papists in this; and having less knowledge, and
laboring under greater prejudices than they, no wonder if they maintain
contrary Principles one to another. This may be seen in some of the old
Heretics, which sprung from amongst the Jews, and brought their Opinions into
the Christian Religion; the Cerinthians for instance, who owned that the Word
had dwelt in Christ, but did imagine that it was but for a certain time. And if
the Patripassians, and afterward the Sabellians who had the clear Revelation
of the Gospel, yet for all this, opposed the Doctrine of the Trinity, as
contrary to the Unity of God, and affirmed that there was in God but one Person
which had appeared under three differing Names; It ought not to appear strange
that the Jews blinded by their hatred against Christians, should through their
prejudices, apprehend that what their old Masters taught about the three
Sephiroth, did not signify three Persons in God, but only the three different
manners in which God works by one and the same Person.

I have already hinted, that the Jews even about the end of the fourth Century
had great offense given them by the Christians in their Worship of Saints and
Relics; which being at last as Idolatrous as the Heathenish, made the Jews
look upon them as no other than Heathens. This may be seen in many places of
the Talmud, which they pretend was finished about five hundred years after
Christ. But especially in their Additions to those Books which they made when
Idolatry was so ripe both in the East and the West.

One might make a Book of those too just Accusations of the Jews against the
Christians, which caused them to be Banished out of many Kingdoms. The Dominican
Friars made a Collection of most of them in the Thirteenth Century, when
Christians going much into the Holy Land, did something retrieve their lost
knowledge of the Greek and other Eastern Languages. Since that time the Jews
transcribing their Talmud, and their other ancient Books, begun to use the
words of Samaritans, instead of those of Apostates and Heretics, which they
used before in speaking of Christians, against whom in the old Times they had
made many Rules.

Besides, the violent and Antichristian methods which some Christian Princes
used against them by a false Principle of Religion to make them, against their
Will, profess Christianity, made them look upon Christians as no better than
savage Beasts, which besides their outward Form had nothing of Humanity, and
regarded neither Justice nor Religion: For, though their own Jewish Principles
are persecuting enough, yet they cannot but condemn the same Principles when
used against them; nothing being more apt to make Men reject Truth, than
Persecution, because Conscience ought to be instructed not inslaved, as
Experience in all Ages does abundantly confirm.

It cannot be denied but that the Jews Crucified Christ for affirming himself
to be the Son of God. Neither can it be supposed that he meant no more by it,
but that he was God's adoptive Son, as the Jews were, or some of their Kings:
For, he spoke in an ordinary plain intelligible sense. He meant therefore by
it, not only that he was the Messiah, but that the Word of God dwelt in him,
the same which the Jews acknowledged to be the Offspring of God. And for this
the Jews Crucified him, as he hints plainly enough in the Parable of the
Husbandmen, for he designs the Prophets by the name of mere Servants, and
himself he calls the Son, in opposition to the Prophets; and tells the Scribes
and Pharisees, that though they knew him to be such, yet would they for all
this put him to death. So that by Crucifying him they did purpose to destroy a
Person whom they knew to be the true Messiah, but by whom they were like to
have lost their credit with the People; He having called them a parcel of
Hypocrites, who made a Trade of Religion, who in their hearts laughed at it, and
only endeavored to get by it. This is the meaning of those words which Christ
puts in their mouths, and which was near really in their hearts, Come let us
kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. And not only out of hatred, but
out of policy also, they opposed him, that they might keep themselves safe and
quiet. They looked for a Conquering Messiah, who should subdue all Nations, and
bring all their Enemies under them. But here they saw Christ, a Man destitute
of all human succors necessary to bring about so great a design: They thought
it therefore more advisable to set him aside without following his Doctrine,
than to espouse a Quarrel which might incense the Romans against them, and
cause the ruin of their Nation: This they meant by saying, The Romans shall
come and take away both our place and Nation.

To be satisfied of this, one ought to observe that Speculative Doctrines are
not the common Rules of public Deliberations and Counsels. Let the Papists be
an instance of it. They proceed in their decisions upon the Principle of the
Pope's Infallibility; when at the same time hardly any one of them believes it,
and many do confute it both by reasons and matters of fact not to be answered.

The Jews likewise, though they knew themselves to be fallible enough, yet
Papists like they acted in their public Assembly, as if they had been
infallible. And this was enough to satisfy those who could not distinguish, or
would not further inquire into the business, which was the case of most
ordinary people. Accordingly, of the two Thieves that were Crucified with
Christ, one had observed the Injustice of that violent hatred the Jews had for
him: But the other cursed him looking on him as a false Prophet, justly
condemned by the greatest Authority known to him in the World.

Lastly, It is certain, that when a decision is once made, the People for the
most part, do not much inquire into the justice or reasonableness of it, but
quietly acquiesce in it, and rely upon the Authority of those who made it. The
Jews had a particular reason to do so, being assured that their Religion came
from God, and not seeing any danger in professing it, as it was delivered to
them by their Forefathers. And this is now the only reason they have for
professing Judaism; Neither is it to be wondered at, that the Notions the old
Jews had of it should make but little impression on their minds, no more than
the Doctrines of their Doctors, which they call Cabalists, because they follow
the Traditions of the old Synagogue.

For their late Teachers, moved by a spirit of contradiction, have raised many
new Questions about the Characters of the Messiah, and other like Articles of
Religion, controverted between them and the Christians, by which they have
plunged their People into inextricable difficulties; and they are so
exasperated now against us, that they can hardly be calm enough to take notice
of those visible Contradictions which may be seen between their ancient
Writers, and their now Doctors writing upon the same subject. They deny now
adays what the old Jews freely granted, and their whole study is to keep their
People in a blind submission to their Authority: Insomuch that they have this
Maxim amongst them, that the People are obliged to believe that the right Hand
is the left, when their Rabbis have once so declared. But I shall make some
more particular Reflections upon the proceedings of the now Jews, and show that
their obstinacy is altogether unreasonable, and that there is no fairness at
all in their way of disputing against Christians.

CHAP. XXIII.
That the Jews have laid aside the Old Explications of their Forefathers, the
better to defend themselves in their Disputes with the Christians.
Eus. them. Ev. Lib. iv. 1.
IT has been long since observed by Eusebius that the Jews have varied from the
belief of their Fathers as to the sense of several places in the Old Testament,
and it is no more than they themselves freely own in their Disputes with us.
The spirit of Disputation has wrought much the same effect among the Papists,
(as Maldonat was not ashamed to confess, on St. John, chapter vi.) Of this
alteration in the Jewish Sentiments, (which is acknowledged by one of the
Socinian Writers, viz. Volzogenius in Luc. xxiv. 27.) R. Solomon Jarchi fully
witnesses. He was the most famous Commentator the Jews had about five hundred
years ago; yet he in his Exposition of Psalm. xxi. 1. has these words, Our
Masters did understand this Psalm of the Messiah, (as indeed they did Gemar. on
Talm. tr. Massechet (...) chapter v. and Targ. on this Psalm, ver. 8, and 18.) but
it is better to understand it of David himself, that we may the more easily
reply to the Heretics, that abuse some passages in it.

But this is not the only place where the Jews have changed the faith of their
ancient Masters. There are many others examples of it, some of the chief of
which I shall produce, after I have observed the several degrees by which they
arrived to so wide a disagreement with their Ancestors.

1. Their Doctors, as I have already noted, did early introduce new Notions of
several Texts of the Old Testament. I speak not now of their Fabulous fancies
only, such as that of Philo, who Lib. de Septenar. supposes the Voice of God
uttered on Mount Sinai, to have been heard in all parts of the World; to which
the Jews, Pirke Eliez. c. 41. Tankuma, fol. 73. col. 1. have added many more
new conceits; but I speak of such their Explications, as were contrary to, and
in effect did overthrow the ancient Notions of the Prophets. As for instance,
where Philo seems in some manner to maintain the Transmigration Lib. de Somn.
page 455.
of Souls, where he delivers the Doctrine of the Souls Preexistence before the
Body De Mund. p. 891.
, where he seems to hint the Eternity of Matter, according to Plato Mund. op.
p. 214. De mund. Incor. page 728. A. De Viat. off. p. 669. F.
, although it is certain in his Treatise of Providence, he does assert the
Creation of Matter.

2ly. It is observable that after the Emperor Hadrian's time, some of the Jews
who expected the Messiah, according to Daniel's Prophecy of the Seventy Weeks,
but were out in their Accounts of those Weeks, had almost entirely lost the
hopes of his coming: This we gather from the History of R. Hillel in Gemara,
tit. Sanhed. fol. 98. col. 2. and fol. 99. col. 1. who maintained that the
Promise of the Messiah was accomplished in the Person of Hezekiah, and that
there was no more Messiah to be expected by the Jews. Now they say that this
Hillel was the Grandson to R. Juda the Compiler of the Misna.

3. We see how careless they have been in preserving the Apocryphal Books
formerly in esteem with them, and which indeed but for the Christians, had
totally perished. Philo has borrowed some of his Notions in his 2d. Book of
Agriculture; and let any one compare Job xxviii. 20. Psalm. xxxiii. 6. Prove.
viii. 12, 22. with what is written Wisdom vi. 24, 22. and so on till Chap.
viii. 11. and he will find a great likeness, if not the very same Notions and
words.

4. Through the same neglect they have quite lost the Works of other ancient
and famous Jews, as namely of Philo the Jew, who was in such reputation amongst
them, as to be chosen the Agent or Deputy of the Alexandrian Jews in their
Embassy to the Roman Emperor; and of Aristobulus, who lived in the time of the
Ptolomees, and Dedicated to one of them his Explication of the Law, of which we
have a fragment in Eusebius; which shows that his Notions were the same with
Philo's, and that they did generally prevail in Egypt, before Christ's
Incarnation, as well in the time of Philo.

It is no hard matter to give some reasons of this neglect. For, 1. their first
destruction by Titus, and after by Hadrian, involved with it a great part of
their Books. They thought then only of saving their Bibles, with which (it
seems) their Targum was joined, and so this came to be preserved with the
Scriptures. This was by the great care of Josephus (as he himself relates)
desiring of Titus this favor alone, that he might preserve the Sacred Books.

2. After their second destruction by Hadrian, they applied themselves straight
to gather their Traditions and Customs, which now make the Body of their Misna,
or Second Law, as they call it. This spent them a deal of time: For to compose
such a work, it was necessary to collect the several pieces in the hands of
several men, who had drawn certain Memoirs for the observation of every Law
that did more immediately concern them.

3. They then began to increase their hatred for the study of the Greek Tongue,
abandoning themselves wholly to the study of their Traditions. This we see in
the Misna Mas. sota c. 9. 14.

4. About this time, being pressed with Arguments out of these Books by the
Christians that disputed against them, they thought best to reject the Works
themselves: And because the Christians used the LXX Version against them, they
invented several Lies to discredit it, as we see in the Gemara of Megilla; and
lest that should not do, they made it their business to find out some that were
able to make a new Version; such as Aquila in the time of Hadrian, and
Symmachus, and Theodotion, who turned Jews toward the end of the Second
Century. These Three Interpreters were designed to change the Sense of those
Texts which the Christians (according to the Old Jewish Traditions) did refer
to the Messiah. Of this Justin Martyr has given some Instances in his Dialogue
with Trypho, R. Akiba's great Friend; and we see that St. Jerome, Ep. 89.
complains of the same.

And now what wonder is it, if the Jews in this humor did neglect, or rather
rejected those Apocryphal Books, whose Authority in some points were set up
against them by the Christians, as were the Books of Baruch, Wisdom, and
Ecclesiasticus?

As for Philo, tho he wrote in a lofty Style, and after an Allegorical way,
(and therefore we find in the Rabboth several Thoughts common to him and the
Cabalists, and other Allegorical Authors, whose Notions are gathered in the
Rabboth); yet the Jews soon lost all esteem for his Works. First, Because he
writ in Greek, which was a Language most despised by them at this time; they
having established it as a Maxim, That he who brought up his Children in the
Greek Tongue was cursed, as he who fed Swine. Bava kama fol. 82. col. 1. and
Sota fol. 49. col. 2. Secondly, Because some Christians challenged him for
their own. For finding some of his Principles to be agreeable to those of the
Christian Religion, it came into their head (tho it is a Fancy without any
Foundation) that he while he was at Rome, was converted by St. Peter. The same
thing befell Josephus as soon as the Christians began to use his Authority
against the Jews; notwithstanding that the Jews have no better Historian than
Josephus. Thirdly, Because the Jews had then almost forsaken the study of the
Holy Scriptures, and given themselves up entirely to the study of their
Traditions, or Second Law, as they call it. The Catalogue of their Ancient
Commentators is very small. Their first literal Commentator is R. Saadiah, who
writ his Comments on the Scripture in the beginning of the Tenth Century. As
for the others that were long before him* as Zohar, Siphre, and Siphri, Siphra,
Mechilta, Tanchuma, and the Rabboth, they all make it their business to explain
allegorically, or to establish their Traditions.

As to the Targum, we see how heat of Dispute has carried the Jews to such
strange extremities, that now they reject no small part of those
Interpretations that were Authentic with their Forefathers. It may not be
amiss to give some Proofs of this, to show that we do not accuse them without
cause.

And in general, there is not a more idle Romance than that which the Jews have
devised touching two Messias's that are to come unto the World. One must be of
the Race of Joseph by Ephraim, and called Nehemiah the Son of Husiel, who (as
they will have it) after a Reign of many Years at Jerusalem, and after having
sacked Rome, is at last to be killed himself at Jerusalem by a King of Persia.
The other Messiah is to be Menahem the Son of Hammiel, who is to appear for the
delivery of the Jews, being sent from God on that Errand, according to Moses's
Prayer, Exodus iv. 13.

For the time of this second Messias's coming shall be when the Mother of the
deceased Messiah the Son of Joseph, having gathered the Jews dispersed from
Galilee to Jerusalem, shall be there besieged by one Armillus the Son of Satan,
who is to proceed out of a Marble Statue in Rome, and who in this close Siege
shall be at the very point of destroying them. Then they say Messiah the Son of
David shall come with seven Shepherds, to wit, the Three Patriarchs, Moses,
David, and Elias, and eight of the principal Fathers or Prophets, who are to
rise before the rest.

They say, That Moses at the head of them shall convert the Jews without
working any Miracle, and then all the Jews shall rise at the sound of a
Trumpet, passing under ground till they come to Mount Olivet, which shall
cleave in two to, let them out. Then the Jews shall come from all Quarters to
form the Messias's Army, and the Messiah the Son of Joseph shall be raised from
the dead, to come in among the rest; and so the two Messias's shall reign
without jealousy of one another; only the Son of David shall have the chief
Power, reigning from one end of the Earth to the other, and that for Forty
Years.

All this time the Jews shall continue in Feasting and Jollity, using the other
Nations as Slaves: And then Gog the King of Magog, with the Kingdoms of the
North, shall come to attack the Jews in Palestine, but he and they shall be
destroyed by Rain and Hail; after which the Land shall be purged of the dead
Bodies, and they shall build the Third Temple, and then the Ten Tribes shall
return, and offer Sacrifices to God in the Temple, and God shall pour out his
Spirit on all Israel, and make them Prophets, as Joel has foretold, chap. xi.
28.

This is the Notion in short of the Two Messias's, which R. Meyr Aldabi gives
us in his Book Entitled Sevile Emuna, chapter 10. p. 123. But it is certain, 1.
the ancient Jews knew but of one Messiah. Trypho knew not of two, as we see in
Justin Martyr's Dialogue, which is a clear proof, that those passages of the
Targum, which speak of two Messias's, are Additions to the ancient Text, made
since the Jews invented the conceit of a double Messiah.

2. It is certain the Talmudists did not believe firmly the Return of the Ten
Tribes, Tr. Sanh. c. 10.. 3. Some did hope for it, as does also R. Eliezer
Massech. Sanh. c. 30.. 3. But R. Akiba was of quite another opinion. And yet
their Posterity has been so much inclined for R. Eliezer his opinion, that one
of their greatest Objections against Jesus being the Messiah, is this, that if
he had been the Messiah, he would have gathered the Ten Tribes.

3. Their confining of the Messias's Reign to forty years, is contrary to the
opinion of their Fathers, who held that the Messiah should reign for ever. Some
afterward thought that he was to reign forty years, others that he was to reign
seventy years, as you see in the Gemara of Sanhedrim, chapter 11. fol. 97. col. 2.

4. They suppose now that the Messiah shall build a third Temple. Whereas
Haggai describing the second Temple as that under which the Messiah should
appear, expressly calls it the last, Hag. ii. 9. And this R. David Kimchi and R.
Azariah, and the Talmud of Jerusalem, Megillah, fol. 72. col. 4. The Talmud of
Babylon, Tit. Baba batra, fol. 3. col. 1. and several others do acknowledge.
Though some few suppose Haggai's Prophecy to have reference to a third Temple.
See Abarbanel and Men. ben Israel on Hagg.

5. It is the remark of one of the most celebrated Authors of the Talmud, and
received amongst the other Jews, that all the times noted by the Prophets for
the coming of the Messiah are past. Dixit Rav Omnes termini de adventu Messiae
transierunt, nec jam remanet nisi in conversione, si Israel convertatur,
redimetur, quod si non convertatur, non redimetur. Since that they have been
forced to quit that miserable shift; and now they maintain that all the
Promises of the coming of the Messiah were conditional, and that he shall come
when his People the Jews shall be by Repentance prepared to receive him. Manas.
Ben. Isr. q. 27. on Es. And yet the Ancient in the same place before did affirm
that the Messiah must come in the most corrupt Age, fol. 97. col. 1.

To be a little more particular, the Jews did maintain, that all the Prophets
spoke of the Messiah. See Bethlem Juda in the word Goel. At present, they
dispute almost every Text that we urge for the Messiah, so that instead of
convincing them, we can only shame them by laying before them the Authorities
of their Fathers, who understood these Texts in the same sense that the
Apostles did.

The Modern Jews are very sensible of the Notion of a Plurality of Persons in
the words, Let us make Man after our Image, Genesis i. Some of them therefore are
for changing the reading, and instead of, Let Us make Man, would have it, Let
Man be made, though the Samaritan Text, the Old Seventy Version, and the
Talmudists, and all their Ancient and Modern Translations read as we do. See
Aben Ezra on the place, and R. David Kimchi in Michlol, p. 9.

They will scarcely allow the Messiah to be spoken of in Genesis iii. 15. Although
Jonathan's Targum, and that of Jerusalem do clearly understand it of the
Messiah.

The Old Jews affirmed that the Angel who appeared, Genesis xix. and in other
places, and who is called the Lord, was (as I have before showed) the Word of
the Lord, but many of their Disciples do say it was a created Angel, as we
learn from R. Shem Tov. in his Book Emun. and Men. ben Israel, q. 64. on
Genesis. Such a thing cannot be done but by an extreme impudence, since we see
that they profess just the contrary in their own Prayers, where you read in
their Office of Pesach, And he brought us out of Egypt; Not, say they, by the
hand of an Angel, neither by the hand of a Seraphim, nor by the hand of an
Envoy, but the Holy Blessed, by his Glory, and by himself, as the Scripture
says, Exodus xii. 12. And so there they refer almost all the appearances of the
Angel of the Lord, to God himself, exclusively, to any created Angel: And such
are those Appearances, Genesis xiv. 15. Genesis xx. 6. Genesis xxxi. 24. Genesis xxxii. 24.
where they say that Israel wrestled with God. Exodus xii. 29, etc.

The present Jews are not for applying the Text, Genesis xlix. 10. to the Messiah,
but some refer the words to Moses himself, as R. Bechay, others to David,
others to Ahijah the Shilonite, and others to Nebuchadnezzar. Notwithstanding
both Jonathan's and the Jerusalem Targum, note expressly this Prophecy to be
spoken of the Messiah.

And thus in the same Text, the Scepter there spoken of was explained in the
Old Talmudists by Power and Dominion which should not depart from Judah till
the coming of the Messiah; Though now among some of the Modern Jews it
signifies only Affliction and Calamities. R. Joel aben Sueb.

At this day the Jews do obstinately deny any Promise to be made of the
Messiah, Deuteronomy. xviii. 18, 19. And some of them will have it spoken of Joshua,
some of David. So the Author of Midrash Tehil in Psalm. i. and some of Jeremy.
But it is visible, that in and before the times of Jesus Christ they were of
another opinion, as may be gathered from 1 M^c. xiv. 41. and is clear from what
the multitude say, Joh. vi. 14. This is that Prophet who was to come into the
world. See also Luc. vii. 16. Joh. i. 19. Mat. xxi.

It was not questioned in St. Paul's time, whether the 2d. Psalm did relate to
the Messiah, else St. Paul could not have applied it to Christ, as he does Act.
xiii. 33. nor was it questioned for some Ages after; the Talmudical Doctors
agreeing to it. You see that in the Gemara of Succoth, c. 5. in Jalkuth in
Psalm. ii. in Midrash Tehillim. But their new Expositors have done their utmost
to make it belong to David only, or to apply these words, Thou art my Son,
Psalm. ii. to the People of Israel. So does R. Mose Israel Mercadon upon that
Psalm in his Comment, Printed at Amsterdam.

The Jews in Christ's time, did believe the xxiid. Psalm to be a Prophecy
touching the Messiah. And Jesus Christ to show the accomplishment of it in his
own Person, cites the first verse of it on the Cross, Mat. xxvii. 46. Yet soon
after as we see in Justin Martyr's Dialogue, they denied that Psalm to belong
to the Messiah. But their folly appears because they cannot agree among
themselves; some referring it to David, others to Esther, and others to the
whole People of the Jews. Menass. q. 8. in Psalm.

The 16th. ver. of the same xxiid. Psalm is thus Translated by the Seventy,
They pierced my hands and my feet: This reading is proved by de Muis on this
place, and by Walton in Prolegom. p. 40. But our Jews now read it, As a Lion my
hands and my feet, which is not sense. Their own Masora Notes that it should be
read, they have pierced. However they have espoused the other reading, and will
not be beaten from it by any Argument, because they think this reading will
best destroy the Inference which the Christians draw from this place to show
that the Messiah was to be Crucified, according to this Psalm.

The Psalm lxviii. by the ancient Jews was referred to the Messiah, and so does
R. Joel. Aben Sueb refers the last part to the time of the Messiah, p. 158. in
h. Ps. It was also by St. Paul, Ephesians. iv. 8. referred to the Ascension of our
Lord: Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led Captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. The very same subject is handled in Psalm.
xlvii. 5. which Psalm David Kimchi does acknowledge belongs to the Times of the
Messiah, and there they cannot deny but the true God is spoken of, the same
Memra who conducted the People in the Desert, and gave the Law at Sinai, as it
is spoken v. 8, and 9. And yet the Modern Jews will apply those words of Psalm.
lxviii. 10. to the Ascension of Abraham, or Moses, or the Prophet Elias, to any
rather than the Messiah.

It is granted by the Modern Jews that their Fathers understood Psalm. lxxii. of
the Messiah. So R. Saadia on Dan. vii. 14. Salom. Jarchi on Psalm. 72.6. and
Bahal Hatturim ad Numb. xxvi. 16. and yet now they stick not, (of which R.
David Kimchi is a witness) to interpret it only of Solomon.

In Jesus Christ's time the Jews confessed Psalm cx. did belong to the Messiah,
v. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Christ's argument, Mat. xxii. 44. necessarily supposes
it. So it was understood in the Midrash Tehillim, and by R. Saadia Gaon on Dan.
vii. 13. But notwithstanding this, our later Jews affirm that it was made for
David, or Abraham.

'Twas of old constantly believed, that Wisdom, Prove. iii. and viii. did denote
the (...). I have showed it from Philo the Jew, from the Apocryphal Book, and
from the Cabalists, and yet at this day they explain it of the Law of Moses, or
the Attribute of Wisdom.

Jonathan in his Paraphrase on Isa. ix. 6. interprets the Text of the Messiah:
For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and his Name shall be
called, Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace. And so did the most ancient Jewish Writers. But after Jesus
Christ, the Jews having broken up a new way, it has pleased some of their late
Writers to tread in the steps of R. Hillel, and to apply it to Hezekiah. So
does Solomon Jarchi, David Kimchi, Abenezra and Lipman. As for the rest they
quite change the present Text by referring to God all the Names, which are
evidently given to the Messiah, except that of the Prince of Peace.

For much the same reason do the latter Jews make Zorobabel to be spoken of in
Isa. xi. 12. Manas. q. 18. on Isaiah. Though not only St. Paul understood it of
Jesus Christ, Romans xv. 12. 2 These. ii. 8. But the ancient Jews did generally
refer it to the Messiah, as appears all along in the Targum of that Chapter,
and the Jews showed they understood it so, by their rejecting Barcochba, when
they found he could not smell Souls as they thought the Messiah should do
according to the second verse of the said Chapter. And St. Jerome witnesses
upon that Chapter that all the Jews agreed with Christians, that all that
Chapter was to be understood of the Messiah.

The old Jews, as St. Jerome witnesses upon this Chapter, ascribed Isa. xxv. 6.
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf be
unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb
sing; for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert,
to the times of the Messiah.

But the Modern Jews have endeavored to wrest it, and to make it agree to
other times, because they saw how the Evangelists applied it to the Miracles of
our Lord. See Menass. q. 17. on Isaiah. And they are gone so far in that fancy
that they give it out now for an Axiom amongst their People, that the Messiah
shall not work any Miracle. So Rambam. R. Meyr Aldab. and R. Menass. ben
Israel, who would have the Miracles which are there spoken of, either to be
understood Metaphorically, or to be referred, to the time of the Resurrection.

The Impudence of R. Solomon on Isa. xlviii. 48, 16. is amazing: The words of
the Text run thus, From the time that it was, there am I, and now the Lord God
and his Spirit have sent me. From hence it appears that the Messiah, who is
here spoken of, according to the Targum, was on Mount Sinai, when God gave the
Law from thence. This R. Solomon will by no means grant of the Messiah, but
affirms that it is spoken of Isaiah. But how was he on Mount Sinai when the Law
was given? Why, he answers, His Soul was there, as were the Souls also of all
the Prophets, God then revealing to them all those things that were to come,
which each of them in his time have since Prophesied of. A fancy, that R.
Tanchuma, who lived a long while before R. Solomon, never hit on: For he
maintains from Isa. lvii. 16. that the Souls are then created, as God orders
Men to be born in every Generation.

We see how positive they are in expounding the Sufferings of the Messiah,
which are described Isa. liii. of the People of the Jews. And yet they cannot
but know that Jonathan refers the end of the lii. Chap. and the beginning of
the liii. to the Messiah, as the Apostles refer it to Jesus Christ, following
herein John the Baptist, Joh. i. 29. And so did R. Alexandri among the
Talmudist, as we see in Sanhedrin, fol. 93. col. 2. and in the Midrash Conen in
Arze Levanon, fol. 3. col. 2.

The Prophet Micah, chapter v. 2. speaks of the Messiah: But thou, Bethlehem
Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee
shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth
have been from of old, from everlasting. The Jews cannot deny this. But then to
evade what is there spoken of his Eternity, they pretend it means no more than
his descent from David; as if the distance of time from David to Jesus Christ
could be called Eternity. This is the way Manasseh ben Israel, q. 5. on Micah,
takes to get over this difficulty. Before him others took another way, and
affirmed that God decreed before the Creation of the World, to send the
Messiah, and that in this respect it is said in Micah, that his goings forth
are from the days of eternity.

Jeremy, chapter xxiii. 26. says very expressly, that the Messiah shall be called
the Jehovah, our Righteousness; and he repeats the same, chapter xxxiii. 15, 16. In
those days, and at that time will I cause the Branch of Righteousness to grow
up unto David, and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the Land. In
those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: And this is
the Name wherewith he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. R. David
Kimchi owns it, and quotes the Authority of two Eminent Rabbis for it, namely,
R. Aba Bar Caana, and R. Levi in Eccha Rabati. But they will none of them own
that this Name Jehovah belongs any otherwise to him, than it does to the Ark;
which is altogether impertinent; for the Ark is never called Jehovah; nor does
Menasseh prove that it is with all his talking, q. 18. in Isaiah.

Jonathan, as well as Philo, ascribes to the Messiah the Prophecies, Zech. vi.
12, 13. And so Jonathan applies to the Messiah what is said in the same
Prophet. But many of the Modern Jews, among whom R. Solomon is one, do refer
them to Zorobabel.

These several places I have now mentioned may serve as a Sample of the
confusion the Jews are in, while they attempt to interpret the ancient
Prophecies; and I may confidently affirm, that all those other places which I
have omitted, that intimate a Trinity, or the Divinity of the Messiah, or the
time when he should come into the World, are in like manner explained so very
triflingly, and forcedly, as that oftentimes their own Authors, convinced by
the Evidence of the Texts themselves, have refuted them, and given a new
Interpretation of them. Whence it comes to pass, that their Reader can find no
certain sense of those Texts to rest on, but his understanding continues in an
entire darkness, and unsetledness.

This ill luck they have of Explications, is not of yesterday, as I have
already observed. Soon after Jesus Christ's time, they set themselves to oppose
what the Christians held of the two Comings of the Messiah, though so
distinctly described, one of them Zech. ix. 9. and the other, Dan. vii. 13. And
still to this day do they reject that Notion of his two Comings, as may be seen
in Menass. on Zech. ix. p. 185.

But others of them, who found it impossible to deny that the Scripture speaks
of two Comings of the Messiah, whom they expected, thought it better to make
two Messias's, than to acknowledge that the Messiah whom they expected was to be
a suffering Messiah. And thus they thought they removed the difficulties in the
other opinion, that made but one Coming of the Messiah, by owning the Messiah
the Son of Joseph should be a Man of sorrows, but Messiah the Son of David was
to be a Glorious Deliverer.

As the Jews Disputes with the Christians increased, they advanced certain
Characters of the Times of the Messiah; and all of them very miraculous; which
they inferred from some Allegorical Descriptions in the Prophets concerning the
Times of the Messiah. These they run up to ten, as we see in Shemoth Rabba,
Parascha 15. And they make a great use of those Miracles, which they conceive
should have been in the time of Jesus Christ, if he had been the true Messiah.
Notwithstanding all which Menasse q. 7. on Isaiah, finds himself obliged to
assure us that David Kimchi and Abarbanel, and many Interpreters explain most
of these passages as Allegorical Descriptions of the Times of the Messiah. And
Maimonides is of this opinion, that when the Messiah comes there shall be no
change in the Order of Nature, Jad Chaz. Lib. de Regibus. And in that he
follows the opinion of one Rabbi Samuel that is quoted in the Talmud Tit.
Beracoth, where he says that there shall be not any difference between the
Times of the Messiah, and the other Times of the World, but the subduing of the
Kingdoms by the Messiah.

To conclude, the Jews being so often deceived in their Expectations of the
Messiah, and finding themselves abused by a great number of false pretenders to
that Character, have almost lost their hopes of his Coming: And finding his
Coming to be a thing uncertain, few of them do regard the Promise of the
Messiah, with that assurance with which the Ancients did expect it.

Indeed it is observable that though Maimonides professes to own the Messiah,
and has inserted the hope of it among the Articles of the Jewish Faith, which
he has given us; yet he otherwhere speaks very indifferently of it. In one
place he asserts the observation of Moses's Law, and the recompenses annexed to
it, to be the chief end of the Jews enquiry, and not the time of the Messias's
appearance; as we are informed by the Author of the Chain of the Cabala.

The same judgment may be made of Joseph Albo, who writ with great bitterness
against the Christians: For, 1. he maintains in his Book of the Principles that
R. Hillel was no Apostate, though he denied the coming of any other Messiah,
but of Hezekiah, who was already come. And Albo gives this reason for it,
because the Coming of the Messiah is no Fundamental Article of the Jewish
Religion. Orat. 1. chap. 1. Nothing can be more wretched than this excuse of
his. For if the Messiah had come before the Babylonian Captivity, as R. Hillel
would have it in the Person of King Hezekiah; and if no other was to be
expected, why did the Jewish Church take those Books into her Bible that were
written by the Prophets that lived under the second Temple? and why did not R.
Hillel and his Followers declare against them as false Prophecies, that spoke
of the Messiah as being yet to come? namely, Zechary, Haggai, and Malachy, who
did all Prophecy of the Messiah, as has been abundantly shown, with Proofs out
of the Targums of those Books, and the general consent of Jewish Writers.

2. The same Albo is not afraid to assert, That the Article of the Messiah, has
no other foundation than the authority of Tradition. For, says he, there is
not any Prophecy either in the Law, or in the Prophets, that foretells his
Coming by any necessary Exposition of it, with respect to him, or which may not
from the circumstances of the Text be well explained otherwise. This is his
Position in examination of Genesis xlix. 10. where he does his utmost to evade the
Text, v. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc.

3. He looks on the Article of the Messias's Coming to be a matter of that
small importance to the Jews, that he leaves it doubtful, whether the Messiah
be come since the time of Onkelos their famous Paraphrast, who expresses his
expectation of this Promise in many places of the Books of Moses; and if he be
not already come, whether he shall come in the Glory of the Clouds of Heaven,
or whether he shall come poor, and riding on an Ass; and because of Men's sins,
not distributing those great Blessings promised at his Coming, nor Men on the
other hand regarding him as the Messiah?

Certainly, R. Lipman in his Nitzachon, where he examines the above mentioned
Text, Genesis xlix. 10. advances a Rule which quite overthrows all Proofs from the
Holy Scripture. This Rabin, seeing the Jews give such opposite Interpretations
of Jacob's Prophecy, concerning the Scepter's continuance in Judah, as were
impossible to be reconciled, some understanding Empire, by the Scepter; and
some Slavery and oppression; he lays this down for a Maxim, That the Law was
capable of diverse Explications, and all of them, though never so incompatible
and contradictory, were nevertheless the words of the Living God.

This is very near the Sentiment of R. Menasseh Ben Israel, in his Questions on
Genesis, where he collects the several Jewish Expositions of this Text. But
granting this once for a Principle, it is in vain to consult the Scriptures, or
to think of ever discovering the meaning of them. The sense of them must
absolutely depend on the Authority of the Rabins; and what they teach must be
all equally received as the Word of God, though they teach things contradictory
to one another. Such Positions put one to a loss, whether their blindness, or
their spite, is therein most to be pitied.

CHAP. XXVII.
That the Unitarians in opposing the Doctrines of the Trinity, and our Lord's
Divinity, do go much further than the Modern Jews, and that they are not fit
persons to convert the Jews.
WHAT I have observed of the alteration made by the Modern Jews in their
Belief, is enough to show that they were forced to adopt new Notions, because
of the evident Proofs drawn from the Opinions of their Ancestors, which the
Christians used against them.

The very same prevarication may be charged on the Socinians, in their
Explications of those places of Scripture, that prove the Blessed Trinity, and
the Divinity of our Savior.

And, 1st. They have borrowed many of the Jews answers to the Christians, and
often carried them much further than the Jews themselves did intend them. 2dly.
They have invented the way of accommodation, for the evading of those
Quotations in the New Testament, that are taken out of the Old Testament, as
finding this the most effectual means to escape those difficulties, which they
can no other way resolve. 3dly. The Unitarians, especially those of England, to
make short work, do not stick to assert, that the Christians have foisted those
Texts into the Gospel, which speak of the Trinity, and the Divinity of our Lord.

It is fit I should give particular Instances of each of these, in proof of
what I say.

Smalcius De Divin. Chr. c. 10.
maintains in the general, That the Books of the Old Testament are of little
use for the Conversion of the Jews. He gives this reason for it, That almost
all that which is said to be spoken of the Messiah in the Old Testament, must
be interpreted mystically, before it can appear to be spoken of him, and by
consequence very remotely from what the words do naturally signify.

Then in particular: When we would prove a Plurality of Persons in the Deity
against the Jews, from those Expressions of Scripture that speak of God in the
Plural Number; although the Jews (as you may see in their Comments on Genesis i.
26. xi. 7. and especially on Isa. vi. 8.) are forced to own that a Plurality is
imported in those Expressions, and therefore pretend that the Number is Plural,
because God speaks of himself and the Angels his Counselors; yet the
Socinians, as Enjedinus witnesses for them, do deny that these Plural
Expressions do denote any Plurality in the Deity, no more than Expressions in
the Singular Number do. As for Socinus, he solves it by a Figure, by which, as
he says, a single Person speaks plurally when he excites himself to do any
thing. A Figure of which we have no Example in the Writings of the Old
Testament.

Socinus has followed the Jews Evasion on the words Genesis iii. 22. Behold the
Man is as one of Us, in maintaining that God does herein speak of himself and
of the Angels. And Smalcius has followed him in this Solution. The very same
Eplication they give of the words, Genesis xi. 7. Let us go down and confound
their Language; borrowing entirely the Subterfuge of the Jews, who at this day
teach that God spoke it to the Angels.

Crellius on Gal. iii. 8. espouses the Jewish Sense of the Text, Genesis xii. 3.
In thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed; by which he overthrows
the force of St. Paul's Citation, and makes it nothing to the purpose. He
supposes that St. Paul did herein allude only to the Passage in Genesis; but on
the contrary, it appears that he followed the Literal Sense, as we have it,
Genesis xii. 3. xviii. 18. xxii. 18. xxvi. 4. xxviii. 14. and as the Ancient
Cabalists do acknowledge at large in Reuchlin, L. 1.

Smalcius chapter 2. Ib. asserts, That the Promise of the Seed of the Woman, Genesis
iii. 5. can very hardly be understood of the Messiah. And yet the Ancient Jews
acknowledged it in their Targum of Jerusalem, and by the Cabalists, Tikunzoh.
21. fol. 52. col. 2. and Bachaie fol. 13. col. 3. in Genesis

Schlichtingius affirms that Psalm. xlv. does literally relate to Solomon, and
that this is its first and principal sense. Although the Ancient Jews do all agree
that it treats of the Messiah, and cannot be understood of Solomon.

Socinus persuading himself that St. Paul cites Heb. i. 6. from Psalm. xcvii. 8.
And let all the Angels of God worship him; does maintain that he cites it in
the mystical Sense, because Jesus Christ could not be adored by the Angels
before he was advanced to be their Head. And yet the Jews of old did refer it
to the Messiah, adding these words in the end of Moses's Song, Deuteronomy. xxxii. as
we see there in the LXX Version, from whence it was indeed that St. Paul took
the words in Heb. i. 6.

Again, Socinus to rid himself of Psalm. xxiv. where according to the Ancient
Jews Opinion the Messiah is spoken of, does pretend that the Messiah is not
meant here in this Psalm, or at least he is described only as the Messenger of
God. A Salvo as ridiculous as his Answer: For most of the Characters and Works
of God are ascribed to him that is there spoken of, and he is expressly called
the Lord of Hosts.

But this is not all. For our Socinians not only follow the Jews, but exceed
them in the bold ways they take to get over those Authorities which make
against them. Because that the words of Psalm. xl. 7. Thou have bored my ears,
are cited by St. Paul in this manner, A Body have thou prepared me, Heb. x. 5.
who follows herein the LXX Text, which thus paraphrases the Psalmist's words;
from thence Enjedinus takes occasion to accuse the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, for not having cited the Original, and to traduce him as an Apocryphal
Writer.

They go further than the Jews do on Psalm. xlv. 6. Thy throne, O God, is for
ever and ever. A Text cited by St. Paul, and applied to Jesus Christ, Heb. i.
7, 8. The LXX translate it as we do. But the Jews have tried all ways to
deliver themselves of this Authority, which proves so evidently that the
Messiah is God. As for Socinus, he pretends to reject the Jews Solutions. But
his Disciples have invented another, which is worse than that of the Jews, as
may be seen in Enjedinus and Ostorodius.

Psalm. xc. throughout relates to the Messiah. Jesus Christ applies it to
himself, Matthew. xxii. and from thence proves that he is David's Lord, although
he is the Son of David. But Enjedinus refutes this Argument of Jesus Christ:
And Schlichtingius treats it as absurd. This is a thing that deserves to be
reflected on; because these Gentlemen pretend that among them only true
Christianity is continued.

The like way they take to answer what the Apostle says of Christ's creating
the Heavens and the Earth, Heb. i. 10, 11. and his Proof of it from Psalm. cii.
27, 28.

And with the same Impudence do they elude the Citation from Psalm. cxviii. 22.
which is quoted Mat. xxi. 42. Although R. D. Kimchi, among other Jews, refers it
to the Messiah.

It is strange to see how they take the Jews part in explaining as they do,
Isa. vii. 14. A Virgin, that is, say they, a Prophetess, Crell. on Matt. i. The
only reason of this Explication is the word Immanuel, which there follows, to
their great perplexity. They therefore say, that Immanuel is spoken of the
Father in Isaiah's Prophecy, and of Jesus Christ in St. Matthew's Gospel in a
Mystical Sense.

Isaiah, chap. xxxv. 5. has distinctly noted the Miracles which the Messiah
should work, and has given us a clear Character of his Person. R. Solomon
Jarchi endeavors to shift off this Text, and to explain it of the deliverance
of the People out of Babylon. Socinus, who could not but know how the
Evangelists have referred it to the Miracles of Jesus Christ, does nevertheless
establish as well as he can the Explication of the Modern Jews. And this he
does for no other reason, but because the Appearance of God himself is spoken
of in the 4th Verse of this Chapter.

How audaciously does Crellius destroy the Proof of the Place where Christ
should be born, Matthew. ii. 5. taken out of Micah v. 2.? Says he, The Jews
cited it only according to the Mystical Sense. But we know the Jews took it to
be the Literal Sense, as appears by their Targum.

The viiith Chapter of Proverbs was understood by Philo of the (...). And
indeed such Attributes are given to Wisdom in that Chapter, as belong only to a
Person, such as being conceived, born, creating, governing, exercising of
Mercy, and the like. But Socinus is not content it should go so: He will have
all this attributed to the Wisdom of God by a Prosopopeia, just as our later
Jews do interpret it of the Law.

Jer. xxiii. 5, 6. relates to the Messiah in the Judgment of all the Ancient
Jews. Our Socinians will not allow this; but rather than own that the Messiah
is named God, they refer the Title of, The Lord our Righteousness, to the
People there spoken of.

We have a remarkable Prophecy for the Proof of the Divinity of the Messiah, in
Zech. xii. 10. They shall look on him whom they have pierced. The Jews
anciently did, and still do, understand it of the Messiah. And Jesus Christ
does apply it to himself, Rev. i. 7. What says Socinus to this? He declares
that this Text which is so like Psalm. xxii. has been corrupted by the Jews, and
thus he trys to render its Authority useless.

Here you have a Sample of their conduct, in rejecting the Literal, and setting
up a Mystical sense: But there are other Quotations cited in the New Testament,
from which it is manifest that our Lord Jesus Christ is the God spoken of in
the Old Testament, the Authority of which Texts cannot so easily be eluded. And
to take away the evidence of these, they have invented the way of accommodation.

David speaking of the God of Israel, has these words, Psalm. lxviii. 19. Thou
art ascended on high, etc. Hence we conclude that Jesus Christ is the God of
Israel, because St. Paul says they had their accomplishment in our Lord's
Ascension into Heaven, Ephesians. iv. 8. The Jews say, those words in the Psalm
were spoken of Moses. The Socinians cannot deny they were spoken of God; but
deny they were spoken of the Messiah literally. But, say they, these words were
applied to Jesus Christ by St. Paul, only by way of accommodation. Strange! Is
it not plain, that David says no more in this lxviii. Psalm of the Messiah,
than he says in Psalm. cx. which the Jews do refer to the Messiah? Is not the
calling of the Gentiles here clearly foretold v. 33, 34. which is owned on all
hands to be the work of the Messiah? Is it not then visible that St. Paul in
citing these words has followed the sense of the Ancient Synagogue, who
understood Psalm. cx. of the Messiah, according to the Literal sense?

Socinus owns that the words Psalm. xcvii. 7. which are applied to Jesus Christ,
Heb. i. 6. do respect the Supreme God. He cannot therefore deny Jesus Christ to
be the Supreme God to whom they are applied. But he does it, as he pleases, by
this way of accommodation, which he says the Sacred Author used in applying
this Text to Jesus Christ. And so the Adoration commanded to be given him,
terminates not in him, but is referrable to the Supreme God who commanded this
Adoration.

Isa. chapter viii. 13, 14. has these words, Sanctify the Lord of Hosts. The Jews
interpret them of the Messiah. Gemar. Massech. Sanhedr. in chapter iv. and they are
cited by St. Paul, Romans ix. 32. St. Luke ii. 34. St. Peter, 1 Pet. ii. 7. who
apply them to Jesus Christ. The Socinians, whose Cause will not bear this, that
Jesus Christ should be called the Lord of Hosts, do therefore deny that the
Massias is here treated of, or that any one else is here meant, but God only;
adding, that the Holy Writers of the New Testament, in applying them to Jesus
Christ, turned these Texts to quite another sense than was intended by the Holy
Spirit at the inditing of them.

The Prophet Isaiah again has these words, chapter xxxv. 4, 5, 6. Behold your God
will come -- and save you, etc. Sal Jarchi and D. Kimchi, expound them of the
Deliverance from Babylon; contrary to the ancient Jews opinion, who, as these
Rabbis confess, understood them of the Messiah. The Socinians will not deny
that Jesus Christ assumed them to himself, but to show how little ground he had
for so doing, they insist on it, that he only accommodated the words to himself.

The same Isaiah writes thus, chapter xli. 4. I am the first and the last; and
Jesus Christ has the same expressions of himself, Rev. i. 17. The Chaldee
Paraphrast thought they belonged so properly to the True God, as to Paraphrase
them in this manner, I am the Lord Jehovah who created the World in the
beginning, and the Ages to come are all mine. Joseph Albo makes this Text a
proof of the Eternity of God, and notes that it is a parallel Text to Isa.
xliv. 6. But if you will have Socinus opinion of the place, when it is applied to
our Lord Jesus Christ, it does not at all regard his Eternity.

Once more, we read Isa. xlv. 23. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out
of my mouth in righteousness -- that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue
shall swear. St. Paul refers these words to Jesus Christ, Romans xiv. 11. nay he
proves our standing before Christ's Judgment Seat by this Quotation.
Notwithstanding the Socinians believe them only a simple accommodation, and not
the prime scope of the Text.

I know the Apostles have sometimes cited Texts from the Old Testament, which
have not their exact accomplishment in that sense wherein they are used. As for
example, 2 Cor. viii. 15. St. Paul exhorting the Corinthians to supply the
wants of their Brethren with their abundance, adds, As it is written, He that
had gathered much had nothing over, and he that had gathered little had no
lack. Thus alluding to the History of the Manna, Exodus xvi. 18. it is plain
that he accommodates that Story to the Beneficence of the Christians, without
any thing, either from Letter, or Allegory, to justify this accommodation.

They who think that John, chapter xix. 37. does allude to Exodus xii. 46. Neither
shall you break a bone thereof, go upon this ground, that Christ was typified
by the Paschal Lamb, and therefore what was spoken of the Paschal Lamb is truly
applicable to Christ. But some others believe that St. John cited this passage
from Psalm. xxxiv. 21. and applies what David says of all the just in general,
to the Messiah, who is often called the Just One, as being eminently so.

I know that some think that a Prophecy which has been already accomplished
literally, was accommodated by the Holy Penmen to a like event. And thus they
think St. Matthew, chapter ii. 17. applies the voice that was heard at Ramah, and
Rachel's weeping for her Children, to those Expressions of sorrow used by the
Women of Bethlehem, when Herod slew their Children: Although this Prophecy was
before accomplished in the Captivity of Judah and Benjamin under Nebuchadnezzar.

But besides what I have said upon such places, the Examples of this nature are
but few, and those may be easily discerned by a careful Reader from such
Citations as are not Accommodations, but Proofs; and for the Texts which are
commonly and generally quoted by the Holy Writers, they expose the Books of the
New Testament to the scorn and contempt of Jews, who suppose that the Apostles
went about to make Converts from the Synagogue by such passages of the Old
Testament, as had nothing of strength or reason to convince any Man, for such
are the places quoted by way of Accommodation; and let any one but consult the
Writings of the Jews against Christianity, and he will find that the main
Argument they make use of against the Proofs brought by the Apostles, is, that
the passages they cite, were never designed by the Spirit, to that purpose
Literally taken, but were only made use of by them by way of Accommodation.

But the most wonderful thing of all in the Unitarians management of this
Controversy, especially in our English Unitarians is this, that they do not
only side with the Jews, and dress up their sense of those Texts of the Old
Testament which are cited in the New as Proofs of our Lords Divinity; or which
are objected in confirmation of the Holy Trinity; and that they have not been
content to bring in the Notion of Accommodation to elude the force of those
Quotations on which the Apostles grounded several Doctrines; but for the most
part they give broad intimations, as if the New Testament Writings were on
purpose falsified by the Christians, and many things there inserted which were
never thought of by the Authors of those Writings.

If they could have made good this accusation, it would have saved them a great
deal of pains which it has cost them to find out Answers to the several
Objections proposed to them. It Is the most easy, natural, and shortest way to
join with the Deists in destroying the Authority of the Gospel, and to
endeavor to show that nothing certain can be drawn from thence, seeing that
since the Apostles Times the Christian Faith has been corrupted, and new
Doctrines have been foisted into their Books, which from the beginning were not
there.

For my part I see no other way left them for the defense of their bad Cause.
But by ill luck, Socinus has stopped their retreat even to this last Refuge, by
the Treatise he writ concerning the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. When they
have solidly refuted this Book of their great Leader, it will be then time to
take their Charge against the Sacred Books into more particular consideration.

Let them do this when they will. We promise them when they have done it, to
reproach them no more with Socinus's Authority, in defense of the Integrity of
the Scripture. But for the present we refer them to the Book of a famous
Mohammedan called Hazzadaula, who has handled this matter with length and force
enough to confound both the Unitarians and Deists. I mean his third Book of the
comparison of the three Laws, the Jewish, Christian, and Mohammedan; of which
there is an Extract in Jos. de Voisin de Lege Divina, in a Letter from Gabriel
Syonita.

It has been thought by some, that Mahomet and his Followers did accuse the
Jews and Christians of corrupting the Old and New Testament Writings. But we
see this Accusation is proved false by such as have managed the Controversy
against Mahometanism. And the more knowing Mahometans do insult the Christian
Missionaries for charging it on them, when Mahomet accused the Christians only
for wresting several passages in Scripture, and putting a false and forced
sense on them.

But with what face the Mahometans can object this I know not, when they
themselves do so grossly pervert the passages in Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 33. Hab. iii. 3.
Deuteronomy. xviii. and xxxiv. in favor of Mahomet and his Law; and in favor of
Mahomet only many Texts in Isaiah, Ezekiel, Zephany, and other Prophets, as you
may see them alleged by Hazzadaula in his Fourth Book; but especially when
they urge all those places in St. John's Gospel, where the Paraclete is spoken
of, as so many Promises of Mahomet's coming.

I must confess some warm indiscreet Mahometans in dispute with the Christians
have given them occasion to believe that the Mahometans generally accused the
Christians with falsifying their Scriptures. Just as the petty Controvertists
of the Church of Rome have impudently averred the Scripture to be corrupt in
many places, the better to establish their Church's Authority. And thus we find
Ahmed the Mohammedan, charging both Jews and Christians with altering of their
Bibles. Hotting. Hist. p. 364.

But as there are in the Roman Church Men wiser and calmer that see the
consequences of so rash an Accusation, and have therefore proved unanswerably
the Integrity of the Sacred Text; so are there among the Mahometans more wary
and cautious Disputants, who despise and disallow those false Charges advanced
by some of their party against the Jews and Christians. Such a one was
Hazzadaula in the Book before cited, who solidly proves that by the care the
Masorite Jews took to ascertain the Text of the Old Testament, it was
impossible they should be willing to corrupt it; and that if they had been
willing, yet they were divided into so many Sects of unreconcileable hatred to
one another, as rendered it impossible for them to do it.

He then shows that the difference which is between the several Versions, as
between the Seventy and Syriack for Example, was no prejudice to the Purity of
the Text it self; but that this arose from the several Views the Interpreters
then had, from the different Notions and senses they affixed to the Original
words. He then passes to the Examination of the various Readings, which our
Unitarians triumph in; and shows that neither their number nor variety ought to
diminish the Authority of the Originals. He gives Reasons for his preference of
the Jewish Bible to that of the Samaritans. He proves the corruption of the
Books of the Old Testament could not be made before Jesus Christ's time, since
he never reproached them for it, which he would certainly have done, had they
been guilty of it; nor could the corruption come in after Christ's time,
because the Jews and Christians who are such mortal Enemies, have had these
Books in keeping, and daily read them, though they interpret them very
differently.

In a word, we cannot easily meet with a more perfect Treatise on this Subject,
nor one more proper to refute the bold insinuations of some who under the name
of Christians, and Men skilled in Critical knowledge, have undertaken to shake
the Foundations of the Christian Religion; and for this purpose would discredit
the Authority of the Holy Scripture, under the disguise of making it rest on
the Authority of Tradition.

The Reader will, I hope, reflect on what I have said concerning the conduct of
the Socinians in their Disputes with us, relating to the Divinity of Christ.

To which I may add, that some of them, less modest, though more sincere than
Socinus, being convinced that no Answer could be given to the Quotations from
the Old Testament that were used in Proof of our Lord's Divinity, thought fit
to reject the Epistle to the Hebrews, which contains those Quotations, as an
Apocryphal Piece. This Enjedinus has done, and thought it a quick way to
deliver himself at once of many difficulties, from which otherwise he could not
extricate himself. For had he believed Socinus's Answers Satisfactory, he had
never betaken himself to this last and desperate shift.

Others, of whom Mr. N. is one, do suppose that whatever makes for the
advantage of the Trinitarians Cause is all forged. And so they abandon the
fanciful Explications Socinus has given of the first Chapter of St. John's
Gospel, as having no need of them, so long as they can make one believe that
the Trinitarians have foisted into the New Testament whatever they pleased.
This is still a shorter answer than the former. The first rendered one
particular Book only, useless to the Trinitarians; but this makes all those
Books of the New Testament useless, from whence any Objection may be drawn
against the Unitarians.

What end the Socinians have in these dangerous attempts, whether to facilitate
the Conversion of the Jews, as they pretend, or to do service to the Atheists
and Deists, as it seems to be their real design, is worthy every Christian's
serious enquiry. If they intend the Conversion of the Jews, we may well demand
of them what way they will take to effect it. Smalcius, one of their chief
Writers, has affirmed that the Books of the Old Testament are of little use to
convert the Jews. De Div. Chr. c. x. already quoted. His reason is, because if
we interpret any Text in the Old Testament of Jesus Christ, we must interpret
it Mystically, that is, according to quite another sense than that which the
words do naturally import. And now admitting this to be true, what use can a
Socinian make of the Old Testament against the Jews?

Sommerus, and Francis David, (whose Opinions as to the denial of the Worship
of Jesus Christ, are embraced by Mr. N.) being forced to own that the Author of
the Book of Proverbs did ascribe a Son to God, chapter xxx. 4. and yet being not
willing to acknowledge it as a truth, took the readiest way to defeat the
Authority of this Book, and placed it among the Apocryphal Writings. One should
wonder how such Socinians are like to be Converters, who call the Jews Canon of
the Scriptures into question, and consequently leave no Books from whence, as
from a common Principle, they may on each side deduce their reasonings.

As for the Books of the New Testament, what use can they make of them? Yes,
very great, says the Socinian. If the Books of the New Testament were
reformed, and those Patches entirely taken from them, which were never written
by the Apostles, though added under their Names, such as the Epistle to the
Hebrews, which was brought in after the year 140. of Christ, and stuffed with
Doctrines of a Trinity, and Christ's Divinity, contrary to the Faith of Jesus
Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians; then we might hope to
have success in the Conversion of the Jews.

But in truth they are not likely to succeed with their reformed Socinian
Gospel, so well as they would have us believe: For it is reasonable to think
that every Jew of common sense would retort the Book on themselves, and tell
them frankly, This is not the Christians Gospel from whence you offer to
convince me, this is a Book of no Authority, but an Imposture, of which you are
the Father. We Jews who are spread throughout all parts of the World, and are
intermingled among Christians of all Persuasions, never yet met with these
Books, such as you now produce them, to show that Jesus is the Messiah.

You tell us, they were corrupted by the Christians of the second Age: Produce
Copies more ancient, as Vouchers of this Truth. The Books which you contend
were falsified, are of no Authority. What other Books have you besides these
falsified Books, to prove there ever was such a Man as Jesus Christ, who did
and suffered what you tell us of? Since you accuse these Books of Additions,
and defalcations, and all sorts of corruption, you have no solid proof for the
matters in them, which you say are true. They who thus falsified the
Scriptures, by adding and substracting as they please, or rather you your
selves by advancing this Position, have spoiled all use that might be made of
these Books in Points controverted between us.

Thus much it is natural for a Jew of but an ordinary capacity to say, and to
quote his Tanchuma, and all the Rabins who have disputed ever since there were
Christians, against the Gospel, on the score of their attributing Divinity to
Jesus Christ.

This Tanchuma is a famous Book among the Jews, and has a passage in it in the
Parascha va-elle Massahe, which the Italian Inquisitors blot out of all those
Books which the Jews Printed by Bomberg at Venice. But this passage is still
preserved, and is to this effect, that Jesus Christ whom they call wicked
Balaam, taught that he was God, and on the contrary, R. Tanchuma argues that he
was a mere Man.

But should we call into the Dispute a Learned Jew, that understands the
Original, and the meaning of his Prayers, he would laugh in the face of a
Socinian that should go about to persuade him, that Jesus is not represented in
the Gospels as God, or that the Christians were not of this belief till after
the 140th. year after Christ.

And good reason for it: The Learned Jews know well, that the Prayer which in
the Christian Countries is called the Prayer against the Sadducees, and in
other Countries the Prayer against the Minnim, the Heretics and Apostates, was
truly and originally written against the Christians, for being Teachers of a
Trinity, and of Christ's. Divinity, and so as they judged, destroyers of the
Unity of the Godhead. And this is R. Solomon's sense of that Prayer in his
Notes on the Talmud. The Jews otherwise know that this Prayer was composed
under R. Gamali^l, who died A. D. 52. i. e. eighteen years before the
Destruction of the Temple. That this is no Fable of the Talmud, which in more
than one place Talm. tr. Berac. chapter c. and Beth. Isr. sect 69.
does relate it, they may evidently prove from Justin Martyr's Dialogue,
written A. D. 139. who mentions this Prayer, or rather Curse, against the
Christians, as already spread and received throughout all the Synagogues of the
World.

Our Learned Jew deriding these Socinians, would represent that he knew not how
they could refuse Jesus Christ that Worship which the Christians ever since the
first Preaching of the Gospel throughout the World have paid him, on
supposition of his being the true God. He reads how his Ancestors saw him
adored by the Christians in the first Century, and he proves it to the
Socinians from the Talmud Sanhedr. c. 4 in Gem.
, wherein are diverse Relations of R. Eliezer the great Friend of R. Akiba, who
lived in the end of the first Century, and the beginning of the second Century,
concerning the Gospels, and the Public Worship rendered to Jesus Christ by the
Christians.

In a word, any Jew who has sense enough to reflect on it, may see that the
Gospel proposes Jesus Christ as the Object of Christian Worship. And not to
mention now their other prejudices; The single prejudice which will be taken
against such a Socinian Novel-Gospel, will tend more to make them disesteem the
Gospel, and reject it altogether, than it will dispose them to attend to the
Arguments of a Socinian drawn thence in behalf of Christianity. These things I
leave to the consideration of our Socinians. For other Christians, they see
whither the Socinian Methods of treating Scripture lead, and cannot but behold
with sorrow the wounds they give to the Christian Religion, under pretense of
making it more apt to gain the Jews, but in truth making it so ridiculous to
Men of any ordinary capacity, that we cannot wonder at their not having after
all their boasts, converted so much as one Jew to the Christian Faith.

FINIS.
A Dissertation concerning the Angel who is called the Redeemer, Genesis XLVIII.
SIR,
YOU do very truly observe that the Subject of our last but short Conversation,
is a matter of the greatest moment, and deserving the utmost care in the
discussion of it. When mention was there made of the Angel, whose Blessing
Jacob prayed, might descend on the Sons of Joseph, I then asserted he was not
other than the (...), or Word. You were not then very forward to embrace this
Notion, being carried away with the Authority of some great Names, and
especially of Grotius, who understand this Angel in Jacob's Prayer to be only a
created Angel.

But having not time to hear the Grounds of my Assertion, you were desirous I
should put them with what perspicuity I could into writing, in hopes that the
same Arguments, if they should prove cogent to bring you over to my opinion,
might be of use to others who were in the same Sentiments with your self. So
good an end being proposed, I set my self without delay to your commands; and
having digested my thoughts in this Paper, I now send them to you, entreating
you to judge of them, as you are wont of the Labors of your Friend, with all
impartiality and humanity, still remembering that I made it only my care to
express my thoughts clearly, and to find out the truth, and to deliver it
simply according to the best of my understanding. And so I come to the Question
in hand.

SECT. I.
Moses having related how Joseph took his two Sons along with him to Jacob his
Father that lay sick, in order to obtain his Blessing on them before he died,
goes on to give us the form in which he Blessed them, Genesis xlviii. 15, 16. (...)

These Words are thus rendered by the Greek Interpreters commonly called the
Septuagint: (...): O (...), etc.

And in the Vulgar Latin Version, Benedixitque Jacob filiis Josephi, and ait:
Deus in cujus conspectu ambulaverunt patres mei, Abraham and Isaac, Deus qui
pascit me ab adolescentia mea usque in praesentem diem, Angelus qui eruit me de
cunctis malis benedicat pueris istis, and invocetur super eos nomen meum,
nomina quoque patrum meorum Abraham and Isaac, etc.

You see there is little or no difference between these Versions and the
Hebrew, with which also agrees the Spanish Version of Athias and Usquez, which
was Printed in the last Age at Ferrara, and which is of great Authority with
the Jews, and serves instead of the Text for them that know not Heb^^^. It
renders indeed, The God which fed me, by, El Dio governan a mi, and the word
(...) that has redeemed me, by El redimien a mi, or, my Redeemer, but the
sense is not altered thereby.

Drusius notes in his Fragments of the ancient Interpreters of the Old
Testament, that the Participle (...) here attributed to the Angel, is rendered,
(...) by the Greek Translators in Ruth iv. 8. which imports the next of kin, to
whom the right of inheritance belongs, and with it the Relict of his deceased
Relation. From this Translation of the word, St. Hierom, and after him many
other Divines taking this Angel to be the Messiah, have collected a relation
peculiar of this Angel to the Family of Jacob, of which the Messiah was to be
born. Christ, says he Hier. on Isa. 59.
, shall come and redeem us with his Blood; who, as the Hebrew has it, is of kin
to Sion, and is descended from the stock of Israel; for so the word (...) or
(...) signifies.

But there is another sense of the words, (...) and (...) according to which
the Greek Interpreters do more commonly render them, I mean that of (...) and
(...), which confirms the use of the like word in the Spanish Version. If you
would see the places, you may consult Kircher's Concordance.

The whole difficulty therefore of the place may be reduced to three Heads,
which I shall propose by way of Question:

I. Whether the (...) spoken of, v. 15. is the very (...) whom the Jews
acknowledge for their God?

II. Whether the (...) mentioned in v. 16. is the same with that (...) v. 15.
or differs from him as a Creature does from its Creator?

III. Whether the Prayer contained in Jacob's Blessing be made to God alone, or
to the Redeeming Angel together with him.

SECT. II.
In Answer to the first Question we need not be much to seek: For Onkelos in
his Chaldee Paraphrase Expounds the word (...) by (...) The like Jonathan has
done in his Version. Nor do I know any Christian that ever blamed them for it.
How should they? since it is evident to them that consider this Text carefully,
as the Christians generally do the Holy Scriptures, that these Targumists have
herein faithfully expressed the mind of Jacob.

Jacob had been newly remembering that Appearance in which God had blessed him
at Luz, in these words, Genesis xlviii. 3, 4.
God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me, and
said, Behold I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of
thee a multitude of people, and will give this land to thy seed after thee for
an everlasting possession. Now what can be more absurd than to imagine, that
Jacob when he blesses Joseph's Sons, and prays for the increase of his
Posterity by them, should direct his Prayers to any other than him whose
kindnesses he had so abundantly experimented, and whose Promises for the
multiplication of his seed, were even now fresh in his Memory?

This I thought fit to observe against those of the Jews that doubt it,
following as they think the Author of the Book Rabboth, who notes that a lesser
Title is given to the Angel, than to him that is called Elohim; as if he had a
mind thereby to Matthenot Kehun. f. 23. col. 4. and f. 108. col. 3.
tell us that by the Angels here mentioned, Jacob intended an Angel and not God.

If the Author of the Rabboth had understood this of a created Angel, he had
certainly been in a very great mistake. For, besides the absurdity of this, it
is a wicked thing to suppose that Abraham and Isaac did walk before the Angel,
as Jacob asserts they did before God. God, says he, v. 15. before whom my
fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk. For the word walk in this place comprehends
all the acts of their Religion throughout their whole lives, and so Moses uses
the word to describe the entire obedience of Enoch, Genesis v. 22. This a Modern
Jew, R. Solomon Aben Melek, acknowledges in his Michlol Jophi on this place,
where he says the word walk denotes the worship of the heart which a Creature
owes to God.

But that the Author of the Rabboth understood it of an uncreated Angel, who
often is called in the Old Testament, Elohim, and Jehovah, and Jehovah Elohim,
I little doubt, because he quotes the same authority in this place, which we
meet with in the Bab. Talm. Pesachim c. x. f. 118. col. 1. and which makes this
Angel to be God.

But if he was of another mind, we should have other Jews to confront him, of
no less Authority that understand it our way, particularly; we have the Prayers
of the Jewish Church, many of which alluding to this and the like places in
Genesis do refer to God only, exclusively to a created Angel, the Title of
Redeemer, who delivers from all evil. See Talm. Hier. tr. Berac. c. 4. f. 8. c.
1. and their Liturgies.

I know Cyril of Alexandria Lib. vi. in Genesis p. 210.
, would have Jacob to understand God the Father by (...) v. 15. and the Eternal
Son of God by the Redeeming Angel; which Explication he would confirm by Ephesians.
i. 2. Grace be to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ. Because Grace is nothing but the Blessing of God communicated to the
Church by the Father and the Son. Chrysostom Hom. 66. in Genesis p. 7.
But St. Chrysostom's Opinion is much more probable to me, who asserts Elohim
to be the Eternal Son of God, that is described in both the 14, and 15 verses
by different Titles.

And herein he followed all the ancient Christians, who used to ascribe to the
Son all the Appearances of God, or of the Angel of Jehovah that are mentioned
by Moses; and in particular they teach that the Blessing of the (...) was
prayed for by Jacob in this place.

I scruple not to assert that the ancient Christians ascribed all the
Appearances of God in Moses Writings to the Eternal (...), having the following
Authorities for my assertion. Just. Mart. cont. Tryph. Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 7.
Tertul. cont. Jud. cap. 9. Orig. in Isa. 6. Cyprian. cont. Jud. ii. 5. Constit.
Apost. v. 21. Eusebius. H. E. i. 3. Cyr. Hieros. Cat. xii. the Council. Sirm. c.
13. Gregor. Baet. tr. de fide. Theodor. Q. 5. in Exodus Leo. i. Ep. 13. ad
Pulch. and many others.

In like manner they refer to the Word those Appearances of God, which be
vouchsafed to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob himself, as you may see in Just. Mart.
Apol. for those to Abraham and Isaac; and for those to Jacob, in Clem. Alex.
Paed. i. 7. Novat. I. de Trin. c. 26, 27. Proc. Gaz. in h. l.

The ancient Christians did in this no more than the ancienter Jews did before
them, who by Elohim in this place did not understand a created Angel, but the
(...), whom the Targumists and the strictest Followers of their Fathers
Traditions are wont to express by the (...) and the (...).

Philo makes all the Appearances which we meet with in the Books of Moses to
belong to the Word, and the latter Cabalists since Christ's time not only do
the same, but deny that the Father ever appeared, saying, it was the (...) only
that manifested himself to their Fathers, whose proper name is Elohim. For this
consult R. Menachem de Rekanati from Beres. Rabba. on the Parasch. Breschit. f.
14. c. 3. Ed. Ven. and on Par. (...) f. 30. c. 1.

I have often wondered how it came to pass, that most of the Divines of the
Church of Rome, who would seem to have the greatest veneration for Antiquity,
should so much despise it in this Question wherein the ancient Jewish and
Christian Church do agrees. Sanctius in his Notes on the Acts, chapter 7. says, it
is a difficult question among Divines, whether God's Appearances in Scripture
were performed immediately by God himself, or by his Angels. And then having
cited several ancient Fathers, who thought it the (...) that appeared, he adds,
Sed Theologis jam illa sententia placet, quae statuit Angelorum ministerio
antiquis hominibus oblatam esse divinam speciem, quae est sententia Dionys. de
caelest. Hier. c. 4, etc. To the same purpose Lorinus another Jesuit speaks in
Act. vii. 31.

But this is not the worst of it that they forsake the judgment of the
Ancients; they do herein make bold to contradict the plain words of Christ
himself, Joh. i. 18. Christ says thus, No man has seen God at any time, the
only begotten who is in the bosom of the Father he has declared him. And
parallel to this Text is Joh. vi. 46. Certainly he must be very blind who does
not see that Christ in these words not only denies the Father to have shown
himself in those Appearances that were made to the ancient Patriarchs, but also
asserts them to himself, and not to the Angels.

Away then with such Divines who setting aside the Authority of Christ, do
choose to Theologize in the principal Heads of Religion according to the sense
and prejudices of the Moderns. We desire to be no wiser in these matters than
the Primitive Christians were, among whom it passed for an established truth,
that the Elohim in Jacob's Prayer, was the very Jehovah of the Jews, termed by
them sometime Shekinah, and sometime Memra.

SECT. III.
As to the second Question it would be no Question at all, but for the
obstinacy of some latter Jews. He that reads the Hebrew Text without prejudice,
cannot but see the Elohim in v. 15. is called (...) in the following verse,
whence it follows that this Redeeming Angel is Jehovah.

But because this opinion is contradicted by some of the chief Modern Jews, as
Abarbanel and Alshek on this place, and by most of the Popish Divines, as well
as some few of the Reformed, that have not sifted this matter accurately, we
will offer some proofs for the conviction of them that are not obstinately bent
against it.

And, 1. If Jacob had had two Persons then in his mind so different as God and
a created Angel are, he would have coupled them together by the particle, which
is not only conjunctive, but very proper to distinguish the Persons of whom we
speak, and said, God before whom my Fathers walked, God who fed me from my
youth, and the Angel that delivered me, bless the Lads. But Jacob is so far
from doing thus, that on the contrary he puts a demonstrative as well before
the Angel as before God, without any Copulative between, which sufficiently
demonstrates, he means the same Person by God and the Angel. Munster was well
aware of this, and therefore being willing to distinguish the Redeeming Angel
from God, he Translates it with an addition, the Angel also.

2. It cannot be easily supposed, That Jacob would in a Prayer use the Singular
Verb (...) in common to Persons, in Nature so very different, the Creator and a
Creature. He certainly ought to have said, God and the Angel, (...) may they
bless the Lads, if he had spoken of two. But his speaking in the the Singular,
may he bless, is an Argument of his having in his Eye one Person alone, whose
Blessing he prayed for on his Seed. Otherwise it would have been a Prayer of a
strange Composition. For according to Athanasius, we do no where find that one
prays to God and the Angel, or any other created Being at the same time for any
thing. Nor is there any like instance of such a Form as this, God and an Angel
give thee this.

3. But setting aside those Rules with which the contrary Opinion can never be
reconciled, consider the thing it self in Jacob's Prayer, and you will find it
absurd to distinguish between the Offices of God, and those of a created Angel
toward Jacob. The Office ascribed to God, is feeding him from his Youth; the
Office ascribed to the Angel, is delivering him from all Evil; which must be
very distinct Offices, if the Persons be distinguished. And so R. Jochanan
accounts them, Gem. Pesasch. f. 118. Tho he believes the Angel to be the same
with Elohim, yet he contends that feeding, the greater Work, is attributed to
God; and delivering, the lesser Work, to an Angel. The same thing is said by
the Author of Jalkut on this place; and R. Samule on the Book Rabboth
abovementioned. But in the Phrase of these Jewish Masters, this Distinction is
very insipid; it is harshly formed, without considering that Jacob in this
Blessing reflected on the Words of the Vow which he made at Luz, afterward
called Bethel, because of God's appearing to him there. Now, these were the
Words of Jacob's Vow, If God will be with me, and keep me in the way in which I
shall walk: if he will give meat to eat, and clothing to put on, and bring me
home in safety to the house of my Father, then shall the Lord be my God, Genesis
xxvii. 20, 21. Here you see it is from God that Jacob expects to be kept in his
way, i. e. to be redeemed from all Evils that might happen, and that he esteems
this to be no less a benefit than Sustenance or Clothing, which he mentions in
the second place. Here is no Angel spoken of here; and since the redeeming
Angel is to be expounded from this place, he cannot be a created Angel, for
here is no other spoken of, but the Lord.

4. By fancying him a created Angel, who delivered Jacob from all Evil, they
make Jacob to be a mere Idolater, as ascribing that to a Creature, which
belongs only to the Lord of the Creation. The Scripture appropriates to God the
Title of Redeemer, (...); nor do godly Men ever say of a Creature, that it
delivers them from all Evil. David, I am sure, never does, but when he speaks
of the Tribulations of the Righteous; he adds, but the Lord delivers him out of
all, Ps. xxxiv. 20. And Jacob on another occasion, directs his Prayer to the
Lord that appeared to him at Luz, saying, Save me from the hand of my brother
Esau, for I fear him much, Genesis xxxii. 9, 10, 11.

5. God, as I said, has so appropriated the Name of Redeemer to himself, that
Jacob could not without Sacrilege communicate this Title to any Creature,
though never so excellent. We cannot be ignorant, that David makes this the
proper Name of God, Psalm. xix. 14. as does Isaiah, Chap. xliii. 14. xlvii. 4.
And this Jonathan confesses on Isa. lxiii. 16. in these words, Thou art our
redeemer, thy name is from everlasting, i. e. this is the Name that was
designed for God from the beginning, which yet cannot hold true; if in this
place, Genesis xlviii. 16. it be ascribed by Jacob to a created Angel.

6. It appears plainly from Genesis xlix. that Jacob neither desired, nor expected
any Blessing from a created Angel, but only from God. Thus he prays, etc. The
God of thy Father shall be thy helper, and the Almighty shall bless thee with
the Blessings of Heaven above, etc. Not a word of a mere Angel that redeemed
him from all Evil; so far was the Patriarch in his former Blessing, from
begging of an Angel the Multiplication of his Seed, which was the only thing
which he could now expect of God, as the Jews own. Bechai Praef. in Pent. f. 1.
c. 1.

7. The same Conclusion may be drawn from the very Order of Jacob's Prayer. Had
Jacob intended a created Angel by him whom he names in the last place as a
Redeemer from Evil, and whose Intercession with God he bespeaks in behalf of
his Children, would he not have prayed to the Angel in the first place? It is
most rational so to do. He that wants the Interest of a great Man to introduce
him to the King, he does not in the first place direct his Petition to the King
immediately, but first to the great Man, and afterward by him to the King. Let
the Papists therefore look to the Absurdity of their proceeding, while they
first pray to God, and then to Saints and Angels. Let those Jews who are of the
mind of Isaac Abarbanel and Franco Serrano, in his Spanish Notes on this place,
and stickle for Angel-worship, see how they can clear themselves of this
difficulty, as well as reconcile themselves with those ancienter Jews, who
abhor this sort of Idolatry. Maim. Per. Misna ad tit. Sanh. c. xi.

SECT. IV.
How firm these Reasons are, to show the Angel here spoken of to be an
uncreated, and not a created Angel, is I hope evident to every one. Something
however of great importance may be still added to illustrate this weighty
Argument, and that is the Judgment of the Ancient Synagogue. The most ancient
Jewish Writers, and they that received the Traditionary Doctrine from them,
though mortal Enemies of the Christian Religion, yet agree with the Christians
in the Sense of this Text. For, God be thanked, such Truths were not renounced
all at once by these Enemies of our Faith, but they began to dissemble them by
degrees, as they found them turning against them in their Disputes with the
Christians.

To begin with the Writings of the Jews before Christ, we find it is God the
Word, ver. 12. who is described as he that delivers from all Evil, in the Book
of Wisd. xvi. 8. no doubt with respect to this place, where he takes the Angel
that delivered Jacob from all Evil, to be God.

The same Doctrine is to be met with in Philo the Jew, that lived before
Christ, and in Christ's time. He Allegor. ii. p. 71. D.
expressly affirms of the Angel that delivered Jacob from all Evil, that he was
the (...). And so does Onkelos in his Chaldee Paraphrase, translating the Words
of Jacob simply, as they lie in the Text, without any Addition.

Jonathan indeed seems to be of another mind in his Paraphrase, that runs thus,
God before whom my Fathers, Abraham and Isaac worshipped, the Lord that fed me
from the time I began to be till this day, may be pleased that the Angel may
bless the Lads, whom thou have ordained to deliver me from all Evil. Here he
distinguishes the Angel from God; but that he did not mean a Creature by this
Angel, is clear, for that in other places he translates this Angel by the Word,
or (...), and especially in that remarkable place where the same Angel is
treated of, Isaiah lxiii. 8, 9, 10. he says it was the Word that redeemed
Israel out of all their Afflictions.

Let us pass to the Jews after Christ's time, and show that they did not
immediately renounce the Doctrine of their Forefathers.

The Author of the Book Zohar in Par. (...) fol. 123. has these words, which
he repeats often afterward, (...) come, see the Angel, that redeemed me, is
the Shekinah that went along with him.

This is sufficiently intimated by the ancient Author Tanchuma in his Book
Jelammedenu, who notes on Exodus xxxiii. that the Jews would not have a created
Angel go before them, but God himself, in these words, Moses answered, I will
not have an Angel, but thy own self. Now the Jewish Commentators on this place
of Exodus xxxiii. explain of the Shekinah, the words, thy own self, and always
distinguish the Shekinah from all created Beings.

R. Solomon in his Notes on this Text has these words, The Angel that delivered
me, i. e. the Angel who was wont to be sent to me in my affliction; as it is
said, Genesis xxxi. 11, 13.
And the Angel of God spoke to me in a dream, saying, Jacob, I am the God of
Bethel, etc.

The Note of R. Moses Ben Nachman on this Text, Genesis xlviii. 16. is very
remarkable. The Redeeming Angel, says he, is he that answered him in the time
of his affliction, and who said to him, I am the God of Bethel, etc. he of whom
it is said, that my name is in him. The like he has on Exodus iii. where the
appearance in the Bush is mentioned: This is he of whom it is said, and God
called Moses out of the Bush. He is called an Angel, because he Governs the
World; for it is written in one place, And Jehovah, that is, the Lord God,
brought us out of Egypt; and in another place, He sent his Angel and brought us
out of Egypt. And again, The Angel of his Presence saved them, viz. that Angel
who is the face of God, of whom it is said, My face shall go before you.
Lastly, that Angel of whom the Prophet Malachi mentions, And the Lord whom you
seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Angel of the Covenant whom you
desire. At length he adds, The face of God is God himself, as all Interpreters
do acknowledge; but no one can rightly understand this, without being
instructed in the Mysteries of the Law.

R. Menachem of Rekan. on Genesis xlviii. 16. the same that afterward commented
on the whole Pentateuch, was no stranger to this Notion. Says he, He means the
Shekinah, when he speaks of the Redeeming Angel, f. 52. See also f. 55.

The like has R. Bechai, the famous Jewish Writer, whose Comments are
constantly in the hands of the Jewish Doctors. He proves that this Blessing is
not different from that which is afterward repeated, Genesis xlix. where no Angel
is mentioned. Whence it follows, that the three terms in Genesis xlviii. God, God
that fed me, the Angel that redeemed me, are Synonimous to the mighty one of
Jacob, Chapter xlix. which Title the Jews in their Prayers do frequently ascribe to
God. Bech. f. 71. c. 4. Ed. Rivae di Trento. He also there teaches, that this
Angel was the Shekinah. As does R. Joseph Gekatilia, in his Book called Saare
Ora, according to Menasseh Ben Israel q. 64. in Genesis p. 118. Aben Sueb on this
place, a Man of Name among his Party, writes much to the same purpose on this
place.

These are followed by two Eminent Authors of the Cabalists. The one in his
Notes on Zohar, f. 122. toward the end, says, the Angel that delivered me from
all evil, is the Shekinah, of whom Exodus xiv. 19. And the Angel of the Lord,
which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them, and may God
bless us in the age to come. The other is he who contracted the Zohar on
Genesis, and is called R. David the less. He in that Book Ed. Thessalonic. f.
174. professes to follow the opinion of R. Gekatalia in his Saare Ora.

Nor does Menasseh Ben Israel himself much dissent from these in the
abovementioned place. For though he attempts to reconcile Genesis xxviii. 16.
with the first Commandment, Exodus xx. Thou shall have no other Gods before me,
by saying it was the opinion of several of their Masters, that there was no
contradiction between them; yet at length he produces the opinion of the
Cabalists, for the satisfaction of his Readers, who possibly would not
acquiesce in his former reason drawn only from Modern Authorities.

I mention not R. Levi ben Gersom's opinion, who denies the Angel here spoken
of to be a Creature, but calls him the Intellectus Agens, because he seems to
have borrowed the Notion from the Arabian Philosophers; nor is it commonly
received by those of his Religion. Many others might be added to these Jewish
Testimonies, but what I have already produced is I think very sufficient.

SECT. V.
Having thus showed the Opinions of the ancient Jews concerning Jacob's Angel,
and that to this day the Tradition is not quite worn out that exalts him above
a created Angel; I now proceed to the third Question, the clearing of which
will fully justify that Opinion of the Ancients concerning this Text.

And that is, Whether this form of Blessing, be not an express Prayer? The
soundest and most part as well of Jews as Christians do agree, That we cannot
worship Angels without Idolatry. This Maimonides affirms, as I quoted him
above; and the Protestants, as all Men know, do abhor this Idolatry in the
Roman Church.

I do therefore positively assert, That these words contain a Prayer to the
Angel, as well as to God, for a Blessing on his Children. This the Jews cannot
gainsay, since Jonathan their Paraphrast, and other Writers after him, do
commonly term this Blessing (...) or a Prayer And for this reason R. Menasseh
thought it necessary to endeavor to reconcile this Prayer of Jacob with the
first Commandment, which forbids Angel-Worship according to the Jews
Interpretation. R. Menach. de Rek. in Pent. f. 97. c. 4.

It is true Jacob's form of Blessing does seem to proceed from him either as a
Wish, or a Prophecy: A Wish, as if he had said, Would to the Lord, God and his
Angel would bless the Lads. A Prophecy, as if he had foretold that God and his
Angel should in aftertimes fulfill what he now wished. But it might be both
Wish and Prophecy, and notwithstanding be a direct Prayer to God and the
Redeeming Angel. It Is well known how the Jews commonly delivered their
Petitions to God in this form. And yet I cannot forbear giving one instance to
confirm it. You may read it in Deuteronomy. vi. 22, etc. And the Lord said to Moses,
saying, Speak to Aaron and his Sons, thus shall you bless the children of
Israel, and say, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee; (...)
the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord
lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And they shall invoke
my name for the children of Israel, (so our Translation is to be mended) and I
will bless them. So that in plain terms the form of Blessing here prescribed by
God, is called Invocation.

I cannot therefore see what should hinder, but that we after Jacob's example
may offer up our Prayers to a created Angel, supposing, as some do, that Jacob
prayed for a Blessing to such a kind of Angel. De Sanct. Beat. l. 1. c. 29.
Corn. A Lap. on Genesis xlviii.
It is a necessary consequence that Bellarmine and others of his Communion draw
from this instance: Holy Jacob invoked an Angel, therefore it is not unlawful
for the pretended reformed to do the like; therefore one may worship others
besides God; these things, says he, cannot be denied, unless you reckon Prayer
to be no act of Worship, not peculiar to God alone.

But let them of his Church get out of these difficulties as they can, who
believe Jacob's Angel to have been a mere Creature. Let them try how they can
convince a Socinian from Ephesians. i. 2. and other places of Scripture, where
Worship is ascribed to Christ. The Socinian has his answer ready, he may wish
and pray to Christ for Grace, though he be not God, since he does no more than
Jacob did, when he prayed for a Blessing on his Children to a mere Angel.

I am more concerned for these Divines of the Reformed Church, who have given
the same Interpretation of Jacob's Angel, with the Generality of Papists,
though they cannot be ignorant, they therein dissent from the Divinity of the
ancient Jews, and the Fathers of the Christian Church, and even the more
Learned and candid Romanists, such as Masius was; I might add, (which perhaps
they have not considered) though they therein contradict the whole strain of
the New Testament. See Mercerus ad Pagnini Lexicon, p. 1254.

The intended shortness of this Treatise will not permit me to enlarge on this
Head. However one thing I must not pass over, which is worthy the examination
of the less cautious Divines. It is very certain, that the God that appeared to
Jacob in Bethel was the very God that fed Israel in the Desert, and against
whom the Israelites in the Wilderness did rebel. Now the Apostle is express, 1
Cor. x. that he was Christ, whom the Jews tempted in the Wilderness, i. e. that
he was the (...) and not a mere Angel. The Apostle takes it for granted, it was
a thing undisputed by the Synagogue in his time. And indeed unless this be
allowed, St. Paul's reasoning in this Chapter is trifling and groundless.

Well! what can Bellarmine say to this? he who asserts a created Angel to be
spoken of, Genesis xlviii. 16. He has forgot what he said on that Text when he is
come to this place. He here strenuously urges it against the Socinians, to
prove that Christ was then in being when the Jews tempted him in the
Wilderness. And since hereby he owns that Christ in his Divine Nature was he
that led Israel through the Wilderness, who is sometimes called God, and
sometimes an Angel, he inconsiderately grants what he had denied before, that
the Angel who redeemed Jacob from all evil, being the same Angel that conducted
Israel, was also God.

SECT. VI.
You see what Contradictions Bellarmine falls into, out of his zeal to promote
the Doctrine of Invocation of Saints. I wish there were not something as bad in
our Divines that carries them in the like Contradictions. The best I can say
for their excuse is only this, They have not carefully attended to the Style of
Holy Scripture. Two or three things therefore I will mention, which occur
frequently in Scripture, that methinks would have suggested higher thoughts of
this Angel to one that considered what he read.

He that considers how often our Lord Christ is called in the New Testament,
the Spouse, or Husband of the Church, and compares it with the same Title that
God appropriates to himself under the Old Testament Estate, will make little
doubt that it was the same Christ who was then married to Israel. By the same
rule one may infer, that our Lord Christ in calling himself a Shepherd, had a
respect to that Title, by which he is so often ascribed in his dealings with
Jacob and his Posterity. This the ancienter Jews were sensible of, and
therefore both here, Genesis xlviii. 15. and chapter xlix. 24. where God is mentioned
as a Shepherd, they understand it of the Shekinah or (...). R. Menachem de
Rekanah from the Book Habbahir in Pent. f. 84. c. 2. Of this also the Jews in
Christ's time were not ignorant, who hearing Christ in one of his Sermons
likening himself to the good Shepherd, Joh. x. did presently apprehend that he
would be thought the Messiah, and therefore took up stones to stone him. And
then in the process of his Discourse to maintain this Character, he made
himself one with the Father.

As Christ called himself a Shepherd, to show that he was the God that had fed
Jacob and his Posterity like sheep; so also is Christ most frequently
represented in the New Testament under the Notion of a Redeemer; intimating
thereby that he was the same Redeeming Angel of whom Jacob had spoken. It was
he that was called Isa. lxiii. 9.
the Angel of his Presence, by whom God redeemed his ancient People: And he is
also called the Angel of the Covenant Mal. iii. 1.
, in the promise of his coming in the time of the Gospel.

Here I should have put an end to this Tract, but for two Objections that lie
in my way, and seem to require some kind of Answer.

The first is taken from the Jews who many of them expound this Redeeming Angel
by Metatron, and Metatron according to them, being a created Angel, or as some
say, no other than Enoch that was Translated; there seems to be as many
Authorities against us as for us.

But let it be observed, 1. Though the Jews have several Names of Angels which
are not mentioned in Scripture, yet they are all formed out of the Names of
God, according to the Rules of their Cabala, and that with respect to the Ten
Sephiroth, as Buxtorf has noted, Lex. Talm. p. 828.

2. This is plain from the word Actariel, which is at the head of the Jewish
forms of Excommunication v. Bartolocci, f. 4. and 450.
. This is derived from (...) the Name of the first of the Ten Sephiroth, whence
the Talmudists place Actariel upon the Throne, Beracoth, f. 7. c. 1. and
distinguish him from the Ministering Angels that stand before the Throne. But I
refer the curious Reader that would know more of this to the ancient Jewish
Book Entitled, Berith Menucha, c. 1.

3. This is no less plain of the Angel Metatron, who as they say was he that
discoursed with Moses, Exodus iii. and the Angel in whom God placed his Name. So
that they acknowledge, though it is framed from the Latin Tongue, yet it
expresses the same that the Hebrew word (...) does as R. S. Jarchi on Exodus
xxiii. confesses. Now St. Hierome on Ezekiel. i. 24. notes, that the Greek
Interpreters sometimes render God's Name (...) by (...), which leads us into
the meaning of those ancient Jews that accounted (...) and Metatron to be the
same.

4. The Generality of Jews are so far from believing Metatron to be Enoch, that
they believe him to be the Messiah, the (...) before his Incarnation, in our
phrase, but in theirs, the Soul of the Messiah, which they look on as something
between God and the Angels, whom nothing separates from the Living God. See
Reuchlin, l. i. de Cabala, p. 651. where he proves Metatron to be the Messiah
from their Writings: Or in short, take the confession of Menasse ben Israel, Q.
6. in Gen.. 2.

And truly if one would compare all those places of the Old Testament that
mention the Angel, whom the later Jews call Metatron, he would find such
Properties belonging to this Angel, as are incommunicable to a Creature. And
this shows that they who have departed in this point from the Tradition of
their Fathers, did it on this ground, because they were loath to acknowledge the
Divinity of the Messiah, which seemed to be clear upon allowing Metatron to be
the Messiah. They were more careful to defend their own prejudices, than the
Opinions of the Ancients.

II. Another Objection is made from the place in Rev. i. 4. the words are
these, John to the seven Churches that are in Asia, Grace be to you, and peace
from him that was, and is, and is to come, and from the seven Spirits that are
before his Throne; and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, etc. For
John here seems to wish and pray for Grace, not only from the Father, but also
from the Seven Angels that are before the Throne of God, and so to be reckoned
among the Ministering Spirits.

This place is indeed abused by those of the Romish Church, to show that
Prayers may be lawfully directed to Angels. And the Jews themselves have
contributed to lead some Men of Note into the mistake. For, besides the four
chief Angels, whom they make to preside over the four Armies of Angels, which
they have chiefly grounded on Ezekiel. i. they speak of seven other Angels, that
were created before the rest, and that wait on God before the Vail, R. Eliezer,
in capit. c. 4.
that divides them from the Shechinah.

The hearing of these things so often repeated by the Jews, has given occasion,
I say, to some considerable Divines to believe those seven to be proper Angels,
whom St. John mentions in his Revelation. But then not apprehending how Prayers
could be offered to them, nor why the precedence is given them before Christ,
they would not have John here to have spoken a Prayer, but only to have wished
Grace on the Seven Churches; and this they thought a sense consistent enough
with the Angel-worship forbidden by St. Paul, Col. ii. 18. and even in this
very Book, Revel. xix. 10. and xxii. 9.

But to shorten this matter, I altogether deny that St. John intended here any
created Angels. What then did he mean by them? Nothing else but the Holy
Spirit, for whose most perfect Power and Grace on the Seven Churches he here
makes Supplication. For as Cyril on Zech. iii. 9. (...) (...). The Number seven
is always a mark of Perfection in the thing to which it is applied. St. John
therefore thought of no allusion to the Jewish opinion of seven Angels, when he
prayed for Grace from the Seven Spirits before the Throne; but had in his mind
to express the far more plentiful effusion, and more powerful efficacy of the
Holy Spirit under the Gospel than under the Law, and his never ceasing
Ministration for the good of the Church, for which purposes he has received a
Vicarious authority under God, immediately to Christ, as Tertullian speaks, de
Praesc. Haeret. c. 13. and for this Interpretation I have Justin Martyr,
Paraen. ad Graec. and St. Austin on my side.

St. John's way of expressing himself is borrowed from Zech. iii. 9. where God
is represented as having seven Eyes running through the Earth, to signify by
this Figure God's perfect knowledge of all things, as Cyril Alexandrinus Notes.
Hence we read of Christ, Revel. iii. 1. These things says he that has the
seven Spirits of God. And in another place seven Eyes, and seven Horns are
ascribed to him. But we never read (which is worth our observation) of these
seven Spirits, as we do of the four Beasts, and twenty-four Elders, that they
fell down and Worshipped God.

But why does St. John put the Holy Spirit before Christ? If I should say St.
Paul has done the like in Gal. i. 1. and Ephesians. v. 5. to teach us the unity and
equality of each Person in the Blessed Trinity, or because St. John in the
following Verses was to speak more at large of Christ, I think I should not
answer improperly. But I shall add another reason, which may explain the whole
matter.

In a word, I do believe this difficulty must be resolved another way; for that
which makes this place so intricate according to the judgment of many
Interpreters, is their referring to the Father, the words of the 4th. verse,
Grace be unto you, and peace from him, which is, and which was, and which is to
come; which ought to be referred particularly to Christ himself, who is
described, Chap. iv. v. 8. according to the description of the (...) in
Jonathan's Targum on Deuteronomy. xxxii. 39. But then some will say, Why is there any
mention made of the seven Spirits, if we conceive that the Grace which is asked
for the Church, in the first words, is asked from Jesus Christ? The thing is so
clear, that Socinus has perceived it.

Now seven Spirits are here mentioned, to denote the Spirit of God, which was
to reside with his sevenfold Gifts in the Messiah, according to the Prophecy of
Isaiah, chapter xi. 2, 3. and from thence it comes, that in Revel. chapter v. 6. the
Lamb is described having seven Horns, and seven Eyes, which are the seven
Spirits of God, sent forth into all the Earth. To Christ there are attributed
seven Horns, which denote his Empire, in opposition to the Empire of the little
Horn, which is spoken of Dan. vii. 8. So there are seven Eyes, which are the
seven Spirits of God, attributed to him; likewise, to denote the Gracious
Providence of Jesus Christ by the Holy Ghost, and that in opposition to the
little Horn, in which there were Eyes, Like the Eyes of man, Da^ vii (...)

Here then the Grace asked, is from the seven Spirits, that is, from the Holy
Ghost, who is united in one with the Messiah Jesus Christ, and is sent by him;
and so it is said to be asked from Jesus Christ himself, who both has those
Spirits as his Eyes, and does cause the Mission of them to his Church.

St. John therefore does not place the Holy Spirit before Christ, but mentions
him with Christ, because he after Christ's Ascension, and during the time of
Christ's continuance on God's right hand, has a more particular hand in the
immediate Government of the Church, and is especially watchful to do her good.
And for this reason I think it is, the Holy Spirit is placed as it were without
the Veil, like a Ministering Angel. Many of the Ancients knew this, as
Victorinus Petavionensis, Ambrose, Beda, Arethas, Autpertus, Walafridus Strabo,
Haymo, Rupertus, from whom Tho. Aquinas, and Caelius of Pannonia, who rebukes
those that understand it otherwise, and other Elder Divines of the Roman Church
learnt it, to say nothing of those of the Reformed Church: But it is time to
give over.

A TABLE OF TEXTS of Scripture Occasionally Explained in this Treatise.
GENESIS. Chap. Ver. Page i. 1 116, 119, 123, 142 2 141 26 101, 117, 320, 323,
400, 414 iii. 5 118 8 370 15 401 22 42, 118, 320 iv. 7 118 8 21 vi. 3 141 ix. 7
142 xi. 7 118, 323 xv. 1, 5, 9 370 xviii. 1, 2, 3 147 18 35 20, 21 443 xix. 401
24 323 xxi. 9 61 xxv. 7 118 xxx. 24 120 xxxv. 7 323 xlviii. 15 285 16 108, 285
15, 16 433 xlix. 10 43, 293, 401 18 278 EXODUS. Chap. Ver. Page iii. 2 346 6 54
14 304 15, 16 34 iv. 13 201 xii. 3 106 4 21 xvi. 6 xix. 17 320 xxiii. 23 348
xxiv. 1 32^ xxxiii. 14 348 LEVITICUS. Chap. Ver. Page xxvi. 11, 12 275 NUMBERS
Chap. V. Page vi. 22, 24, 25, 26 139, 453 xi. 25, 26 14^ xxi. 8 60 xxiv. 17 294
DEUTERONOMY. Chap. Ver. Page iv. 7 169 vi. 4 176 xviii. 15, 16 317 18 57, 402
19 402 34 57 xxx. 11, 12, 13, 14 62 xxxii. 2 350 9 106 43 56 JOSHUA. xxiv. 19
118. JUDGES. xiii. 18 109 I SAMUEL. ii. 5 38 10 62 II SAM. vii. 14 61 16 35 23
323 xxiii. 2 142 3 62, 142 I CHRON. xiii. 6 199 NEHEM. viii. 8 84 PSALMS. ii.
103, 320, 402 2 293 6 267 7 140, 256 8 267, 300 12 289 viii. 63 xvi. 10 55 xix.
4 63 xxi. 1 391 xxii. 36, 39, 91, 309 16 403 xxiii. 1 275, 304 xxxiii. 6 111,
141, 344, 155, 162 xli. 39 xliii. 3 44 xliv. 69, 80 39 xlv. 38, 272, 299, 309 6
281 7 281, 284, 297 9, 10 284 11 284, 290 xlvii. 319 5 404 lxviii. 38, 403 10
404 19 414 lxxii. 33, 319, 404 17 269 10, 11 294 lxxx. 15, 17 270 lxxxii. 8 283
lxxxix 15 44 25, 26 270 28 256 xcv. 11 24, 46 xcvii. 1 37, 38 7 295 20 366
xcix. 37 cii. 15, 16, 17, 22 38 25 37 cx. 24, 38, 55, 103, 282 1 301, 404
PROVERBS. iii. 8 102, 404 viii. 404 15, 16 153 22 110, 171 23, 24 140, 171 25
171 xxx. 4 140, 267 xxxi. 4 429 ECCLESIASTES. i. 4 112 xii. 1 161, 119 ISAIAH.
iv. 2 273 v. 39 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 259 vi. 3 139 8 414 vii. 47 14 59 viii. 13, 14
295, 420 ix. 6 44, 109, 273, 405 7 273 xi. 1, 2, 3 143, 297, 405, and 459 2
143, 405 xxv. 6 405 xxviii. 281 xxxiii. 22 139 xxxv. 4, 5, 6 302, 420 xl. 3 296
13 144 14 175 xli. 4 421 xliii. 6 295 xlv. 23 421 xlviii. 16 406 xlix. 23 291
lii. 36 liii. 33, 36, 48, 328, 407 4 58 10 297 live. 39 13 262 5 119 lx. 1 295,
315 2 85 19, 20 315 lxi. 1 48, 143 lxii. 3 166 lxiii. 285 9 119, 346 10 355
JEREMIAH. ii. 20 329 v. 5 108, 329 6 108 xxiii. 26 407 xxxi. 21 328 33 303
xxxii. 4 310 xxxiii. 15, 16 407 EZEKIEL. i. 283 xxii. 2 272 DANIEL. iii. 25 1^0
vii. 13 377, 383, 308, 319 9 323 14 283, 308 ix. 8, 9, 13, 14, 18 153 xii. 2
301 HOSEA. ii. 19, 20 284, 299 xi. 1 58 AMOS. ix. 11, 15, 16, 17 37 MICAH. v. 2
276, 407 vii. 7 280 14 262 19 280 18 315 HABAKKUK. ii. 3 280 iii. 36 8 358 13
280, 359 18 294, 359 HAGGAI. ii. 4, 5 358 9 399 ZECHARIAH. ii. 10, 11 37 iii. 9
456 v. 12 315 vi. 12 38, 258, 274, 409 ix. 9 36 xii. 10 36, 284, 409 14 306
MALACHI. i. 11 59 iii. 1 107, 255, 285, 296, 303, 348 iv. 44 2 64, 256, 280,
315 The Apocryphal Books. IESDRAS. ii. 5, 7. 107 iv. 58 107 III ESDRAS. i. 28,
47, 57 111 TOBIT. viii. 6 101 JUDETH. ix. 7 106 xvi. 14 111 WISDOM. i. 4, 5, 6,
7 112 iii. 8 113 vii. 22, 23, 24, 25 102 ix. 1 103 2, 4 102 17 102, 113 xvi. 12
106 xviii. 5 64 15, 16, 17 104, 106 ECCLESIASTICUS. xvii. 17 108 xxiv. 9 110 18
111 xlvi. 5, 6 105 xlviii. 3, 4, 5 105 li. 10 103 IMACCAB. xiv. 41 402 II MACC.
ii. 8 114 22, 23 113 MATTHEW. Chap. Ver. Page i. 20 296 23 59 ii. 7 276 15 58
17 422 18 328 v. 328 viii. 17 58 ix. 15 328 xi. 29 4 23 xix. 6 59 xxi. 16 63,
289 13 329 42 330 xxii. 54 32 54 xxiii. 37 330 xxvi. 53 307, 330 63 276, 308 64
276, 308 xxvii. 18, 19, 20 310 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 308 46 309 xxviii. 6 310 19
296 20 331 MARK. xiv. 39 309 LUKE. i. 2 344 17 48 69 62 79 295, 296 ii. 294 11
310 49 298 iv. 18 85, 143 v. 20, 21, 24 300 23 331 vii. 16 402 xi. 20 331 xvii.
20 63 xxii. 70 276 xxiii. 35, 36, 37, 38 308 xxiv. 46 310, 44, 47 Pr. p. ii.
47, 48, 49 310 51, 52 311 JOHN i. 258, 315, 318 14 332 15 299 18 333 30 299 29
333 34, 51 297 18 446 ii. 4 298 16, 19, 21 298 iii. 13 298 14 60 17 2^8 29 2^9
31, 35 299 iv. 21 59 v. 333 8 344 16, 17, 18 300 19, 21, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29,
33, 39 301, 333 39 Prev. p. iv. 46 Pref. p. ii. vi. 41 334 46 333 51 302 14 402
vii. 38 ^16 42 276 viii. 28, 38 303 51, 53, 56, 57, 58, 59 304 x ix. 35, 38 304
x. 11, 18 304 24, 25, 37 305, 454 xi. 4, 25, 27 306 xiv. 6 334 16, 17, 26 28,
306, 334 xv. 12, 13, 14, 15 306 16 335 26 335 xvi. 27 28, 29 30 306 xvii. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5 307 21 335 xix. 37 309 32 422 xx. 22, 28 310 31 311 ACTS. i. 344 ii.
30, 31 48 iii. 22 34, 58, 318 25 57 vii. 30 346 37 318 52 335 x. 43 in the
Pref. ii. xiii. 24 55 xx. 28 336 xxvi. 22 in the Pref. ii. ROMANS. v. 14 25 x.
6 62 18 63 xv. 11 37 I CORINTH. x. 1, 2, 3 45 9 348 4 314 11 45 x. 454 xv. 336
27 63 47 25 xvi. 22 422 II CORINTH. viii. 15 422 GALATIANS. iii. 8 37 16 43, 57
19 349, 351 iv. 22 45 24 25 29 61 EPHESIANS. i. 21 63 v. 14 16 vi. 336 I
TIMOTH. i. 4 363 II TIMOTH. vi. 20, 21 363 HEBREWS. i. 38 1 349 2 314, 345, 349
3 103, 114 5 60 6 56, 295, 416 ii. 351 2 349 6, 7, 8 63 iv. 4, 9 46 12 10, 106,
344 vi. 46, 336 6 383 vii. 46, 336 x. 39 xii. 22 337 25, 26 315, 351 29 337 I
PET iii. 21 46 II PET. i. 21 48 ii. 16 231 iii. 5 345 I JOHN. i. 1, 5 213 v. ^7
99, 347 REVELATIONS. i. 337 4 458 ii. 7 iii. 1 458 xii. 1 64 xix. 10 2^4 6 337
xxii. 2 42, 337 14 42 9 234

THE TABLE OF MATTERS.
ALlegorical Expositions in use before Christ's time, Page 24, 45, 57. Angel of
the Face, or Presence of God, Called the Redeemer, vid. Dissert. Page 433.
Apocryphal Books among the Jews, cited and followed in the New Testament, Page
14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Apocryphal Books in our Bibles, their Antiquity, Page 67,
68. Their freedom from corruptions, Page 71, 72.
Appearances. Page 201, etc. Cabalistical Divinity received by the Jews, Page
179, 180, 381. Embased about Christ's time, Page 363.
Chaldee Paraphrases, their Original, Page 27, 84, 85. And Antiquity, Page 91.
Progress, Page 28, 86, etc. Antiquity of those we have, Page 85, 86, 88, 89.
Their Interpretations, Page 94, 95, 96, etc.
Christ. See Messiah. Divine Essence, its kind of Unity, Page 121, 268.
Plurality of Persons in it, Page 116, 118, 120, etc. Distinguished by the Name
Sephiroth, Page 163, Prosopa, Page 160, 167, 164, 171.
Panim or Faces, and Havioth or Substance, Page 171. And Madregoth, or degrees,
Page 163. Wisdom coming from the Infinite, Page 169. And Understanding from the
Infinite by Wisdom, Page 168. Yet they are all one, Page 170, 174.
Elias a kind of second Moses, Page 244. Enoch's Prophecy, how anciently
known, Page 319. God, His Name Eloah in the Singular, used in Scripture, Page
117. His Name Elohim in the Plural joined with a Singular, Page 116. He speaks
in the Plural, and why, Page 117, 118. God understood by the Jews where only
King is expressed, Page 119. Why called God of Gods, Page 122. His Name Elohim
signifies Plurally, Page 125, 161.
Greek Learning discouraged among the Jews, Page 30. Jews early Provision
against the Christian Objections, Page 323, 324. Law, by whom given, Page 349,
350. Messiah to be like Moses, Page 22. Spoken of by all the Prophets, Page 32,
266. By Isaiah, chap. liii. Page 33. In Canticles, Page 25, 33, 268.
Rules for Interpreting Prophecies concerning him, Page 34, 35. Messiah
expected according to the Jews, ever since Adam's time, Page 42, 43. To be
united with the second Number or Wisdom at his Coming, Page 171. The same with
the Word, Page 254, etc. With the Shekinah, Page 333, 334, etc. To be a
Prophet, Page 261.
Messiah ^s the Son of God, Page 267, etc. And Bridegroom of the Church, Page
272, 284, 299. The true Jehovah, Page 278, etc. His Great Dignity, Page 286.
Messiah is God according to the Gospels, Page 300, 301, etc. He is to be
Worshipped, Page 289. Messiah a Shepherd, Page 304, 316. Why Christ did not
expressly assume the Title of God, Page 339. Christ, or Messiah, Crucified for
affirming himself to be the Son of God, Page 388.
Moses's Education in Egyptian Learning, Page 13. Platonic Philosophy out of
credit in Philo's time, Page 356, 360. Occasioned the Heresies in the Christian
Church, Page 361.
If Plato's Morality and not his Divinity followed by the first Christians Page
360, 361. Plato borrowed the Notion of a Trinity from the Jews, Page 362.
Powers of God what, Page 122, 146, 147, 150. They made the World, Ib. 129.
Philo's Notions of them, but not so clear, Page 155, 156. They are said to be
the same as Wisdom and Understanding by the Cabbalists, Page 161, 162. Simon
called himself the Power of God, Page 134. Those Powers called Prosopa, Page
160.
Psalms, their Titles by whom affixed, Page 19. Rules for Interpreting them.
Page 20.
Pythagoras had many Notions from the Hebrews, Page 354, 356. Scripture-Reading
discouraged by the Jews after Christ's time, Page 326. Misinterpreted by way of
Accommodation, Page 423. By the Modern Jews, Page 392, and Talm. By the
Socinians, Page 414, 415, etc.
Shekinah, the same with the Word, Page 149, 272. And sometimes used for the
Spirit, Ib. 168. The several Appearances of it to the Patriarchs, and under the
Legal Dispensation, Page 165, 166, and 286. Called Father, Page 167. And
Jehovah, to whom Prayers of the Jews were directed, Page 279. Its coming into
the Tabernacle, Page 225. And Temple, Page 243. Leaving the Temple, Page 247.
Its Return, Page 248 Its expected Appearance in a visible manner in the age of
the Messiah, Page 263, 275. Shekinah to be a Priest, Page 282. To be the same
with the Messiah, Page 286, 333, etc. Shekinah called Rachel, Page 328. A
Stone, Page 330. The Finger of God, Page 331.
Simonians, some of their Opinions, Page 135, 136. Spirit, made all Things,
Page 102, 111, etc. Is a Person in Genesis i. 2. Page 141. An Uncreated Being,
Page 162. And not Air or Wind, Page 155. Called sometimes the Shekinah, Page
149. But more commonly Bina or Understanding, Page 167 Called by the
Cabbalists, Mother, Page 167. And the Mouth of God, and the Spirit of Holiness,
and the Sanctifier, Page 173. Seven Spirits, the Spirit of God, Page 456, 459.
Traditions, how many sorts, Page 11, 12. Time of the Authors of them, Page 13.
One kind useful to clear the Text, Page 20, 21. To understand the Prophecies of
the Messiah, Page 22. Used by the Apostles in the sense of Texts quoted by
them, Page 316, 317, 318. And Justin Martyr, Page 319, 320, 321.
Types, their Ground, Page 45. Often used by the Apostles, Page 46.
Unity, of Divine Essence according to the Jews, Page 121, 268. Wisdom, made
all Things, Page 102, 104, 162, 173. Begot by God, Page 121. To be united with
the Messiah, Page 171.
Word, or (...), whence so called, Page 127. The Use of it among the Jews, Page
365. Made all Things, Page 102, 103, 126, 129. Man especially, Page 130. After
his Image, Page 129, 131. Is an Emanation from God, Page 102. The same with an
Uncreated Angel, Page 104, 106, 108, 194, 195, 203, 206, 215. That acted in all
the Divine Appearances in the Old Testament, Page 183. Objections against this
answered, Page 346, 347, 348. The Son of God, Page 121, 183. A Person, Page
193, 372. A true Cause or Agent, Page 125, 126, A Divine Person, Page 196, 197,
366, 373. Used by the Chaldee Paraphrasts for Jehovah and Elohim, Page 372,
374. In the Text, Page 149. And by the Targums, a Word, a Man, Page 259. The
same with the Shekinah, Page 149, 272. And with Wisdom, Page 162, 163, 164,
272. And Messiah, Page 254, etc. A Mediator, Page 183. A Teacher, Ibid. A
Shepherd, Ib. and p. 275. The Sun of Righteousness, Page 256. God swears by his
Word, Page 209. The Word prayed to, Page 210, 211. The Word gave the Law, Page
219, etc. And spoke from off the Mercy-seat, Page 225, 245, 247.
Zohar, its Author probably, Page 177.
ERRATA Praecipua sic Corrigenda.
Page Line 13 1 for Author, read Authors. 23 31 for upon r. concerning. 25 28
for cap. viii. r. cap. vii. ibid 32 for of great, r. of the great. 64 28 for
with r. to. 69 22 for sure, r. secure. ibid 35 for would, r. must. 71 13 for
not, r. no. ibid 15 for who have quoted, r. have quoted. 117 25 for 6ly, r.
2ly. 161 3 after Scriptures, add, with relation. 163 29, 30 for which is the
same, r. which Names are the same. 173 13 for Caema, r. Cochma. 205 20 for can,
r. may. ibid 22 for cut many, r. cut away many. 213 29 for such, r. so. 233 15
for this, r. the former. 244 16 for this, r. the former. 262 32 for Micah vi.
14. r. Micah vii. 14. 288 16, 17 for besides they, r. besides that they. 291 30
for (...) r. (...) ibid 34, 35 for to the two, to the Father, to his (...), r.
of the two, of the Father, of his (...). 315 11 for chap. xii. 18 r. vii. 8.
320 32 for Psalm. xv. r. xlv. 327 20 for Context, r. Text. 331 4 after
righteous, add, Word. 339 13 for which, r. what. 340 23 for marks, his. r.
marks of his. 364 17 for To, r. On. 376 3 for they were very few of, r. there
were very few. 392 1 for Chap. XXIII. r. XXVI. 400 21 for Ancient, r. Ancients.
433 16 for understand, r. understands. 434 15 for (...) r, (...) 451 9 for
Deuteronomy. r. Numb.

BOOKS Printed for Ric. Chiswell.
THE Fathers Vindicated, or Animadversions on a late Socinian Book, Entitled,
[ The Judgment of the Fathers touching the Trinity, against Dr. Bull 's Defense
of the Nicene Faith.] By a Presbyter of the Church of England.

Reflections upon a Libel lately Printed, Entitled, [ The Charge of
Socinianism against Dr. Tillotson, Considered, 4to]

Dr. Williams (now Lord Bishop of Chichester) his Vindication of Archbishop
Tillotson's Sermons against the Socinians; and of the Bishop of Worcester's
Sermon of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion. To which is annexed, a
Letter from the Bishop of Salisbury to the Author, in Vindication of his
Discourse of the Divinity of our Savior. 4to.

SCRIPTORUM ECCLESIASTICORUM Historia Literaria facili and perspicua methodo
digesta. Pars Altera. Qua plusquam DC. Scriptores novi, tam Editi quam
Manuscripti recensentur; Prioribus plurima adduntur; breviter aut obscure dicta
illustratur; recte asserta vindicantur. Accedit ad finem cujusvis Saeculi
CONCILIORUM omnium tum Generalium tum Particularium Historica Notitia Ad Calcem
vero Operis Dissertationes tres, (1) De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis incertae
aetatis. (2) De Libris and Officiis Ecclesiasticis Graecorum. (3) De Eusebii
Caesariensis Arianismo adversus Joannem Clericum. Adjecti sunt Indices
utilissimi Scriptorum Alphabetico-Chronologici. Studio and labor Gulielmi
Cave, S. T. P. Canon. Windesortensis. Fol.

Bishop Wilkins, of the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion. In two
Books. The 4th Edition.

Primitive Christianity: Or, the Religion of the Ancient Christians in the
first Ages of the Gospel. In Three Parts. By William Cave, D. D. The fifth
Edition. Octavo.

Several Discourses, viz. Proving Jesus to be the Messiah. The Prejudices
against Jesus and His Religion considered. Jesus the Son of God, proved by his
Resurrection. The Danger of Apostasy from Christianity. Christ the Author:
Obedience the Condition of Salvation. The Possibility and Necessity of
Gospel-obedience, and its Consistence with Free Grace. The Authority of Christ
with the Commission and Promise which he gave to his Apostles. The Difficulties
of a Christian Life considered. The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus.
Children of this World wiser than the Children of Light. By the most Reverend
Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Being the Fifth Volume,
Published from the Originals, by Dr. Barker, Chaplain to His Grace. 8vo.

-- Several Discourses upon the Attributes of God, viz. Concerning the
perfection of God. Concerning our Imitation of the Divine Perfection. The
Happiness of God. The Unchangeableness of God. The Knowledge of God. The Wisdom
and Sovereignty of God. The Wisdom of God in his Providence. The Wisdom of God
in the Redemption of Mankind. The Justice of God in the Distribution of Rewards
and Punishments. The Truth of God. The Holiness of God, etc. Being the Sixth
Volume; Published from the Originals, by Dr. Barker. Octavo.

Sermons Preached on several Occasions. By John Conant, D. D. The first and
second Volumes. The Second Edition Corrected. Published by Dr. John Williams,
now Lord Bishop of Chichester. 8vo.

A Commentary on Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers In Four Volumes. In
4to. By Dr. Sim Patrick, Lord Bishop of Ely.

-- His Commentary on Deuteronomy is now in the Press.

A Discourse of the Government of the Thoughts. By Geo. Tully, Late Sub Dean of
York. The 3d Edition, 1699.

A New Account of India and Persia, being Nine Years Travel begun 1672, and
finished 1681. By John Friar, M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society. Fol. School.
Illustrated with Cuts.

The Life of Henry Chichele Archbishop of Canterbury. In which there is a
Particular Relation of many Remarkable Passages in the Reigns of Henry the
Fifth and Sixth, Kings of England. Written in Latin by Arthur Duck. LLD.
Chancellor of the Diocese of London; and Advocate of the Court of Honor. Now
made English, and a Table of Contents Annexed. 8vo.

FINIS.

