the Memory of the Just is Blessed (...)

MARIA REGINA II. Obit. December. 28.94 Aetatis suae. 32:



I have fought a good fight I have finished
My course I have kept the faith Hence forth
There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness.
F. H. van. Hove. sculp:

The Whole Duty of Mourning, And the GREAT CONCERN Of Preparing Our Selves for
DEATH, Practically Considered. Written some Years since by the Author of The
Whole Duty of Man. And now Published upon the Sad Occasion of the DEATH Of Our
Most Gracious Sovereign Lady MARY the II. Queen of England, etc. of Blessed
Memory. Necessary to be given at all Funerals.

LICENSED, January 16th. 1694/5.

Printed for I. Back, at the Black-Boy on the middle of London Bridge.

THE PREFACE TO ALL Mourners, Upon the SAD and MOURNFUL OCCASION Of the
much-to-be-lamented DEATH Of Our Most Gracious Queen.
THis Tract, whereof Death is the Subject, has been Concealed some Years; and
upon this Sad and Mournful Occasion of the Death (...) our Gracious Queen,
which loudly calls the Nation to Weeping and Mourning; it appears now in the
Habit of a true Mourner.

UPON so irreparable a Loss as the Kingdom has Sustained; Death is the
properest Theme which befits the Season; for when mournful Countenances, heavy
Hearts, and watery Eyes appears every where, this Whole Duty of Mourning, in the
Closet may prove a good Companion.

EVERY day, you see, Nay, every Hour, says Seneca, shows us what a nothing we
are, and by some fresh Argument or other puts us in mind of our forgot
Mortality: but so Doleful and Mournful a Scene England did not expect would
have appeared; especially at such a season, when our Eulogies and Praises
should have Ascended to Heaven, from whence flowed the Redemption of the World;
even by the great Mystery of our Saviors Incarnation; but this high Festival
is now by the decree of Providence turned into Mourning, and our Song into
Lamentation.

THE Wise Man tells us, Eccles. 7.2. That when the living are in the House of
Mourning, they will lay it to Heart; and if we ought to lay to Heart the Death
of any; much more of Righteous Persons; how ought we then to bewail this Sad
and Mournful Calamity, wherein God has deprived us of one of our Royal
Defenders? O, then let us speedily wish with the Prophet, That our Heads were
Water, and our Eyes Fountains of Tears, that we might Weep, Day and Night, for
the Loss of so Virtuous a Princess, and so Gracious a Sovereign Queen.

TO give a direct Copy of so Blessed an Original, my Pen can never arrive to
that Dexterity, but am Conscious to my self it must be very defective; and the
only Apology I can make in this time of Dolor, and Anxity is; that broken
Language is the best Rhetoric upon a Mournful Occasion; but the Veneration of
those matchless Excellencies which appeared in our Royal Sovereign Animates my
Pen to join with all Condolers in the Contemplation of those excellent Virtues,
that Adorned so Illustrious a Princess,

IT was Heavens Decree, to take from us the Light of our Eyes, and the Breath
of our Nostrils, a Gracious, and most Excellent Princess; one, under the shadow
of whose Wings we sat with great delight, and enjoyed a more then an ordinary
portion of Happiness and Prosperity; for the Radient Beams of her Royal Bounty
and Charity extended so far, that to preserve a sinking Kingdom, she Ascended
the Throne; not out of any Ambition she had to grasp a Crown, but out of a
tender Compassion to save a distressed Nation. She was truly Magnanimous, by
Nature, Birth, and Education, and adorned with all the Ornaments befitting so
Excellent and Matchless a Princess; in her Power and Dignity, she was Sovereign
Queen over a mighty and renowned People: and invested with the highest
Authority, that a Crown could render her; thus being inthroniz'd, she was the
Glory of her Sex, and an Ornament to the Diadem which she Wore.

HER mind was Noble, Large, and Capacious, and not inferior to her Power and
Dignity; her apprehension was quick and lively, and her Judgment was Peircing
and Solid: Religion, and Piety, shined with that lusture in all her Divine
Conversation, and the whole Series of her Life, that indeed she was a Pillar of
Christianity; for the Influences of her Princely Piety was of that Impression
and Extent, as might well lay Claim to those Second Causes the Almighty Ordains
to his Governing Administration here below.

SHE not only understood her Religion well, but loved it, and with great
Sincerity practiced it; for she always with a Steadfast, Regular, and Unaffected
Devotion, approached with that Awful Sanctity to the Altars of God, that she
seemed to Instruct when she Prayed, and Convert when she Kneeled; so that at so
high a degree of Piety, the greatest Atheist, must needs be convinced and
believe a Deity, and the loosest Libertine, could not but be Reformed; for his
Admiration must needs create a Devotion upon a prospect of her Sacred Example.

HER Delight was in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law did she Meditate both
Day and Night; for in the midst of all the most Important Affairs of State, she
forgot not her Creator; for so Zealous was she for her Sacred Devotions, that
she would rather spare time from her Sleep, than from her Prayers.

SHE always had a great Zeal for the Good of the Church, and she was the very
Joy and Delight of the Hearts of the Clergy; for she encouraged their Studies,
and continually Supported them under all the Reproaches of Malicious and Wicked
Persons; even such, was her Royal goodness to the Pastoral Authority.

THE best practical Books she often made her Study in her Royal Retirement, and
at other times caused them to be Read, as part of her Entertainmen, when she
was Pleased to sit at Work with her Maids of Honor; and this she did as a
prudent design whereby to furnish their thoughts with profitable Knowledge, and
heavenly Meditation: for her Heart was wholly fixed upon God and Goodness.

EVERY Month, she constantly Communicated in her Royal Chapel; and always
prepared her self with such a Strictness and Devotional Frame of Soul, that she
Received the Blessed Sacrament in a most Humble and Awful manner, as being
deeply affected with a due Sense of the Divine Majesty.

HER Temper was Naturally Sweet, her Disposition was Free and Generous; her
Carriage Gracious; and her Intentions most Sincere: her Conversation was
Lovely, and she was endued with a large mixture of Christian Charity and
Compassion: all Eyes that beheld her at a distance, might discern Mildness, and
Goodness, in her Majestic Countenance; which all her Attendants found its real
Effects.

SHE delighted to do good; and had a singular Dexterity in the doing of it: for
she prudently knew what was proper to be done, both as to the manner and
Season: and she seldom vouchsafed a Royal Favor to any, but her Princely Way
of doing it trebled the Obligation; and very easy was she in dispatch of what
ever Affairs came before her: her Divine Soul indeed was truly Noble, and
fitted to her Sovereign Place, and Royal Character; and she had a Serene
Capacity as far beyond any of her Subjects, as she was in Power and Dignity
above 'em: and had the Almighty been graciously pleased to have continued her
Life, we had, had great hopes, and expectations of more then ordinary Blessings
under her Government.

TO set forth all her Princely Virtues and Sublime Perfections, is too
difficult for a Mortal's Pen to Delineate, or a Mournful Subjects Tongue to
Express; neither can any expect so many Angelical Virtues can be Writ in so
narrow a Compass, her whole Life indeed Corresponded with Heaven, and she was a
Burning and a Shining Light amongst all her Subjects.

But now the Mourning Scene begins to appear; for on Thursday December the
20th. her Majesty felt her self indisposed, but did not think it required the
Attendance of her Physicians; but the Day following her Illness increasing, the
Worthy Dr. Millington, and Dr. Ratcliff were called; and upo^n the growing
Danger; Dr. Brown, Dr. Cox, Dr. Gibbons, Dr. Robinson, and Dr. Cole, with other
Learned Gentlemen were added to the Consult of Physicians: and on Saturday the
Symptoms of the Smallpox appeared, that Eternal Foe to Beauty and a Distemper
which has proved too too fatal to the Royal Family.

HER Spiritual Physicians who always paid their Religious Attendance, were the
most Reverend Dr. Tennison Archbishop of Canterbury; the Right Reverend, Dr.
Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worcester, Dr. Patrick Bishop of Ely, Dr. Burnet
Bishop of Salisbury, and Dr. Kidder Bishop of Bath and Wells.

These Stars of the Church, whose Influence ever shined bright in the sweet
Society of her whole Life; are now o'er-cast with Sorrow, and become her
Mournful Assistants to conduct her out of it, and though it is not hard to
imagine what a more Melancholy, though Spiritual Office they were to perform
in this last dutious Service to their most Gracious Royal Sovereign, their best
of Friends and Patronesses: yet as Grieved and Sorrowful as they were at the
too visible Face of that King of Terrors, DEATH, that was so ready to snatch
away that Sacred Life; however they could not but be extraordinarily Comforted
to find her so well and so readily prepared to receive him.

THE worthy Archbishop, who constantly attended her, even to the last moment
of her Life, was one day asked by her Majesty, What her Physicians Opinion of
her was? To which his Grace Sorrowfully, but Sincerely replied to this effect,
that they despaired of her Recovery: her Majesty wholly unconcerned, but with
her Natural Sweetness of Temper, was Cheerfully pleased to answer in these
words, God be Praised, I am Provided.

THAT constant even Temper, of Tranquillity and sweet Composure of Mind,
accompanied her through her whole Sickness; (her preparation for Eternity being
not the Work of her Deathbed) that she always expressed a perfect resignation
to the Divine Will and Pleasure of Heaven; and seemed to have nothing in this
World, but what she could freely part from but her Dear Lord, to whom amongst
many other kind Affectionate, and tender Expressions, she was pleased to breath
forth this hearty and most Passionate wish, in these Words. That his Subjects
might all Love him as she had done.

DURING her whole time of Sickness, his Majesty was that Pious and Constant
Mourner over her, and such was his extraordinary tender Affection, and
Fondness, that no Persuasions nor Entreaties could draw him a moment from her,
neither could any Solicitations prevail with him to absent the Room, but
Compassionately lay in a Camp-bed all the time by her.

THE day before her Departure she joined in Communion with the Reverend
Bishops, and took the Blessed Sacrament, as a Viaticum for Eternity: and all
her Religious Deportment through her whole Sickness was so Angelical, that her
Reverend, and Pious Heavenly Guides found opportunity to Learn more than
Instruct; insomuch that the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury was heard to Express,
That when it pleased God to call him, he Prayed that he might be found so well
prepared to Dye.

DURING her whole time of Indisposition, no Studious endeavors were wanting,
if possible to Save so Precious a Life; but as Human Art and vigilant Diligence
cannot exclude the Will and Pleasure of Heaven, so both the Physicians
indefatigable Industry, and the Nations importuning Prayers were wholly
Successless: for on Friday the 28th. of December, 1694. about One in the
Morning her attending Divines resigned their Royal Charge to her Ministering
Angels; at which time without the least Pang of Death, in a Soft and Sweet
Slumber she breathed out her Soul into the Arms of the Almighty.

I dare not presume to draw the Royal Face of Grief, or attempt to describe the
Sacred Sorrows of our Afflicted King at this Mournful Juncture, but this I may
humbly crave privilege to Express, that as to his Royal Character, he is so
good a Prince as no Age can Parrallel; one who for his Subjects Safety has
exposed his Royal Person in a Field of Blood, against a Tyrannical and
Insulting Foe; when Balls of Iron thundered from the Roaring Cannons Mouth in
Fire and Smoke then could he look grim Death in the Face in the fiercest
Battles, and with an undaunted Courage never have shook at the approach of that
Pale Pince of Terrors; but when the Icy hands of Death had struck the fatal
blow; he could not resist that melting and tender Affection, when he felt all
the Agonies of Death in the dying looks of his beloved Consort: for though she
left the World without the least expiring Pangs by dying even in Smiles; our
Sorrowful King a Mournful Spectator, stood by in little less than Convulsions
to behold her.

AND now what good Subjects can forbear opening the Sluices of their Eyes, and
let fall Floods of Tears upon so Mournful an Occasion; but to sum up our much
to be Lamented Loss, I shall refer the Reader to the Pen of the Reverend Dr.
Wake one of Eminent Authority,

If a Queen so Virtuous, that her very Example was enough to Convert a
Libertine, and to Reform an Age: so Courteous and so Affable, as to be the
Wonder and the Delight of all that knew her: so great a Lover of her Country,
and the Interests of it, as to be willing to hazard what, next her Conscience,
she the most valued; her good Name, and good Opinion in the World, for the
preservation of them: so Firm and Constant in her Mind, as not to have ever
known, no not in Death it self, what it was to Fear: so Happy in Business, as
to Astonish rather than Satisfy, those who were the best Versed in it. I say
that to have been deprived of such a Queen as this, and that at such an Age,
when our expectations were at the highest from her, be a Loss above the power
of Words to Express, then such is our Loss: the greatness of which we are so
far from being able sufficiently to declare, that we cannot yet make an
Estimate of it.

AND as our Sorrows cannot but be justly Expressed, in the Loss of so Excellent
and so Virtuous a Queen; yet, let us offer up our Praises unto God, from whom
every good and perfect Gift comes: that he has not left us Comfortless? that
he has not cut down the principal Cedar? that he has not deprived us of our
chiefest Support, and Royal Defender? but that we enjoy and have a good King to
Sit upon the Throne, to Sway the Scepter, and to go in and out before us, to
Protect us from the force of France, and the danger of all Europe; and that our
Dear and Dread Sovereign may be for ever Happy in us his Loyal Subjects, and we
in so Good and Gracious a Prince, let us Implore the Divine Powers to Protect,
Guide, and Defend him, in Spirit, Soul, and Body; as for his Enemies let them
be Clothed with Shame; but upon himself let his Crown for ever Flourish; and
let all the People say, Amen.

AND now, O all you Sons and Daughters of Sorrow and Affliction, that
faithfully Loved and Honored our Renowned Princess, Lament your Loss; but seem
not to Bewail her Felicity: do not immoderately drown your Eyes, because God
has Wiped away all Tears from hers: and though in such a National Concern of
highest Grief, Natural Duty shows us to be Mortals, yet let us not forget to be
Christians; and as our Savior said to the Holy Women, so may I with all Awful
Reverence Express, Weep not for her, Blessed Soul, but for your selves, that you
are not so Happy.

AND this Sweet Advice Saint Hierom gives us, Let us not Mourn, as for one
Lost; but rather be thankful that we have had so Good, and so Gracious a
Pattern; nay that we still have her, for all still live in Christ, yea, though
they die, and whomsoever he thus takes unto himself are still within his Family.

THINK, that you heard her Royal Tongue Express the great Farewell; and in the
most Tenderest Affection was pleased to say, Farewell my dearest Sovereign Lord,
farewell; I hear Heaven's call, and the mighty Hour is come that we must part;
farewell, my Royal Family, and all my mournful Subjects, now farewell: each in
your own order all must prepare to follow me: Follow her, then first in her
Pious Example, Fight the good Fight keep the Faith, finish your Course as she
did, and henceforth is laid up for you (what she Blessed Saint has now received)
a Crown of Righteousness: which God the Righteous Judge has prepared for all
those that Love and Fear him.

G. B.

Advertisement. For more particular Concernment in Devotion, read these Books
following.
THE Whole Duty of Prayer, Containing Devotions for every Day in the Week, and
for several Occasions Ordinary and Extraordinary. By the Author of The Whole
Duty of Man. Necessary for all Families. The Fourth Edition. Price 1 s.

THE Whole Duty of Divine Meditation, in all its Various Parts and Branches. By
the Author of The Whole Duty of Man. Price. 1 s.

Both Printed for John Back, at the Black-Boy on the middle of London Bridge.

THE Whole Duty OF Mourning, AND THE GREAT CONCERN Of Preparing Our Selves for
DEATH, Practically Considered.
PSALM lxxxix. ver. 68. What Man is he that lives, and shall not see Death?
shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of the grave?


The INTRODUCTION.
THat needs no Proof where all are Examples to themselves: such is that easiest
and hardest Lesson, that all must die; that Death is the undoubted issue of
Sin: and that it is a Separation of the Soul from the Body for a time: but
because it steals on, as they that sleep in a Ship-under Sail, who arrive at
their Port, while they think not of going: so we go on with a restless pace, to
the Grave and Silence; and the unknown Limit of our present Life, consuming
while we are not sensible of it; and because it is terrible to flesh and blood,
our main care must be to inform our selves, first what Preparation we are to
make, that neither our Life may prove uneasy, nor Death terrible: Secondly,
How to fortify our selves against the Fear of Death: And Thirdly, How to
comfort our selves with Spiritual Remedies against immoderate Grief for the
Loss of Relations and Friends: These Three Branches shall be the Heads of my
Discourse.

I. First, We must prepare for Death, for Solomon tells ye, 11 Eccles. 3. in
the place where the tree falls, there it shall be: and as Death leaves us, so
Judgment shall find us: now as the Passage to the promised Rest, which was a
Type of Heaven to the Israel of God, appeared terrible, Deuteronomy. 1.19. so likewise
is our Journey to the Celestial Canaan; we are instantly ripe, though not ready
for dying: are all subject to this pale Prince, to whom we are visiting every
moment: this day we now live, we divide with Death; and that which is gone, is
irrecoverably lost.

II. The Hour is uncertain to all Men; but they are certainly Happy who are
then provided: Luke 12.37. many are apt to watch against the coming of Thieves,
who can take nothing from them but only that which a little Time must: then
what a stupid Negligence is it, not to watch and provide for Death, which they
know will certainly, and may quickly come, and take away Body and Soul, nay
Heaven it self to all Eternity, from the securest Sinner. Think thou of Youth
and Strength? alas! how many that are young, and in the Vigor of their Age,
have died before thee? Do thou at the Funerals of others, think with the
proud Pharisee, Luke 18.11. God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are?
seeing then that thou art exempted from the Privilege of Immortality of Body,
let not Satan delude thee, but seriously prepare for that day, which may prove
thy happiest.

III. Consider, That God is the Great Creator of the World; and the Sovereign
Judge of all Mankind: Remember, he sits above, on his glorious Throne, in whose
hands are the Keys of Life and Death: that whatever he pleases he brings to
pass; and none can resist his Almighty Power; whatever he does is surely the
best; and none can accuse his All-knowing Goodness.

IV. Next, If we consider our own sinful State, we may well cry out and say,
Unhappy we, the Children of Dust and Ashes! Why were we born to behold the Sun?
Why did our Mothers conceive us, and bring us forth to a miserable World; and
unkindly rejoice to hear us cry? Whether alas! has the Errors of their Lives
lead us, and in how deplorable a Condition does our Birth engage us! We enter
this vain World with weeping Eyes, but upon Death's Summons we go out with
sighing Hearts.

V. All the few Days we live are full of Folly and Vanity, and our choicest
Pleasures are mixed with Bitterness: the Time that is past is vanished like a
Dream or Shadow, and that which we expect to come, is not yet at all: the
present Time we enjoy, tarries but a moment; and then takes Wings and flys
away, and never returns again: already we are dead to all the years we have
lived, and vain it is to expect to live them over again: But the longer we live
here, the shorter is our Life; and in the end we become a Lump of Clay, and a
Feast for Worms.

CHAP. I. Several Notions of Death; what it is, its Author, Name, and Nature.
FIrst, If we would know what Death is, the Philosopher tells you, To die, is
to be no more Unhappy: and if we consider Death according to the right Notion,
it is but a departed Breath from dead Clay, enlivened at first by Breath cast
upon it: Now Job tells you, Death is a Moth, and as the Moth breeds out of the
Garment, so Death does out of the Body. The Heathens were of Opinion, that
Death was an Eternal Sleep, the Fear of the Rich, and the Desire of the Poor:
but Pious St. Augustine often breathed forth this heavenly Wish, saying, O that
I could see Death, not as it was, but as thou, O Lord, have now made it. Death
is the supremest Monarch in the World, as he has the Dominion over Sin; and he
is the antientest King, whose Reign began from Adam; yet St. Paul tells ye, 1
Cor. 15.26. at last this King shall be vanquished; the last Enemy that shall be
destroyed, is Death; and Christ who is the Resurrection and the Life,
pronounces this Sentence, O Death, I will be thy Death.

II. Whoever was the Author and Father of Death, Sin was the Mother; for the
Apostle tells ye, 1 James 15. that Sin when it is finished brings forth
death; and Eve the Mother of all Living, was delivered in Childbed of Death.
Now Adam falling, Sin follows him, and Man being tempted, Death assaults him;
and by Sin Death enters: Every Parent is an Adam to his Child, infusing
Corruption in his Generation. Since then Death by Sin crept in at the Window,
or rather at the Ear, which is prone to listen to Evil Counsel, let us cast it
out by the Sense of Faith, in harkening to God's Word, which will make us wise
unto Salvation.

III. As for the Name of Death, it is called a Sleep, so St. John terms it,
Chap. 11.11. Our friend Lazarus sleeps: and of St. Stephen it is recorded in
Holy Writ, after he had done praying for his Persecutors, When he had said
this, he fell asleep. 7. Acts 60. it is likewise said of the Patriarchs and
Kings of Judah, that they slept with their Fathers, and Job expresses, That
man lies down, and rises not, he shall not be awaked out of sleep, till the
heavens shall be no more. Likewise Saint Paul mentions in his Mystery, We shall
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed 1 Cor. 15.51.

The Night is the Emblem of Sleep and Mortality: Now Sleep is but the Shadow of
Death, and where the Shadow is, the Substance cannot be far off: Lastly, the
Grave it self is but a withdrawing Room to retire in for a time; it is going to
Bed to take rest, which is sweeter than Sleep, and when it is time to awake and
rise, we shall, as the Royal Psalmist says, be satisfied.

IV. Next, as to the Nature of Death, few, or none know it, though all must
sensibly feel it: there is nothing after Death, and therefore Death is nothing;
it is without Essence, or Substance, but a privation which kills he Creature;
therefore curiously to ^quest the Efficiency of it, were but to employ the Eye
to behold Darkness: Solomon in his Book of Wisdom, Chap. 1.13. mentions that
God made not Death; but created all things that were good: this caused good St.
Augustine to breathe forth this Supplication, Lord, thou have not made Death;
wherefore I beseech thee, suffer not that which thou have not made to reign
over that which thou have made. Now Death came into the World, by Man only;
whose Soul was affected to know that which God never made, which was the Evil
of Death, thinking it had been very good, by desiring to know the worst of
Evils: But so Divine a thing is Knowledge, that we see Innocence it self was
ambitious of it: from whence that Proverb is derived, That Evil is not known,
but by good.

V. Pet no Learned Man knows so much, but Ignorance may suffer him to commit
Evil: for none of a sound Judgment and right understanding can be guilty of
Wickedness: and there is no fear of knowing too much Good; but there is much
Fear of practicing too little: But since the Almighty has revealed in his word,
more than we can comprehend, and enough to work out our Salvation, let us
attain to sober Knowledge, and not repine, but be content with our Ignorance.
Indeed Knowledge and Power are the Worldling's Idol; but let every Man
endeavor fully to know himself, and then Pride and Ambition will soon vanish.

CHAP. II. That Death has no respect of Persons; but we are continually dying
whilst we live.
ALthough Men cannot, or are unwilling to pay those Worldly Obligations they
lie under; yet they must pay this Debt to Nature; and it is a Favor afforded
by Nature, that what she has made most vexatious, she has made Common, that
the Equality of Fate might mitigate the Cruelty of it; and this Question the
Psalmist asks, What Man is he that lives, and shall not see death?

II. Our Savior told the Jews, their Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness,
and are dead, 6 John 49. and the Apostle tells ye, Phil. 2.8. that Christ,
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto
Death, even the death of the Cross. So that we see it is as natural to die, as
to be conceived and born; yet it is improper for us to say Men die Naturally,
for Man dies not as a Beast by an Annihilation, but by a Decree from Heaven; it
is appointed for all Men once to dye, Heb. 9.27.

III. Sickness the Messenger of Death, respects not the best Complexion; the
Sores of Lazarus will make as good Dust as the Paint and Washes of Jezabel: and
like Jonas his Gourd, we come up in a night, and are gone in a moment; we come
naked into the World, and no sooner we are born, but the Grave waits for us:
but to continue in the Body is not the request of those which desire Heaven;
for the Apostle he desired to be dissolved: and the Psalmist cries out* As the
heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so longs my Soul after thee, O God, Psalm.
42.1. Death only shortens Time, not Life; and the Merit of Death is the Debt
due to Sin, both imposed on Mankind for Sin.

IV. Now, if we cast never so bright a Luster in the World, yet alas! our
brittle Bodies how quickly are they broken; Man (says Jeremiah) fades like a
leaf, and sin like a wind takes him away. Let a Man live never so long, yet at
last Death seizes him; but to consider aright, Death is instrumental in our
Passage to Heaven, therefore how can any think their Time ill spent in
preparing for that, which will complete their Happiness.

V. There is no Circumstance of our Lives, but has been imbittered by some sad
Occasion of a dying Relation or Friend: a happy Meeting often ends in some sad
Misfortune, which conduces to an Eternal Parting: This King of Terrors meets us
every where, (...) creeps in at our Windows like a Thief, and enters in at our
Doors with his Grand Commission; he accepts of no Bribe, but will draw his
fable Veil over all the splendor and glory of the Universe.

VI. Death has his several Instruments to accomplish his Ends; sometimes we
are taken away by Violence and secret Influence, by the Aspect of a Star, and
the stink of a Mist, or by the sending out of a Cloud, and meeting of a Vapor;
Accidents has happened, by the Fall of a Chariot, a sinking House, or a high
mettled Horse to cast his Rider; others by the stumbling at a Stone* the
scratch of a Nail or Fin, by a full Meal, or an empty Stomach, by watching at
the Wine, and drinking of it in full Bowls and Glasses, the Healths of others,
when in the mean time they destroy their own: Some by too great Study and
Watching at Prayer, others is blasted by the Sun, or Planet-struck by the Moon;
sometimes Death's Harbingers are Heats or Golds, watchful Nights, or slumbring
Days; by Water turned into Ice, or thawed into the Floods of a River; sometimes
by a Hair, or a Ra^sin; by violent Motion, or sitting still; by Severity, or
Dissolution; by God's Mercy, or his Anger; by every thing in Providence, and
every thing in Manner, Nature, and Chance.

VII. Like Worldlings, we take indefatigable Pains to heap up Necessaries for
our Life, and in the greedy Negotiation we purchase Death; then we are snatched
away, and leave what we have so hardly ventured for, behind us: Now all this is
the Law and Constitution of Nature, it is a Punishment due to our Sins, the
unalterable Event of Providence, and the Decree of Heaven: The Links and Chains
which confine us to this Condition are strong as Destiny, and immutable as the
Eternal Laws of the Almighty.

CHAP. III. The Certainty of Death practically considered.
O Vain and miserable World! how infallibly true is it that all must die: and
yet, alas! this is not all, but many complaints remain, which does attend and
perplex us: for here we begin our race in frail and contemptible Weakness, and
the whole course of our lives is a hazardous progress of dangers. If we escape
the mischances of silly Children; we drive on the rash adventures of
Headstrong Youth. If we out live those sudden Storms and Tempests; we fall
into more Malicious and Wicked Calamities: our own negligent and superfluous
Cares deliberately pine and consume us, and the crosses and affairs of the
World: wear and tire out our Lives.

II. If fortunately, we should by a strange and miraculous Success, over come
all these, and still bear up our healthful and prosperous Head: we are sure, at
last old Age will creep and find us out; and check our Nerves by bowing our
strength down to the Grave. The Grave of Silence, from whence no claim, or
privilege Exempts, nor any potent Power controuls his Command: Kings and
Princes must lay down their Crowns and Scepters, and Queens must leave their
Diadems and Royal apparel; the Rich must leave their Wealth behind them, and
the Great ones of the World must be crumbled into Dust: the Beautifullest face
must be converted into Rottenness; and the Pampoured and well fed Body must
become the food of Worms; the buisie and most activest Man must find a time to
dye; though his great Affairs and full Employment, can spare none to provide
for it. Even the Learned, the Eloquent, the Wise, and most Virtuous must submit
to Fate; and the Heirs of Life it self be the Prisoners of Death.

III. Now, this when we see, we weep, and are afraid; since we all must drink
of the same cold Cup, all Heads must descend to the same dark Grave; and none
can imagine how soon they may be called. To day we are jocund in health among
our Friends, and earnest about our Affairs; and to morrow Arrested by the hand
of that unwelcome Serjant, Death. Frail flesh and blood, may naturally and
faintly struggle for a time; but at last must yield, and be buried in the Earth
from whence we were taken.

IV. At last we must take our leave of our nearest Relations, and dearest
Friends; and bid for ever a long farewell to all the World; then perhaps our
acquaintance may talk of us a while, sometimes as we deserve, and often as they
please; perhaps, our Bodies once laid out of sight; we are no more remembered,
than if we had never been born: only our good Works follow us to our Graves,
and faithfully accompany us beyond our Funerals. But it is not for us, O Lord,
to choose our own connditions; but to manage well what thou appointest.

CHAP. IV. Several Motives to Remember Death practically Considered.
GOd having made Man of the Dust of the Earth. Genesis 2.7. and thereupon after
his Fall showing him his readiness to return to dust. Genesis 3.19. Ecclus. 12.7,
does yet further call us to consider our frailty; ordaining that this House of
Clay is to be supported by a puff of Air continually breathed in and out, and
that this being stopped the building must of necessity fall; from whence we see,
our life hangs as it were, loose before us, going in and out every moment:
therefore it is called the breath of Life, Genesis 2.7. and. 7.15.22. this ought
to put us in mind of Mortallity, by thinking on the breath of our Nostrils so
easily departing: this is plainly demonstrated by the Prophets. Isa. 2.22.
Psalm. 146.4. and 104.29.

II. Another Instrument of human frailty, is the Pulse, which arises from the
Heart, and the Arteries or beating Veins; and this by a double motion of
Contraction and Dilatation, whereby they are drawn in and out, both for the
expeling of noxious fumes through the insensible pores of the flesh, and for
drawing of, air, to refresh the heart and vital Spirits: from the variety of
the Pulse are taken many signs of Health and Sickness, Life and Death: it is
the Character of our Strength or Weakness, and from hence is described the
fainting and decayed state of Man, from the panting of the Heart, and
restlesness of the Arteries and beating Veins.

III. Another Sustainer of our Life is our daily Food, Meat and Drink, whereby
the Spirit is revived. 1 Samuel 30.12. and without it we fall down into the
Grave. Now if our appointed Food for a Meal or more, be wanting, then instantly
the Body faints, and the Flesh fails, Isa. 44.12. then Death creeps on by
degrees, and Men begin to dye sensibly: there is a Sense both of painful hunger
in the Stomach, and of universal faintness and languishing through the Body:
for hunger is a Worm gnawing the Intrails, calling for Meat, or threatening
Death. Jer. 11.22. Lam. 4.9. Men being hungry and thirsty their soul faints
in them. Psalm. 107.5. and by this infirm condition whereunto God has subjected
our nature, he calls us to think on Death.

IV. Our Table, as often as we come to it, is the Memorial of our Mortality; and
our food before it enters the Body for nourishment, is diversely prepared, as
Corn, and the like, are made to grow by the dung of beasts. Luke. 13.8. and
from hence is the strength of our corruptible Life: So that we may say with
Holy Job, to Corruption thou art my Father. chap. 17.14. But this not all, but
we feed upon Death it self, and that by the allowance of the Almighty. Genesis
9.3. in taking away the lives of other Creatures to maintain our own; this is
seriously to be thought upon as a wonderful Work of God: that our lives are
preserved by the Death of the Creatures, our living Bodies are sustained by
their dead Carcasses: in their Blood Swims our Life; and from their pangs of
Death, spring the Pleasures of our Life, our Feasts and daily Food. Now if
those that in part were maintained by Sin Offerings were said to eat Sin; Hos.
4.8. then those that in part were maintained by the death of Creatures, may be
said in the like Phrase to eat Death. So often therefore as we eat the Flesh of
the dead Creature, and make our bodies to become their Graves; So often are we
called to remember our own Death, and our own Grave in the body of the Earth.

V. Another Help to preserve our frail Bodies is our Apparel, which God has
given us to cover and defend them from Cold to preserve Health: and herein we
have a double or treble memorial of Death; considering that our Apparel was
given us, when by our Sin we came first into the World to the state of Death.
Genesis 2.25. and when God first gave us our Garments he took 'em out of Deaths
Wardrobe, they being made with the death of the Creatures from whence they were
taken: God made coats of skin for Adam, and his Wife, and his Posterity, Genesis
3.21. Heb. 11.35. our Garments therefore being Badges of Mortality, and
Cognizances of Death, so often as we look upon them, we are called of God to
remember Death; and so often as we cloth our selves with them, to be mindful
that we put on the Livery of Death.

VI. As Food and Raiment are Means to preserve Life, so Labor of Man in his
Vocation is a means to get both Food and Raiment, and therefore an Help of
Helps to maintain Life; and yet in and by this Labor also, we are called to
remember our Latter End, and to think of Death: for upon Labor attends
Weariness and Faintness, even a failing and decay of Life: Painful Labor
sometimes makes Men weary of their Lives and to think of Death, and wish for
it as for hid Treasure; Ex. 1.14. Job 3.17.22. considering that in Death Men
rest from their Labors. Rev. 14.13.

VII. And above all, consider the Labor, Vigilance, and Care, that is found in
the highest Callings, how many Thorns is there platted in every Crown: Likewise
in the Magistracy, what Troubles is there in distributing Justice, and in the
painful Work of the Ministry, who watch over Souls; all these have through
their indefatigable Weariness in Affairs of Church and State, have thought it
as the best Expedient, to think of Death; nay, even to wish for it, and
consequently to prepare for it. Numb. 11.15. 1 Kings, 19.4.

VIII. And not only by the Weariness thereof, but by the diverse Kinds of Labor
in several Vocations, God takes occasion to show the Vanity and Shortness of
Life present, and summons them by their Callings, and by the Quality of their
Works to think of Death: For the Weaver, by finishing every Web, God teaches
him how his Days are cut off, and the Web of his Life finished, Isa. 38.12.
yea, before the Web is finished, by the running of the Shuttle at every Stroke,
and every Thread added to the Web, the Lord admonishes how swiftly the days of
his Life run away, Job 7.6. Then the Shepherd in the Field, by the removal of
his Tent or Fold, he is taught to think of the Removal of his Life.

IX. The Travel that Men have by Land, is appointed of the Almighty to put us
in mind, that our days are swifter than a Post, Job 9.25. that we ride Post, as
on Dromedaries that run by the way, in all have to their Journeys end. And the
Voyages that Men have by Sea in the most swiftest sailing Ships, is mentioned
by the Almighty, to represent the swiftness of our Time, that carries us night
and day, sleeping or waking to the Haven of Death; Job 9.26. and according to
this Wisdom of God, and his Example, should Men make right use of their
respective Callings, Employments, and Affairs of the World, to see before their
Eyes continually, their Laws End.

X. As Labor and Toil in the Day, so Sleep and Rest in the Night-Season, is
also a necessary Help to preserve this Mortal Life; and this Sleep is a lively
Image of Death: for in Sleep Men lie down as dead Men, without Sense or Motion,
ceasing from their Works, and taking no notice of the things that are done by
others; and therefore the Holy Scriptures describes Death by the Name of
Sleep, or lying down to sleep, Job 14.12. Psalm. 76.5. Matthew. 27.52. John 11.11.
1 Cor. 11.30. 1 These. 4.13. Now when Sleep assails us, and like a Giant throws
us down, we ought to think of Death; and by sight of our Bed to remember our
Grave, to look upon it as a Tomb or Sepulcher, and every Night before we go
into it, to labor for reconciliation with God, that so we may lie down and
sleep safely.

IX. Whenever Sleep seizes upon us, let us seriously meditate, and think how
securely, and sweetly do they sleep, that take care to go to Bed with a just
and quiet Conscience? who after a toilsome day of Faithful Diligence and
Industry, in a Course of prudent, just, and pious Living, lay down their
careful and wearied Heads in Peace and Tranquillity, and safely rest securely
in the Bosom of the Almighties Providence: if they awake at midnight, their
Conscience void of Offense, comforts them in the dark, and with Christian
Courage, bids them not tremble or be afraid at the Shadow of Death; no, nor
even at the grim Majesty of Death it self; but confidently, and with good
Assurance, look up with the Eye of Faith, and long for the Dawn of that Eternal
Day: this indeed should be our chiefest care, to note, and censure, and correct
our selves: to strive for Mastery over our Passions; and to dismiss from our
Thoughts, what no ways concern us.

CHAP. V. Of Sin, the Means of Death, of Sickness, Youth, and Old Age.
OUR Sins the Works of the Flesh, in Scripture, are called dead Works, Heb.
6.1. and 9.14. and the Workers of them are called dead Men, Mat. 8.22. Luke
15.32. John 5.25. Ephesians. 2.1.5. and therefore upon every occasion of Sin
committed, we are taught to remember Death. Whatsoever thing has Death annexed
and threatened as the Reward and Fruit belonging to it, the same thing is a just
and necessary Memorial of Death: Now all our Sins have this Reward denounced,
Romans 6.23. and 7.5. and therefore in all Sins Death is set before us: as God
also speaks expressly in his Warnings against Sin, Deuteronomy. 30.15.19. as in sight
of Death, we are to remember Sin the Cause of it, so in the sight of Sin we are
to remember Death, the Effects of it.

II. Neither are these Sins thus to be considered by us, only in respect of
their future Reward; but God, by a further Judgment in sending a present
Terror and Fear of Death upon the present Acts of Sin, Lev. 26.36. Heb. 2.15.
does call Men, yea, and force them to remember Death: thus it is with all
Wicked Doers, and with the Just sometimes in part, through diverse Temptations,
Psalm. 77.3.7, 8. but with the Faithful, there is another Remembrance of Death
by occasion of Sins, as comfortable to them, as the former is terrible to the
Wicked: for in fight of Sins that perplex 'em, they call to mind what shall
quite free 'em from those Sins, which Expedient is Death; thereupon they set
Mortality before their Eyes, and are taught that Lesson of the Almighty, to
long for their Redemption, by desiring to remove out of the Body, Romans 8.23. 2.
Cor. 5.8.

III. Afflictions, Sicknesses, and Dangers wherein Death is threatened unto Men,
are likewise Means of Death, and by them also we are called of God to remember
our Latter End. Sometimes it pleases the Great Being for the Warning of Secure
Men, to bring them to the Gates of Death before they enter: Psalm. 9.13. and
though he bring them back again, yet is this done by the Almighty for a
Memorial of Death: God brings Men into such Extremities, that nothing but Death
is to be expected, they receive the Sentence of Death in themselves, and
despair of Life, 1 Cor. 8.9. and are free among the Dead, in their own and
others Judgment, Psalm. 88.4, 5. and thus many times they are in Deaths often, 2
Cor. 11.23. and such things God works oftentimes, that Men might renounce the
World, and set their Heart, and their House in Order, as a Preparation for
their Departure, Job 33.22, 29.

IV. Let us praise then the Goodness of the Almighty, who ordains all things
for the best to his Servants: whose unlimited Providence governs us all our
Life, and takes so peculiar a Care of our Death: He wisely casts us down on our
Beds of Sickness, and mercifully draws the Curtain 'twixt the Transitory World
and us, shutting out all its vain and pernicious Designs, and contracting all
our Affairs and Business to a little Room or Chamber; there in that close and
quiet Solitude, he speaks to our sorrowful Hearts, and methodically sets before
us, all our sinful Life; there he prudently discovers to us the Frauds and
Fallacies of this World; and kindly invites us now at last to prepare speedily
for the other. Thither he carefully sends his Messengers of Peace, to treat
earnestly with our Souls, and reconcile them to his Heavenly Kingdom: Thither
he sends even his only beloved Son, to secure our strait Passage, and to guide
and conduct us to himself.

V. O, how quite contrary will our serious Thoughts be then, to what they were
in our Negligent and Careless Health! how shall we justly and freely Censure
what we once much esteemed; and be easily and readily convinced into wiser
Counsels! when our unruly and stubborn Senses shall be checked with Aches and
Pains; and our rash and inconsiderate Minds made sober and calm with Fear. When
the Opportunity and Occasions of Sin shall be removed away, and every Object
about us, incline us to Repentance.

VI. Let thy Holy Name, O Lord, for ever be magnified! whose Mercy Sanctifies
even thy Punishments and Judgments into Favors: thou bring us Low and Weak
to persuade us to be humble; and prescribest us a Sickness to heal out Souls
and cure our Infirmities: thou command the unsatisfied Grave to dispense
with none, but indifferently seize on all alike: That all may not neglect to
provide for that last and fatal hour, and none be utterly undone with foolish
and mistaken Hopes; thou tell us sincerely and plainly, we all must dye; but
tenderly and kindly concealest the Time and Place, that every where we may
readily stand on our Guard, and every moment vigilantly expect thy Coming.

VII. In the Age of Man, where they first climb up and ascend to their height,
and then presently decline and descend again, is propounded by the Almighty.
Now the Face of Man is a Dial of his Transitory Age, and the manifold Changes
thereof from time to time, as the Shadow of Declination in the Dial, do show
his Mortality: and the main Differences in the Physiognomies of Men, may justly
serve for a Memorial of Man's changeable Estate, his Beauty and the Vigor of
his Countenance being daily altered, as the Grace and lovely shape of the
Flower that perishes, James 1.11. This ought to affect us daily, that the
different Faces which we behold may put us in mind that the fashion of this
world passes away.

VIII. As the Face, so the Stature of Man growing up as a Plant, according to
the diverse Measures and Degrees of his growth appointed of God, Psalm. 144.12.
Luke 1.80. and 2.52. is another Testimony of his changeable Estate, even from
the Child of a Span long, unto those that have their full growth, Lam. 2.20.
though some be of low stature, as Zacheus, Luke 19.3. and some again higher by
the head, as was Saul, 1 Samuel 10.23, 24 yet even in these compared with
themselves, the proportion of their Growth is an Evidence of their Age to such
as know them: and thus the Wheel of Man's Age is visible in the variation of
his his Stature, which may put him in mind of his Latter End.

IX. Besides the Face and Stature, the Almighty has set other Marks upon the
Bodies of young and old, for a Memento of their Time passing away: God
describes to Youth, the Time of Love, Ezekiel. 16.7, 8. and to Age the near
approaching Tokens of Death, whereby they are warned of God to prepare for it:
for through decay of strength, the Arms and Hands, the Keepers of the House,
begin to tremble, Eccles. 12.3. and the Legs that are as Pillars of the Body,
bow themselves; and the help of a Staff to rest on, is sought of the Aged
Person, Zach. 8.4. and with that Assistance, at every Step he takes, he strikes
upon the Earth, and raps at the Gate of the Grave, until it be opened unto
him: This Weakness is further signified by the ceasing of the Grinders, Eccles.
12.3. both the upper and the nether Millstone, which are called the Life of
Man, Deuteronomy. 24.6. these Teeth failing, Life begins to fail, wherein the Memorial
of Death is set before us.

X. And as in the outward Parts, so the like Weakness and Decay of strength is
to be observed in the inward; the Silver Cords of the Sinews, which conveys the
Faculty of Sense and Motion from the Head, in Old Age are loosed, Eccles. 12.6.
that Cable of the Marrow in the Back Bone, which was wont so firmly to hold and
stay the frail Bark of our Body, tossed with so many Motions, and by those many
Conjugations of Nerves which kept our Body steady, begins now to dissolve: the
Head, which is the golden Bowl, wherein is emboxed the Brain that ministers
that Faculty of Sense and Motion, through Age is broken and become crazy: the
many Veins, which carry the nourishing Blood from the Liver unto each part of
the Body, become like unto broken Vessels; and the Arteries, which by the
reciprocal Motions and Pulses, do convey the Vital Spirits from the Heart, even
to all Parts of the Body, these through languishing Age becomes slow and weak:
and all these faint Operations are so many Memorials of Death, and do plainly
portend the Approach of our Latter End.

XI. The Old Man's gray head is in Scripture compared to the white Blossoms of
the Almond Tree, Eccles. 12.5. this Tree making have to flourish before many
others in the Spring, is therefore in Vision used to signify, that God will
hasten his Word to perform it, Jer. 1.11, 12. and consequently the sight of the
gray head, either in our selves or others, serves as a Divine Vision to warn us
of God's Decree of hastening our Latter End: yea, those are upbraided of God as
Contemners of this Vision, who though their head be not all white do not
observe the first sprinkling of the head, when as the gray hairs are here and
there upon them, and they know it not, Hos. 7.9. and regard not this Memorial
of their Mortality.

XII. As to the decay of Sense; in Old Age, they that look out of the Windows
be darkened, Eccles. 12.3. the Eyes fail; Genesis 27.1. and 48.10. 1 Samuel 3.2. and
4.15. and that dimness of Sight is one of Death's Apparitors to summons Men to
their End; by that restraint of Sight, God calls Men to make a new Covenant
with their Eyes, to turn them out of the Corners of the World, not to gaze
longer after Vanity, nor to walk after the Lust of their Eyes; to live by Faith
and not by Sight, 2 Cor, 5.7. not to look after things temporal which are seen,
but after things Eternal, which are not seen, 1 Cor. 4.18. and as the Sense of
Seeing waxes dim, in Old Age, that of Hearing likewise fails; the daughters of
Music are abased and brought low, Eccles. 12.4. Men cannot then any more hear
the voice of singing-men and singing-women, 2 Samuel 19.35. God that planted the
Ear, Psalm. 94.9. when he makes this Plant to wither again, calls them to
remember their Transplantation into another World, to wait for their changing,
and to prepare for it. The Tasting likewise decays; for Old Barzillai cannot
taste what he eats, or what he drinks, 2 Samuel 19.35. Old Isaac by his touch
cannot distinguish betwixt the hands of his Son, and the Skin of a Beast, Genesis
27.16.21, 22, 23. The Psalmist when Old, is covered with Clothes, and feels no
heat, 1 Kings 1.1. yea, the inward Senses begin to fail also; Memory decays;
the Understanding is diminished, and the Aged sometimes in their decrepid Age,
return to their Infancy, and not able to discern between Good and Evil, 2 Samuel
19.35. how inexcusable are they that live securely, and think not of Death,
when they have so many Warnings given them.

XIII. With Decay of Strength and Sense, comes the decay of Health: Old Age is
many times a continual Sickness, and when the days of Man are multiplied, they
are but Labor and Sorrow, even the strength of them, Psalm. 90.10. then is the
time, when the evil days approach, and the years of which Man says, I have no
pleasure in them, Eccl. 12.1. then is the Light of Sun, Moon, and Stars
obscured; and then the Clouds return after the Rain, one Infirmity after
another, v. 2. Through decay of Natural Heat arises Indigestion and Crudity of
Stomach, and thereupon follow Rheums and Catarrhs; and from thence proceeds
Aches, and manifold Pains and Diseases, whereby the Almighty, as with an Iron
Pen writes our Lesson, and engraveth this Sentence deep in our Flesh and
Bones, Remember your latter end approaching, and prepare for Death.

CHAP. VI. Several Forerunners of Death, which may warn Men to prepare for it,
Practically Considered.
THus in every Age before Death Approaches, we have manifold Fore-Warnings of
his Coming, and when Death appears, God usually brings with it some
Joynt-Warnings, to prepare us further for our speedy Dissolution. And first,
before Death makes a Seizure, there is commonly Pain, like a Harbinger, sent
before, to warn the Soul to entertain the Almighty with a present and diligent
renewing of their Faith and Repentance: for God could have taken Men out of the
World without Pain or Sickness; by a sudden Change, in the twinkling of an eye,
1 Cor. 15.51, 52. but the Divine Wisdom saw it not necessary.

II. When the Lord appeared unto the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, and
vouchsafed unto them Visions of his Glory, he used commonly to send before, as
a Marshal, or Usher, some great fear, Genesis 15.12. Exodus 3.6. so that they fell
down as dead Men, Ezekiel. 1, 28. and 2.1, 2. Rev. 1.17. or stood trembling, Dan.
10.8.11. their hair stood an end, and all their bones did shake. Job. 4.14, 15.
But since God in his Divine Wisdom has altered that Method, and appears unto a
Sinner at his Death in sweeter Visions of Heavenly Comfort, and prepares them
with all Reverence for that hour.

III. God does now as it were usher his way, by sending Sicknesses and bitter
Diseases, that thereby we might be humbled for Sin, and renounce this
Transitory Life, by giving a more willing Farewell unto it, and to long for our
Translation, and the Joy which succeeds it: God shows, that then he expects a
special Act of Humiliation, when near our End he visits us with such Pains;
which creates a Mourning in us for Sins committed in the World, before we
depart out of it: then are we summoned to stir up the Grace of God within us,
and to raise up our Spirits with all Love and Reverence to meet the Lord, that
we may receive his Blessing, and enter into his Gates with Joy, and into his
Courts with Thanksgiving.

IV. These Pains prevailing at the approach of Death, causes Men to lie down,
and fall upon their Beds, Job 33.19. Acts 5.15. and to let all the Affairs of
the World alone, with the Works of their several Callings: through Infirmity of
Body God forces them to stoop, and calls them to remember their Frailty, and
their End; as if he should command them to couch down before him, and require
them to prostrate their Souls at his Footstool, in seeking his Favor and Mercy
in his dear Son, even as their Bodies are prostrate by his Hand of Visitation.

V. This very Position of the Body, represents unto us, how the Grass
withers, and the Flower falls, and admonishes our Souls to worship and
fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker, Psalm. 95.6. and by Faith to
enforce our Bodies also, leaning on our staff, to worship upon the head of our
bed, Heb. 11.21. Genesis 47.31. and 48.2. that he may straightway lift us up for
ever; as Jacob bowed himself to the Ground seven times, at the approach of his
Brother Esau, Genesis 33.3. So the Lord by Sickness, bows us down, that we may
come submissively into his presence, humbling our selves under his mighty hand,
that he may exalt us in his due rhyme, 1 Pet. 5.6.

VI. Another Warning to think of our Latter End, is that distaste of Meat, and
want of Appetite in Sick Persons; when their life abhors bread, and their
Soul dainty meat, Job 33.20. when the Staff of Bread fails, and the stay of
Natural Life is withdrawn, then God summons the sick Persons to remember their
end, to double their Care for Eternal Life, to seek the hidden Manna unknown,
and unregarded of the World, Rev. 2.17. to feed upon that bread which comes
down from heaven, and gives Life unto the world, John 6.33. by applying of his
Promises, and tasting the Sweetness that is in them.

VII. Again when Sleep departs through Sickness, this is another distinct
Warning to move Men to think of their End; God holds their Eyes waking, that
they might meditate on their present Frailty; thereby are they called to
commune with their heart, and that their Spirit make diligent search concerning
their Estate and the Means of their Comfort, Psalm. 77.4, 5, 6. God withdraws
Sleep from their Eyes, and Rest from their Temples, that they might remember
the Eternal Rest from all their Troubles, and might long after it, and prepare
for it.

VIII. Now, precedent Pains, the Sick Bed, the loathing of Meats, and the
Departure of Sleep, these are Occasions and Furtherances of Meditation, to
remember our End: Now on the other hand, there are as many Hindrances of
Meditation and Disturbances of the Mind, which meet with Men upon their Beds of
Mortality, which to avoid that Obstruction, the Consideration of those
Inconveniences should prove as Motives to persuade us, not to deferr our
making our Peace with God, to the last Moment of Time; that so we may
profitably forecast before it is too late.

IX. It happens sometimes in Sickness, that as some want Sleep, so others in
contrary Extremity are oppressed with continual slumbering and sleeping, which
with an unresistable Necessity invades them; and this not only in Lethargies,
Palsies, and other cold Diseases, but likewise in many Burning and Pestilential
Fevers; during which time they lie senseless, and cannot think on their present
Danger, nor of any thing which belongs to a due Preparation for their End: this
leaden Sleep is a black Cloud of Death, a Nightshade, and a particular
Darkness, of which in its measure is verified that more general Saying of our
Savior, John 9.4. the night comes wherein no man can work: and therefore while
there is Light and Liberty of mind, in the time of Health, our End is to be
remembered and provided for, before the Hours of Oppression does seize upon our
Mind.

X. Sometimes in Sickness, though Sleep oppress not, there is a kind of raving
Distraction, caused by Frenzy, Melancholy, or other Distemperatures, which
does overwhelm the Mind, as Nebuchadnezzar's once was, by the Finger of the
Almighty, Dan. 4. so that it is unfit to think of Death, or to seek any Comfort
against the Danger of it: and from hence therefore it does likewise appear, how
unwise they are that deferr the Time of their Repentance unto the Time of
Death, when it is uncertain whether they shall be Masters of their own Wits,
and Natural Understanding, not to speak of supernatural Grace, which is far
above the reach of Man, and yet necessary to Salvation.

XI. Sometimes the very Vehemence and Extremity of Pain, does trouble and
disturb the Mind, and disables it, that it cannot orderly and quietly dispose
it self unto Godly and Comfortable Meditations; but being overcome with
Impatience, frets, and murmures, its tossed to and fro, and becomes fruitless:
therefore are these Extremities of Anguish compared to a Cup of intoxicating
Wine, making Men as it were overcome with grief, Isa. 51.17.21, 22. Lam. 4.21.
and even frantic with woe and sorrow, that they know not what they do, Deuteronomy.
28.34. Jer. 25.16. Eccles. 7.7. and what Folly is it then for Men to be
unprepared through forgetfulness of their Latter End, and to remain stupefied
in Security all their Life, till they are plunged in a Gulf of Misery?
Perplexity and Extremity of Anguish may justly come as a Snare upon them that
abuse their present Peace and Quietness, by promising themselves Liberty and
Power to dispatch all that is necessary for their Salvation at the last Moment.

XII. And commonly when Death approaches, our Adversary the Devil, that goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour us at all Opportunities, does then
especially rage, knowing that his time is short, Rev. 12.12. and withal seeks
to take Advantage of our present Weakness, by insinuating himself into each of
our former Perplexities, and adding frightful Dreams to our Slumbers, strong
Fancies to our Distraction, and aggravating our Pains with great Terrors, by
that Voice which is within us.

XIII. Experience may inform us what great Temptations many have conflicted
with upon their Beds of Mortality; and therefore the Consideration of this last
Great Enterprise should alarm every one betimes to arm themselves against the
Last Day of their Lives; to furnish themselves with a Competency of Grace,
against the Day of Glory; to seek Truth and Righteousness; Faith, and Patience;
to heap up store of Comfortable Promises out of the Word of God, and to lay it
up in their Hearts, to be kept in readiness; whereby they may nourish up
themselves in Hope, and be vigilant in praying uncessantly; that having
finished this last Combat and obtained the Victory, they may then be translated
from a State Militant to a State Triumphant for ever.

CHAP. VII. Of the Separation of Soul and Body, with other Memorials of
Mortality, Practically Considered.
THE Divine Providence has ordained that at the Hour of Death, the Soul and
Body shall be separated; and at this Separation, the Soul is conveyed away
invisibly; no Man knows how nor whither: for no Humane Sense can discern the
Spirit of Man ascending, Eccles. 3.21. for God in his unsearchable Council,
orders his secret Will to be kept unrevealed from Humane Understanding. Now
this secret manner of translating the separated Souls, by carrying some close
Prisoners to endless Misery, and transporting others in invisible Chariots unto
Eternal Glory, serves to warn and admonish us to remember the Evident Monuments
of our Frailty: when secret Things are hidden from us by the Almighty, those
which are Revealed, are the more to be observed by us, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

II. The Scriptures will inform us how some Persons, Men, or Angels, have
vanished out of the sight of those they had conversed with; and from thence we
are to observe, that it is not requisite for us to know what they had heard and
seen, or to pry narrowly into that which the Divine Wisdom has ordered to be
kept from us, Luke 24.31, 32. Acts 8.39. Judge. 6.21, 22. Moreover God has
appointed that they should not be suffered to live, which attempted to converse
with the Spirits of those which were departed from us, Lev. 20.27. 1 Samuel 28.8,
9. etc. But by all this, we are so much the more lead to observe the common
visible Memorials of Mortality, showed unto us in them that die before us.

III. Furthermore, it is to be observed, that when the Spirit is returned away
presently to God that gave it, yet the Body remains and returns to the Dust,
from whence it was taken, Eccles. 12.7. If the Almighty by Death had taken away
both Soul and Body, or if it had pleased him to take away all Men, as Enoch and
Elias were, Heb. 11.5. Genesis 5.14. 2 Kings 2.11.17. or to bury all Men so as
Moses was, Deuteronomy. 34.6. namely, so as their Bodies should be seen no more among
Men; yet, even then, there were occasion enough to remember that wonderful
great and final Translation; but now, seeing every Man departing this Life,
leaves a part of himself on Earth among his Friends, yea, and that visible
Part, even the Body, which was best known among Men; God by this frail Part of
Man, that is left, gives us occasion to contemplate what is done with the
immortal part; and to keep in Memory the Death past, to prepare us for the
Death to come.

As Elias ascending to Heaven let fall his Mantle, for a Remembrance unto
Elisha that took it up, 2 Kings 2.13. so we ascending, do let fall our Flesh,
that has been the Mantle of the Soul, under which it was veiled, and covered
in the Days of our Mortality: Now by this Pledge, the dead warns the living to
part from the love of Vanity, and to make ready for this Change, when the Soul
departs more naked out of the World, than it came into it.

V. Besides, the Body is left behind, as a Pledge of our Corruption, to imprint
into our minds the horror of Death, through that putrefaction which soon
invades it, when it is deprived of the Souls presence: had the Body remained
only without Life, and retained its former Comeliness and Beauty, and not been
liable to putrefaction, how then would their dearest Relations and Friends have
choicely kept them, and lovingly embraced them: but now, by the divine
appointment, the body is Sown in Corruption. 1 Cor. 15.42. the Royal Body of
David sees Corruption, Acts. 13.36. the Body of Lazarus the Friend of Christ
begins to Stink the Fourth Day, John. 11.39. the Fair Body of Sarah, whose
Beauteous Countenance charmed Kings and Princes, she being dead must needs be
removed out of the sight of her most Faithful and Loving Husband, Genesis 23.4.

VI. And in such a degree has Corruption prevailed, that some Bodies has been
forced to be buried very deep in the Earth, So noisome have they been, and soon
putrefied; but though they are not to be looked upon with the Eye, yet they are
the more to be thought upon, and our fading Estate to be Reflected on: by this
Serious Reflection, Job humbled himself, confessing that Corruption was his
Father; and to the worm thou art my mother and sister, Job. 17.14. and by this
Consideration might be humbled the Proudest and most Ambitious Heart, when they
Seriously Reflect how the Worms breed out of their own Corruption, and
surround their whole Carcass, Isa. 14.11. these are the Laws and Ordinances of
Death established by the Almighty, whereby he call us the more effectually to
think of our End, not to pamper the Flesh, nor to take so much Care for our
Bodies as we do for our Souls; according to this Example of God, who shows more
respect, and love to the Soul by receiving of it into his Glorious Kingdom,
whereas he suffers the Body to lodge in the Pit of Corruption. 1 Cor. 15.43.

VII. The Sequestration of the Body from the Place where the Soul is, and the
Corruption of it being Separate, are mememorials wrought immediately by the
Hand God: Now, besides these there is other after warnings of Death, effected
by the providence of God, by the affections and respects of Men, that is paid
to the Honor of the dead, and Comfort of the living: Now for the Honor of the
dead, Holy Men of Old have showed great Care to provide Sepulchers, Tombs, and
Monuments for them; such was the Cave of Machpelah purchased by Abraham, Genesis
49.30.31. the Pillar on Rachels Grave that Jacob set up, Genesis 35.20. that
continued so many Generations to Samuel's time, 1 Samuel 10.2. the Title on the
Sepulcher of the Man of God, that Prophesied of Josias, 2 Kings. 23.17, 18. the
Sepulcher of David, that continued twice Fourteen Generations, from David to
the Apostles time, Act. 2.29. having been preserved in the time of the
Babylonian Captivity, even then when both City and Temple were destroyed: these
in Scripture are called Memorials, Math. 23.29. John. 11.38. chap. 19.41. by
which the Righteous are taught to Remember their latter end.

VIII. The Magnificent Tombs, and the Sumptuous Sepulchers are but so many
Scaffolds, Stages, and Theaters of human Frailty, and so many Pulpits out of
which our Mortality is Preached: and all the Graves of the Popularity are the
Coffers of Death, the view whereof should instruct us to lay up our Treasure in
Heaven: and thus though the touch of a Grave defiled the Body with a Ceremonial
Pollution in the time of the Law, Numb. 19.16. yet the sight of a Grave may
serve to cleanse the Soul, by a Spiritual Consideration of our latter End, even
as the sight of the Leviathan being raised up, made Men Purify themselves, Joh.
41.25.

IX. The Grave being prepared for the Dead Corpse, then Men proceed with their
Funeral Pomp and Exequies: the mourners go about the streets, and a great train
of Relations, Friends, and acquaintance accompany the dead unto his Grave, and
follow him that is going to his long home: Eccles. 2.5. this going a Procession
to the Grave, is a Memorial to them of their own Condition, that they in their
Course must die, and be carried forth in like manner: thus they are called of
God to remember at such times: then have they special cause to remember, that
Iron Chain of Death and Mortal necessity; by which the dead Person is said to
draw all men after him, as there were innumerable before him, Job. 21.23.

X. Then are Men called to climb up the Mountain of Contemplation, from the
height thereof to look about them from one end of the World unto the other, to
behold the two great Gates thereof so often mentioned in Scripture, that stand
always wide open, night and day; the one of entrance into the World, and the
other of departure out of it. Job. 1.21. Eccl. 7.5.14, 15. 1 Timothy 6.7. there
may they observe how many Thousands come every Hour Naked, Crying and Crowding
into the World at their Birth, and as many Thousands every Hour of the Day and
Night that depart Groaning, and Crowding out of this World at their Death;
thence they see, how one Generation goes, and another comes Successively,
Eccles. 1.4. one draws on the one, and another drives on the other, and there
is no Rest in this Race, but all run Uncessantly from the Oriental Gate, to the
Western Port, even from the Womb to the Grave.

XI. And as it was ordained at the new Temple, that he which Entered at one
Gate, must not return through the same, but go out at another, Ezekiel. 46.9. So
here is no return, but every one hasts forward, and never cease till they
have past the Gates of the Grave: and by this Contemplation, when we see, and
find our selves in the midst of the throng, carried on with others in the Swift
Winged Chariot of Time, unto the Sunsetting Gate of the World; we are hereby
warned to use this fleeting World as though we used it not, and to think daily
of that new Eternal World out of which there is no Gate of departure, when we
are once entered into it; and therefore also to make strait Steps to our Paths,
and so run that we may obtain.

XII. Having been at the Grave, and performed the last duty to the Deceased, we
then return from the dead to the living, to the Friends of the dead, to Mourn
with them, to Comfort them, and give them the Cup of Consolation; Romans 12.15.
Jer. 16.7.8. Genesis 37.35. 1 Chronicles. 7.22. John. 11.19. and in this action we have
another Call to remember our End: and while we administer Consolation to
others, we are to take an Exhortation our selves: Now, the house of mourning is
the School of mortification; and therefore it is better to enter into it, than
into the house of feasting: for there is the end of all men, and the living
will lay it to his heart, and so be made better in his heart, by the
Consideration of the dead, and by the Sadness of the Countenances waiting on
that Consideration; Eccles. 7.2, 3, 4.

XIII. When the Comforters of them that Mourn, are departed to their respective
Habitations; yet still the Friends of the dead, even while they are on Earth,
so often as they miss their departed Friends, and want the help and benefit,
which they were wont to enjoy from them; so often are they called to remember
Death, that caused such Separations; Lum. 4 18.20. and in this remembrance they
are withal Warned to be prepared ready for Death, and not to be Conformed unto
this World, from whence their Comforts are taken away: when the Shepherd takes
up the young Lamb, the Ewe follows him of her self, and needs no calling nor
driving: when the great Shepherd of the Sheep takes away the Souls of Young and
Old, and of dearest Friends from one another, it is to Encourage them to run
after the Lord, and to long after his Presence, in whom they shall find more
then all this World can afford.

XIV. So often as we think of an indulgent Parent, or an entire Friend, that
would have rejoiced with us, and assisted us; so often are we called to be
stirred up in our desires to be with them; and especially to run after such a
Shepherd, that has laid down his Life for his Sheep, John. 10.11. Whom the Ewe
should follow more then her Lamb; and whom our Soul should long after more then
after our dearest Friends: thus this missing of Friends, and Separation from
them, both is to some, and ought to be unto all, an effectual means to Separate
their minds from the Earth, to loosen their hearts from the love of this Life,
and to make them aspire after that perfect, and indissoluble Communion, into
which their Friends are gone before.

CHAP. VIII. Eternal Life described, and practically considered.
THis Consideration of the last period of our Life ought most to affect us,
which must end in Eternal Bliss, or everlasting Woe: this being duly thought
upon, may serve to make a deeper Impression upon the Soul, and be retained in
the memory more than all the memorials that have been rehearsed: Now would it
not seem Strange, if any Person were to have Executed upon him the next day a
Shameful and Ignominious Death, or to be Exalted to a Rich and Honorable
Estate; think you that this Person could not keep in mind the Judgment
approaching, or the glad Tidings of his Worldly Happiness, without the help of
a remembrance: and more strange is it, that these great and main Concerns of
Eternal Salvation, or Eternal Misery, should not by their own value press the
Heart of Man with their ponderosity, unto a continual remembrance of them,
without other warnings; when as we know not whether we shall have a days
Respite before they approach.

II. The Last End of the Righteous is Eternal Life, and this Life consists
especially with God and the Saints: Now, by Fellowship with God, Men come to
see God, Math. 5.8. Even to see him as he is, 1 John. 3.2. to see his face,
which no man can see, and live, Ex. 33.20. to see him, before whom the Glorious
Seraphims, Cover their faces with their wings, Isa. 6.2. To see the Holy
Trinity, the Blessed Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Clothed, with the Sacred
Robes of their several Beauty, and Majesty, shining distinctly, as the pure
Jaspar, the Carnation Sardine, and the Green Emerald: Rev. 4.3. then the Son
will manifest himself to those who are his, John. 14.21. and they shall behold
his glory: John. 17.24. and and the Father shall be seen in him: John. 14.9,
10. and with them both, the seven spirits which are before the throne, even
that one and the same spirit Enlightening with his Sevenfold Graces and Gifts
that bright Sevenfold Lamp of his Church. Rev. 14. chap. 4.5. 1 Cor. 12.11.

III. With this Vision, shall the soul be satisfied when it awakes: Psalm.
17.15. and this Pleasure Surpasses all that Mortal Eye can behold; for even the
Heavenly Angels, are but a shadow of that Goodness and Glory, which is in God
the Creator and Author of all things: Romans 11.36. all is but as a drop of a
Bucket, or as a small Mote of dust, that turns not the balance; yea; as
nothing, and less then nothing before him: Isa. 40.15.17. The Beauty of this
World, and the Excellencies of all Earthly things, are such as Eye has seen,
and the Heart imagined; but this Glory and Pleasant Countenance of God is
Exceedingly above all that we can desire or think: Ephesians. 3.20. Such as eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. 2.9.

IV. Now, we ought not to forget this End, but Imprint it in our minds; for
though we know not distinctly, what the things prepared are, yet we know they
are Great and Glorious; for so much is revealed unto us by Gods Spirit, and we
have the mind of Christ: 1 Cor. 2.10.12.16. and therefore, O thou great being,
teach us to make a Covenant with our Eyes; to turn them away from beholding of
Vanity; and ever to look at this mark, and to feed our Eyes with a sight of
this Glory, and even afarr off to behold it by Contemplation, until we approach
nearer unto it, and with the Psalmist be satisfied therewith, Psalm. 17.1^.

V. And in our Fellowship with God, we are not only allowed to see him, but to
enjoy him, and all that we see in him: by Covenant he gives himself to be our
God: Genesis 17.7.8. and is our portion and inheritance: Psalm. 16.5. Jer. 10.16.
Lam. 3.24. in this Promise are Contained all the Riches of Glory, and all the
Treasures of Immortality: and in all the Promises of the Gospel, there is not
more Comfort, then that which is included in this Word: for what Gift is
greater then God? or what can be wanting to them that have the Lord for their
exceeding great reward: Genesis 15.1.

VI. The Comfort of this Gift is unspeakable for the present in the midst of
affliction; but in the last period of our lives, then is the fulfilling of
this, and the like Promises: therefore is that End ever to be remembered and
longed after: then especially shall it appear how his Flock shall remain as
Lambs in the Bosom of the Lord their Shepherd: Isa. 40.11. then will it be
further revealed, how God dwells in them, and they in him: 1 John. 4.15, 16.
he that fills heaven and Earth: Jer. 23.24. is himself a House wherein they
shall dwell, and they a Mansion wherein he shall make his abode: John. 14.23.
by this Heavenly Conjunction and Cohabitation with God shall the Elect be one,
even as the Father and the Son are one; Christ in them and the Father in him,
that they may be perfect in one: John. 17 22.

VII. This thrice Blessed and most Glorious Union is that Green bed of Christ
and his Spouse, Cant. 1.16. an Eternal Paradise of Delights and Garden of
Spiritual Comfort: by this Communion God Embraces those who are his with both
arms of his love, and puts them in his bosom; Cant. 2.6. chap, 8.3. and in
this divine Embracement there is felt more Happiness and Heavenly Joy, then all
the Love and Fruits of Love, or whatsoever went under the Name of the Tenderest
and Strongest affection in this World, could ever yield unto the Heart of Man:
for if the first Fruits of Spiritual Joy now at this pesent, in the midst of
Tribulation, be an Hundred fold more than all the Pleasure of Houses and Lands,
Fathers and Mothers, Wife and Children, the most desirable things of this
World; Mark. 10.29, 30. then how can it be but more then an Hundred Thousand
fold Pleasure to enjoy the Beauty and Face of God in Heaven; to inherit the
fullness of Joy in his Presence, and Pleasures for evermore at his Right Hand.

VIII. If the infinite Blessedness of the Glorious Persons in the Holy Trinity
does appear in their mutual Union, so that they were an all sufficient and
Eternal delight unto themselves, in enjoying one another continually before the
World was, and before Men or Angels were made: Pro. 8.30. then may we well
think, how our Vessels shall be filled and overflow with Heavenly Comfort: 1
John. 14. when we come to Drink of that Divine Fountain, and Enter into our
Masters Joy, Mat. 25.21.23. and taste the sweetness of that Communion; this
Love of God is better then life it self: Psalm. 63.3. and all our Life and Love
of this World is to be hated in Comparison of it: Luke. 14.26.

IX. And as in Soul, so in Body shall we be made like unto Christ: our vile
bodies shall be changed, and fashioned like unto his glorious body, and this
according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself;
Phil. 3.21. that is, as effectually and Comfortably as an Almighty Power is
able to bring to pass: and therefore as in the transfiguration of Christ, his
face did shine as the Sun; Mat. 17.2. Even so shall the righteous shine forth
as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father: Mat. 13.43. as the raiment of Christ
through the brightness of his Body, did shine as the Transparen light; and was
exceeding white as snow: Mark. 9.3. and withal white and glistring: Luke. 9.29.
So the whole Person of the Righteous, made whiter then snow in their
transfiguration, shall shine, Glister, and Sparkle, with a Radient Beauty and
Heavenly Brightness, then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed,
when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before
his ancients gloriously, Isa. 24.23. then he shall be glorified in his Saints,
and made mavelous in all them that believe: 2 These. 1.10.

X. If the Face of Moses, while he was yet Clothed with Corruption, when he
had seen but the Back-parts of the Almighty, and that but for a moment in one
Vision, did yet shine so Gloriously, that Men fled away amazed from him and
durst not behold the Brightness of his Countenance: Exodus 34.30. chap. 33.23
What then shall be the Glory of the Righteous when being Clothed with
Immortality, they shall see God Face to Face, and that in a perpetual Vision
for evermore.

XI. From this Transfiguration of the Saints made so Glorious by the sight of
God and Fellowship whith him, arises the Glory of their Fellowship one with
another, which is also an unspeakable Felicity of the Second Life; to enjoy all
the Beauty and all the Love, of all the Glorified Souls and Bodies in Heaven:
as Jonathan seeing the Grace of God in David, was knit unto him, and loved him
as his own Soul: 1 Samuel 18.1. So here the Saints beholding the Glory of God
revealed in each other, shall be linked together in the nearest bonds of entire
Affection: they that first give themselves to God, do then give themselves to
one another by the will of God: 2 Cor. 8.5. they are all one in Christ Jesus:
Gal. 3.28. there is one body, and one spirit: Ephesians. 4.4. all are gathered
together in one, under one head, whether things in heaven, or in Earth, Men and
Angels whether they be Thrones, or Principalities, or Powers: Ephesians. 1.10.22. all
things are the Saints, whether it be Paul's, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs.
and they are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23.

XII. Hereupon the Angels take the Souls of Men deceased into their Bosoms,
and convey them to Heaven; and then even the Poorest of the Faithful come into
the Bosoms of the chiefest among the Saints; even Lazarus the Beggar into
Abraham he Patriarks Bosom: Luke. 16.22, 33. and not Lazarus only, but many
from the East and West, shall come and Sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
in the Kingdom of Heaven: Mat. 8.11. then especially shall those which one
Mourned for Zion, be filled with Comfort, and rejoice for ever with Jerusalem:
they shall suck and be satisfied with the Breasts of her Consolation: there is
no weeping, nor Complaining; Rev. 21.4. no Curse, no angry Word; no Countenance
of dislike, or disdain* no Evil, nor no occasion of Evil; no appearance of
Evil, nor no suspicion of Evil: no want of Good in themselves, nor no envy of
Good in others; but every Man's Joy doubled for another Salvation, and
Glorified in another Glory.

CHAP. IX. The Christians Map of the World, wherein the Vanity of it is shown
in the shortness of Man's Life, and that this World is not a Place of any long
Continuance: Considered Practically.
THe Apostle tells ye: Heb. 13.14 that here we have no continuing City, but we
seek one to come: this will seem to look to be a hard Verse to the Rich, that
they must not tarry here to enjoy their Riches, though they have Honestly and
Laboriously heaped it up; but must with Sorrow and Grief be taken from it; but
because Sorrow, I know, is a Passion loves no Prefacing, I will forthwith
spread my Mantle and divide these Waters; and then there will appear on one
side, Earths Inhospitality, we have here no continuing City: at the other
Heavens All Sufficiency; but we seek one to come:

II. The World appears here, as with a Clinched Fist, readier to give a Blow
then a Benifit, a very withered Jeroboham, whose Hand is shortened that it
cannot help, not help us to a continuing City, for here we have none; but the
other is the open Hand of Heaven, fuller of Assistances and Blessings than all
Rhetoric can delineat; but in this Verse is the Christians Map of the World,
consisting likewise of that Pair of Globes Caelestial, and Teristrial: Globes,
not Cosmographical, but Theological; one of them not so much discovering the
Rarities of the Earth, and Flourishing Cities of the World, as demonstrating the
Vanity and Emptiness thereof, and that there is no Continuing City in it: the
other not so much Teaching us the Motion of the Stars, and walking unto Heaven
with a Staff, as how we may one day shine among those Lights, and really
inhabit that same Glorious City, which is some Happiness here, but to hope, for
what we Expect hereafter.

III. The first of these, methinks, the lower, or Terrestrial Globe, deals with
us here, some what like Satan with our Savior, Mat. 4. Setting us, as on a
Pinnacle of the Temple, and shows us all a fair Prospect of the Earth, yet with
a Lrue, not his False Glass, not as a Lure, but as a Caution, not in the
Language of the Tempter, telling us of Kingdoms and the Glory thereof, but in
the Apostles Doctrine, 1 John. 2.17. the World passes away and the glory
thereof; passes it must, and that one day in the total, pass to nothing, as
now in the parts, to no Continuing City; By which defect and indigence of the
World, we are the Plaintiffs here Condoling; we the General Race of Adam, we
Mortals, because we Sinners: the next is our wants, what we are Scanted of, and
that is a Place of residence, a Continuing City, we have none, lastly, the Scene
of all these Miseries, where we are thus straightened, and that is here, in this
same Dirty Prison Earth.

IV. But what? have we no Continuing City? by your Favor, Holy Apostle, did
not the Creator, so soon as he had built this Great House the World, and
furnished it, bring in Man his Tennant there, and Sole Possessor? Can we
Complain of Wants? did not all Creatures then wear Man's Livery, a name of
Servitude, and the very Wheels of Time it self appointed to attend him unto
Immortality? can they then whose is the whole Earth want Cities? whose Chariot
is Immortality; whose Lackquies Time was; can they want Continuance? and yet it
is here, that we have no Continuance.

V. Indeed this World was thus Man's Royal Manor once, and all Creatures were
Tennants to him, and Paradise was to have been his Continuing City, and all
this too, Leased out to him, paying but the Rent, obedience, for as many Lives
as he should have Posterity: but the edge of his Ambition cut off his entayl'd
Happiness, he would be Paramount, Chief Landlord; he, so breaking the
Conditions, forfeited his everlasting Tenure that now he is but a Tennant at
Will to an offended Landlord, and scarce an Equal sharer in the Vivacity of his
Brother Animals; but this Misery and Mortality of Man, is a Condition not
Imprinted by the Almighty, who, as he is himself Immortal, had put a Coal, a
Beam of Immortality into us, which we might have blown into a Flame, but blew
it out by our first Sin; we beggered our selves by harkening after false
Riches, and therefore now are driven to our wants, to these Complaints, that
here we have no Continuance,

VI. We infatuated our selves by listening after false Knowledge: for that Tree
of Knowledge bereft us of the Tree of Life, it taught us to know Evil only: and
left us doubly like the beasts that perish: Psalm. 49.12. both for Infatuation
and Corruption: like the Beasts indeed for Praecipitation unto Death, but not
for the Protraction of their Life; most of 'em running Man out of Breath, if we
may believe the Naturalists, as especially in this particular, the Crow Nine
times Numbering out his Age, the Stagg fourtimes exceeding hers, the Raven again
trebling his: the Phaenix as long L^v'd as all of them.

VII. These and others Sport and Chant away whole Centuries of Years, while Man
sits sighing over his poor Handful, Psalm. 39.5. thou have made my days but as
a span long, nay rather a short Span; mine age is nothing unto thee, says
David, there to God, that might say here unto the Beasts, mine Age is nothing
unto these: and yet it would Savor: but of Learned Heathenism, to Chide at
Nature, and call her Stepmother to Man, and natural to others; but the
Philosopher himself takes off that Cavil, affirming one day of a Life of
Reason, above an Age of non-intelligence, beyond-all their longaevity of Sense:
but Divinity turns this seeming Discontent into a Comfort, informing us that
this Life properly belongs to things of Sense, all its chief Blandishments,
Treasure, or Pleasure, being but Sensual, and no otherwise than Imaginarily
Good; much good may it do them, than with the length of this Life, that are to
enjoy no other, while Nobler Souls of Reason and Religion, trampling on this,
hasten to a better Life among their Brother-Angels, in their own Country,
Heaven; there to Measure real Felicities no more by Time, but by Eternity.

VIII. No longer then let this be a Complaint, but Condolation, that we have
here no continuing City: thus having brought you acquainted with the Plantiffs,
as well as with your selves, Consider now their wants, We have not a Continuing
City: Now Cities have their period and dissolution, both Occasional and
Natural: some of them, like goodly Troy, and better: Jerusalem, those Phoenix
Cities of the World, in Successive Ages, buried in Fiery Tombs, raked in their
own Ashes: others, too many of 'em, like old Rome and Carthage, sacked and
demolished by the Bloody Hand of War; so that you see, the Imperial Cities of
the Four great Monarchies, nay, those Monarchies themselves, all as well as
Babylon, now sit in the Dust: Isa. 47. and 'twas but Flattery in Livius the
Historian, who called Rome, the Eternal City, after so many downfalls, and
scarce a Feather now of that proud Eagle left.

IX. It was not also her a Fiction in the Poets describing of old Saturn, their
God of Time, how he devoured his Children, though of Stone, I am sure the Moral
is real, and Terms him a devourer; for whatsoever Time brings forth, Time
destroys; this I need say no more of, every Languishing Body, every Nodding
Structure is a demonstration; Witness our own Metropolitan City which was in
1666 laid in Ashes, and had not Pious Care, and Dilligent Industry have raised
this our Phoenix and Mother-City, we had wanted Earthly Habitations for our
Bodies, and Ecclesiastical Tabernacles for the Good of our Souls: and Happy are
they who Build such Tabernacles here, that they are not chid by that fame
Prophet Haggai. 1.4. Is this a time for you to dwell in ceiled houses, and let
my houses lie wast? etc.

X. Yet alas! how Wanton now adays, is the Worlds invention for Superfluous
Building, Temples are too Old Fashioned, the Zealous Father St. Bernard may
still Sigh: Men Build as though they should Continue for Ever, and Glut as
though to dye to Morrow, which indeed they may rather fear, such a Woe being
denounced against them, as the Prophet mentions: Isa. 5.8, 9, 10. Woe unto them
that join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that
they may be placed alone in the midst of the Earth, etc. but to avert it,
imitate that Ecclesiastical Centurion: Luke 7.5. whom the Jews respected, for
loving their Nation, and building them a Synagogue. And, if thou needs wilt
Build, let St. Chrysostom be a little thy Surveyour would thou erect
Beauteous and Splendid Edifices? I forbid thee not, says he, yet found them
not on Earth, it is but an Heap of Sand, but Situate in those Calm Regions that
are above the Breath of Danger, Build in Heaven: for here is no Continuing City.

XI. But Cities are here put for the Inhabitants, and our want of peaceful
residence, shadowed under their discontinuance; for if we Reflect on the
Pilgrimage of Abraham: Genesis 12.1. where he is called from his own Country and
his Fathers House, to divide a Life between Variety of strange Lands and
Dangers; So that indeed we Read of no other settled Possession that he had but
Machpelah: Genesis 23.17. his only Purchase a place of Burial, thus it was with
the Father of the Faithful, he had no Continuing City.

XII. Nor was it any thing better with the Children; few and evil have been the
days of my Pilgrimage, says old Israel: Genesis 47.9. long and evil the days of
our Pilgrimage, murmured the Children of Israel in the Wilderness: Exodus 14.
that Journey, was a true Type of the Saints way to Heaven, who Wandered up and
down, says the Apostle: Heb. 11.37. destitute and afflicted. Militant is the
Churches Name, she is an Host upon Continual Marches and Removes; our
Habitations here, so often Varied by occasions, either of some Loss, Disfavour,
Sickness, or of Death, (I need give no Examples) that, like the Traveling
Commonwealth of Israel, we have rather so many several Stations, than
appropriate Mansions.

CHAP. X. That Man himself is Frail, and is no Continuing City, or has any
Duration here, Practically Considered, and Emblematically discussed.
TO show that Man is no Continuing City, is easily demonstrated, by these
following Qualifications, which a City ought to be Furnished with: and First,
it is an Emblem of Strength, so says the Wise Man: Prove. 10.15, The rich man's
wealth is his strong City: and the Psalmist says, who will lead me into the
strong City? Psalm. 60.9. this is the frequent Epithet, through the holy Book,
strong and well fenced Cities: indeed there is the Combination of most Men and
Arms, the Storehouse of Munition, it is the Heart of the Body-publick, the Seat
of most Spirit and Vigor, deservedly may these be called Strong Holds, and
Good Fortifications.

II. Now what a City Man has in this Sense, soon be your own Judges: Walk but
about it, View well the Towers thereof, (if you can find any) how Weakly is he
Fenced about with these thin Walls of Clay! Walls, that every Ague Shakes,
every Dropsy Drowns, every Fever Fires, every Danger Batters; one Fort indeed
there is in it, the Heart; but that so feeble as it is in a continual Trembling;
a Palpitation not more for Breath than Trouble, Psalm. 30.10. Watchmen too it
has, Eyes placed in a Tower, the Head, but neither foreseeing or preventing
Mischief; at best Exercises, either dimm or drowsy.

III. The Soldiers of it, the Hands often Treacherous, advantaging the Enemy and
by Sins Wounding his own Bosom, while in all this Extremity his Carriages the
Feet are unable to convey him from Surprisal, or keep him from being Captive to
the Grave: so Weak a City Man is, that even Worms can Conquer it: Pliny tells
us, for a wonder, of a City undermined by Conies; but Worms Triumph over this,
and scarce ever glory of the Victory: what is it I wonder, Philosophers call
Man a little World for? is it because he has such Earthquakes in him, so many
Chollicks and Palsies? is it because he has such Thunderings, sudden Noises in
his Head? because such Lightnings, Inflammations in his Veins? He is a little
World indeed, Himself the Earth, and his Misery the Sea: nay a great World of
Weaknesses, born the most helpless of all Creatures, and lives the Sport of
every least Distemper: how seasonable here for Man is St. Paul's
acknowledgment: 2 Cor. 1.29. who is weak, and I am not weak. Yet put, the Case
with David he be so Strong and come to Eighty Years, yet it is no Continuing
City, but a doubled Misery Labor and Sorrow: Psalm. 90.10. and a City of no
Strength.

IV. Secondly, a City is a Figure of Unity: Psalm. 122.3. Jerusalem is as a
City, that is at unity with it self: in unity, a city like each Building of it
is an Aggregation of many into one, the proper place of Laws and Government,
which are the Causes and Maintainers of Peace, Unity and Concord: but alas! we
have no such City, no Continuing Unity, but rather here, continual Discord,
Witness too many Unquiet Families, our clamorous Streets, and the revenging
Hall: indeed, so deep Root has that Envious Man's Seed taken in the Ground of
humane Hearts, that the whole World almost, is become little better then a
Field of Tares.

V. In the Church, what Floods, what Seas can lend us Tears enough to bewail
this want of Unity in matters of Religion? how is the seamless Coat of our
Blessed Lord many times, Rent and Torn by Atheists, Libertines and Factious
Novelists, which the Bloody Soldiers themselves spared, that it might Prefigure
his United Church? how was the Spouse like her Head and Savior Crucified
between two Malefactors, Schism and Faction! while I speak of Love, I will not
Strait wish those Cut off, which did Trouble us, but as our Charitable Mother
Church, has taught us, Pray, Lord forgive our Enemies, Persecutors, and
Slanderers and turn their Hearts: for Religion has no such Scandal as this
want of Union.

VI. And for the Commonwealth, how full has it been of Jarrs and Contentions?
the Elements, Fire and Water, not at such Strife as Men, sure that Prophet
spoke of those times, Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim,
and both against Judah: Isa. 9.21. all, so captious of Indignities, so
apprehensive of all Trespasses such going to Law for Trivials; that which was
anciently said of the Friars of this Realm, with a little Variation may now be
said of the Lawyers, those lived of the Ignorance, but these wax Fat on the
Strife of the People: Ah! what is become of that Sin Covering Amity? the Badge
of Primitive Christianity! as Eusebius told a Bishop of his Age, that asked him,
how he should know the Christians from the Infidels, in those Miscellaneous
Times, Observe, says he, but how they Love each other, how fast those Brethren
hold the Bands of Amity: and the same distinction gives the Bishop of our
Souls: Hereby shall men know ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another: John. 13.35.

VII. But how are we degenerated into Nabalism? Love is fled, and not so much
as Friendship left: very Ethnicks and Jews had both their Golden pair of
Friends; as David and Jonathan whose Souls were Knit together; Theseus, and
Peruhous, who durst Exchange their Bosoms, and be the mutual Currents of their
flowing Hearts: but hard it is amongst Christians now to find Unity, as the
Apostle says, I speak this to our Shame; now Love sits on the Lips, and can
soon take her Flight; Frothy Courtship, Judas's Kisses, Ehud's Embracements are
the Friendships of this Age; or if any be more real, yet are they often Leavened
with Inconstancy, and like the Leagues of War, hold but for their own hopes and
ends; very Marygolds, that follow but the Sun, and Close against the Clouded
Evening: Now, for that Heaven-born Spirit that dares be Faithful, in spite of
all the Shuffles the Rude World puts on him; that knows not upon any Urgencies
to Violate devoted Friendship, (yet to keep Word, is a Qualification of a
Saint: Psalm. 15.4.) but such a one, were as great a Rarity as Salomon's Female
Virtue: Pro. 31.10.

VIII. Thirdly, a City is an Emblem of Safety; of Safety by Consequence as
before of Strength, indeed our Safety is by Defense, that by Strength, and both
by such wellfenced Cities, (as Instrumental means:) in the 35. of Numb. 6. you
read of Cities of Refuge, Cities where very Delinquents might find Safety: but
we have none such here to secure us, even from undeserved Dangers, no, of all
the Fortifications in the World, I would fain see that Place, that could Wall
out a Famine, or a Pestilence, I Am sure Samaria was a wellfenced City, and yet
both these entered it, and well nigh Un-peopled it: 1 Kings. 18.

IX. Nor need we go so far for sad Examples: they have entered our own Cities,
and no Fence here are Judgment-proof, not Argob's Cities, let them be Walled as
high as Heaven: Deuteronomy. 3.5. a Shower of Vengeance, Hell out of Heaven shall Rain
down on Sodom, be it never so well immured: and indeed, who dares put
Confidence in City-Walls, that has ever heard or read of Jericho: Josh. 6.20.
an Arm of flesh is but a Bruised Reed, no Safety in either Horses or Chariots;
Pharaoh found one of them, as David says, but a Vain thing to save him: Exodus
14.25. where his Chariots hurried the faster to destruction, for their Wheels
being off, and what Safety in the Multitude of an Host, Senacherib will tell
you, whose Confidence was as great as his Army: 2 Kings. 19.35.

X. But those who rely only upon their own Strength, God is not in all their
Thoughts; Like that Proud Emperor, Nero, that Cut off the Heads of all the Gods
in Rome, and caused the Image of his own to be fixed upon them, we Sacrifice to
our own Sword and Spear, when it is the right hand of the Lord, that brings
mighty things to pass; Strength of Arms, I confess are Means and Instruments of
War, but unless from God, whence they are all? and, without his assistance may
soon again become a Prey to Tyrants, the Sport and Rattle of the Wind and
Waves; some may Remember we have been driven to that of David: Psalm. 6.10, 11.
thou, O God, wentest not forth with our Armies, till we came to his
Acknowledgments there, of Vain is the help of Man. God will have the Glory of
our Welfare, and it is requisite he should, since he is the Author of it, who
else live here in a Shop of angry Meteors, violent Elements each of which would
soon Destroy us, were not he our Lord Protector: how often therefore does David
call him Rock, and Refuge, Strength, and Tower, Castle and Fortress: Conclude
we then with him, Psalm. 4. Thou O Lord, only make us to dwell in safety.

XI. Lastly, a City is a Hieroglyphick of Rest, and therefore in the 21st. of
Josh. it is said, God gave his people Cities which they builded not, and rest
round about them: nay, Eternal Rest it self borrows an Expression from the Name
of City: it is called the New Jerusalem, the City of the Living God: Heb. 12.21.
but Man is no Citizen of this, as it is a Representative of Rest, his Life a
Giddy-wheel; the Orbs, the Clouds, the Winds, the Rivers not so full of Motion;
I speak now of the Travells of his Mind, that busy Spirit hurried through
Thousands of the Worlds Distractions, which yet if best Employed, is subject to
be tired: even Reading is a Weariness, says the Royal Preacher: Eccles. 12.12.
and there is no end of many books; unless an end of their Author.

XII. But if this Mill Grind Empty, have not the Mind good things to Work on,
and how does it set it self on Fire! on Fire of Hell, by Sinful and Cupidinous
Revolutions! what mischief leaves it un-imagin'd on the Bed, unpracticed up!
how full of all Contemplative uncleanness! even to the making up that Sinful
climax: Genesis 6.5. the Heart of Man: the thoughts of the heart, and imaginations
of the thoughts, are all evil continually: no Rest from Sinning: and thence how
Restless, think you, is the Guilty Conscience, only in this particular, like
God, that it never Slumbers, nor Sleeps; the Clamor of this inward Voice,
deadens the Voice of Ravens or of Thunder; not only audible to us Waking, but
interrupting of our best Repose, Job. 7.13. When I say my bed shall comfort me,
and my couch shall give me rest, then thou frightest me with dreams, and
terrifiest me with visions.

XIII. To be thus uneasy, is enough to make one with David, ones own
Metamorphosis, Psalm. 55.6. O that I had the Wings of a Dove! for then would I
fly away, and be at rest: at rest from the distracting Cares that follows this
vain Worlds Affairs! at rest from the impetuous Solicits of the Flesh! at rest
from the importunate Temptations of the Devil! at rest from the refractory
Impieties of wicked Company. All which, make every honest David sigh out here,
Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and have my habitation
among the tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5. Thus is our Life a tossed Ark,
tumultuous without, sick within; and the poor Soul, like Noah's restless Dove,
can find no ground to fix on, till she return from whence she flew at first;
and then indeed she rests, Rests from her Labors, so says the Spirit, Rev.
14.13.

XIV. But here, we have no continuing City; no City of Rest: Now, Job sums up
all the Particulars, and produces the Total, in his 14 Chap. v. 1.2. Man that
is born of a Woman is of few days, and full of trouble; he comes forth like a
flower, and is cut down: he flees also as a shadow, and continues not, that
is, has no continuing City. And having thus demolished this Earthly City, how
can we now choose but with Metellus sacking Syracuse, lament the transient
vanity thereof, and bewail our strong Desires of so weak an Object, as no
Continuing City.

CHAP. XI. That there is nothing in this World, worthy of taking off our
Affections from Heavenly Things; Practically considered.
THere is a Place, where the Woman is clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under
her Feet, Rev. 12. where the Church, and every Member of it, is robed with
Glory, and far above the reach of any Mutability: But as St. Bernard says, this
is in the City that is above, it is not here: this Place is the Moon's chief
Region, her very Exchange as it were, to vent all her Varieties, and nothing,
save alteration, continues here: Earth you see is the least of Elements, and to
the Heavens, no more than is a single Atome to the Sun; an infinite substance
then, such as the Soul is, must needs be straightned here: this little Circle
can never fill the Hearts vast Triangle; no, nothing but the Trinity. Vain it
is therefore to think of placing our Affections here.

II. This again is the lowest and most dreggish Element, the Sink of all, and
so the Shop of Dangers and Diseases, and they both so destructive, that they
obstruct our abiding here: It Is the Valley of the World, Earth, the Valley of
Tears, Tears indeed, where we enter Life with Cries, continuing with Sighs, and
going out with Groans. This is our Music here! here, where Mirth is but
apparent, Grief is real: where we eat the Bread of carefulness, and mingle our
Drink with weeping, and all our Actions with sinning, this is our Diet here!
here we only taste of Joy, but glut in Sorrow; we walk in Happiness, but journey
in Calamity, this is our Travel here! here where Riches are but Thorns, Honors
but Pinnacles and Pleasures, Bees that leave more Sting than Honey: these are
our Treasures here! So that the World you see, with all its Pomp, makes but up
a Nebuchadnezzar's Image, Dan. 2. though the Head be Gold, the Breast of
Silver, Belly Brass, and Legs of Iron, yet are the Feet of Clay: let one be
honorable, another rich, a third beautiful, and a fourth never so vigorous,
yet are the Foundations of them all but Clay, and a small Stone from out the
Sling of Death, does break and liken them to Dust: and this is the End of all
Things.

III. Now, methinks, by this time, we should be all of Holy Monica's Mind, St.
Augustine's Pious Mother, who, as he tells us, having thus discoursed over the
Frailty of the World together, melted into this Expression; For my own part,
says she, I am now delighted with nothing in this World, and what do I longer
here, but practice Jobs attendance? So after all this Colloquy of ours,
anatomizing the vain World, what can we find here worthy our Affections? and
not worthy our Disdain? Then what do we here, here in our unsatisfied Desires?
our eager Prosecutions? treasuring for the Moth, and Thief, like Spiders,
spending our Bowels to catch Flies, and as Menot says of sharp Hunters, who
lose a Horse of a Price, in pursuit of an Hare worth nothing; here being
neither a City of Strength, Unity, Rest, nor Safety: What do we then here, but
Ixion-like, grasping of a Cloud for Juno.

IV. It was a Question once debated in the Court of Alexander, What was the
Greatest Thing in the World? and having many about him of all Sciences, a
Geographer answers him, the Mount Olympus, that Hill indeed being so vast and
high, as frequently is took for Heaven it self: An Astronomer, he answered
'twas the Sun, that World of Light so many times bigger than the Earth; a
Parasite tells him his own Victory; but an honest Moralist standing by,
affirmed the greatest thing in the World was, to be an Heart that could Contemn
the greatest: this Philosopher answered as though he had heard Christ himself
Preach on that 14. of Luke. 33. Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all
he has, cannot be my Disciple: a pair of imitable Examples, and one of them a
Heathen, and shall Christians come behind such, in Contemning of the World, and
the greatest things in it, then, let us even change Names with them, but let
our Souls aspire with Monica's, that Glory of one Sex and Copy of the other,
what do we here? like David; thirst for better Waters, Psalm. 42. and yet as
'twas with Monica, one thing Necessary: one thing there was, which made that
Female Saint desire a little longer Continuance here; which was her Sons
Conversion, and to see him Baptized a Christian.

V. So one thing must our Soul desire of God, that we may live to see that
Christened, Baptized in the Tears of Penitence; and then away to our continuing
City; what do such Eagles here, when as their Carcass is in Heaven? indeed what
do we so long, looking on this Terrene Globe, whose Zones are all Intemperate,
( Freezing Charity, or Scorching Envy, Avaritious Drought, or Riotous
Profuseness,) whose Paralells are Equal Cares and Fears: whose Circumference is
Vanity, and Center is Corruption: hark how the Philosopher calls us off, Behold
now the Beauteous Frame of Heaven, and desist at length to Admire base Earthly
things, let the Bodies Figure be the Soul's Tutour, and an Elevated Eye, Teach
an Upright Heart: the Heart to seek that Contiuing City, the Eye to look for
one to come.

VI. And here the Christian, and the Heathen part, who have all this while gone
along together in the we have no continuing City; they likewise undauntedly
apprehending their Mortality, and such as dare to hasten it: Desperate
Unthrifts of their Blood: only to period their Miseries; yet some of them in
general Notions Dreamt of the Souls Immortality: thus far shined the dimm Light
of Nature, here were their Herculean Pillars; but without any endeavor of good
Works to seek, or with the Eye of Faith to look for one to come; this is a
regenerate Man and a Christians Hope, the Child of Propagative Faith.

VII. That was a strange close of dying Adrian, Thou little wandering, merry
Spirit, who were wont to cheer the Body, what place shall thou now Inherit!
etc. Alas! Heathens find but diminutive Comfort at their Death, treading those
unknown Paths with unprepared Feet, going from one Darkness to another; oh! how
may we ever Bless God, for our Vocation, our double Light of Grace and
Knowledge, when the most Learned of 'em go hence, with I know not whither I go:
whereas the meanest Christian with a Job's Faith Exulteth, I know that my
Redeemer Lives; and therefore go forth my Cheerful Soul, and fear not now to
go to Christ, whom thou so long have Served: yet it is not my Task here
rigorously to determine all those Lost, whose exact Virtues, so out Moral'd
Christians.

VIII. We cannot limit Mercy, God loves it above Sacrifice: Mat. 9. and our
Just Lord requires but according unto what he gives: Luke. 12.48. though indeed
the Heathen People that know not God, in respect at least of outward Calling
are not within the pale of the Messiah Dear; and the Law so Written in their
Hearts; I fear that Suppressing those inherent Evidences of Nature (which St.
Paul calls withholding of the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.) does
render them inexcusable, as the Apostle St. Paul argues strongly in that
forecited Chapter: Acts 4.12. for there is no other name under Heaven given
among men whereby they may be saved; but not to make our selves inexcusable by
Judging another, this we leave to the Great Judge of all, Revealed things to
us; albeit we say not what becomes of them, yet to our grateful Comfort we
know, says he, that when this earthly tabernacle of ours shall be dissolved,
we have a building not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens: 2 Cor. 5.1. and
yet our Confidence is to Weak to go alone, it must be accompanied with
Diligence, we must not think to enjoy Heaven, with only looking for it: they
would not then be so few that are chosen: Math. 20.16.

IX. All are Baalamites, and desire to dye the Death of the Righteous, but
Vainly, unless they live the Life of them; it is Foolish to expect an end,
without the means: to look for this Heavenly City, and not seek it: or that any
Lazy Confidence should think to gain it, as God knows that is all the evidence
many have to show for it, I hope for it; but for all this Hope, if no Endeavor
be used, the Heart may break: no, nor is it Faith can look for it unless
Operative, for our Faith cries out like Rachel, give me Children or I die:
James. 2.20. but such a Faith as Works by Love, makes our Hope infallible, of
finding what we seek, we seek one to come.

X. Seek, then, is a Word of Labor: bidding us with the Apostle, Work out our
own Salvation: Phil. 2.12. Work, it is not a Feast or a Feather-Bed, will bring
a Man to Heaven, our Jehovah will not as the Poet Jove did in Diana's Lap, Rain
down this Golden Purchase into our Bosoms: no, no Drones shall ever taste the
Honey of that Hive, but those industrious Bees alone that seek it; a sharp
Reproof for Idleness, that Gate of all Impieties, is a Whip of Scorpions for
the Sluggards Back: Prove. 6.10. some like the Spouse, seeks no farther then the
Pillow; but she found not her Beloved there; Cant. 3.1. and as little do they
who stretching on their Beds of Ivory, ever find his Benefits, whose Bed was
but a Manger; but Ruin suddenly, for their not seeking finds out them: Prove.
6.1. Idleness we know, it was denominated those Virgins Foolish, and Excluded
them both the Chamber, and the Knowledge of the Bridegroom, Matthew. 25.10. thus
Slothful Persons, like Arrows from a feeble Bow, fall short of what they Aim
at, and with Esau come too late to gain the Blessing: Genesis 27.30.

XI. Diligence invites a Blessing; you see, Moses keeping watch over his Flock
by Night, is graced with Visions; Exodus 3.4. a sight of him whose Vision is
Beatifical, and Saul seeking his Fathers Asses, finds a Kingdom: 1 Samuel 9.20.
and David is taken from following the Ewes great with Young, and made the great
Shepherd of Israel, Psalm. 78.71. Diligence invites a Blessing, whereas on the
Contrary, Idleness allures Temptation, and Tempts the Tempter; while David
exercised himself in God's Law Day and Night, all went well with him, he feared
not what either Man or Satan could do to him; but when once he ascends his
Wanton Prospect, and loosens the Reins unto his Idler Senses; the Devil soon
changes his Title, and makes him a Man after his own heart, Wraps him in a
double Snare of Murder and Adultery; and after these, how Justly he Complains,
mine Eyes are Dimm, Psalm. 6.7. when there is such a Pearl in one, and the other
Blood-shod!

XII. Indeed, it is the sitting Bird that is the Fowler's Aim, the Envious Man
Sowes his Tares while the Husbandman Sleeps; and Hell it self is beholding to
Idleness, not only for Company, but for a description; being called a Lake of
standing Water: Rev. 21.8. there is an old Fable, how once the Elements
Contended for Priority; the Fire most active got Supremacy, the Agil-Air Wonn
the next Regions, the Ambitious Waters Flow to overtake 'em, while Drowsy
Earth sat still the while, and therefore is ever since Disgraced with the
lowest Room; No Sin so unnatural, as Idleness: in a Word, the Idle Man's the
Devil's Cushion, whereon he sits and takes his Ease, while the well-busied
Heart, is in the Shop, or Workhouse of the Almighty: then let ever some good
Act or other, be as an Anchor to the Floating Mind; Sedulity becomes even our
Civil Callings, but for Spiritual, says the Apostle: 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.

CHAP. XII. Several Instrumental Means to be used in the Seeking and Attaining
of a Heavenly Kingdom; Practtically Considered.
IN the pursuit of a Heavenly Kingdom, we must Run so that we may obtain; But,
because it is necessary a Seeker should have Eyes as well as Feet, Knowledge as
well as Industry: least as the Perverse Jews, you ask, and receive not, because
you ask amiss: James. 4.3. Now Consider the manner how to Seek: and that is by
doing Good, and suffering Evil: doing Good and being active is the Work of
Nature, but to do well, is an effect of Grace, and cause of prosperous Reward,
as Holy Moses intimates to Israel: Deuteronomy. 6.28. Do ye that which is good in the
sight of the Lord that you may prosper: Do you that which is good, and that you
may do chiefly with these two Instruments, a Praying Tongue, and a Relieving
Hand; for Charity and Prayer are the Swiftest Wings, on which the Soul can
mount to Heaven.

II. Prayer, is the Jewel of God's Ear, the Dialogue 'twixt Heaven and Earth;
the Tongue of Angels; the Souls Ambassador with God, which never with a
Faithful Hand, knocked at Heaven Gates and was sent Empty away; what though not
presently heard, it is but to double our Importunity? what though not
straightway granted, it is but to glorify our Patience? yet sometimes, I
confess, our Prayers like Exhalations drawn up here, may fall else where in
fruitful Showers, and may light on our posterity: but fervent Prayer never goes
uncrown'd, but is still heard in a proportion to our Welfare, though not always
answered according to our vain Desires.

II. Prayer is the Sole Phoenix of the Graces, from out the Ashes of whose
Spicy Nest, Revives a Bird of Paradise; this can make a Precious Arabian Bird
as Happy as her other Sister, and for stony hearts can give us Hearts of Flesh:
Ezekiel. 11.19. there is a kind of an omnipotence in Prayer, it locks and opens
Heaven, 1 Kings 18.5.7* it renews Societies 'twixt parted Souls and Bodies, 2
Kings 4.33. it blows down the Walls of Jericho, stays the Sun, and makes Fire
descend; it holds that Hand which holds all the World from striking a very
Sodom; GOD himself can do nothing till praying Lot is gone; Genesis 19.22. and
it is very remarkable in that Dialogue 'twixt GOD and Abraham, Genesis 18. how God
disisted not from Granting, till Abraham first left off Petitioning: and
therefore, as the Apostle wishes, Pray Continually, 1 These. 5.17. That is, at
constant times, of public and retired Devotions; or else continually by Good
Words or Works: for indeed no Circumstances can exclude Prayer, and besides,
every good Action is a kind of Supplication. Seek therefore by doing Good, and
that first by Prayer.

III. But because Prayer alone makes a Man but like a Bird with one Wing, or as
a Boat with one Oar, somewhat lame and imperfect to perform this Duty; for let
any Zeal make what noise it will, if spoke with the Tongue of Men and Angels,
yet without Charity, it is but a tinkling, not a well-tuned Cymbal: 1 Cor. 13.1.
Let therefore the praying Tongue say to the relieving Hand, as Ruth to Naomi,
Ruth. 1.16. Whether thou go, I will go; and where thou dwell, I will
dwell. Let Charity, I say, and Prayer, like Links of a golden Chain, depend on
one another, though like two Gloves, one lost, the other but of little use; yet
both together make themselves complete: For God, like Isaac, Genesis 27. will feel
the Hands, as well as hear the Voice of whom he blesses.

IV. Pliny in his History tells us of the Eagle, That she knows her young Ones
by their Eyes, their Perspicacy, and unless they can outface the Sun, she
rejects them as a Bastard Brood. But God knows his Children by their Hands,
their Liberality; and whom he finds, like Jeroboam, withered-handed,
close-fisted, he counts them but degenerate Sons, and will dis-inherit them of
his Heavenly Kingdom, yet will give them a Portion, I tremble to say where:
Cast then thy Bread upon the Waters; Eccles. 11.1. relieve the Needy, whose
Multitude and Weakness terms them so, and after many days, (for Heaven will
never forget it) thou shall find it: and that flowing to thee, like rich
Merchandise, with blessed increase: each one that shall crave an Alms, is an Arm
stretched out from God, who has another Hand as ready to reward, as that was to
receive; for who so has Mercy upon the Poor, lends to the Lord; Prove. 19.17.
and indeed, but lends to the best advantage, for the Lord will recompense
him. God puts us not to the expense of costly Sacrifices, should he, how cold
would his Altars lie! the Calves of our Lips, and Offerings of our Hands, are
now all he challenges; and therefore, to do good, and to distribute, forget
not: for these are the pleasing Sacrifices.

V. Part with some of that, which long you cannot keep, to gain that which you
can never lose: Make you friends of that unrighteous mammon, Luke 16.9.
Ethimius, tells us, God has given Men Riches, not as unto Treasurers, but
Stewards: Imitate then that wise One in the Gospel, for to every one it shall
be one Day said, Give an Account; and believe it, none shall make a better
Reckoning at the last great Audit, than the Charitable Person: For love
covers a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8. and this indeed the Judge himself
attestates, Mat. 25.30. Christ there describing his last general Sessions,
seems to take notice only of Works of Mercy; there is no mention of your
Frugality, Temperance, Diligence, or other Virtues; but Feeding, Clothing,
Visiting, and Ministering; these Christ names, and takes upon his own account,
You have done it unto me, and therefore re-pays them with Eternal Happiness,
Come you Blessed, etc. and Charity is the way unto that Kingdom, and Heavenly
City of the New Jerusalem that we seek, though not the worth of it. Seek
therefore by doing good, and that by Prayer and Charity.

VI. It follows next, That by Patience in suffering Evil we ought to seek: By
suffering, for thereunto are we called, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps:
and two ways likewise must we suffer; by Bearing, and Forbearing: in which two
Things, says Epictetus the sum of all Philosophy, and I may add, of almost all
Christianity consists: First, in forbearing Intemperance, all Luxurious Riot,
and Excess; it is both the Mother and the Nurse of Virtues. Hippocrates his
Aphorisms is true on both sides, That Diseases, both of Body and Mind, for the
most part, owe their original to fullness and redundant Humors; and indeed,
where Satan tempts one fasting, he tempts a thousand full, and therefore
abstinence is the best Cure of both. And oh how well had it been for their
Posterity, had but our first Parents been acquainted with this Virtue in
Paradise! then, for ought I know, they had still been there, and then I Am sure,
that same one Man's Meat, had not proved so all others Poison: but ever since
we took from that first Mother of ours, all our vicious longings, we likewise
hunger after Superfluities, and Forbidden Fruits, not contented with enough,
but are too indulgent to our wanton Genius.

VII. Intemperance brings not only Gray Hairs, but Green Years, with Sorrow to
the Grave! For how soon does immoderate Potions, like much Water on a little
Fire, extinguish natural Heat? and as soon do intemperately devoured Meats,
like much Fire a little Water, drink up the radical moisture? and here that
Judaism is seasonable, What need this wast? Wast of Food, Wast of Feeders? a
little contents Nature, but nothing satisfies Opinion: how fast does Luxury
consume the vital Lamp, oft-times so captivating the Body to Diseases, that
nothing can free it, but that general Remedy of all Maladies, an early Death:
So that the Intemperate are of the Number of David's Wicked Ones, that scarce
live out half their days, Psalm. 55.33. and however not by the Laws Politic,
yet by the Divine Statutes, each of these is by double Guilt his own
Self-murtherer.

VIII. Be not therefore like that Image of Intemperance, Sardanapa^^^, whose
effeminate Luxury bereft him of his Kingdom, least it bereave you of a better,
of the Kingdom of Glory: but rather imitate that Pattern of Abstinence, the
good Emperor Valentinus, who of all the Conquests, he had ever Won, though
many, yet on his Deathbed, said, he Gloried but of one; and being asked of
which; the greatest Victory, says he, that ever I got, was in Subduing that
greatest Enemy my own Flesh: I close this with St. Peter's dehortation, and in
his wooing Language: I beeech you brethren abstain from fleshly lusts which war
against the Soul* 1 Pet. 2.12. seek Patience by suffering, and that not only by
forbearing, but likewise by bearing Evil.

IX. Bearing Evil, first, Affliction is the Coat of a Christian, and the Cross
his Badge, and it is said to every one, as well as Constantine, under this
Banner thou shall overcome: are we not all Members of that Head which was
Crowned with Thorns! the parts then must look to Simpathize together with it;
for the Head enters not by one passage, and the Members by another; but all go
into Heaven at the same Strait Gate: the Red Sea is the way to Canaan, and
through many tribulations must we enter into that Kingdom, Acts. 14.22.
Affliction, like the Toad, has a precious Pearl in the Head, how ever it
appears ugly; no Affliction is for the present joyous, but our light
afflictions which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory: 2 Cor. 4.17.

X. Adversity is God's Knife, wherewith he spares not to Lance whom it
pleases him to Heal, and those, like precious Jems, are most beautiful after
Cutting: and though our Earthly Mother, this World, may perhaps for our
Affliction with Rachel, call us Ben-onies Sons of her Sorrow; yet God our
Heavenly Father, will one day for our patient Suffering, with Jacob, call us
Benjamins, Sons of his Right Hand; you may perhaps have heard of that Saying of
St. Austin, God had never but one Son, and that his only Son, without Sin, but
not without Affliction; no ^ot his beloved Son in whom he was so well pleased:
Mat. 3.17. indeed, the rather was he Afflicted for that he was beloved, seeing
he Chastneth whom he loves, and Scourges every Son whom he receives: Heb.
12.6.

XI. The Rod is the Badge of Filiation: and therefore St. Augustine notes in
God, a cruel Mercy, and a merciful Cruelty: the first, when he permits the
Wicked to prosper in this life, as it is Job 21.13. the wicked live, wax fat, and
grow in Wealth, says he, but what ensues, a sad Catastrophe, in a Moment they
go down to Hell; a while they flourish, says the Psalmist, like a green bay
Tree, but anon, when their Sins are Ripe, they are cut down like the Grass, and
wither like the green Herb: Psalm. 37 2. and this indeed is a cruel Mercy, no
marvel if the Prophet desired rather God's merciful Cruelty: Jer. 10.14.
Correct me, O Lord, yet with thy Judgment, not in thine Anger.

XII. The very Heathen could say, It Is better to have been afflicted, for
adverse fortune more profits man than smiling stars; and Job as well as David
had Experienced it: Blessed is the Man, says he, the Man, what Man think you,
the Man that is Clad in Purple, and fares deliciously every day? no, that is not
he: is it the Man whom the King will Honor, with the Ring, and Steed, and Royal
Robe? it is not he neither: what then, is it the Man that has caught this World
in a Purse-net, and by the Omnipotence of his Gold, Commands all the Felicities
that grow in Solomon's Walk under the Sun? no, none of all these, but Blessed
is the man whom God corrects: Job. 5.17.

XIII. To this purpose, St. Augustine feigns a Conference 'twixt God and
himself, God personating a Merchant, and himself a Chapman: says God, I have
merchandise to sell: what is it? says the Holy Father: why says God, the
kingdom of heaven: says St. Augustine, what is the price on it? for poverty, says
God, the richest Kingdom; for momentany affliction, Eternal Rest; and for
Reproach a Crown of Glory: since then our light afflictions which is but for a
moment, brings us a more excellent and eternal weight of Glory: Romans 8.18.
let us not refuse the Chastning of the Lord, but when he sends it, Patiently
suffer Evil: therefore seek by doing Good, do good by Charity and Prayer; and
seek by suffering Evil, and suffer by abstaining all Intemperance, and
sustaining all Afflictions: so run and you shall obtain, thus seek and you
shall find, the Continuing City that we look for: a Prospect of which I shall
give you in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. A Prospect of the Heavenly Jerusalem, which we are to seek;
Practically Considered.
This is an Object worthy all our Pains; and our best deservings undeserving
it: take but a glimpse of it, for we can do no more at present; here we see, as
in a glass but darkly: 1 Cor. 13.12. Consider it abstractly as a City, then as
a Concrete, one to come; first, you see, it is a City, not a Wilderness, as is
this World, where we are all in Pilgrimage to the Sepulcher: and behold here a
most exact Distinction 'twixt this same and the former City: the Worldly one's
built but of Clay and Stuble, the Work of Men's Hands, and those that make 'em
are like unto 'em, of a Frail dissolution: but this Celestial City is made by
him who made the Hands, whose Architecture is the Almighty, these Buildings
therefore are, John 14.2. the abiding Mansions, whereas those Earthly ones: 2
Cor. 5.1. are but Gourds, but Fleeting Tabernacles; you remember the other was
a City of Negatives, neither of Strength, Unity, Rest, nor Safety; this of all
affirmatives, where in are all those fixed as in their proper Sphere.

II. And first, it is a City of Strength, ask St. John else: Rev. 21.1. the
Foundation all of Gold, the Walls of Adamant, and its Twelve Gates of Pearl,
materials of the Strongest: yet Guarded with Innumerable Angels that excel in
Strength, Psalm. 103.20. Garrisoned with an Army of Martyrs, and Governed by the
Lord of Hosts, indeed there can want no Strength where dwells Omnipotence; here
then were that an oppertune Desire, who will lead me into this Strong City? and
that will do it, by diligent seeking, if thou pursuest it.

III. This too is a City of Unity, the King of Salem's Dwelling House; those
Stars are the Embroideries of Peaces Coat, and the Gay-beams of the Sun and
Moon, but the Bright Smiles of Love Triumphant; Heaven is the Place where
Charity was bred, Faith and Hope are low born Virtues to her, 1 Cor. 13.8. here
they begin, and here they end: but this greater Grace of Love and Unity,
(astray indeed on Earth) take up their Eternal Rest in Heaven, nay, there were
no Heaven without it: Concord here, ever Flows, and knows no ebb, springing
from the undivided Trinity, unto the Goodly Fellowship of the Prophets, and
Communion of all Saints, who shining all with the same Light of Glory, breath
all the same Incessant Hallelujahs: none envying each others Happiness, Vessels
all full though of several Sizes; none know either want or emulation this
Jerusalem is the City, at Unity with it self: Psalm. 122.3.

IV. Next, it is a City of Safety, you see, Strengthened beyond all Opposition,
and Seated above Short-armed Danger: no angry Storm can shake the Cedars of
this Lebanus, or blast the Ascenders of this Holy Mountain, here only may we
cry, Peace, Peace, all Safety dwelling here* no Enemies being left to interrupt
it, Sin and Sorrow, the Grave and Hell are all Conquered, by him who has
subdued all things: 1 Cor. 15.27. yet were the World let loose against them,
Christ's little Flock need fear no ill; for they are in such a Hand, as who
shall take them from him? John. 10.28. let the World totter into its first
Chaos, ruin should threaten them in vain, whom God makes dwell in Safety: Psalm.
4.8. this Canaan is full of secure Vines and Figg-trees; the Prophet Zachariah
means this City Sure; when he says, Men shall dwell in it, and there shall be
no more destruction, but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited: Zach. 14.11.

V. Lastly, all these speak Heaven a City of Rest, where there is such
Strength, Love, and Safety, needs must there be true Security: first, Heaven is
the Center of Souls, as the Earth is of Bodies, and only there they rest: there
indeed being contentation adequate to the Soul's Capacity, no further search,
no more desire, where as here, one corner of the Heart or other, still is
Empty: Heaven satisfies the hungry Soul with goodness: Psalm. 107.9. and yet
this Heavenly Rest is not to be taken, (as some Impious Spirits) only
privately, as a total Cessation from all Sacred Business, for in that Sense,
Saints have no rest in Heaven, never ceasing to fall down before the Throne,
says St. John, never silencing their Sacred Anthems to the King of Glory but
as Philosophy-says of the Spheres, this Holy Motion is their endless rest, in
respect of all molestations and wonted troubles, which this World showrs on
them; here they are said to rest, and so says the Spirit: Rev. 13.14. they rest
from their labors.

VI. And now could but divine Contemplation transport you with St. Paul, 2 Cor.
12.2. but snatched your Souls a while from out their Earthly Tenements, and
Elevate 'em to the Heaven we speak of! what glorious Objects not to be
revealed, should you there behold? there should you see Felicity walk hand in
hand with Eternity; and what this World can never show you, Glory attended on
by Safety: there is Light never Clouded, Health never Weakened, Pleasure unmixed
with Grief, or Beauty with Deformity, a Moon without her Spots, Wisdom
acquainted with no Error, and Life beyond the reach of Death.

VII. There shall you see the Eternal Eternally, one whom all shall love
without Satiety, and with unweariedness Praise him continually: there likewise
should your Ears with Equal Happiness Banquet themselves on the true
Celestial Melody, sweeter than that feigned of the Spheres, even of
Halilujah-singing Saints and Angels: there shall you find, as 'twere an happy
Marriage, a Conflux of all goodness united; so that there is nothing absent that
you could wish present, nor any thing present that you could wish absent; here
then with David we may lie down in Wonder, what glorious things are spoken of
thee thou City of God! Psalm. 87.3. and yet, like as to Sheba's Queen, not the
one half can be told you.

VIII. But yet this Happiness is too much for the present; in this Life
Pleasure is the shorter twin; and therefore as an exercise of our Hope and
Patience, we look for one to come: you see the industrious Husbandman Reaps not
presently, but with a costly Confidence, many Days, Weeks and Months, waits at
expectation's Gate; so must we, says St. James, chap. 5.7. look for this
precious Seed, and have long Patience for it; delay whets our desire, and
multiplieth our Estimation: yet may not violate the Rule of Patience, or
anticipate the call of Nature; like him that reading Plato's Book of the Souls
Immortality, made himself away to hasten it; but such make more have than good
Speed.

IX. Christians must wrap up David's Wish, and St. Paul's Desire, in Job's
Patience: Job. 14 14. all the days of my appointed time will I wait till my
change comes; and take the Apostle's Word for it, in due time we shall reap if
we faint not: Gal. 6.9. The Mariner too, that Man of hopes, the watery
Plough-man, you see, endures his Voyage er'e he gains his Freight, yet for the
most part, somewhat he receives beforehand, but his completed Payment, not
till he makes his utter port: so likewise in our passage to the true Elysium,
we patiently must cut through Winds and Waves, and not expect our entire Wages,
till our Course be finished.

X. Yet in the mean time, we are not without that Seal of the Spirit, 2 Cor.
1.22. the earnestness of our Hopes, the Co-assurance of God's Spirit with ours;
for we have here Heaven in the Blossom, the Fruit not till hereafter; here the
harmonious Feast of a good Conscience, which is Heaven inchoate, but for the
Consumation, we look for that to come: this one to come, intimates here, both
the certainty and duration of this supernatural City: the certainty, because it
bears the force of a Promise, and so it is, Heb. 11.16. for God has prepared
them a City, the Saints then sure enough shall have it, since he has prepared
it, all whose promises, are Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. and if his Word be not
enough we have his Oath, Psalm. 83.3. I have sworn by my Holiness, says he,
that I will not fail David for ever: Woe then, be to our infidelity, if we
believe not the Oath which he Swear in the House of his Servant David, that he
would give us; and indeed with faithless Man, what is to come may still be so,
but Promise-keeping is God's Attribute; for so the Prophet David describes him
by it, Psalm. 77.8. that he keeps his promise for ever.

XI. His Performance and his Promise differ not in Essence, if in Time, and
therefore as St. Paul exhorts, 1 Cor. 15.58. Brethren, be ye steadfast, and
unmovable, your hope being not in vain in the Lord: we look for a City to
come, and that shall come which we look for: I, and not only come, but ever
shall continue; the futurity, speaks the permanence, that while it is present,
it shall be still to come; this future knows not any Preter-perfect-tense,
Years eating up Days, Ages swallowing up* Years, Time loosing his never so much
past, yet never the less to come: not like our slender Joys here, no sooner
flowed to us (almost) but ebbing from us: but a Continuing City, Stored with
fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Evermore! more
perennious than the Gliding Stream, or Constant Sun: here the Sun may be one
day Darkened, and the Moon pay home her borrowed Light, the fixed Stars may
become Planets and wander headlong from their Spheres, whole Nature may so
forget her Office, that Heaven and Earth may pass away, but these Pleasures
like the Right Hand they wait on, remain for evermore: and this is our expected
City, whose Inhabitants, you will say, (by better title than they of Tarsus) may
be called Citizens of no mean City, Act 21.29

XII. And in this Royal City, the days brightness there it knows no light, no
nor ever fears the least Eclipse: whose cheerful and smiling Brow no Moving
Cloud o'recasts; nor tempestuous Storm molests the passage of its Rays: but
still shines on Serene and clear; and fills with splendors that Spacious City:
it needs not the declining luster of our Golden Sun; nor the borrowed Silver of
the Pale faced Moon: the Radient Sun that appears there is the Lamb, and the
Light that shines is the Glory of God: the Walls of this City are raised with
precious Stones, and every Gate is of one rich Pearl; the Mansions are built
with choicest Jewels, and the Streets are paved with transparent Gold: in the
midst of this City runs a pure Crystal River, perpetually flowing from the
Heavenly Throne; there all along those pleasant Banks deliciously grows, the
Tree of Life: healing all Wounds with its balmy Leaves, and making Immortal all
that but taste its Fruit.

XIII. Thus is the holy City, which we are too seek, Built; thus is the City of
the New Jerusalem Adorned: O thrice fortunate, and most glorious City! how free
and happy are thy blessed Inhabitants! every Head there wears a Royal Crown, and
every Hand a Palm of Victory: every Sparkling Eye o'reflows with Joy, and every
Silver Tongue with Psalms of Praise: there we shall dwell perpetually in the
view of God, and be filled for ever with the sweetness of his Presence; this is
that Celestial Sphere, whose Zodiac is Felicity, whose Constellations are
degrees of Glory, and whose Poles, are Joy and Eternity.

THE Second Branch, HOW To Fortify our Selves against THE Fears of DEATH.
CHAP. I. That if we dedicate our Lives to Christ, the advantage of Death will
be to our Selves.
THe Apostle tells us, Phil. 1.21. to me to live is Christ, and to dye is Gain.
First St. Paul lived, so do all Men, so do all Animals, what our Apostle says
of Bodies, I may of Life: there is a natural Body, and there is a spiritual
Body, 1 Cor. 15.44. so there is a Natural; and there is a Spiritual Life; this
is an hidden; but that a manifest Life; this an enclosure, but that a common;
it is common to Heathens with Christians, to Beasts with Men; the little Ant,
the crawling Worms have a share in Life as well as we; so that these may say as
well as St. Paul, to me to live; why should we be so much in love with, or dote
upon this Life, which we have no more Interest in, than the meanest living
Creature? indeed, it is a Mercy for which we ought to be thankful; it is a
Talent which we are to improve; but it is no Privilege wherein we should
glory, whereof we should boast, or wherewith we should be too much affected.

II. Secondly, as St. Paul lived, so he made account of dying: others live as
well as he, and he must dye as well as others; and as certainly as we live, we
must die: and Man is no less subject to perishing than the Beast; yea, the good
man has no more exemption than the bad; for so the Prophet asserts, Isa. 57.1.
The Righteous perishes: indeed the Apostle elsewhere calls Righteousness a
Breast Plate, Ephesians. 6.14. but it is not Death proof; and though it delivers in,
yet not from Death: it is true, Death is the wages of Sin, but still, it is
here the Lot of a Saint: perfect Innocence should not have known Mortality, but
Grace in the best is mixed with that Sin, which brings Death: Christ, (I
grant,) has taken away Death, but so as he has taken away Sin for the
present, only in part, not fully: Sin is taken away by Death, that is the Power
and Guilt of it.

III. And indeed, it is not without manifold Reason that divine Providence has
so ordered it: first that the Members may be conformable to their Head, and
that we may follow Christ, the same way of Death, in which he has gone before
us to Glory: secondly, that by pulling down of the Wall, the Moss may be fully
plucked out, and by the dissolution of the Body, its Infirmity and Frailty
wholly Purged away: thirdly, that the Power of God may appear the more Glorious
in Raising us up, after Death has laid us in the Grave and the Grave turned us
into Dust: fourthly, finally, that the Strength of our Faith might appear the
more in believing we shall live though we die: for these Reasons the Wise God
has appointed his own Children to Walk through the Valley of the Shadow of
Death.

IV. To carry it yet one Step further, and that in a few Words, it is no other
than St. Paul (who was not only a Christian, but an Apostle) who takes it for
granted, that he must die; neither the Word nor the Work of Righteousness can
secure from Death; for Prophets, Apostles, Ministers as well as others, are
Mortal, and must dye: indeed, they are, (according to our Savior's Metaphor)
the Lights of the World, but such as after a while may be blown out by a
violent, however must go out by a natural Death: Clouds they are from whom the
Rain of Instruction falls upon the People, but at length they themselves vanish
away: finally, Angels they are in Respect of their Office, but still they are
Men in regard of their Nature, and must die like Men: St. Paul himself hence
supposes it is a thing which sooner or later would befall him.

V. Now this blessed Pattern of the Apostle, might serve to shame us out of our
inordinate living to our Selves, and quicken us in our endeavor to live to
Christ; as Peter said in another case to Christ, John. 6.68. Lord, whither
should we go? thou have the Words of Eternal Life: let us say in this, Lord to
whom should we live? thou have Command of our Natural Life; yea, thou art the
Life of our Life, and Soul of our Soul: oh that all our Oil might empty it self
into this Golden Candlestick! that all our Water might run in this Channel, all
our Actions be levelled at this Mark CHRIST, and his Honor: for indeed, all he
did was in reference to us; he was born for us, lived for us, died for us, Rose
again for us, is Ascended, and Sits at God's Righthand, and shall at last
come again for us: why should not our Souls then wish to be with him? it is a
known saying, the Soul is not where it lives, but where it loves: and it is
no less true, whom the Soul loves, to him it will live: and it is by Faith
that Christ lives in us, and it is by Love that we live to Christ: let him be
the sole Object of thine Affections, and then he will be the chief end of thy
Actions.

VI. That Expression of the Spouse in the Canticles, my beloved is mine, and I
am his; Cant. 2.16. is very considerable to this purpose: my beloved is mine,
in that she expresses her Sense of Christ's Affection toward her: and I am
his, in that she insinuates her love toward Christ: and (which was the Fruit
of it) the Resignation of her self to Christ: excellently does St. Bernard
Illustrate these Words: he is mine, and I am his: he mine, because he is
merciful: I his, because I am not unthankful: he Conferreth on me, Grace for
Grace: I return him Praise for his Grace: he is for my Deliverance, I for his
Honor: he for my Salvation, I in Subjection to his Will. Thus it was with the
Spouse, and thus it will be with every Christian, who duly pondereth upon the
Mercy of Christ toward him, and has his Soul affected with Love and gratitude
to Christ. Now if there were not in us any Spark of Love to Christ, yet even
Self-love cannot but strongly oblige us to live to Christ, in as much as this
is the only Honorable, Profitable, and Pleasurable Life.

VII. No Life so honorable as this: all Actions are dignified, especially by
the End to which they tend; whence the more noble the Intention, the more noble
the Operation: and what Intention can be higher, or end nobler than the Glory
of Christ? this is that which by a strange Activity turns our Earthly into an
Heavenly, our Natural, into a Spiritual Life, which is the most excellent of
all Lives: to live to a Man's Lusts, debaseth his Life, and makes it no better
than Beastial; but to live to Christ, exalts it, and renders it no less than
Angelical.

VIII. Nor is no Life truly Profitable but this; the Way to live to our Selves,
is to live to Christ: whilst he has the Glory, we have the Benefit: and as his
Name is Advanced, so our Good is Advantaged: there is a strange Riddle, and a
seeming Contradiction in those Words of God by the Prophet Hos. 10.1 Ephraim is
an empty vine, and brings forth fruit: a Vine is then said to be Empty when
it is Fruitless, and can that which brings forth Fruit be said to be
Fruitless? but the next Words [to himself] unfolds the Riddle, and reconciles
the Contradiction, since the Fruit which is brought forth to our selves is no
Fruit: what one said of the day wherein he had done no good, I have lost a day:
that may we say in this case, that day and time of our Life is lost, wherein we
live not to Christ.

IX. Finally, this is the most Pleasurable Life, free from those Cares and
Fears, Distractions and Vexations, with which living to the World, and our
Lusts, is encumbred, full of those Joys and sweet Pleasures, and Delights
whereof all others are Ignorant: he that can say, to me to live is Christ, may
say, to me to live is peace of Consience, contentment of Mind, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost, in one Word, this is the only way to make both our Life
Comfortable; and our Death Gainful.

X. I shall now Conduct you into the Walk of the pleasant Field of Death's
Gain, where it will appear that Death is Gain to a Godly Man, and a Good
Christian; many are the Miseries under which we Groan in this Life; but, as St.
Ambrose says, Death is a Cure for 'em all: in this respect it is, that Seneca
says aptly, it is the cause of none, but the end of many evils: upon this
account it was, that Death has been, even by the Heathens, looked upon as an
Advantage: when those two famous Carpenters, Agamedes, and Trophonius, had
built a Temple for Apollo at Delphos, they begged of him a Reward, to whom this
Answer was given by the Oracle, that it should be Conferred on them within Nine
days; within which time they died: and when Cydippe begged of Juno a Boon for
her two Sons, Cleobis and Bito, she found them in the Morning dead in their
Beds, as if the Gods could not bestow a greater Benefit than Death, by which
Men are freed from the Calamities of Life.

XI. In this respect Seneca's Comparison is very fit, who resembles Death to
an Haven, into which when the Ship enters, she is past all the danger of Rocks,
Sands, Waves or Winds, to which she was Continually liable upon the Tumultuous
Seas: indeed Death is that which delivers our Bodies from Pains and Aches,
our Tears, and our Hearts from Sorrows: and in this respect St. John calls them
who die in the Lord, blessed, because they rest from their Labors, Revel.
14.16. to wit, all Labor both of Mind and Body with which here they are
oppressed.

XII. The Truth is, many are the Afflictions of all Men, so especially of the
Righteous in this Life: they are sure to meet with Persecution from Wicked Men,
for their Righteousness sake; as the Tree is beaten with Sticks for its Fruits
sake; yea, such is the rage of Persecutors, that they care not to what Sorrows,
of Hunger, Cold, Nakedness, Imprisonment, Banishment, and Want, they expose
them: besides, Almighty God is pleased to Chastise em; for whilst he lets
others alone in Sin, he exercises their Graces by Adversity, whilst others
enjoy Prosperity: but when Death comes, it sets them free from all, as being
the last Chastisement which God does inflict upon, and the last Mischief which
Wicked Men can do to the Godly.

XIII. Finally, so long as we continue in this World, the bur of Corruption
will cleave to us; but Death rids us of it: according to that of St. Paul, 6.7.
He that is dead is free from Sin: in this respect, Death is fitly called by St.
Ambrose, the Grave of our Sins; and by Gregory Nyssen, the Expurgation of
Wickedness, for till the Vessel be broken, the muddy Water of Corruption cannot
be wholly poured out: Consult the Experience of the Saints, and you shall find
them still Complaining of Spiritual Conflicts with their Corruptions: we are
besieged on every side, (as Saint Cyprian observes) and, oh how often is a
Breach made upon us! if Covetousness be knocked down, Lust rises up; if Lust
be quelled, Pride starteth forth; if Pride be subdued, Anger exasperateth; thus
are we forced to a continual struggling with our Sins: but when we die, the
Combat cease; and as for the present we are not under Sin; so then, we shall
be without Sin, or so much as the Motions of Sin.

CHAP. II. Of the Fears of Death, and how to Fortify our Selves against them:
Practically Considered.
DEath in all Men's Opinion is the King of Terrors, and the most formidablest
Enemy in the World to humane Nature, now all Grief arises from Love and
Self-interest, and naturally Men fear Death, because it puts a period to that
Life, which Indulgent Love, and Weak Nature would preserve: Christians were
wont to assume that Courage, that no Fear possessed 'em, but that of Sin: they
could Expostulate with the Law, and say, thou have no power over me, for God
the Father has sent his beloved Son to Redeem me from the Captivity of thy
Bondage, and therefore thy Terrors and Accusations, are all in vain: for this
Expedient I have, I will creep into the hole in my Saviors Side: there will I
hide my self from all my Foes, and plunge my Conscience in his bleeding Wounds,
and by Virtue of his bitter Death, Victorious Resurrection, and Glorious
Ascension shall I gain the Conquest.

II. Why should we then thus be surrrounded with Fears, and permit Death's
Terrors thus to affright us? seems it so hard a task to Walk the Path, which
all our Ancestors have Trod before us? Adam the first of all Mankind, and
Righteous Noah that feared the Almighty: Abraham the Father of the Faithful,
and Friend of God, and Moses the Servant of the Lord: David the Man after God's
own Heart, and Solomon the Wisest King that ever Swayed the Scepter: all these
have Justly paid their Debt to nature, and subcribed to the Law of universal
Mortality: Nay, Jesus himself, the blessed Savior of the World, has expired on
the Accursed Cross of Eternal Shame; and went to his Transcendant Glory through
the Gates of Death.

III. And Now shall our Childish and fond Self-love so blindly flatter us; as
to wish an Exception from this regular and general Rule? shall we be still
murmuring and repining, when our Life is but a Bubble, a Vapor, nay, but, a
Span, and still exposed to innumerable Sorrows and Afflictions? does not the
very shortness mitigate and abate its Miseries? and does not those many
Miseries highly applaud its shortness? should we not rather be glad and rejoye
at the approach of Death, that when ever it comes it proves so advantageous to
us? if in our Aged Years, it is a Haven of Repose; and ought to be kindly
Entertained after so long, and tedious a Voyage: if Death appears in our
Infancy and Youth, it prevents a Thousand Calamities, and numberless Dangers of
ruining our Souls: if by an ordinary fit of Sickness, it is according to the
Course of Nature; if by any disaster or outward Violence, it is always the will
of Heaven: what occasion have we then to dread or fear, how many Darts Death
has in his Quiver, when we are sure he can throw but one at us.

IV. Therefore to depart this World is an act to be done but once; and that
once well done, we are happy for ever: we must needs confess the Decrees of the
Almighty are always Just; and that it is only our selves are the cause of all
our Miseries; for no sooner are we Born but we begin to Sin, we Sacrifice our
minority and Youth to Vain Sports and Follies; and our Riper Years to Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Lust, and Pride: we spend our Old Age in Politic Craft and Greedy
Avarice; and begin not to live till we are ready for the Grave: then indeed we
lament the shortness of our time; when we have our selves like Spend thrifts
thrown it all so Prodigally away: for when we have lived, and led a loose and
negligent Life, we then Complain Death seizes on us unawares: we find fault
that perhaps our days are too few to grow Rich; or to satisfy the Ambition of
a haughty Spirit: but did we strive to be Taught the Love of God, and to
immitate the meek and humble Life of the Blessed Jesus: it would require not so
much the number of Years; as the faithful endeavors and utmost diligence of a
Pious Mind: could we but bestow, on the improvement of our Immortal Souls, the
time we so vainly trifle away on our Frail Bodies; our day would be short
enough and not seem tedious; and long enough to finish our appointed Task.

V. Then what shall we but say to our Souls! that our only business here, is
but like unto the Wise Virgins; to Trim our Lamps, and to wait the coming of
the Bridegroom? but to sow the Immortal Seed of a never failing Hope; and
expect hereafter to reap a due Increase: it is insignificant, how late in the
Year the Fruit be gathered; if still it improve in growing better: no matter
how soon it falls from the laden Tree; if a Stormy Wind blow it not down before
it proves Ripe: let us then Contemplate, on God's most Just and Secret
providence; who governs all things by the Counsel of his Divine Will whose
powerful Hand can Wound and Heal; lead down to the Grave of Silence, and bring
back again: let us be ever ready, to him to bow our Heads, and freely submit to
him our dearest Concerns: let us say unto him, Lord, strike as Thou please
our Health, or Lives, we cannot be safer than at thy disposal: only these few,
but earnest Requests we humbly make; which, O may thy Clemency Vouchsafe to
hear! Cut us not off in the midst of our Sins and Folly; nor suffer us to
Expire with our Sins unpardoned: but make us, Lord, first fit, and ready for
Heaven; and then take us to thy self in thy own due time: for it is not for us,
O Lord, to choose our own Conditions; but to manage well what thou have
appointed.

VI. It is true, Death bereaveth us of a Mortal and Transitory Life, but it is
an inlet to an Immortal and Everlasting Life; it despoileth us of our Worldly
possessions; I, but it puts us in possession of our Heavenly Inheritance, it
takes us from the Society of our bosom Friends and Neighbors: I, but it
sends us to Abraham's Bosom, and makes way for our Society with Christ:
finally, it severs the Soul from the Body; I, but it unites the Soul to God:
what is it for the Candle to be put out, whilst we enjoy the light of the Sun?
for the standing Pools to be dry, so long as we may drink at the Fountain? for
our Earthly Comforts to be taken from us, when Heavenly Joys are Conferred on
us? the truth is, Death is not a privation, but a permutation: so Holy Job
calls it a Change: Job 14.14. and that a Blessed Exchange, of a Cottage for a
Palace, a Wilderness for a Paradise, a House of Bondage for a Place of Liberty,
of Brass for Gold, Pebles for Pearls, Earth for Heaven.

VII. But let the advantages of Death mitigate the Fears which is apt to arise
in us from the apprehensions of it; when Abigall told Nabal the threatening
Words of David; the Text says, 1 Samuel 25.27. his heart died within him, and
became as a Stone. thus is it with the most of us, when any Summons of Death is
given: nay, not only with the most, but even sometimes with the best: Christ
comes to the Disciples on the Sea, to preserve them from the Storm, and they
are Troubled; Death comes to deliver us from all evil, and we exceedingly
Tremble: indeed the reason is, because we Consider not that Death is a
deliverance, and an advantage to us: what Chrysologus says of Martyrs, is true
of all Good Men, Their death is a birth and end a beginning, they live by being
killed, and whilst they are thought to be extinguished on Earth, they shine in
Heaven; and surely were this well pondered by us, we would not seek Consolation
against Death, but Death it self would be our Consolation: those Words of Job,
chap. 16.14. I have said to Corruption thou art my Father; to the Worm thou art
my Mother and Sister, are not unfitly allegorized by Origin to this purpose; as
if he therefore called Corruption and Worms his Father and Mother, because as
Parents are comforters to their Children, so were they to him.

VIII. It is true the Separation of Soul and Body is Terrible, and a natural
Fear of it cannot but be in all; I but it is as true in respect of the Godly,
that when this Separation is made, the Soul is set at Liberty, and rejoices,
yea, the Body is at rest, and knows no Trouble; and is such a Separation to
be feared? this Life, what is it but a going to Death? and Death what is it but
a going to Life? little cause there is then sure, why we should either too much
Love the one, or Fear the other: shall that be the Object of our Fear, says
Tertullian, Which freeth us from what ever is to be feared? and this we have
from the Mouth of a Roman, I would not be Young again though God would grant it
me, and he gives this Reason, because when I die I shall go from my Inn to my
home.

I. It is not Death it self, but our mis-apprehension of Death is terrible to
us; says St. Ambrose: Did we look through, beyond Death, at the happiness which
follows, it would not be dreadful but Amiable in our Eyes, and with the
Apostle we would not Fear, but desire to depart: that of the Wise Man, Prove.
14.32. the Righteous has hope in his death, the Caldee reads, the Righteous
hops he shall dye; so far is a Good Man, from fearing of that he hops for,
his dissolution; and though he dare not rashly hasten, yet he willingly
entertaineth it, whenever sent by the Almighty to him.

X. Now if a good Life preceed, an happy Death cannot but follow; nor is it
probable, a happy Death should be the Consequent, if a religious Life has not
been the Antecedent: some there are, who would invert these Words of the
Apostle, Phil. 1.21. To me to live is Christ, but to die is Gain: and make Gain
the predicate of the former; and Christ of the latter; thus does every Covetous
man say, To me to live is Gain, and to dye is Christ; Vain Men who will have
Gold to be their God, and yet Christ to be their Redeemer, they will serve
Mammon whilst they live, and yet be saved by a Savior when they dye; but it
will be Just with Christ to say to all such Mammonists, in these Words of God
to the Israelites, in the day of their distress, Go to the Gods which you have
Served, the Gain which you have lived to, and let that deliver you in this hour
of your Death.

XI. Others there are who would severe these Clauses, whilst they would gladly
say, To dye is Gain, but not to live is Christ: one was asked, whether he had
rather be Croesus or Socrates, his answer was, he would be rich Croesus in his
Life, and good Socrates at his Death; you know whose Prayer it was, Numb.
23.10. Let me dye the death of the Righteous, and let my last end be like his;
and it is that no doubt which many wish and desire; nay hope, who yet regards
not to live, the Life of the Righteous, and that their Course to that end may
be like his: but what a Folly, nay Madness is it, for Men to expect to Reap
that they do not Sow? to Sow to the Flesh, and to the World, and yet Reap by
Christ the Gain of everlasting Life after Death? as therefore we expect the
one, let us endeavor the other; and if Gain by Death be our Hope, let living
to Christ be our practice,

XII. So that this Scripture thus Considered, does plainly put a difference
between the Precious and the Vile, the Godly and the Wicked; whilst to these
who live to themselves Death is a loss; but to those that live to Christ, it is
a Gain: Adrian was wont to say, that Death is the Rich Man's fear, and the Poor
Man's desire: and this I may well apply here, Death either is, or may be the
bad Man's fear, but the good Man's wish, or to use St. Ambrose his Expression;
it is an Haven to the Just, but a Shipwreck to the Guilty; to the Good, a Bed
of Repose, but to the Wicked a Rack of Torture; The Man who lives to the
World, says to Death, as Ahab to Elijah. 1 Kings 21.20. Have thou found me oh
mine Enemy! but he who lives to Christ, may say to it as David of Ahimaz. 2 Samuel 18.27. it comes with good tidings.

XIII. And now would you on the one hand see the reason why you are so fearful
of Death? it is because your Consciences accuse you, that you have not lived as
becomes Christ's Disciples; and so you may thank your own Guilty Consciences
for those fears of Death: it was not without reason, that St. Paul says, 1
Cor. 15.56. The sting of death is Sin; since Death is only venomous and deadly
to them who live in Sin: on the other hand, would you see the way to a joyful
End? would you have Comfort in, and Gain after Death? Oh let it be your Study
to live to Christ: it is our Savior's Counsel to his Disciples, Mat. 6.25.
Take no thought for your life, let me alter it a little, take no thought for
your death, but for your Life, let your Care be to advance Christ in your
lives, and it will be his Care to Confer the Gain of Glory and Immortality upon
you at your Death.

XIV. Lastly, I shall earnestly beseech you in those Words of our Savior to
his Disciples, I say unto you all Watch; indeed, when we see many falling in
their full Strength, and snatched away in the prime of their days, have we not
reason to Watch? and Watching to prepare for the Hour of our Death: let it then
be the Care of us all whilst we live, to live to the Glory of our Creator,
every one of us in our Station, Consecrating our selves to, and Employing our
Talents in his Service, and for his Glory; and whenever that time shall
approach, whether sooner or later, to any of us; we may like good Stewards give
up our Accounts with Joy and not with Grief; and receive that happy
Commendation of Well done goood and faithful Servants, enter into the Joy of
thy Lord.

XV. It was reasonable Advice, and a proper Instrument of Virtue, which
Pythagoras taught his Scholars: Let not Sleep seize upon the Regions of your
Senses, before you have three times recalled the Conversation, and Accidents of
the day: Examine what you have Committed against the Divine Law, what you have
Omitted of your Duty, and what Use you have made of the Divine Grace to the
purposes of Virtue and Religion; joining the Judge Reason, to the Legislative
Mind or Conscience, that God may Reign there as a Lawgiver and a Judge: then
Christ's Kingdom is set up in our Hearts: then we always live in the Eye of our
Judge, and live by the Measures of Reason, Religion, and Sober Counsels.

THE Third Branch.
CHAP. I. Containing Spiritual Remedies against immoderate Grief for the Loss
of Relations and Friends: Practically considered.
SAint CYPRIAN affords us these two Golden sayings: That we should not too much
bewail the departure of our dearest Relations, and when the day of our
Dissolution does approach, that we readily and cheerfully Obey God's Call. Let
the Comfort then, which Death brings, moderate our Sorrow for our Friends who
Sleep in Jesus: why should we be troubled for them who are at Rest? and sit
down in Sorrow for them who are entered into Joy? why are we Clad in Black for
them who Walk in White? and so many Tears flow from our Eyes for them, who have
all Tears wiped away from theirs? It is Storied of the Thracians, that they
mourn at the Birth, and rejoice at the Death of their Friends: nor was it
without Reason, that they should account those fit to be bewailed, who are
launching forth into the Tempestuous Sea of this World, and attend them with
Joy who are got into the Harbor of Rest.

II. We read concerning Lazarus, that Christ Rejoiced when he was dead, but
Wept being to raise him to Life: and Chrysologus his Note is very apt to our
present purpose; Christ bewaileth not the losing, but restoring of his Life:
according to which the Greek Fathers make the Reason of our Savior's Tears to
be, that he should now call him back to a miserable Life: indeed as St. Hierom
says concerning Nepotian, we may say of every one who departs in Christ, We
are not so much to condole his loss of this Life, as to Congratulate his
deliverance from the miseries of this Life.

III. Thou will say perhaps, it is my Friend, my dearly beloved Friend who is
dead, and can I choose but Mourn? But, is he thy Friend, and do thou envy him
his Happiness? do thou dearly Love him and yet grieve at his Welfare? he is
thy Friend, and Death is his Benefit: and shall the Benefit of another,
especially of thy Friend be thy Sorrow? I, but he is snatched from my Arms, and
I have a great Loss in his departure, and that is my Trouble: True, this nature
prompteth to, that we should be sensible of our own Loss; yea, Grace requires
that we should be sensible of such a Loss, as it is a Cross inflicted upon us
by divine Providence.

IV. Thus Patient Job, Chap. 1.20. When the News came to him of his Childrens
Death, Shaved his Head, and rent his Mantle: Signs of that Sorrow, which
natural affection put him upon; yea, he fell down upon the ground and
Worshipped: Signs, that in his Sorrow he looked higher, at the Hand of God
which had done it: but, as with one Eye we look on our Loss, and Weep; so with
another Eye we must look on their Profit, and Rejoice; as it is a Chastisement,
we must be affected with Sorrow; and as a Mercy to them we must express our
Joy: and thus, whilst we mingle these affections together, our Sorrow will not
be Exorbitant.

V. Indeed, when any die, to whom we have reason to fear, Death is the
beginning of Sorrow; and there is sad Cause of bitter Mourning: but not for
them who die in the Lord: David justly bewailed dead Absalom, because he died
in his Rebellion, and therefore despaired of his Bliss; but when the other
Child died, he dries his Eyes, as not doubting its Happiness: they indeed
cannot sufficiently be lamented at their Death, who dying in their Sins, drop
into Hell; not they who are carried into those heavenly Mansions; says Isidore
Excellently.

VI. Let not, I beseech you, immoderate Grief too much overwhelm you; but when
you have shed your solemn Tears, and paid your due Sighs to the memory of your
Friends then wipe ^our Eyes with the Comfort of Hope; and change your Grief
into a Charitable Joy: Remember the Friends you Mourn for, are delivered from
the Miseries of this Sinful World, and all the Miseries you so Justly deplore:
their Frail Bodies Tremble no more with a shaking Palsy, nor Burn with the
violent Flames of a scorching Fever, they cry out, and lament no more for want
of Sleep; nor tumble and roll up and down their uneasy Beds: but quietly rest
in the silent Grave; till they rise again to Immortal Glory: which while their
Bodies there expect in Peace; their Souls are enlarged to a spacious Liberty:
no longer are they Confined to this Prison of the Body; but gone to dwell in
the Region of Spirits; they are no longer exposed to these Stormy Seas; but are
gladly arrived at their safe Harbor.

VII. Comfort your selves, with this firm belief, that they are not lost, but
gone before us: that the living Body which thou now sowest with Tears shall
rise again with Joy a Glorified Creature: that we shall meet in Heaven and
never part again, and that with greater advantage of Love and Perfection: the
most perfect Secular Amity has some bitterness, because the best has some
imperfection: but there shall be no Animosity in Friends to disturb each other,
because no Sin, nor imperfection: Now indeed if we are Confident of such a
Resurrection, Why should we bewail the Dead? Why too much, if we believe they
are not lost? Why should we impatiently take it, that they are withdrawn for a
time, whom we believe returning to Eternity? why should we immoderately grieve
that our Friends go before us, seeing we must quickly follow after?

VIII. Moderate weeping is most highly Commended, for it expresses a natural
affection we had to the departed, but with a Christian-like Moderation of our
Grief, whereby our Faith to Godward is demonstrated: and the reason is
manifest; for they rest from their Labors, and their Works follows them: why
should we then weep, since they are received into the Throne of Bliss, and are
made partakers of Eternity? and St. Cyprian says, those that depart in the
Faith of Christ, they are sent before us, not lost from us: they shall receive
Immortality, and be Heirs of Christ's Kingdom: again, they who attain to the
Glory of God's Kingdom, are to be thought Happy, and in Joy, not in Sorrow,
Vexation, or Woe; and therefore not to be grieved for, in that they are
departed from us; for of necessity it is, we must either depart from them, or
they from us.

IX. Thrice happy were we, if we were received into that Joy, that Glory, that
Eternity, whereof the Saints in Christ's Kingdom are Partakers: a Glory
Distinguished, but a Joy Communicate; O admirable Mystery! O ineffable Mercy! A
Mystery only to those Revealed, whom he in his Mercy has reserved to be
Inheritors in the Covenant of Peace, established by his Promise, Confirmed by
his Power, and Conferred on his Elect Israelites, Glorified by a Savior in the
highest Heaven, even where Cherubims, and Seraphims make Melody and Solace, to
the Blessed Trinity.

X. Touching the Inconvenience of immoderate Sorrow, St. Paul, 1 These. 4.13.
gives us an Exhortation, I would not brethren have you ignorant, concerning
them which are a sleep, that ye sorrow not even as them which have no hope:
whence it appears, that excessive and immoderate Sorrow, implies a diffidence
or distrust we have of our Soul's Immortality, Resurrection, and Glorification,
whereby we seem to derogate from that Written Verity, who said; Verily, verily,
I say unto you, the hour shall come, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it shall live: John. 5.25.

XI. But many Carnal Men there be, whose Spiritual Eyes are dazzled, or rather
blemished, with Terrestial Objects, and can extend their Intellectual Sight, no
farther than the exterior Object of Sense guides 'em: and these like
Nicodemus, will not scruple to enquire, How can a Man be born again which is
Old? can he enter into his Mother's Womb again and be born? Little do these
consider how, nor know they how there happens Children by procreation, and
regeneration: of which sort might Rachel seem to be, who wept for her Children,
and would not be Comforted, because they were not: so strangely does the
violence of Passion transport these, as they become Stupid and Senseless in the
deprival of a Friend.

XII. To Conclude I wish every immoderate and dispassionate Mourner to Reflect
on these two Considerations: First, To Conceive the Matter or Composition
whereof he was made, for whom he mourns: Secondly, The necessity of his
dissolution; being enjoined by that universal Doom, which cannot be repealed,
to return to that Mould from whence he had his beginning: as to the first, for
his Composition; thou shall find the Matter whereof he was made, Vile, Sordid,
and Contemptible, where that Beauty wherein Consisted the eminent part of his
Luster, is but Earth, which we make our inferior Center; yea, though he were
by Birth in the highest Rank of Descent, yet the Matter whereof he was Composed
is but equal with the obscurest Vassal.

XIII. As to the latter, namely, his Dissolution; as the time is dubious to all
Men, so is the necessity of the Doom not to be avoided: it was the Pagans
Maxim, Earth must to Earth, and it is Pittacus saying; That the Immortal Gods
themselves could not Struggle against Necessity: seeing then the Frailty of his
Composition, the Necessity of Dissolution, have recourse to him in the depth of
thy Affliction, who will infuse into thy Tear-distilling Wounds the Balm of his
Consolation: acknowledge thou thy Infirmities with the Publican, and he will
act the Faithful Samaritan; restrain thy too tender Affection, as one that is
believing; so shall not the Death of thy Happy departed Friend grieve thee, but
by the Wings of Faith Transport thee from Earth to Heaven; Translate thee as a
Faithful Bezalie, from Idolatrous Babel; to Zealous Bethel, from Edom to Eden;
from the Tents of Kedar to the Habitations of Moloc, to those Princely Cedars
of Lebanon, from Marah the Water of Bitterness, to Bethesda the Pool of Solace:
Finally from this Exile of Tears and Misery, to the Siloam of Joy and Eteral
Glory, there to receive That Crown of Life which the Lord has promised to them
that love him

The Close.
TO Sum up this Duty of being ready prepared for Death; we must reflect with
Sorrow and hatred upon Sin the true Cause of Man's Vanity: Man in his first
Estate was altogether Excellency; God saw every thing that he made, and behold
it was good, Genesis 1-31. Surely this was much more true of Man the Masterpiece
of the Creation, not Vanity, but Divinity was his Nature; he was not Envelop'd
with Rags of Frailty, but Enobled with Robes of Innocence; nor did he walk in a
Vain Show, but a Sacred Representation of God himself.

II. And now if you would know how this Flower was Blasted, it was by the
Breath of the Basilisk; how this Image was defaced, it was by the Poison of the
Serpent; how Man became Vanity, it was by reason of Iniquity: this Verifies
that saying of the Wiseman, Prove. 28. He that sows iniquity shall reap
Vanity.

III. Let us provide then for our selves another, a better Estate, than the
best which this World affords, an Estate of Glory in the Heavens; Man's best
Estate on Earth is Mutable, but that is Durable; Empty, but that is Satisfying;
Uncertain, but that is Sure; only for term of Years, but that is for Eternity.

IV. That we may be ready prepared to meet this certain Herald of the Grave;
let us carefully provide for that Hour, and set our House in order, take leave
of our best Relations and Friends, and support our selves with the Comfortable
Hopes of Immortal Life and a Glorious Resurrection; and that Death come not
upon us unawares, let us always observe what Christ did instruct his Disciples,
Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day, nor the hour, wherein the Son of
Man comes.

V. That Person has not well Conned over his Lesson of Happiness, that is
loath to go to it, though it be through a dead Sea; nor can he be Justly
thought desirous of Heaven; who is unwilling to shake Hands with Earth: it was
justly said to that Lame Beggar, who refused the offer of his Prince to take
him into his Coach, Thou well deservest to stick in the Mire: and surely it is
but fit that they should live and lie in Sorrow, who are unwilling that Christ
should take them up to himself.

VI. Let Peace and Tranquillity of Mind be our Continual Study; and therefore
in whatsoever State we are here, let us learn to be Content, be it never so
mean, so as not to repine; and let us not be Content, be it never so high, so
as to rest satisfied; and whether our Estate in this World be high or low, let
the first and best of our desires and endeavors be after that Estate which is
not a Shadow, but a Substance; not a Lease but an Inheritance; not Vanity, but
Felicity, and shall be far more in the Fruition, than it is in the Expectation.

VII. Are our Friends for the present in a flourishing Estate? Take we heed how
we Launch out either our Hopes, or Love too much toward them, considering that
they are but Vanity, and therefore our Hope which is placed on them will end in
Shame, and our Love in Vexation.

VIII. Why so big with Expectation of Advantage or Advancement from thy Rich
Ally, Honorable Lord, Potent Friend? Alas, thou do but set thy Foot upon the
Water, which cannot bear thee: why so inflamed with Affection to thy beautiful
Wife, Child, or near Relation? Alas thou do but embrace a Shadow in thine
Arms, which cannot, nor must not stay long with thee: but set thy Affections on
Heaven; to the possession whereof he will bring us, who has purchased it for
us.

IX. Now because Death daily attends us, let us wait for it, and consider well
these Four things: First, Whence thou came: now, this thou art told, That
Sinners begat thee in Sin; and miserable Wretches brought thee into this Vale
of Misery: So that thy Conception was Sin, thy Birth Misery, thy Life a
Punishment, and thy Death a Torment; and the longer thy Life is, the more Sin
thou will have to answer for. But perhaps thou will say, To what end is this
humane Life lent thee? Why, only to gain a Heavenly Life; and this is all
Divine Love aims at: that thy Life may seem shorter, and thy Labor less.

X. Secondly, Consider whether thou go; thy Life, which like a Flower is
subject to fade and decay, tells thee, That thou art in a passing State: but
let it rejoice thee to think, that thou go to thy Fathers; and be comforted
in this hope, thou shall be buried in a good old Age: therefore, let it not
trouble thee to live, nor affright thee to Dye; but live in Patience, and dye
in Desire: though thou do here for a while bewail thy Sorrow, thou will at
length forget thy Banishment, and return to thy own Country.

XI. Thirdly, to express what thou art, what Language can that unfold? Dust,
and Air, this thou know; and to Dust thou shall return, that is certain: Man
is a sickly, diseased, empty thing, and every Man shall be turned into nothing.
This none can plead ignorance in; for our Metal is a moist Humor, and the
Mould no better, in an unclean Womb; condemned sooner than born, that is our
condition: our best Stock is the Seed of Abraham; and with Job, we say to
Corruption, thou art our Mother; and to the Worms, thou art our Brethren and
Sisters: these are our great Kindred; our dwelling is amongst Insects, our
quantity vile, our weight lighther then Vanity, our worth, nothing. What then
is our being? a Dream and Sorrow.

XII. Fourthly, Consider what thou shall be; thou know what thou art, and
therefore do know thy self not to be; but yet thou do desire both to be,
and to know what thou art; for to see God, and to live with him, is to enjoy
him: and this is eternal Safety, and secure Eternity: this may be admired,
though hardly understood; yet better understood, then can be expressed:
therefore to thy Soul say, O Soul, that art ennobled with the Image of God,
adorned with his likeness, espouto him by Faith, redeemed by his Blood, endowed
with his Spirit, ranked with his Angels, What have thou to do with Flesh? but
to contemplate on that brightness, that sweetness, and pleasure, which
remains for thee in that Vision, where thou shall behold Christ Face to Face
for evermore.

THE TABLE.
THe Introduction. Page. 1 Chap. I. Several Notions of Death, what it is, its
Author, Name and Nature. 6 Chap. II. That Death, has no respect of Persons;
but we are continual dying whilst we live. 10 Chap. III. The Certainty of Death
Practically Considered. 14 Chap. IV. Several Motives to remember Death
Practically Considered. 17 Chap. V. Of Sin, the means of Death, of Sickness,
Youth, and Old Age. 26 Chap. VI. Several forerunners of Death, which may Warn
Men to prepare for it, Practically Considered. 37 Chap. VII. Of the Separation
of Soul and Body, with other Memorials of Mortality, Practically Considered. 46
Chap. VIII. Eternal Life Described and Practically Considered. 57. Chap. IX.
The Christian's Map of the World wherein the Vanity of it is shown in the
shortness of Man's Life, and that this World is not a Place of long
Continuance: Considered Practically. 68 Chap. X. That Man himself is Frail, and
is no Continuing City, or has any Duration here; Practically Considered, and
Emblematically Discussed. 78 Chap. XI That there is nothing in this World,
Worthy of taking off our Affections from Heavenly things* Practically
Considered 89 Chap. XII. Several Instrumental means to be used in the seeking
and attaining of a Heavenly Kingdom; Practically Considered. 101 Chap. XIII. A
Prospect of the Heavenly Jerusalem, which we are to seek; Practically
Considered 113
The Second Branch. How to Fortify our Selves against the Fears of Death.
CHap. I. That if we dedicate our Lives to Christ, the Advantage of Death will
be to our Selves 125 Chap. II. Of the Fears of Death, and how to Fortify our
Selves against them Practically Considered. 136
The Third Branch.
CHap. I. Containing Spiritual Remedies against Immoderate Grief for the Loss
of Relations and Friends: Practically Considered. 150 The Close. 160
FINIS.

