REFLECTIONS Upon the BOOKS OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE To Establish the TRUTH OF THE
CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

In Two Volumes.

Volume I.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

IMPRIMATUR.

Liber cui Titulus est, Reflections upon the Books of the Holy Scriptures, etc.
in II. Vol.

The 12th. of January. 1687/8. H. Maurice Rmo. in Christo P.D. Willielmo
Archiep. Cant. a Sacris.

TO THE KING.
Great SIR,
THe gracious acceptance which your Majesty was pleased to allow the first
Volume of my Reflections upon the Holy Scriptures to establish the Truth of the
Christian Religion, encouraged and almost necessitated me to the further
presumption of laying these two Volumes at this time at your Majesty's Feet.
Your Majesty did me the honor to say, That you were pleased to see Divines
apply themselves to the clearing of Subjects so important. And after this
Judgment given by so great a Prince, which is so evident a Demonstration of
your Zeal for the Fundamental Truths of the Christian Religion, it had been
unpardonable in me not to have gone on with the Work; and I had Reason then to
Consecrate it wholly to your Majesty, who I was assured would approve of my
Intentions, and for that Reason would pardon the Imperfections of the
Performance. As your Majesty continues still to give such illustrious Instances
of your Clemency and Royal Protection to those of our Nation, so, I confess,
Sir, I thought my self under an Obligation to lay hold upon this Opportunity of
publishing what all those who find so sure a Protection in your Majesty's
Dominions, feel and think as much as my self upon these new Testimonies of your
Royal Bounty: When your Majesty had taken us into your particular care, and had
granted us several Privileges, and so made us sharers in all the Advantages,
which those who live under your Government enjoy, your Majesty did yet
something more, and inspired all your Subjects with the same compassion toward
us with which your Royal Breast was already touched. You saw our miseries, and
resolved to give us ease, and this generous Design was executed, and your Royal
Clemency diffused in the hearts of all your Subjects. The whole World, Sir,
which has received upon all its Coasts some Remainders of our Shipwreck, is
filled with admiration of the unexampled effects of your Majesty's Clemency.
There is no place so barbarous, whither the renown of that mercy which has been
so gloriously extended toward us, has not been carried: and the remembrance
will be ever dear to the remotest Ages of Posterity. We must Sir, be wholly
insensible if we had not all of us the highest sense of so great a Bounty; and
we should justly appear to the whole World to be unworthy of this your
Majesty's Paternal care, if notwithstanding that low condition to which we are
now reduced, we should not prostrate our selves before your August Throne with
the humblest demonstrations of Thankfulness. When God showers down the greatest
Blessings upon Mankind, he requires this just Tribute, which is also their
greatest honor, by opening to them an access unto the Throne of Glory. And
this sacred Pattern we crave leave to follow, when we solemnly pay the like
Tribute to your Majesty, who can receive nothing from us again, that can answer
the greatness, or the number of those Favors which have so very much exceeded
all our desires. I could wish, Sir, that this Work which I now present to your
Majesty, might be so haypy as to pass to Posterity with this Character of our
acknowledgment, and that it might stand as a faithful Record for ever, to
perpetuate the memory of that lively sense of your Bounty, which is imprinted
on all our hearts: If this could be hoped for, it must be wholly owing to your
Majesty's glorious Name, which latest Ages will receive with Reverence. But,
Sir, though I dare not hope that these Reflections can obtain that honor, yet our
Age at least may see, that they bear these public Marks of Gratitude for all
your Majesty's Royal Favors. This, Sir, is my sole aim in the Dedication of
this Work to your Majesty; and may your Sacred Majesty be pleased to approve of
these poor Testimonies of our Thankfulness in general, and to look upon them as
Instances of mine in particular, and of that profound Respect, with which I am,

London May the 7th. 1688. Sir, Your Majesty's most dutiful and obedient
Subject and Servant, P. ALLIX.

THE PREFACE.
ONe may divide Men into two general Classes, some are without any knowledge of
a Diety, or Sense of Religion: Travelers tell us, that in the West Indies, the
Eastern parts of Tartary, and some places of Africa, such people are to be
found. I know this is a Fact which is disputed by others, and Fabricius a
Divine of the Palatinate, pretends that he has solidly confuted it. If this
Fact should be thought doubtful, yet it is known at least, that some persons
may be found here and there in the World who look upon the Existence of a
Deity, as upon a Fable, and who ridicule all acts of Religious Worship
whatsoever: But one may also say, that if he compare these with the rest of the
World, they make the least and worst part of Mankind, tho many of them affect
to live Morally well.

All the rest of the World make Profession that they own a God; that is to say,
a most perfect, Eternal, and independent Being; that he governs all things by
his Providence; that there is a difference between Good and Evil; that Man does
well or ill in those Actions which depend on his Liberty: From whence they
equally conclude, that Man was designed for the Duties of Religion, that
Society without it would be pure Robbery: And that, as it is hard to conceive
that Men should be wholly destroyed by Death, so it is directly contrary to the
Sentiments of Conscience to deny all Rewards for Virtue, or Punishments for
Vice after this Life.

All the Diversities of Religion amongst Men are reducible to two kinds.

The first is of those who suppose, that there is more than one God, and this
is the Belief of all Pagans in general.

The Second is of those that acknowledge one only God, such are the Jews,
Christians, and Mahometans.

Now, as for the cure of different Diseases, several Remedies are made use of,
so it is visible, that to deliver Men of their various prejudices, we must take
very different Methods.

The ignorance of those Barbarous People in the Indies, Tartary, and Africa,
must be removed, by teaching them the first Principles, and making them apply
the little sense they have left them of good and evil, right and wrong, to the
fundamental Maxims of Religion.

Atheists must be convinced, by Reflections upon those Principles, which they
admit, by showing, that the Truths which they reject, are the natural
Consequences of those Principles, which they dare not dispute.

To convince the Heathen, who suppose many Gods, we must examine their
Principles, and confute them; which is the easiest thing in the World; the
Wisest Men having formerly acknowledged, as they also own to this very day,
that there is but one God.

And indeed it seems, that the greatest part of Philosophers did own a
plurality of Gods, only in compliance with the Opinions of the people, which it
was dangerous to contradict.

And as for the Jews, forasmuch as they agree with the Christians and
Mahometans about the Unity of God, we are only to prove to them the truth of
that which is the very Essence of the Christian Religion, in opposition to
their prejudices; One may prove this against the Jews without any trouble,
because they are agreed in most of those Principles, which the Christian
Religion supposes. So likewise it is easily established against the Mahometans,
who grant the truth of Christian Religion in general, but pretend that it ought
to give place to Mahometanism, as the Law ought to give place to the Gospel,
preached by Jesus Christ.

My design is not to prosecute every one of these ways in particular. There are
Books enough in the World which solidly prove the necessity of Religion against
all sorts of Atheists, as well those, who are so through ignorance, as those
who profess themselves such from Love to Libertinism, and to pass for Men of a
mighty reach.

There are also several Famous Authors, who have made it evident, that Reason
alone is sufficient to overthrow all Pagan Religions whatsoever.

I am resolved to follow a more compendious, and sure Method, that is, to
demonstrate the Truth of the Christian Religion, considered by it self.

In short, It is impossible (considering the opposition there is between the
Christian Religion, and all other Religions in the World) that the Christian
Religion should be the true, but that all others must be false in those
Articles wherein they essentially differ from it.

And on the other hand, one cannot explain those Arguments which clearly evince
the truth of Christianity, without convicting all other Religions of falsehood,
because they are destitute of those proofs, which are peculiar to the Christian
Religion.

I know very well, that there are several ways which lead to the end which I
propose. Men that think much, wish that a perfect Conformity of the Christian
Religion, with the Conscience of Man might be demonstrated, from Reflections on
the Heart of Man, and the Dictates of it, which to them would be a convincing,
and demonstrative proof.

Others apply themselves to a speculative examination of the Doctrines and
Proofs of the Christian Religion, to show their Conformity with the Notions of
Reason: I will not deny but that both these employ themselves usually in this
sort of study, and that Truth finds a considerable support from their
Meditations.

But how useful soever they may be, I have rather chosen to follow another
course, as thinking it of more advantage, solidly to establish the Facts which
the Christian Religion proposes; which appears to me to be more proper to
persuade all sorts of Readers, and better levelled to the ordinary Capacity of
those, who newly enter upon the examination of this Truth.

And as the necessity of Revelation is generally owned by Heathens, and by all
other Nations of the World: I thought it a thing altogether unnecessary to
enter upon the examination of several abstracted Questions, such as these:
Whether there be any natural knowledge of God, whether Men are naturally
inclined to be Religious, and the like? When I shall have firmly proved, that
God revealed himself, that he prescribed a Service to the first Men, who left
the Rules of it to all their Posterity, from whence all the Religion that ever
was, or is yet in the Heathen World, was derived, I shall have prevented many
very unprofitable Disputes, and which can only perplex the mind by their
obscurity.

I have therefore confined my self to certain Considerations, which do so
establish the truth of the Books of the Old and New Testament, as by their
Union they firmly prove the truth of the Christian Religion.

I hope, that it will not be thought needful for me to demonstrate, that the
Mohammedan Religion ought not to abolish the Christian, as the Christians
pretend, that the Christian Religion abrogated the Ceremonial part of the
Jewish Worship.

As soon as an understanding Reader shall make some Reflections upon the nature
of the Arguments which demonstrate the Truth of the Christian Religion, he may
easily perceive, that God never framed the Model of that Religion, which the
Mahometans would obtrude upon us.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE First Part of the First Volume.
Chap. 1. COncerning the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion. Page 1 Chap.
2. That the Christian Religion is founded upon Proofs of Matter of Fact 5 Chap.
3. Some General Remarks in order to establish the Truth of Holy Scripture. 8
Chap. 4. That the Testimony of Moses concerning the Creation of the World, and
the Promise of the Messiah, is unquestionable. 16 Chap. 5. That Moses is the
Author of the Book of Genesis. 23 Chap. 6. That the Book of Genesis could not
be forged under the Name of Moses. 27 Chap. 7. That it appears from Genesis,
that the Sabbath was constantly observed from the beginning of the World until
Moses. 34 Chap. 8. That Adam was convinced of his Creation by Reason and
Authority. 44 Chap. 9. That Adam was confirmed by his own Experience, in the
persuasion he had entertained concerning his Creation. 49 Chap. 10. That the
Children of Adam had reason to be convinced of the Creation. 52 Chap. 11. That
the Children of Adam were actually convinced of the Truth of the Creation, and
the Promise of the Messiah. 54 Chap. 12. That Noah was fully persuaded of the
Creation of the World, and the Promise of the Messiah. 61 Chap. 13. That the
Children of Noah were convinced of the truth of these Matters. 64 Chap. 14.
That the Posterity of Noah 's Children were persuaded of the truth of the
Creation, and first Promise. 67 Chap. 15. That we find the Family of Abraham
and his Posterity till Jacob fully persuaded of those Truths. 71 Chap. 16. That
this very persuasion seems to have been kept up amongst the Posterity of Jacob,
until Moses 's time. 81 Chap. 17. That the Tradition which gives us an Account
of the persuasion which the Ancients had of the truth of the Creation of the
World, and of the Promise of the Messiah before Moses, cannot be suspected. 86
Chap. 18. An Explication of Moses 's way of Writing; where it is showed, that
in writing the Book of Genesis, he mentioned nothing but what was then
generally known. 89 Chap. 19. An Answer to an Objection which may be drawn from
the Histories of the Egyptians and Chaldeans, concerning the Antiquity of the
World. 95 Chap. 20. An Answer to the Objection which may be drawn out of the
History of China, against the Mosaic Hypothesis, concerning the newness of the
World. 106 Chap. 21. Wherein the last Objection of Atheists is answered. 120
Chap. 22. The Consequences of what we have proved in our foregoing Observations
upon the Book of Genesis. 126
The Contents of the Chapters of the Second Part of the First Volume.
Chap. 1. THat it cannot reasonably be doubted, but that Moses is the Author of
Exodus, and of the three other following Books. Page 137 Chap. 2. That both the
Character of Moses 's person, and the nature of the things he relates has
always made Men read his Books with attention. 146 Chap. 3. That the truth of
the Miracles related by Moses, cannot reasonably be doubted of. 153 Chap. 4. A
Continuation of the proofs of the truth of the Miracles wrought by Moses. 158
Chap. 5. That Moses 's Description of the manner of God's giving him his Laws,
is evidently true. 164 Chap. 6. Some other proofs that confirm Moses 's
Description of the manner how the Law was given and promulgated. 169 Chap. 7.
That there is no just Exception can be made against Moses 's History, in what
relates to the Oracles, which he has recorded in his Books. 173 Chap. 8. That
the Testimony of the Jews, is a constant proof of the truth of the Oracles
related by Moses. 177 Chap. 9. That it appears by the nature of his Relations,
that Moses had the Messiah in view when he wrote the Book of Genesis. 180 Chap.
10. That the same persuasion appears throughout the whole Conduct of Moses,
until his Death. 185 Chap. 11. That Balaam 's prophecy, which Moses relates,
is a further Argument of the same persuasion in him. 188 Chap. 12. That one may
see also in Moses 's Law, plain Footsteps of God's Design, in distinguishing
these from whom he would have the Messiah to be Born. 194 Chap. 13. That the
manner of God's promulgating his Law amongst the Israelites, did much conduce
to the distinguishing them from all other Nations. 200 Chap. 14. That God seems
to have designed to keep up a Spirit of Jealousy in the very Bosom of the
Jewish Nation. 206 Chap. 15. That Circumcision was a means of distinguishing
the Israelites from other Nations. 212 Chap. 16. That the Law of Moses engaged
the Jews to the study of their Genealogies, that they might certainly know that
of the Messiah. 219 Chap. 17. A Solution of some Difficulties in these
Genealogies. 223 Chap. 18. That the manner whereby the Law of Moses fixed the
people of Israel to the Land of Canaan, was to keep them separated from other
Nations. 228 Chap. 19. That the Law tied the people of Israel to the Land of
Canaan, and by several other means established the distinction betwixt Tribes
and Families amongst them. 234 Chap. 20. That the Laws which Moses made
coneerning the state of Virginity, did principally relate also to the Messiah,
which holds also as to several other Laws. 241 Chap. 21. That it was the design
of God by all these Ceremonies, and particularly by that Veneration which he
inspired the Jews with, for the Tabernacle, to preserve the Idea's of the
Messiah, whom he had promised, in their minds, by distinguishing them from all
other Nations. 249 Chap. 22. That it appears by the Books of Moses, that this
whole Model which God had framed, was to last but until the coming of the
Messiah. 256
To the Courteous Reader:
THE Errata's are so small, that they will not disturb the sense any where, and
so few, that we need not trouble the Reader with a Table of them: And therefore
hope he will take such inconsiderable pains upon himself, and excuse the
Author.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE BOOKS OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE For the Establishing of the
Truth OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
CHAPTER I.
Concerning the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion.
WE are to consider three things in the Christian Religion; the Matters of Fact
it propounds to us for true, the Promises it affords us, and the Worship it
commands.

The Matters of Fact it propounds to us as true, are; that God created the
World, that he formed the first Man, from whom the rest of mankind have been
propagated, that a while after this Man was created, he violated the Law, God
had given him; and that whereas he deserved to have perished for this his
disobedience, God was pleased, instead thereof, to comfort him with the hopes
of a Savior which was to be born of the Seed of his Wife; that God has
actually sent this Savior into the World, which comprehends the whole Economy
of Christ, viz. His Birth, Life, Preaching, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension into Heaven, etc.

The Promises it vouchsafes, are the forgiveness of our Sins, the Resurrection
of our Bodies, and a state absolutely happy for ever in Heaven.

And lastly, the Worship or Divine Service it prescribes consists in Obedience
to the Law of God, in Prayer for the pardon of our Sins, and his Protection,
and in a grateful Acknowledgement of what we owe him for all his Benefits
toward us.

The first of these three parts of the Christian Religion, viz. The Truth of
the Matters of Fact it relates, may be said to be the foundation of the other
two, viz. The Promises and Commands.

It is impossible to be persuaded, that God has created this World in which we
live, and made Mankind of one and the same blood; that after the Fall he
promised to save Men, and did actually redeem them in sending Jesus Christ, who
suffered Death, and being raised the third day Ascended into Heaven, etc. I
say, it is impossible to look upon these Facts as true without being assured
that God will accomplish the Promises he has made to us.

And it is as evident that we cannot be convinced of the truth of these
Matters, without being sensible of a strong obligation laid upon us to perform
all the Duties of the Christian Religion.

As soon as a Man reflects upon his being Gods Creature, he finds himself
naturally obliged, to obey God universally, according to his utmost ability:
but when he comes further to believe, that God did not destroy the first Man
for his disobedience; but was graciously pleased to promise him a Savior for
himself and all his Posterity; and when moreover he is assured, that God has
really sent this Savior in the way and manner the Gospel relates to us, we
cannot conceive, but that he must find himself under the highest engagements
imaginable of rendering to God a religious obedience; and believing his Promises.

But there is yet another obligation whereby Man is bound to obey God, to pray
to him, and to offer him all manner of Religious Worship; God by redeeming him
has obtained a new claim to, and right over him, and a more indispensable
obligation is laid upon Man to submit himself to God in all religious Concerns,
as being not only created but also redeemed by him.

Reason acknowledges, that if the truth of these things be once admitted,
nothing can be more just and natural, than those consequences which the
Christians thence infer.

All the difficulty therefore, that occurs in this Matter, consists in the
proof of those Facts which the Christian Religion propounds to us; that is to
say in proving the Creation of the World, the Fall of Man, the Promise of a
Redeemer, his coming into the World, his Miracles, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension into Heaven, etc. which are the Foundations of the Christian
Religion. And indeed these are the very matters of which Atheists and
Libertines require a solid proof.

And it does the more concern us to satisfy their demands; forasmuch as the
Jews, who are scattered throughout the whole World, do oppose our assertion,
that the Promise of sending the Messiah, is already accomplished, though they
agree upon the matter with us in all other Articles. Moreover the performing
this Task may very much contribute to the Conversion of a great number of bad
Christians, whose sall and continuance in vices, and licentiousness is to be
ascribed to their being so weakly persuaded of the truth of these Fundamentals,
and that because they have never considered of them with sufficient attention.

CHAP. II.
That the Christian Religion is founded upon Proofs of Mattter of Fact.
FOrasmuch as in order to establish the truth of the Christian Religion, we
confine our selves at present to those proofs which make out the Matters of
Fact it proposes; omitting all other arguments, which may evidence the truth of
it, though possibly no less convincing; it is obvious, that the proofs we are to
produce in confirmation of them, must be such as are proper to evince the truth
of things long since past and done.

If we were treating of the Events of the time we live in, it might be justly
required, that we should produce Eyewitnesses of them; but forasmuch as the
question here is concerning matters long since past, it is natural for us to
have recourse to History, which furnishes us with the relations of those, who
where Eyewitnesses of the same. This being the only way left us to confirm our
belief of things at so great a distance from us.

I am beholding to History only for the knowledge I have of a Cyrus, an
Alexander, or a Caesar; and yet having read the account they give me of them, I
find them matters I can no way rationally doubt of.

I acknowledge that the certainty we have of things long since past, is much
inferior to that which we have of matters confirmed to us by Eyewitnesses.
Nevertheless, because it is evident, that the Events of ancient Times cannot be
confirmed, but by proofs of this nature, it has never entered into the minds of
any to account the existence of such men as Cyrus and Alexander for Fables,
upon the pretense, that none now alive did ever see them, or because there are
scarce any traces left of those Empires of which they were the Founders.

Indeed the certainty we have of these things is such, as nothing can be
superadded to it, for though it be founded on the Authority of Historians, who
lived many Ages ago, yet withal we are to consider that the matters related, do
not only carry the Idea of probability and truth along with them, but that they
are the very ground and foundation of all the Histories of following Ages;
which cannot be questioned, if we consider the connection and dependence of the
things related, according to the light of Sense, and the equity of Reason.

A Matter of Fact then is accounted certain, when it is attested by those who
were Eyewitnesses of it, when recorded by an Historian, who lived amongst
those who had perfect knowledge of it; when the Matter is not gainsaid or
contradicted by any; if we find it penned at a time, when the things could not
be related by any otherwise than indeed they were, without exposing themselves
to public derision: And last of all, when the matter is found to be of that
nature, as none could be ignorant of it, either because it was the interest of
every one to be informed of it, or because the thing was so public that it
could not be hid from any, or lastly because of its natural connection with all
those other Events which necessarily depend on it.

To speak plain it is very unjust to demand either more proofs, or such as are
of another nature, for the confirmation of the Truth of our Religion, than are
required to verisie any other matters of Fact. Why should not the Testimony of
Noah's Children be sufficient to conclude there was such a man as Methusalem in
case they assure us that they have seen him? Or why should not the testimony of
Methusalem be of credit enough, to prove there was such a Man as Adam, if he
avers that he saw him, and conversed with him? Do'nt we every day give credit
to the account which old men give us of their Predecessors, especially when we
find that what they relate has an exact reference and connection with those
things we are Eyewitnesses of.

But it is an easy thing to make it appear, that the proofs which evidence the
Truth of the matters which our Religion proposes, are infinitely more strong
and convincing.

All the circumstances we can imagine proper to evince the Truth of any
Relation, do concur to place the matters recorded in Holy Scripture beyond the
Reach of doubt or uncertainty.

We account the single Testimony of an Historian a sufficient proof that there
was once a very famous Temple at Delphos or Ephesus; notwithstanding that all
the Monuments remaining at this day to confirm his relation be very doubtful
and defective. Whereas I shall make it appear that an entire Nation, yea many
Nations do attest the truth of those Matters which the Christian Religion
proposes, and that all the Actions, Discourses, and whole Series of Events
thereto relating, do furnish us with an infinite number of characters, which
invincibly signalize the Truth of the Holy Scriptures.

CHAP. III.
Some General Remarks in order to establish the Truth of Holy Scripture.
FOrasmuch as I have undertaken to prove the truth of the Matters of Fact
contained in our Religion from the testimony of the Penmen of the Old and New
Testament, it will be proper, in order to the executing of my design to begin
with a general proof of the Truth of the said Books, which will not be
difficult if one makes the following remarks.

The First is, That it appears from the Five Books of Moses, that he wrote the
History of the Creation of the World, and of the Promise of the Messiah; of the
Deluge, the Rise and Pedigree of the several Nations of the World, of the
Division of Tongues; and in particular the History of the Family of Abraham
until the entering of the Children of Israel into Palestina 2552 years after the
Creation of the World.

The Second is, That the following Books, viz. of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, the
four Books of Kings, of Chronicles, with the Books of Ezrah and Nehemiah, are a
Continuation of the said History, from the entering of the Jews into Palestina,
until their re-establishment in the said Country, about the year of the World
3600. Here we read the Conquest of Palestina under the Conduct of Joshua, how
it was divided amongst the Tribes after they had destroyed, drove out or
subdued the Inhabitants thereof; how often they were brought into bondage by
the bordering Nations, whose rise and pretensions Moses sets down. Here we have
recorded the several Names and actions of the Judges, which God from time to
time raised to the Israelites, to restore them to their first estate. Here we
have an account of the establishment of a Kingly Government amongst them, which
happened about the year 2909; as likewise of the division of this people into
two Kingdoms, which for three Ages together were most opposite in their
interests, and made great wars against each other, as well as against their
neighboring States. We find here the utter ruin of the most puissant of these
two States, viz. That of Israel by the Arms of the Kings of Assyria, about the
year of the World 3283, and after that, the destruction of that of Judah, by
Nebuchadnezar King of the Chaldeans, Anno Mundi 3283. And last of all we have
an account of the Jews Restoration by Cyrus King of Persia, and the State of
the Jews under his Successors.

The Third thing observable is, That in the remaining Books of the Old
Testament we find several historical Relations relating to both Kingdoms, with
several prophecies relating to their decay and restoration, as likewise many
Discourses of Morality and Piety; and that all these relations and prophecies
appear to have been writ at such a time, and with those circumstances, which
have a natural reference to what the other Books recite to us, and an essential
Relation to the Books and Laws of Moses, which we find to be the foundation of
all these prophesies, relations, and whatsoever else we find there concerning
their Government or Religion.

The Fourth is, That the Books of the New Testament contain an exact relation
of the Life of Jesus Christ, who appeared to the World under the Reign of
Tiberius, of the establishment of his Religion in the World, together with some
disputes with the Jews, who refused to own him for the Messiah promised by the
Prophets; and lastly Prophesies declaring what in in process of time was to
happen both to the Jews and Christians until the end of the World. These Books
take the Truth of Moses's Writings every where for granted, as also of all the
other Sacred Writings of the Old Testament, both Historical, Prophetical and
Moral.

These Four particulars do in a manner give us an entire Idea of the Holy
Scripture; and we shall scarcely stand in need of ought else to manifest the
Truth of those Writings, if we consider those undisputable matters of fact I am
now to speak of, and will but make some very natural reflections upon them.

The First is, That the Christians, notwithstanding their being divided into
several Sects and Parties, presently after our Saviors time, have, and do
still, in all places, every first day of the Week, read the Books of the New
Testament translated into their respective Languages; so that it appears
absolutely impossible that any spurious Writings should have been slipped in
amongst them.

The Second is, That as the Christians have had the Books of the Old Testament
amongst them in Greek these 1600. years, so the Heathens had them in that
Language 300. years before, being translated by order of one of the Ptolomy's
Kings of Egypt, whither a considerable party of the Jews were carried, after
that Alexander the Great had conquered the greatest part of Asia, having
overthrown the Empire of Persia, to which the Jews were in subjection.

The Third is, That though the Jews had not all the Books of the Old Testament
from the beginning of their Commonwealth, they that followed the Party of
Jeroboam, and formed the Kingdom of Israel, having only had the Five Books of
Moses amongst them: yet notwithstanding their irreconcilable hatred against the
House of David, they have most religiously preserved the said Books from Anno
Mundi 3030. in which the divisions of the two Kingdoms happened, even until
this day.

The Fourth and last is, That as the Jews every where at this day, read the
Books of Moses and of the Prophets each Sabbath day (which is also observed by
the Samaritanes) and the Christians read them every first day of the week; so
the Jews have always continued to read them for a long series of Ages, as
esteeming it a great part of the sanctification of the Sabbath. Besides which
they also solemnly read them every seventh year in obedience to a Law of Moses,
as being one of the principal parts of their Religion.

I say, that the sole consideration of these matters of fact (which are
indisputable) are sufficient to prove in general the truth of the Books of the
Old and New Testament.

First then, I affirm, that it is as ridiculous to maintain, that the Books of
the Old and New Testament, translated into so many Languages, cited by an
infinite number of Authors, and which have been the subject of various disputes
from the very times of the Apostles or soon after, should be supposititious, as
to aver, that the Books of Justinian, or Mahomets Alcoran, have been falsely
obtruded on the World under their names. I speak now only of the Books
themselves, not of the truth of the History they contain.

Secondly, It is ridiculous to suppose, that the Books of the Old Testament
were forged since the time of Ptolomy Philadelphus; forasmuch as they have been
in the hands of the Heathens themselves ever since that time.

Thirdly, It is as inconsistent to suppose them contrived since the time of the
separation of the ten Tribes from Judah, because we find the Books of Moses
among the Samaritanes, who have preserved them ever since their Revolt, without
any other change, but what is incident to all Manuscripts, that pass through
many hands.

I grant indeed that the Samaritans have none of the other Books of the Old
Testament; but this being to be looked upon only as an effect of their
departure from the Kingdom of Judah, it cannot in the least shake the certainty
we have of those Books. For first the three other Tribes had them and preserved
them with the greatest care, esteeming them of Divine Authority. Secondly,
there were also reasons of State, which made the Kings of Israel, not to regard
the divisions made by Joshuah of the Land of Canaan, nor the authority of the
Priesthood; which Reasons of State (hereafter mentioned) where the cause why
the ten Tribes would not allow the same authority to some of those Books, which
were written before their Revolt, as those of Samuel, and the writings of David
and Solomon, which they did to the Pentateuch of Moses. Most of the others we
know were penned since the Division of the two Kingdoms, and so did more
particularly respect the Kingdom of Judah, and some them after the carrying
away of the ten Tribes by the Assyrians.

Thus we see the Truth of these Books, and more especially those of Moses
confirmed till the time of the revolt of the ten Tribes, and confirmed beyond
exception; at least far beyond the certainty we can have of the truth of any
other Book in the World. It remains only now to examine, whether as to the
Books of Moses we find not the same certainty, when we look back from the
departure of the ten Tribes to the time of Moses, that is to say whether there
be the least probability, that they were forged in any part of that interval of
about 580 years.

I say then in the Fourth place, that it is no less ridiculous to suppose them
forged during that period. First, because it is impossible, that these Books
should have been forged in the form we now see them, but that the Forgery must
have been apparent to all the World. Nothing could be more notorious, than
whether the Jews did read the Law of Moses every Sabbath day in all their
Families or Synagogues, and every Seventh year besides: Nothing was of more
easy observation than whether they did keep their three solemn Feasts, viz.
that of the Passover, Pentecost, and of Tabernacles: Nothing could be more
apparent than whether the Jews did obey the Laws contained in the Pentateuch,
whether relating to particular persons, to Tribes, or their Lands, and the
manner of possessing of them. Indeed nothing can be imagined more absurd than
to suppose an insensible change wrought either in in the Form of their Civil
Government, or the Ceremonies of their Religion.

Indeed it is an unsufferable piece of boldness to charge the Jews with forging
these Books of Moses, or adulterating of them in this period of time, when it
appears they have kept them without any alteration for the space of 2700 years,
as has been showed already: If it be said, that the Jews being divided into
two Kingdoms, and dispersed into distant Countries, were not in a condition to
forge or adulterate any of the said Books, because it might easily have been
discovered; it may be answered, that the same reasons took place in this
interval of 580 years, for from the time of Moses to Rehoboam they were not
only greatly divided amongst themselves, but almost continually subject to
neighboring States, who subdued them by turns, as we see in the Book of Judges.

Moreover we are to take notice, First that these Books of Moses are the rise
and foundation of the Laws and Customs of the Heathens, as well as of their
Fictions, which we shall have occasion to point at in the sequel of this
Discourse.

Secondly, That the History contained in the Pentateuch, is evidently confirmed
by the following Books of Joshuah and Judges, which have an essential reference
to the same, and contain a relation of the public acts of many Nations,
attested, and acknowledged by Heathen Authors, who were the mortal Enemies of
the Jews.

Thirdly, That the said Books are so closely linked and related to those
public and known actions, that it is impossible to separate the Laws they
contain from the Matters of fact attested by Pagan History, or to be ignorant
that the Form of the Jewish Government, was nothing else, but an execution of
the Laws contained in the Pentateuch, which equally lays down that Platform of
their Policy and worship.

My business at present only is to hint these general Reflections concerning the
Truth of the Books of the Old and New Testament; tho the sequel will oblige me
to make some more particular Reflections upon each Book, when I shall come to
consider the several Relations they contain.

I now come to the Matter in hand, beginning with the Book of Genesis; where we
find an account of the Creation of the World, the Forming of Man, the Fall, the
Promise of the Messiah, the Propagation of Mankind, the Deluge, with other
Matters until the Death of Joseph, which contains the History of the World for
the space of 2369 years.

CHAP. IV.
That the Testimony of Moses concerning the Creation of the World, and the
Promise of the Messiah, is unquestionable.
FOrasmuch as amongst those Matters which Moses relates in the Book of Genesis,
that of the Creation of the World in seven days, and of the Promise of the
Messiah, are such upon which all the rest do depend (as I shall show hereafter)
it is evident, that I must make it my business in a special manner to evince
the truth of the same.

Toward the confirmation of which matters of fact, the one of which is, that
God Created a first Man; the other, that God has promised in due time to send
the Messiah for Redemption of Mankind from the punishment of sin, I shall
propose these following Remarks.

Moses the great Lawgiver of the Jews, laid these two Matters of Fact as the
Basis of the Laws he was to publish; and he relates them to us, as things which
were not only known to him, and some others of the Jewish Nation, but to all
the People of the World; and particularly the whole Nation amongst whom he
lived.

To understand the force of this Argument we must mind three things; the First
is, the Nature of the Matters themselves, the other is the Character of him
that relates them; and the third, the use Moses makes of them.

For the first, nothing was more needful to be known than these two things
before us; they were Matters which concern the whole World, and of which every
one ought to be informed; they are Matters about which it is not easy to be
deceived, every one being in a condition to satisfy himself about them, and of
which consequently they could not but be most thoroughly informed.

I dare maintain that there are no Facts in profane History of importance,
comparable to these of the Creation of the World, and the Promise of the
Messiah, as Moses has related them.

2. And as for the Author, who relates these points, it is as plain that his
Character did wonderfully contribute to the making of his Book famous. He was a
Man Illustrious, as well by reason of his Education, as the Rank he held
amongst Men; a Man equally exposed to the Judgment of Enemies and Friends, and
who could not vent theleast thing contrary to truth, in Matters of great
importance, without seeing himself immediately refuted, or rather without
exposing himself to public scorn.

Besides I aver, and am ready to maintain, that we find no Author of so
illustrious a Character as Moses was, or who is distinguished with so many
essential marks of Faithfulness and Veracity, as appears throughout the whole
Tenor of his Writings.

3. This will appear more evidently when we consider the use to which Moses
designs these two Relations of the Creation of the World, and the Promise of
the Messiah.

In a word, his design was not in furnishing his Books with the Recitals of
these important Facts to engage others to read them with more attention, or to
get himself reputation, by exciting a Curiosity in people for his Books. This
would not have been becoming the Gravity and Wisdom of so great a Legislator,
of whom all succeeding Ages have borrowed their Laws.

It is apparent, that his end in the recording of these Matters was to inspire
with a sense of Piety and Religion, those who were committed to his charge.

This is that which in general we may observe about these Matters; but more
particularly it is certain, that Moses his end in recording the Oracles by
which God promised to Abraham the establishing his Posterity in the land of
Canaan, was to represent to the Jews the right they had to that Land, according
to the design and intent of the Divine Wisdom.

But without making this particular Reflection, it is clear, that the Law took
its beginning at the twelfth of Exodus, where God prescribes to his People the
manner of celebrating the Passover; at least this is the first Law which God
gave them through the Ministry of Moses; but forasmuch as Moses his end was to
justify in the minds of his People, the design he had to make them leave Egypt
as well as their pretensions to the Land of Canaan, whither he was to lead
them; it was natural for him to lay before them the ground of those
Pretensions, which he could not do without relating the whole Series of the
History until the time of their Bondage in Egypt, which we read in Genesis; the
greatest part of which only concerns the Ancestors of that People, after that
Moses had first laid down the grounds of Religion, and that which was known to
all Nations.

Let us now imagine to our selves a Man endeavoring all of a sudden to
introduce into the World the belief of things so far distant from common
apprehension as these two points must needs be, viz. That of the Creation, and
the Promise of Christ, in case we suppose them generally unknown. Let us yet
further conceive a Man not only relating those things, but making them the
foundation of a new sort of Laws never before heard of. Is there any Wit, or
Judgment in such an undertaking? Can we therefore suppose that Moses, whose
Writings testify his great Wisdom, should ever have entertained such
unaccountable thoughts.

I dare aver that there was any never Legislator so stupid and inconsiderate,
as to pretend to engage a whole people to submit themselves to the yoke of
obedience, and to receive a great number of Laws respecting their Civil
Government and Religion, by declaring to them two Fictions, of which they had
never before had the least Idea.

It is also very considerable, that these things are not recited by Moses as a
Preface to the Decalogue, as if then first they had been proposed to Moses, or
the People by God; but Moses sets them down as Truths known to them all, and as
Principles, universally admitted, and such as the mere mentioning of them could
not but strongly engage the Jews to render a ready obedience to the Laws which
God gave to Moses in their presence of the Divine Authority, of which their
very Senses were convinced.

Let us also consider the nature of those things, the Relation of which Moses
has joined with these two General Points, to make an impression on the Minds of
the Jews. Let us consider the account he gives them of their Ancestors, nearer
or farther off, whom he represents as equally informed of these Matters, as
having severally delivered the knowledge of them to their Children, and having
joined to these first Truths of the Creation, and the Promise of a Savior,
many other Notions thereon depending, and which tied their hopes and
expectations, to the Land of Canaan. And now judge whether Moses were not to be
accused of great folly and senselesness, if he had proceeded to make such a
vast People (all of the sudden) to receive for Truths publicly and generally
owned, what indeed was nothing but the most ridiculous and ill cohering Romance
that ever was broached.

Now since as it is visible (taking in the Circumstances I have hinted) that
the Authority of such an Historian and Lawgiver as Moses was, relating such
importent Matters cannot be called in question; it follows, that the Atheist
can have nothing to object against his Testimony with the least shadow or
pretense of reason. So that we may already assert, that there is nothing better
attested than the Creation of the World, and the Promise of Christ, which are
the immovable Foundations of the Christian Religion.

Nevertheless for a more evident Conviction, we are willing, before we draw
this Conclusion, to make it appear how weak and inconsiderable all those
Objections are, which Atheists can possibly frame against what Moses relates
concerning these Matters.

What can they with Reason object? Perhaps they will say, that Moses is not the
Author of Genesis, but that it was foisted in under his Name, and consequently,
that whatsoever is built upon the Authority of Moses and his evidence, is all
without ground. Or they may object, that if Moses be indeed the Author of
Genesis, that he lived at such a distance of time from the things which he
relates, that it makes void the authority of his Writings. They may moreover
allege, that Moses relates things impossible, and of which therefore those
that mentioned them before, the things themselves being so long since past and
done, could not be fully informed of, and that they may well be supposed
greatly changed and altered by a Tradition of so many Ages. They may also
allege, that according to the common Opinion, Moses penned not these things as
an Historian, but as a Prophet; and that the apprehension of most concerning
his Books are, that he wrote of things, whereof the knowledge before his time,
was very obscure and confuse, or rather were generally unknown.

They may object against these relations of Moses, that which the most ancient
People, such as the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Chinese, allege for their
Antiquity, which far surpasses the date of the World according to Moses.

These are the principal ways to assault the Truths which Moses relates, either
by maintaining with the Atheists on one hand, that the things which Moses
relates, are indeed mentioned by other Authors, but that they forged them
themselves; or that Moses being an able and refined Politician designed by
Creating a belief of these Matters in the Jews, to make them more submissive
and obedient to him.

In a Word, it may be said, that supposing the Book of Genesis to be writ by
Moses, it was an easy matter for him to dictate whatsoever he pleased to a
People who were under a Law that made it Capital to call in question the truth
of his Relations, or the Authority of his Laws.

This certainly is the farthest, to which the height of Obstinacy can carry
this matter, and the very last refuge of the strongest prejudice. But it is an
easy matter to confound the Atheists and Libertines in every one of these
Articles, and to show that all their Objections do in effect serve for nothing
else but to make a more lively impression of this Argument taken from Matter of
fact, which I have undertaken to set forth in a full and clear light.

CHAP. V.
That Moses is the Author of the Book of Genesis.
I Shall in the Sequel of this Discourse make it appear, that we cannot with
reason, contest the Authority of a Tradition which has those Characters which
we find in the Relations contained in the Book of Genesis: The only thing that
can be questioned in this matter is, Whether Moses the great Captain of the
Israelites, and Founder of their Commonwealth, be the Author of it. This
therefore is the thing which we ought solidly to evince.

Tho it seems that we might dispense with this trouble: forasmuch as it is
easy to show, that the greatest part of the most considerable Events, which
are recorded in the Book of Genesis, were generally believed by others, as well
as the Jews.

At least it must be granted, that these Matters have given occasion to most of
their Fables, viz. To that of the Chaos, to that of the Marriage of Peleus and
Thetis, for the forming of Man to that of Prometheus, to that of Jupiter's
continued Laughter for the seven first days of his Life, which they looked upon
as the Original of the Solemnity of the seventh day, known amongst the
Heathens; to that of the Golden Age, and of the Deluge; to the Name of
Deucalion, to the Fable of Janus, to that of the Division of the World amongst
Saturn's Sons, to the Name of Jupiter Hammon, to the Fable of the Titans, and
of the changing of Women into Statues of Stone; to the Stories of the Incest
the Gods committed with their Daughters; to that of the firing of the World by
Phaeton; and to a great number of other Fictions, which cannot be otherwise
explained, as the learned have shown at large.

Whosoever was the Author of Genesis, whether Moses or another, sure it is that
he was exactly informed of the Matters he relates, and that he lived soon after
Joseph.

First then I say, that it appears he was fully informed of those matters of
which he treats; he sets down the Names of the Heads or Fathers of the several
Nations of the World, and does it so, that what he says does very well agree
with what the most Ancient Historians have left us concerning that matter: He
speaks of these Nations, of the Countries they possessed, and their Kings, as of
things he was perfectly informed of: He very carefully distinguishes the
Original of these several Nations; and the same being at that time commonly
known, no Historian could represent them otherwise than they were, without
exposing himself to the laughter of all by endeavoring to mix Fables with
Relations of this nature.

In the Second place, I say, that this Book was writ by a Man that lived soon
after Joseph: He speaks very exactly of what Joseph did in his place of chief
Minister to Pharaoh; in particular, he sets down the first Original of the
fifth Penny which the Egyptians so many Ages after, continued to pay to their
Kings, being a thing which no Egyptian could be ignorant of.

And Lastly, It is visible, that this Book serves for an Introduction to
Exodus, and the following Books, which have no other Foundation, but the truth
of those things which are related to us there; and do throughout allude and
refer to the several passages of it; and that all Matters of Religion and
Worship, contained in them, are founded upon the truth of the Creation, and the
Promise of the Messiah, which we find in Genesis; and upon the truth of all
those other succeeding Matters of Fact, until the coming of the Children of
Israel into Egypt, when Joseph was chief Favorite, and Minister of Pharaoh.

But we have yet a more easy way to make out that Moses, whose History is
contained in Exodus, and the following Books, is the Author of Genesis.

For first, it cannot be denied, that the Heathens themselves have acknowledged
Moses for the most ancient Lawgiver; for this, we have the Testimonies of
Plato, Polemus, Artapanus, Pythagoras, Theopompus, and Diodorus Siculus, who
places Moses in the front of Six of the most ancient Law givers thus; Moses,
Sauchnis, Sesonchosis, Bachoris, Amasis, and Darius Father of Xerxes.

But further, if when the Lacedaemonians tell us of the Laws of their Lawgiver
Lycurgus; and the Athenians of those of their Solon, we think our selves
obliged to believe them; because naturally every Nation is supposed to be a
faithful Depositary of the Laws of him who first founded their Government; yea,
if we do not in the least doubt of these Relations, though there be no People
at this day, who live according to the Laws of Lycurgus, or Solon; can any
valuable reason be imagined, for us to doubt, whether Moses wrote the Book of
Genesis, when an entire Nation have constantly averred, that he did so? I say,
when all the Jews, who continue at this day, do in all places, where they are
scattered throughout the World equally, and with one consent, maintain, that
they received this Book from him, together with the Laws and Worship therein
contained? Nay, when it is notorious, that many of them have suffered Martyrdom
in confirmation of this Truth?

I omit now to mention the consent of the Christians, who though they be not
descended of Abraham, and do not observe the greatest part of the Laws of
Moses, yet do not cease highly to defend this truth throughout the World, the
Gospel in their sense being nothing else, but the literal accomplishment of
that Promise, The Seed of the Woman, shall bruise the Head of the Serpent. I
shall show in the Sequel of these my Reflections, with how much Justice they
assent to this Truth; but at present I tie my self only to the Testimonies of
the Jews, and that which confirms the Authority thereof.

CHAP. VI.
That the Book of Genesis could not be forged under the Name of Moses.
I Should never have done, should I go about to set down all the Observations
which might be made incomparing this Book of Genesis, with other Histories,
commonly known to the World; and whose faithfulness is unquestionable. Without
entering upon this comparison, we may boldly assert, that there is no History in
the World, whose Author we can be so sure of, as that Moses was the Penman of
Genesis.

But I go further, and assert, that the Jews could not be mistaken in the
Testimonies they give to this Truth, which I prove by these two Remarks.

The First is, That their Observations both Civil and Religious, are at this
day founded upon no other Principles, than those which we find in Genesis: As
for instance, they compute the beginning of their day from the preceding
Evening; they keep the Sabbath, they observe Circumcision, they abstain from
eating the Muscle which is in the hollow of the Thigh, etc. The Observation of
which Laws is indeed prescribed to them in the other Books of Moses, but the
occasion and ground of them all, is no where to be found but in Genesis, to
which all these Laws have a natural Relation.

The Second is, That the Book of Genesis, taking for granted, that the
Posterity of Abraham, as well as his Ancestors, had always observed the Sabbath
and Circumcision; and the Books of Moses, ordering the same to be constantly
read in every Family, to which the Sabbath day was more peculiarly
appropriated, and the whole to be read over every seventh year, as we know the
Jews practice was according to the Law of Moses; the first of which Injunctions
they practice still in all places, and have left off the other, only because
they cannot do it now they are out of their own Land: I say, supposing all
this, it is absolutely impossible, that any other than Moses, could have made
this Book to be received.

The forgery at the beginning, would have been palpable, even to Children
themselves: As for Example, let us suppose that Solomon had formed a design of
deceiving the People, in publishing the Book of Genesis, for a Book of Moses;
Is it possible he should so far impose on his People, as to make them to
receive the said Book all at once, as that which had been constantly read in
their Families every seventh day, and year, and that for 600 years before his
time? and therefore, as a Book that had been so long in all their Families,
though indeed it was never heard of by them before that time.

If an Impostor can create a Belief in others, that he has some secret
Communication with the Deity; those who are thus persuaded by him, will easily
submit themselves to his Laws; but it is absolutely impossible, that a whole
People should all at once, forget whatsoever they have learned, or heard of
their Parents and Forefathers, and instead thereof, admit of Tales forged at
pleasure.

Some Nations have been so ridiculous, to derive themselves from a Fabulous
Original, but they never fell into such Mistakes about those things which were
at no great distance from the time in which they lived.

Besides, we know that these Fabulous Originals never made so lively an
impression upon the Minds of a whole Nations, especially the Learned amongst
them, as generally to be believed; but we rather find, that they have
endeavored to reconcile them to truth, by showing something else was hinted
thereby, as we may see by the Explication the Heathens themselves have given us
of all their Fables, and utterly rejected those which they could not reconcile
to good sense.

But in this case we find a whole Nation to this very day maintaining all the
Matters of Fact related in Genesis, and in particular, that of the Creation, as
of Matters whose Memorial they have constantly celebrated every seventh day,
since the time they first happened.

Lastly, It cannot be denied, but that this Book was constantly used to be read
amongst the Jews, especially on the Sabbath day, and that under the Name of
Moses: For instance, since the time of Jesus Christ, or since that of David.
Neither can it be denied, but this constant reading was observed by virtue of a
Law contained in the said Book: Now if this Law has always been in this Book
from the first appearing of it, which cannot be questioned; how was it possible
to forge and foist in this Book under the Name of Moses the Founder of the
Jewish Government. I say, this Book, which besides all this, contains such
extraordinary Matters, and is the very Foundation of all their Religion.

I will not repeat here what I mentioned in the third Chapter, to make the
Vanity of those Men appear, who imagine the Book of Genesis, and the four that
follow it, might have been forged by others, under Moses his Name: Yet I think
I ought, before I proceed further, to remove a seeming difficulty, which is
often alleged by this sort of People: For say they, it cannot be, that these
Books were ever read, with that care and constancy we speak of, because a time
can be pointed at, wherein the said Book was wholly unknown in the Kingdom of
Judah; and indeed, the History plainly informs us, that the Book of the Law was
found again in the Reign of Josias, from whence they infer, that if it were
then unknown, it might as well be forged.

But indeed, they may conclude from hence, that which willingly we allow them,
that there was a time wherein Ungodliness did prevail, and Idolatry was
publicly established in the Kingdom of Judah it self, yet can they not from
this instance draw any other Consequence which might support their pretensions.

They must needs acknowledge first, that the Books of Moses were not only
amongst the three Tribes, but also amongst the ten, since the time of their
Revolt under Rehoboam; that they who were carried by Salmanassar, into the Land
of Assyria, had the said Books amongst them, as well as those of the ten
Tribes, who were left in their own Country. Thus we see, that when the King of
Assyria sent some of the Priests of Samaria to instruct the Colony which he had
settled in their Country, in the Law of God; it is not said, that those Priests
went to borrow the Law of Moses from them of Judah, nor that the said Laws was
altogether unknown in that Country; but only that they had formerly violated
the Law of God, in serving strange Gods, as they still did, but that withal,
they kept the Law of God, which to this day is yet found among their Posterity.

Secondly, It is evident that tho the wickedness and violence of Manasseh,
caused a great change in Matters of Religion, yet not so great, but that his
Subjects notwithstanding, had still the Books of Moses amongst them; the Blood
which he shed in Jerusalem, was an evident sign, that there were some Godly men
left amongst them, who continued true to their Religion, and observed the Laws
of God. Besides, if we consider his Repentance, we must conclude, that toward
the end of his Reign, he did in some degree, re-establish the purity of that
Religion he had before profaned, a main part of which, was the expounding and
reading of the Books of Moses, according to those Laws before mentioned.

In the third place it is visible, that the reason why Hilkiah, having found
the Book of the Law in the Temple as they were cleansing and repairing it, sent
the same to Josiah, was not because there was no other such Book left in Judah,
but because the said Book being written by the hand of Moses himself, there
seemed to be something very extraordinary in the finding of it at that very
time, when they were endeavoring a Reformation; and it was this Circumstance
which did in a more particular manner excite the Zeal of this good Prince. And
indeed, if we suppose that Josiah had never before seen the Book of the Law,
how could he have applied himself to the reforming of his Country, his People,
and the Temple, in the manner which is recorded in the Book of Kings? How could
a sufficient number of Copies of it be dispersed over all his Kingdom in an
instant, to inform the People about the Ceremonials of the Passover, which soon
after was so Solemnly celebrated by them? Or, how is it possible, that the
Levites, the Priests, and People, could have been all of the sudden instructed
in all the points to be observed in the performing of that Holy Solemnity.

It is apparent, that the Sacred Historian did for no other reason take notice
of this Circumstance, that the Book found, was of Moses own hand Writing, but
to make it appear, that their devout respect for this Book, was not wholly
stifled, as having been by them carefully hid from the fury of their Idolatrous
Kings, and laid up in some secret place of the Temple, where now they had so
happily found it again.

Over and above what has been said already, we are to observe, that how great
soever the wickedness of the Kings of Juda and Israel was, as well as that of
their Subjects, yet the same generally consisted in nothing else, but the
imitation of the Worship of their Neighbor Natitions, as to some particulars,
which tho they were forbid by the Law, yet they left the far greater part of
their Religion in full force. This we have an instance of in the time of Ahab,
where we find Elijah reproaching the Israelites with the Monstrous Alliance
they had made betwixt the Worship of God, and that of Baal, which Queen Jesabel
had introduced.

All this clearly proves, that the Book of Genesis, which is the first of the
Books of Moses, was never forged under his Name, since it was always owned as
the Writing of that Famous Author, and is still so acknowledged by the Jews at
this day.

CHAP. VII.
That it appears from Genesis, that the Sabbath was constantly observed from
the beginning of the World until Moses.
THe other Objection of the Atheists (supposing that Moses was the Author of
Genesis, as we have now proved) is this, that it seems absurd to give credit to
the Relations of a Person who lived so many Ages distant from the things he
recites. To answer this Objection we must first of all declare to them, by what
means the Memory of the Fact which Moses relates was preserved so lively and
entire, as to give Moses so distinct a knowledge of them, and that it was not
in his power to forge or add any thing of his own, it being a thing known to
the whole World, as well as himself.

There is no way whereby we can more solidly evince, that it is impossible the
Creation of the World should be forged by Moses, than by making it appear, that
the Law of the Sabbath has a natural Relation to the Creation of the World,
and that it has been always constantly observed from that time until Moses.
The same also will help us clearly to conceive after what manner the Memory of
the Promise of the Messiah has been preserved so distinct amongst those that
lived since the Creation until Moses. We are no sooner informed that the
Sabbath is a solemn day, ordained at first to celebrate and perpetuate the
Memory of the Creation, but we judge it impossible, that so important an event
commemorated every seventh day, by virtue of a Divine Law, should be an
imposture. But forasmuch as this impossibility is grounded on these two
Propositions; the one, that God gave this Law of the Sabbath to the first Man;
the other, that the same was observed by his Posterity ever since, till the
time of Moses; and that God only renewed it in the Law given from Mount Sinai:
these are the Truths I am now to clear, and it is of more importance to be
proved, because, tho the generality of Authors, Ancient and Modern, Jews as
well as Christians, are of this Opinion, yet there are some of the Christian
Fathers who seem to deny that the Sabbath was ever observed by the Patriarchs.
But it will be an easy matter to prove from Moses, that the Antiquity of the
Sabbath is such as I assert, and at the same time to demonstrate the truth of
the Creation, as well as of the Promise of the Messiah, which in a manner
immediately followed it.

Moses in the second Chapter of Genesis, Genesis II. 3.
expresses himself thus: And God blessed the seventh day and Sanctified it,
because that in it, he had rested from all his work, which he had Created:
Which words clearly evince a Solemn Consecration of the seventh day to God's
Service, by its being made a Commemoration of his finishing the Creation of the
Heavens and the Earth.

But because it may be said, that the intent of Moses in this place was only to
set down the reason why God set apart this day, of all others, to his Service,
by the Law at Mount Sinai, we are to take notice, that this appointment was
made for Man's sake already placed in the Garden of Eden. This we may gather
from the order Moses observes. For he sets down first the Formation of Man on
the sixth day, and his being placed in Paradise, which he gives a more
particular account of in the second Chapter, and after these, he relates God's
resting from his Works, and the Consecration of the Sabbath with the reason of
that Law which he imposed on Man; and then adds, These are the Generations of
the Heavens and of the Earth, when they were Created, in the day that the Lord
God made the Heaven and the Earth. All that precedes these words, is only a
Relation of what passed in the seven first days, and that which Moses sets down
concerning Gods blessing of the seventh day, and his Consecrating it, ought as
well to be accounted a Law appointing the seventh day for his Service, as those
other Blessings, given to the Creatures according to their kinds, are
acknowledged as inviolable Laws of God, by virtue whereof they subsist, and are
perpetuated each according to their kind, by the way of Generation.

In the second place, it is very remarkable, that the Patriarchs, maintained a
Public Worship, at least since the time of Seth; which it was necessary should
be determined to some certain day; and since we find, that even at this time
they distinguished between Beasts clean and unclean, with respect to their
Sacrifices (which they could not do but from Revelation) we have much more
reason to conclude, that God had set apart a time for own Worship and Service.

And indeed, there are many evident signs, that even then the 7 day was
observed. Kimchi Praefat. in Psalmos.
I will not here peremptorily assert that ancient Tradition of the Jews, which
tells us, that the ninety second Psalm, whose Title is a Psalm for the Sabbath,
was made by Adam himself, who was made on the Evening of the Sabbath: But this
I dare assert, that it is apparent, Genesis VIII. 10.12.
that what we read in the eighth Chapter of Genesis about the Deluge, does
refer to this custom, where we find Noah sending forth the Dove and the Raven
on the seventh day, which plainly hints to us his observing of that day; for it
seems, that Noah having, in an especial manner, on that solemn day, implored
the assistance of God in the Assembly of his Family, he expected a particular
Blessing from it.

And we cannot but make some Reflection on that which we read in the XXIX of
Genesis concerning the term of a Week set apart to the Nuptials of Leah, Genesis
XXIX. 27.
where at the twenty seventh Verse Laban thus expresses himself. Fulfill her
Week, and we will give thee this also, for the Service which thou shall serve
with me yet seven other Years. This Week here does so plainly signify a Week
of days that it cannot be more naturally expressed; and indeed, all generally
understand by this Week of the Marriage Feast of Leah, that term of time which
in succeeding Ages has been customary to allot to Nuptial Festivals, as
appears from the Book of Esther, where the Wedding Feast of Vasthi lasted seven
days, this term of seven days having so long since been Consecrated to Nuptial
Rejoycings.

The same we may also gather from the time which was ordinarily allotted to
mourning for the Dead, to which we find the Patriarchs allotted a term
proportioned to that of their rejoicing. For as we see that the Egyptians
mourned ten Weeks for Jacob, because of his Quality, as being the Father of
Joseph, so we find that Joseph, and those that accompanied him, mourned seven
days at his Enterment in the Land of Canaan: And as we find, that this Custom
was perpetually afterward observed by the Jews, as appears from Ecclesiasticus
XXII. 12. so likewise we find the same observed by the Asiaticks, as may be
seen in the History of Ammianus Marcellinus, at the beginning of his nineteenth
Book, De fide Resur. in obitu Sat. p. 321. Seven days were fulfilled after that
the Lord had smote the River. Jalkut in h. l.
and from them it passed to the Christians, as we find in St. Ambrose.

Thirdly, It appears from Exodus VII. 25. that God observed seven days after he
had smote the River to change the Waters thereof into Blood; from whence the
Jews conclude, that the three Plagues Viz. that of Blood, of Frogs, and of
Lice, abode on the Land of Egypt six days, and were withdrawn on the seventh,
which is the Sabbath.

We may also gather, if we calculate the time exactly, that the Jews in Egypt
observed the Sabbath. We find from the History of their departure out of Egypt,
that the same happened on a Thursday, being the fifteenth of the Month Nisan,
and the day in which they sung those Hymns of Deliverance, was the Sabbath
which God had particularly set apart for this Week.

It is also evident from Exodus XVI. that the keeping of the Sabbath was
observed by the Israelites, before the Law was given on Mount Sinai. For we
find God speaking there concerning the Sabbath, not as of a thing newly
instituted, but as of an ancient Law, which they were e not to transgress by
gathering the Manna on that day; for he orders them to gather a double portion
the sixth day, and not to gather any on the seventh. We see that the Israelites
resting on the seventh day is here supposed a known and customary thing,
prescribed to them by a Law of old.

They who went forth to gather Manna on the seventh day are represented as
Transgressors of a known Law, as appears from the words of the Lord to Moses.
How long refuse ye to keep my Commandments and my Laws? Moses also speaks of
the Sabbath which was to be the next day, as of a thing customary, and received
amongst them. To morrow (says he, at v. 23.) is the rest of the Sabbath of
holiness unto the Lord; words which would have been unintelligible to the
Israelites, and expressed a Law, altogether impracticable, in case they had
been destitute of any further knowledge concerning it, and had not been
acquainted, that it was the very day in which the great work of Creation had
been finished.

My fourth Observation I take from the very words of the Decalogue, where first
of all we find God speaking in this manner, Remember the Sabbath day; which
words clearly import, Exodus XX. 8.
that the Law he gave, was not a new Law, but indeed as old as the World, and
which had been observed by their Forefathers. It seems probable also, that God
expresses himself in these terms, because the Tyranny of Pharaoh had forced
them to break this Law, by obliging them to deliver their Tale of Bricks every
day, without excepting the Sabbath, which before he had allowed them to keep.

This is explained very distinctly in the fifth of Exodus, and seems to have
been the occasion of Moses's demanding Straw of Pharaoh, for the Israelites to
go and Sacrifice, in answer to which demand, Exodus V. 5.
Pharaoh expresses himself in terms which show that formerly they had observed
a rest on that day: However it be, yet thus much is apparent, that God commands
them to make their Bond Servants to observe the Sabbath, because the Egyptians
by their example inclined them not to be very careful in exempting them from
all labor on that day.

Moreover, in the second place we are to take notice, that in the last words of
the fourth Commandment, God speaks of it as of a thing formerly appointed and
determined by him, saying, For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and
rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and
hallowed it; which words have a manifest and undeniable reference to that which
happened the seventh day after the Creation, and to the Law then given to Man
concerning it.

We may gather from the fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, that the
sense which we have put upon the third Verse of the second of Genesis, is the
same which the Jews have always had of it. The Apostle discoursing from those
words of David, Psalm. XCV. To whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not
enter into my rest, does suppose a threefold rest, the first of which, is the
rest of the Sabbath, of which mention is made in the second of Genesis, where
we have the first institution of it; the second was the rest in the Land of
Canaan promised to the Jews upon their enduring all those Trials in the
Wilderness: the third, the rest in Heaven, of which the two foregoing were but
the Figures. He argues therefore, that these words of David could not be
understood, concerning the Sabbath day; forasmuch as from the beginning of the
World Men entered into that rest of the Sabbath; and he proves this, by that
passage in Genesis, of which he only cites the first words, viz. That God
rested the seventh day from all his works, as supposing that the Jews, to whom
he wrote, had no need of having the following words quoted to them, which tell
us, that God blessed the seventh day and hallowed it: that is, he Consecrated
the same to his worship and service, forasmuch as nothing was more publicly
and universally known amongst them, the Observation of the Sabbath being a
thing generally received, even before the giving of the Law.

And indeed, the Philo the Jew be of opinion, that the practice of Solemnizing
that day, had suffered some interruption; and that for this reason, the Law of
the Sabbath was given to Moses, yet it is well known first of all, Eusebius praep
Evang. l. 13. c. 12.
that Aristobulus the Peripatetick, in a Treatise dedicated by him to Ptolemy,
surnamed Philadelphus, cites several Passages of Homer, Hesiod, and Linus,
Heathen Poets, which mention the seventh day as a Festival, and Solemn day,
because all things were finished in the same.

In the next place, it is notorious, that if some of the Fathers, as Justin
Martyr and Tertullian writing against the Jews, have denied that the Patriarchs
observed the seventh day, they did so rather with regard to the rigor of that
Law, which forbad all manner of work on that day upon pain of Death, (which was
superadded by God to the first Law of the Sabbath) than to the Observation of
the Sabbath, as it was a day appointed to make a Solemn Commemoration of the
Creation of the World.

In a word, we are to take notice, that the difference which God makes between
the Sabbath, observed by the Patriarchs, and that which he appointed to the
Jews, did consist in two things: First, in that God did impose an absolute
necessity upon the Jews to abstain from all manner of work, even to the very
dressing of Meat, necessary for the support of Life: We find this distinction
clearly expressed in the Law which God gave concerning the first and seventh
day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, for he absolutely forbids all manner of
work on these two days, as much as on the Sabbath, even the preparing of
necessary food, which he permits the five other days, forbidding only Servil
Laborious Works.

Secondly, In that the working on that day by the Law, is made punishable with
death, which was not so before; which Innovation, and new rigor of the Law,
established by God, was authorized, by the punishing of him who had gathered
Sticks on the Sabbath day, whereas we find, that before the Law was given upon
Mount Sinai, God did not command those Jews to be punished with death, who went
forth the seventh day to gather Manna, according to their ancient Custom of
dressing their Meat on that day.

Let me add this further, that tho the Apostles had abolished the rigor of the
Law concerning the Sabbath, introduced by Moses, yet they themselves observed
it; which practice of theirs, in all probability, gave occasion to the
Christians, for almost four Centuries, to keep the Sabbath as well as the first
day of the Week, Solemnizing both those days, the one as a Commemoration of the
Creation of the World, and the other of the Resurrection of our Savior Jesus
Christ.

But what ever Judgment may be past on this last Remark, it is very evident
from Genesis and Exodus: First, that the Law of the Sabbath was observed before
Moses: Secondly, that this Observation was by the first Patriarchs propagated
among the Heathens also, as well as the Idea of the Creation; or as the
practice of Sacrificing, with the other parts of Religious Worship, the
Original whereof, may be seen in the Book of Genesis, as we shall make appear
in our following Discourse.

After all this, we must conclude against the Atheist, that either Moses must
imprudently have laid a Snare for himself, in forging a matter of fact, of
which, not only the Jews, but all the World were able to convince him, since
there were none amongst them but must needs be Conscious whether they had
observed the Sabbath in Commemoration of the Creation, as he relates it, or no;
or else, that the Creation of the World, being a matter of fact so generally
known, and the Memorial of it Solemnized every seventh day by all those who
preceded him, must needs be an uncontested and immovable truth, which I shall
farther evince by those Observations which I shall raise from the dependence
and connection, which the Matters related by Moses in Genesis, have with the
Creation, and the Promise of the Messiah. This is my business at present, in
performing of which I shall make it appear, that nothing can be imagined more
rational and coherent, than the Relations of Moses, in which the Atheists
imagine, that they discover so great Absurdities.

CHAP. VIII.
That Adam was convinced of his Creation, by Reason and Authority.
Though it might be thought more natural in these our Disquisitions about the
History of Genesis, to begin with those matters which happened near the time of
Moses, and from them to pass to those at a greater distance, yet I have chosen
rather to follow the Thread of Moses his Discourse, hoping that this Method
will afford more light to these our Reflections: At least, it will spare me the
trouble of frequent Repetitions, which in the other way I should be necessarily
obliged to. I begin then with this, That Adam was convinced of his Creation,
both by Reason and Authority.

The Creation of Adam being a thing of that nature, that he must first be
convinced of it himself, before he could persuade his Posterity to entertain
the belief of it, it is worth our enquiry to know what ways he had to assure
himself, that he was indeed Created in that manner as Moses relates. And,
forasmuch as the certainty of this Tradition depends upon the Authority of
Adam, whom Moses supposes to have been the first Deliverer of it: It is plain,
that we must be assured that Adam could not deceive himself in this matter, as
it is evident enough that he would not deceive his Children, when he took care
to instruct them concerning it.

As to his own Existence, he could not but be as strongly persuaded of it, as
we are of ours, all the difficulty lying in the manner how he came to exist.
Now there were two ways by which Adam might inform himself of this, viz. by
Reason, and the Testimony of Authority. He could easily find out this Secret by
a rational Reflection: Or, he might also be persuaded of it by God himself, who
had Created him, not to mention now any information which he might have from
the Angels who were Witnesses of his Creation.

It appears, that Adam, whose Tradition Moses has recorded, supposes, that he
had learnt of God himself the manner of his own Formation. God speaks to Adam,
and Sanctifies the seventh day; that is, obliges Adam to keep the Memorial of
his Creation, he ties him by a Law to Commemorate his Creation fifty two times
a Year, and to render him continual thanks for the Being he had received.

But, forasmuch as Adam was capable of making Reflections upon those several
matters, which God had made known to him concerning his Creation; I say, it
cannot be imagined, but that he must have taken these things into
consideration, and have been convinced of the truth of them, by the light of
Reason.

The truth of a Relation consisting in its Conformity, with the matter related,
it appears clearly, that Adam could certainly know the truth of what God had
declared to him, by examining the things themselves.

We may distinguish several Propositions in the Revelation God made to him
concerning the manner of his Creation.

The first was, That his Body was taken from the Earth.

The next, That his Soul was not framed before his Body.

The Third, That his Soul had been joined to his Body to constitute one
individual Person.

The Fourth, That he was Created in a full and perfect Age.

The Fifth, That his Wife was formed of a Rib, taken out of his side, during
the time that he was cast into a deep Sleep.

These are the Truths I propose as instances, the rather because there is not
one of them of which Adam himself could be a Witness.

And yet I affirm, there is none of these which he could not be assured of by
the light of reason, being convinced of them by the same means which assured
him of the Existence of his Soul and Body. The Consideration therefore of these
two Matters, was of good use to confirm the Revelation which God had vouchsafed
him concerning his Creation, of which he could not be a Witness himself.

That his Body was taken from the Earth, Adam might easily infer, from the food
that maintained it; for what is the matter of Man's nourishment, but a
digested, and disguised Earth? And finding himself, at first, in a perfect
estate, it was natural for him to Judge that his Body had been thus at once
framed of the Earth, without passing those several degrees of growth, whereby
Children arrive to their just Stature.

And he might as easily be assured, that his Soul was not formed before his
Body. The Soul is a Being, conscious of his own Operations and Thoughts,
wherefore he needed only make this Reflection: My Soul has had neither knowledge
nor thoughts before it was united to my Body; therefore my Soul did not exist
before it. No great study was required to make so natural a Conclusion as this
is.

Again, how could he be ignorant of the union of his Soul with the Body? Was it
not obvious for him to be assured hereof, by the ready obedience which he saw
his Body yield unto his Soul? He had the Idea of a Tree, as well as the Idea of
his Foot or Arm, whence it was easy for him to reflect thus: How comes it to
pass, that I command my Feet and my Arms, and that I cannot do the same to a
Stone or Tree, though I have the Idea of the one, as well as of the other? Must
not this proceed from, a nearer union it has with the one, than with the
other? He knew that this union continued during his Sleep, and was independent
of his Will. In a word, he had the same proofs of this union, which we have of
it at present, only they were in him much more lively, because our Infancy
makes us in some sort ignorant of the Nature of our Souls, our Souls
accustoming themselves by little and little, to depend upon the Senses, so as
not to be able to raise themselves, without some trouble, above their
Operations.

Neither was it less evident to Adam, that he was produced at a perfect Age: He
saw that his Food maintained Life, and he knew assuredly, that he had not taken
any but very lately: How then could he attain to that Stature without that
help? Or how was it that he found himself now ready to faint, if he deferred to
take it, which formerly he had not felt the want of? These Reflections made it
unquestionable to him that he was formed in a perfect Age.

And Lastly, it was yet more easy for him to be persuaded of the truth of
God's Revelation concerning the forming of Eve, he needed but to count his own
Ribs, and those of his Wife, for he could not find one less in himself than in
his Wife, without being fully satisfied in that Matter.

These Propositions, with many others of like nature, being such as Adam could
be assured of the truth of, by making Reflection either on himself, or on
Plants, or living Creatures, greatly confirming his belief in the Divine
Testimony, concerning his Creation, we may easily infer, that Adam could not
deceive himself about that Matter.

CHAP. IX.
That Adam was confirmed by his own Experience, in the persuasion he had
entertained concerning his Creation.
WHen I take for granted, that Adam could satissie himself concerning the truth
of God's Revelation, by some natural and easy Reflections, I don't find how any
can think strange of this Hypothesis, except some, perchance, might think that
I make Adam too Contemplative.

But if any will be pleased to make these following Observations, they will
justify me, that I have attributed nothing to him, but what agrees exactly
with his Character.

The First is, That Adam finding himself immediately upon his Creation, at his
full and perfect Age, he was void of those Prejudices, which the ignorance and
weakness of his Infancy are the cause of; his Mind was not tainted with Popular
Errors, which often are so great a hindrance to the knowledge of truth: He had
not yet received any ill impression; and when afterward he was so credulous as
to give way to a Temptation, his Experience proved a most powerful means to
inform his Reason, and withdraw him from his Error.

Besides, we suppose here, that the Divine Testimony, which acquainted him
with the particular Circumstances of his Creation, was precedent to the
Reflections Adam made, and indeed, was the cause of them. If we suppose some
Countryman, not capable of discovering of himself, all on a sudden, the
manner how such a thing came to pass, yet this is certain, that his Reason
alone will be able to satisfy him, whether the thing happened in that manner
which the Relation of it imports, he needs but consult the Rules of Probability
to be determined in this Matter.

Adam had not only the advantage of being formed at a perfect Age, of being
acquainted by the Mouth of God himself, about the Creation of the World, etc.
and of living so many Ages, which gave him leisure enough to consider the
probability of what God had revealed to him, to examine the grounds and
certainty of it, and in a word, to judge whether the said Reflections were to be
rejected as Fabulous, or to be relied on as of most certain and evident truth:
But over and above all this, Adam could rationally assure himself of the Manner
how the things (which he had not seen) were done by the experience he had of
other Matters, which were comprehended in the Divine Revelation.

The manner how his Body had been formed of the Earth, was, I confess, a thing
difficult to be conceived, but the production of an Infant like to himself, by
the way of Generation, which he afterward was assured of by experience, was
sufficient to confirm his mind in the belief of the Divine Revelation: The way
of Generation, being at least as much, if not more difficult to comprehend, as
the manner of his Creation.

We have great reason to suppose, that as it was Adam's Duty, that so he did
really make those Reflections, I have attributed to him, if we consider, that
God gave him a Law proportioned to the state in which he was Created: For this
Law supposes that Adam owned himself God's Subject; that he considered God as
his great Benefactor, that he hoped for Rewards from him, and feared to be
punished by him.

And Lastly, If I should grant that these Reflections did not at first make so
deep an impression in his heart, yet at least, it cannot be denied, but that
after his Fall, he was in a manner necessitated to meditate on these truths:
God appeared to him in a visible manner, God passed Sentence upon him, his
Wife, and the Serpent; God condemned the Serpent, and afforded his Grace to
Man; God made him a Promise proportioned to the evil into which he was fallen.
The Woman had deceived her Husband, which did naturally tend to disunite them,
but God uniting himself again with Adam, made the effect of his Promise to
depend upon Adam's reunion with his Wife, having assured him, that the
Offspring of his Wife should be his Redeemer: God threatened the Woman with
extreme Pains in Childbearing, he drove them out of the Garden of Eden, and
placed a Flame of Fire to guard the entrance there.

All this without doubt, would never suffer Adam slightly to pass over Matters
of so great importance as his Creation, and the manner of his being formed out
of the Earth. Things being thus stated, it is easy to judge whether we have
supposed Adam too Subtle and Contemplative by attributing the foresaid
Reflections to him.

CHAP. X.
That the Children of Adam had reason to be convinced of the Creation.
IT is apparent, that as soon as the Children of Adam were arrived to years of
understanding, they were in a condition to make Reflections on the manner of
their production, according to the information received of their Parents. They
were able to compare the twofold Original of Man; the one, in which the Body
was immediately taken from the Earth; the other, in which it was produced by
Generation, and were able to judge if either of them were improbable; and in
particular, whether the formation of their Parents, with other Matters
consequent, and depending on it, could be sufficiently proved and confirmed.

For it was easy for them to judge, that their Parents, of whose tenderness
and care they had so great experience, could not have had the least design to
deceive them in what they had delivered to them concerning the Creation. They
had also leisure enough during the long Lives they enjoyed, to examine the
Solidity of those Reasons which persuaded their Parents of the truth of their
Creation.

For instance, they could easily inform themselves whether there were any more
Men and Women than their Father and Mother, that had been before them, whether
they were produced from the Earth, or by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms,
whether there were any other Language besides that which they spoke? Whether
there were any Ruins of Buildings, or other remains which signified that Arts
had been formerly Cultivated? And in a word, whether there were any reason to
persuade them, that the World had not its beginning at the time which their
Parents assigned for it?

Neither were they only in a condition to judge of the truth of these things,
but their Senses were able to convince them of it: As for instance, by seeing
the first Trees, the production of others from them, and the different degrees
of their growth.

But besides all this, they could experience most of these things in their own
Persons, they could know whether God had assigned to Man the Fruit of Trees,
and Grain for their Food, as Moses has recorded, only by examining their own
Mouths, which were formed to chew Fruits, and not to tear the raw flesh of
Animals, which requires sharper and stronger Sets of Teeth, than those they
found themselves provided with, the eating of flesh not being introduced till
after the Deluge.

Thus after the Act of Generation, they saw their Children Born, as it was
represented to them, that they themselves had been formed.

They had also before their eyes sensible signs of the truth of the Matters
related to them: As for instance, the continual Miracle of a Flame of Fire,
which kept them from entering into Paradise, was a certain Argument of the first
sin, of which they had not been Eyewitnesses.

The Pains of a Woman in Childbearing, did the more confirm the truth of the
Divine Sentence, because it was not obvious for them to apprehend such
Consequences from an act which was pleasing to their Sensual Appetites.

And Lastly, Forasmuch as they kept a Solemn day to Celebrate the Memory of the
World's Nativity, on which seventh day, their Parents repeated to them no less
than two and fifty times a Year, the same thing, informing them of the manner
of their Formation; it is impossible to suppose, that they should let these
things pass without making any Reflection on the truth of them, and the rather
because we cannot rationally conceive, that they should have been serious in
any Duties of Religion, without having first examined the truth of the
Creation, and of the Promise of a Redeemer, which are the true Grounds of all
Religious Acts whatsoever.

CHAP. XI.
That the Children of Adam were actually convinced of the Truth of the
Creation, and the Promise of the Messiah.
I Suppose it is sufficiently evident, that the immediate Posterity of Adam
could easily be assured of the manner how their Parents had been produced, from
whom they derived their Beings. They could likewise be fully satisfied about
the truth of their sin, and the Promise God had made them, That one of their
Posterity should destroy the Enemy of Mankind.

My business therefore next, is to show that they were actually assured of the
truth of these Matters: this will appear if we consider two things.

The first is, that as these Matters were the chief Objects of their
Meditation, because of their extraordinary importance, so it is evident that
they acted as Persons fully satisfied of the truth of them.

The other is, That as they had been instructed in these Truths by their
Parents, so they delivered the same to their Posterity, to whom they
transmitted the belief of these Matters, as of things altogether unquestionable.

I say then, that they acted as those who were fully assured of the truth of
these Matters, which appears throughout the whole course of their Lives, not
only when they did that which was good, but when they were overtaken with sin:
And this alone, methinks, is sufficient to evidence the deep impression, the
belief of the Creation, and the Promise of the Messiah, had made on their
Hearts.

Sacrifices are Acts of Religious Worship; and this Custom therefore of
Sacrificing, which we find amongst the Children of Adam, was an evident mark of
their Piety; and this their Religious Inclination was, without doubt, the
effect of their being persuaded of the truth of the Creation, and first Promise.

The sin of Cain in killing his Brother, shows the same persuasion: The Divine
Oracle, The Seed of the Woman, shall bruise the Serpent's head, being expressed
in very general terms, was applicable, either to the first Son of Eve, or to
his Posterity; or else, to some other who might be called her Seed, because
born from one of her Posterity.

It is natural for us, to pass from one meaning to another, when we are in
search for the true sense of such general propositions as these. Now it appears
from the Name which Eve gave to Cain, that she took the words of this Oracle in
the first sense, that is, she looked upon Cain to be the Son that had been
promised her, as appears from her own words. Genesis IV. 1.
I have (says she) gotten a Man from the Lord. And it cannot be doubted, that
being in this Opinion her self, she was not wanting to cherish and flatter this
hope in her Son, that he was to fulfill the first Prophecy or Divine Oracle:
Neither is it any whit stranger to suppose this, than to imagine, that Mandane
did instill into her Son Cyrus aspiring thoughts for the Empire of Asia, from
the Dream of his Father Astyages, which she looked upon as a Divine foreboding.

When we read therefore, that Cain slew his Brother, seeing him preferred of
God by a very distinguishing mark in the Act of their Sacrificing, through the
jealousy and hatred he had conceived against him: May we not very naturally
conclude from thence, that as he had never doubted of the truth of the Promise,
so he could not endure to see another come to dispute his Pretensions of being
the fulfiller of that first Oracle.

A like Reflection we may make upon the Name which Eve gave to Seth, and indeed,
the Jews in their ancient Commentaries on Genesis, lead us to it: She called
his Name Seth, Rabboth fol. 27. col. 2. par. 23. and alibi.
for God (said she) has appointed me another Seed. R. Tanchuma following the
Notion of R. Samuel, says, That she had regard to that Seed which was to
proceed from another, or a strange place; and what Seed is that? says he. It Is
the King, the Messiah.

I pretend not to maintain the Solidity of the Reflections they make upon the
words, Another Seed. They seem rather to have pleased themselves in sporting
with a word which admits of both significations, other and strange, than to
give us an exact and distinct notion of the importance of that word. Thus much
at least, we cannot deny, but that Eve considering her Son Seth, as him whom
God had given her instead of Abel, she could do no less than acquaint him with
her hopes; and indeed, this information was that which not only disposed Seth
and his Posterity for Piety and the Spirit of Religion, but did also in a
particular manner incline them to separate from the Race of Cain, as from those
whom God had bereft of the right of fulfilling the first Oracle, to which
naturally they might pretend.

It appears from the Example of Enoch, that the Children of Adam lived in the
exercise of Religious Worship: And we know that the said Worship supposes the
Creation of the World, and Promise of the Messiah, and that all the Acts of
Religion are employed either in Commemorating these Truths every seventh day,
or in unfolding the Wonders therein contained, or in testifying our
thankfulness to God for the same.

We may add here, that the instance of Lamech's Polygamy does in some sort make
out to us the force of this persuasion.

Cain being rejected by God, and distinguished by an exemplary Punishment, for
killing his Brother Abel, it is evident, that no man could any longer interpret
that Promise in the first sense, by applying it to Adam's first Son, or his
Posterity. This being so plain, as none could be ignorant of it, it was
therefore natural to seek for another meaning of that Promise, and to place the
fulfilling of it in a Posterity at a greater distance, or more numerous.

And indeed so it happened; for the Exemplary punishment which God inflicted on
Cain during the seven first Generations, according to those words, That he
should be punished sevenfold, made his Posterity apprehend, that God (for the
sin he had committed) had justly debarred him of the right he might otherwise
have had of fulfilling the Promise.

But yet at the same time they conceived also, that this Right, which belonged
more properly to the eldest or firstborn, than to the younger Brothers, was
now to return to his Posterity after the seventh Generation. And in this view
it seems, that Lamech affected Polygamy, as if by multiplying his Posterity, he
had hoped to see that Promise fulfilled by some one or other of them.

It cannot be denied, but that he imitated the Crimes of Cain, and therefore
may well be supposed to have been leven'd also with his false Maxims. But how
greatly soever he was corrupted, yet forasmuch as he had been educated in the
hopes of his Father, and in converse with the Family of Seth, who many Ages
before had formed Public Assemblies for Religious Exercises, we cannot well
imagine, but that he must have had the same Pretensions.

It appears therefore, that the Polygamy of Lamech may justly be esteemed an
effect of his Misapprehensions concerning the sense of the first Promise; those
means which he conceived most likely, he made choice of, to give him a share in
the fulfilling of that Promise, which pointed at a Son to be Born. So that the
irregularity he was guilty of in Marrying two Wives at the same time, may pass
for a proof of his being persuaded not only of the Promise, That the Seed of
the Woman should break the Serpent's Head, but also of the Creation of the
World.

It seems, that according to these Principles, we may give a very plausible
account, as well of those Violences which were exercised in the old World, and
of their strong Inclinations to sensuality, as of those Alliances between the
Family of Seth, and that of Cain; which did not happen till seven Generations
after Cain; that is to say, at a time when the Family of Cain pretended to be
restored again to his ancient right, from which he had been suspended during
seven Generations: The Family of Seth by these Alliances with the Family of
Cain, seeming desirous to secure their hopes and pretensions. It will not be
thought strange, that I look upon the Jealousy of Cain toward his Brother (as
thinking himself supplanted by him of his right to accomplish the Promise) and
the Polygamy of Lamech, as an effect of this persuasion; if it be considered,
that in all likelihood this belief was more strong at the beginning of the
World, the Idea of the Promise being more fresh and lively in the minds of Men,
as a thing at no great distance from those times: And that we find in the Holy
Family in general, manifold instances of this Spirit of Jealousy, and burning
desire of a Posterity.

We find also, much about the same time, another Lamech, the Father of Noah,
declaring by the Name he gave his Son, the hopes he had that he might probably
be the Person who was to comfort Mankind concerning all the Misery sin had
brought into the World. Genesis V. 29.


Thus it appears clearly, that for above sixteen Ages from the Creation of the
World to the Deluge, we find in all the actions of the Children of Adam a
strong impression of the belief of the Creation of the World, and the Promise
of the Messiah. And till this time we find not the least instance which might
seem to convince the Relation of Moses of the least Absurdity. We see men
acting from the persuasion of these two Matters of Fact; we must conclude
therefore, that they were distinctly informed of them; yea, we see all men in
general, acting according to this Persuasion: it is evident therefore, they
were known to all, and the weekly observance of the Sabbath day continually
representing those Truths to the Eyes and Minds of all, takes away all
possibility of Forgery in these Matters.

Let us now enquire whether after the Deluge these Ideas were effaced; or,
whether they have not exerted the same efficacy in the Spirit of Noah, and the
Actions of all his Posterity.

CHAP. XII.
That Noah was fully persuaded of the Creation of the World, and the Promise of
the Messiah.
IF we find that the Children of Adam, and their Posterity, could be exactly
informed of the Creation and the Promise of the Messiah, and that indeed they
were so, it will follow that Noah could not be unacquainted with the same
Truths.

Noah was six hundred Years old when the Deluge came: He had Conversed with
Lamech his Father, who had seen Adam and his Children, as being fifty six years
of Age when Adam died; he had Conversed with Methusalem his Grandfather, who
died that very year the Flood came, and who being three hundred and forty three
years old when Adam died, had without doubt instructed Noah, during so vast an
interval of time, in like manner as himself had been instructed by Adam for
many Ages.

And as Methusalem had lived a long time with Seth, who died in the year of the
World 1042, so it is evident, that Noah who was born in the year 1056, had not
only seen Lamech and Methusalem, but many also of their Ancestors, whose
Discourses he heard, examined their Traditions, and imitated their way of
Worship.

Moreover, Noah saw that there were no men in his time, who did not deduce
their Genealogy from Adam. All his Contemporaries could convince him of it.
Every one of them having as exact a knowledge of their Ancestors as he could
have of his.

Now, that this was a matter which they might be easily assured of, appears on
these two accounts: the one is the long life which the men of that Age enjoyed;
and the other, the short interval of time which was between the Creation and
the Deluge, the whole amounting only to 1656 years. Adam died in the year 930,
and the Deluge happened in the 600 year of Noah's Life. Adam died 126 years
before the Birth of Noah, so as Adam must have been seen and known by
Methusalem, Lamech, and thousands of others who were Contemporarys with Noah.

To these we may add a third Remark, and that is the Jealousy and Hatred which
was between the two Families of Cain and Seth: Cain's Posterity were altogether
corrupted, and the greatest part of Seth's also: Noah being of the Posterity of
Seth, had no reason to call those Matters in question, which he saw generally
owned and received of those to whom their Wickedness and Crimes suggested
Objections against them. And I do not know, whether I might not suppose that
Noah had before his eyes Paradise, with the Cherubims who guarded the entrance
thereof, and made it inaccessible, which if so, was an authentic proof of the
Truths in question: That Garden, as far as we can judge, being not destroyed,
nor the Guardian Angel discharged till the time of the Flood.

Be it as it will, yet Noah being a Man fearing God, was honored with an
extraordinary Call to exhort Men to Repentance, he was commanded to build an
Ark; he saw the Deluge happening, according to what God had foretold, he saw
the Beasts, of their own accord, gather themselves together, to enter into the
Ark, in like manner as he had been told that they came to Adam. He saw the
Deluge cease according to the Divine Declaration, he saw fire from Heaven
consuming the Sacrifice he offered in acknowledgment to God, in like manner, as
the words of Moses seem to imply, that it happened at the Sacrifice of Abel. He
saw himself chosen in a peculiar manner, to be the Depositary of the Promise
which Adam had left to his Posterity, tho he never had the satisfaction of
seeing it fulfilled himself, God having reserved the Accomplishment of it for
another time, and to one of his Posterity at a great distance.

It is very evident, that all these Particulars could not but conduce to
preserve the Memory of these first most important Matters of Fact of the
Creation and the Promise of the Messiah, and therefore, that Noah must of
necessity be convinced of the certainty and truth of them. Let us now see
whether Noah's Offspring had the same persuasion concerning these things.

CHAP. XIII.
That the Children of Noah were convinced of the truth of these Matters.
THe Children of Noah were an hundred years old when the Deluge happened, and
consequently had conversed a long space of time with Methusalem, and many other
of their Ancestors and Relations of the old World, and had frequented the
Religious Assemblies, observed every Sabbath day in the Family of Seth, whence
they were descended; and had been instructed there by those who had seen Adam
and his Posterity; it is evident therefore, beyond all contest, that they could
not be ignorant of the Creation, and Promise of the Messiah.

Now, that they had a distinct knowledge of those Matters, we may evidently
conclude, not only because they had seen God, when he blessed them, and a
second time said to them, as after a new Creation, Gen IX. 1.
increase and multiply: Nor only upon the account of his giving them a positive
Law, forbidding them to eat the blood of living Creatures, Genesis IX 5.
whose flesh they were permitted to feed on, as he had forbid Adam, to eat of
the Fruit of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, when he left the rest to
their free use: Not only, for that he had given the Rainbow, as a new sign of
his Covenant with Mankind; nor only because they had practiced those Acts of
Religion, to which they had been Educated by their Parents and Ancestors before
the Deluge: But because the same may be inferred from that action which drew
upon Cham his Father's Curse.

What is the meaning of Cham's deriding the Nakedness of his Father, and of his
Father's taking occasion from thence to Curse him so solemnly, and that in the
person of Canaan his Firstborn? If it were only a piece of irreverence in the
Father, what reason had Noah to Curse the Son on that account? Or, was it (as
some have supposed) that Canaan had given occasion first to his Fathers
Irreverence, by acquainting him with the disorder in which he had found his
Grandfather Noah? Without doubt, there is something more than ordinary in this
History. Sure it is, that the account given us of Cham, represents him as a
profane person, and deeply tinctured with the Maxims of Cain and his
Posterity, and seems to hint to us, that he supposing the Promise of the
Messiah either frustrated by the Death of Abel, or altogether false, he made
his Father's Nakedness the subject of his Mockery; who seemed to be incapable
of begetting any more Children, and therefore incapable of contributing to the
accomplishment of the Promise of the Messiah, in hopes of which, he accounted
himself so happy, that he had escaped the Deluge.

What means it also, that Noah pronounces so terrible a Curse, against the
Posterity of Cham by Canaan, who were so far from giving an accomplishment to
that Promise, that they were in a manner wholly exterminated by Joshuah, when
God put the Posterity of Shem by Abraham in possession of the Land of Canaan?
It is very natural for us to conceive, that Noah considered his Son Cham's
deriding of him, not only as contrary to the respect which was due to him as
his Father, but also as the effect of a horrid Impiety, which attacked God
himself, as making that Promise, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the
Serpent's Head, a subject of Raillery.

This Reflection upon the action of Cham, and the Curse of Noah consequent to
it, does appear very natural, if we consider that Noah could not but reflect
upon the Name his Father had given him, and the special favor showed to him,
in being alone preserved of all the posterity of Adam, and consequently, the
only person in the World, by whom this Promise was to be fulfilled. Herod lib.
1. Justin Hist. lib. 1. Valor Max lib. 1.
At least, it cannot be denied, but that this Reflection is as natural as it
would have been just in reference to the Fact of cruel Astyages, if when he had
(as he thought) sufficiently cluded his Dream, which presaged the glory of the
Son of Mandane his Daughter, he had found her indecently uncovered and had
taken thence occasion, deridingly to reflect, with his other Children, upon a
Dream which seemed to promise to the Son of Mandane the Throne of all Asia, and
threaten the ruin of his own.

It Is a thing worth our noting, that in the time of Ezra, the Samaritans had so
fresh a memory of Cham's sin, Ezra IV. 14
which they supposed to be generally preserved amongst other Nations, that in
their Letter to King Artaxerxes against the Jews who rebuilt Jerusalem, they
declare, they would not discover the King's Nakedness; implying, that they
could not consent to the injury he might receive from the Jews in suffering
Jerusalem to be rebuilt. It is not needful to repeat those other Arguments
which prove, that the Children of Noah had reason to be, and were actually as
much convinced of the Creation and first Promise, as their Ancestors were; for
seeing that these Arguments were the very same which their Fathers had to
persuade themselves of the truth of these things, we had better proceed to the
Enquiry, whether their Posterity that followed them, had the same Persuasion
they had? which may easily be proved, in making some Reflections on the
following Ages, and upon those who descended from Noah and his Children.

CHAP. XIV.
That the Posterity of Noah 's Children were persuaded of the truth of the
Creation, and first Promise.
IF Noah saw Methusalem, who had seen Adam and his Posterity before the Deluge;
Abraham saw Shem and his Children, who were unquestionable Witnesses of what
had passed before and since the Flood.

Noah dying 350 years after the Deluge, it appears, that his Death happened in
the year of the World 2006; so that Noah died only two years before the Birth
of Abraham, he being born in the year 2008.

Abraham lived 150 years with Shem, who died in the year 2158, and 88 years
with Arphaxad the Son of Shem, who died in the year 2096, he lived 118 years
with Selah Son of Arphaxad, who died in the year 2126, and 179 years with Heber
the Son of Selah, who died in the year 2187.

Isaac being born in the year 2108, might see Shem, Selah, and Heber, who for
some hundreds of years had conversed with Noah and his other Children; I say we
may suppose him to have conversed with those Patriarchs, or at least with those
who being their Contemporaries, discoursed of Noah as a Man but of yesterday,
and from his Relation, and his Children's, were informed of the Creation of
Adam, his Fall, the Promise of the Holy Seed, the Death of Abel, the Miracle of
Paradise, the Preaching of Noah, the Deluge, etc. And who, in obedience to the
Law of God, observed by their Ancestors, did meet together fifty two times
every year, to Celebrate the Memorial of these Wonders, and to teach them to
their Posterity.

We may take notice of three things here which conduce much to the preservation
of a distinct knowledge of these Matters.

The First is, De Dea Syra p. 1060.
That the Ark it self might be seen by all the World, as a certain Monument of
the Deluge, and the saving of Noah and his Sons. This Monument continued very
many Ages after Abraham, and was a means to preserve the Memory of the Deluge
amongst the Pagans, as Lucian, to name no more acquaints us.

The Second is, That it was as easy for any of Abraham's Contemporaries, as
for Abraham, to deduce his Genealogy from Noah and his Children.

And this was the more easy, because the first Division of the World amongst
the three Sons of Noah, was followed by another Partition amongst their
Posterity, in the year of the World 1758, a Division which gave them a just
Title of possession to that part of the Earth, where they were seated, in
defense of which, it seems probable, that the War of Chedorlaomer (mentioned
the XIII of Genesis) was undertaken, the Family of Cham having invaded the Land
of Canaan, which was part of the Inheritance of Shem, as we shall make appear
elsewhere.

The Third and last thing is, That it was not easy to impose a forgery upon
those times, because their Lives were yet of a great extent, though inferior to
those who lived before the Flood.

To these we may add this further Consideration, that as the Jealousy which
was between the Family of Seth and of Cain, was a great means to preserve
inviolably the important Truths of the Creation and first Promise; a like
Jealousy now being risen amongst the Sons of Noah, Cham being Accursed of his
own Father in the person of Canaan, and the same being propagated to their
Posterity, it could not but effectually contribute to rescue these important
Truths from Oblivion, and particularly the Promise of the Messiah, conceived in
these words, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's head.

In a word, Judge. VIII. 23. and IX. 8. Talm. Hier. fol. 11 col. 4 and gloss. in
h. l. and Avodazara c. III. fol. 43. col. 1. De Dea Sir. p. 1069.
we may not only in reference to the matter in hand, take notice of what Lucian
relates concerning the Religion of the Assyrians, which did so lively preserve
the memory of the Deluge, and of what was done to Noah by his Son Cham, when he
scoffed at the Nakedness of his Father; but also, that the God of the
Sichemites was called Baalberith, whose Symbol was the figure of the Privy
parts of a Man, which seems a manifest allusion to their descent from the
Family of Cham, the Sichemites being some of the Posterity of Canaan.

It is also very natural to conceive, First of all, that it was from those old
Pretensions that the Canaanites took occasion to profane the most ^oly things,
with such shameful Idea's.

Secondly, That it was in detestation of these Idea's, that God ordered the
killing of the Priests of Baal. And

Thirdly, That it was for the same reason, that the Jews were commanded to
destroy them utterly.

Fourthly, This was also the reason why the Israelites were so often desirous
of imitating their Crimes.

In the Fifth place, As we see that upon the like account the Moabites and
Ammonites took Chemosh for their God, and that the Women of those Nations were
very zealous to propagate their Religion, of which we have an Instance in
Jezabel the Wife of Ahab, so God was also willing to inspire his People with
Horror and Detestation, for their Religion or any Alliance with them.

Lastly, As there does appear a very great Conformity and resemblance, between
the first Birth of the World from the first Chaos, and its being born again
after the Deluge; between Adam the first Man, and Noah the second, and between
the Jealousies sprung up in both their Families upon the account of the Promise
of the Messiah: So this conformity could not but very naturally contribute, to
preserve the Memory of those Ancient Events which Noah and his Children had
delivered to their Posterity with all the care which is taken to preserve the
Tradition of the fundamentals of Religion.

CHAP. XV.
That we find the Family of Abraham and his Posterity till Jacob fully
persuaded of those Truths.
IT is no less easy to conceive how the distinct knowledge of these Truths,
was in process of time handed down to Jacob and his Posterity. This I shall
briefly explain.

I need not take notice here, that the Religion practiced by Abraham and his
Posterity suppose these Matters as constantly owned and known.

It cannot be denied, but that Lot having followed Terah and Abraham, when God
called the latter out of Chaldea, might thence suppose, that this Heavenly Call
did separate and distinguish him from the rest of the Posterity of Shem, and
gave him a right as well as Abraham, to pretend to the privilege of fulfilling
the Promise of the Messiah, or at least to see it fulfilled in his Posterity.
This we may infer from the Incest of Lot's Daughters; their Crime, which in
another view appears very monstrous, does clearly prove, that they were
strongly possessed with this hope which their Father had raised in them.

I know that some Interpreters suppose, Lyra in Genes. XIX.
that they were moved to commit this Incest from a pious intention of
preserving Mankind, as imagining to themselves, that as the Deluge had drowned
all Men, besides Noah and his Family, so the Flames which destroyed Sodom, had
consumed all Mankind; which they were the more ready to believe, because they
might have heard from their Father, that the World one day was to perish by
Fire. Beres. Rab. part 23.
But indeed, it may be considered as proceeding from a very different Motive,
the Jewish Doctors plainly averring, that this was done by them in hopes of
bringing forth the promised Redeemer.

And if we look upon this action of theirs in this view, with reference to the
Promise of the Messiah, which was the grand object of the hopes of all those
that feared God; it is natural to conceive, that considering their Father, as
one whom God had peculiarly chosen from amongst the Posterity of Shem, to
execute the Promise of the Messiah, and seeing that their Mother was changed
into a Statue of Salt, they conceived themselves in some sort authorized to
surprise their Father in that manner; and the rather, because they conceived on
the one hand, that none of the Canaanites (upon whom God had now begun to pour
forth so hideous a Vengeance, as a beginning of the Execution of the Curse
against Cham) having any part in this chiefest of Blessings, could ever Marry
them, after that God had so manifestly separated and called forth their Father
from amongst them; and on the other hand, supposing that God would dispense
with the irregularity of this action, by reason of their being reduced to an
extremity.

There be three Circumstances which greatly confirm this my remark upon the
Motive of their Incest.

The First is, That they are represented to us as those who had behaved
themselves very chastely, in the midst of the Impurities of Sodom; and that
besides we find they designed no such thing, till after the Death of their
Mother.

The other is, That we see them contriving the thing together, and that in a
Matter which naturally is apt to separate the greatest Friends, where the
Motive proceeds from a Spirit of uncleanness: Nor indeed, do we find that they
continued in this Incest.

The Third is, That they were so far from being ashamed of an action, in it
self so criminal, or concealing the knowledge of it from Posterity, that they
gave those Names to the Children born of this their Incest, that might
perpetuate and divulge the memory of this their action, the one calling her Son
Moab, as much as to say, Born of my Father, and the other hers Benammi; a Name
of a like signification with the former.

This Observation is very necessary, because these two Sons became the heads of
two great People, the Moabites, and the Ammonites, whose Kingdoms lasted above
1300 years, and lived on the Borders of the Holy Land, and were jealous of
Abraham and his Posterity, as pretending that Abraham could not be chosen
before Lot their Father, who being the Son of Abraham's Elder Brother, was to
be considered as the firstborn of Terah, and who were apt, without doubt, to
take it for granted, that if God had brought Abraham out of Chaldea, and
rescued him from Ur, he had in a more peculiar manner, saved Lot alone from the
Conflagration of Sodom, by the Ministry of Angels, and that Abraham and Lot
being equally descended from Terah, the right of accomplishing the Promise, did
equally belong to them.

And indeed, we find that in all succeeding times, these thoughts did
predominate with them, as may easily be made out from the History of Balaam.

We see therefore, that the Moabites who were descended from the Eldest
Daughter of Lot, looked upon the pretensions of the Israelites, that the
Messiah was to be born of their Seed, in Exclusion to all others, with great
impatience, and it was for this reason, that they sent for Baladm, to decide
(by Divine Authority) the difference between them, concerning the right of the
promised Blessing.

We may make very near the same Reflections upon the calling of Ruth the
Moabitess, when she says to Naomi her Mother-in-Law, Thy God shall be my God,
and thy People shall be my People; which signifies a renouncing of the
Pretensions of her own People, and an acquiescing in the Justice of those of
the Israelites, and it was upon this occasion, that Ruth is more particularly
taken notice of in the Genealogy of our Savior, as I shall have occasion to
show hereafter.

That which I have hinted concerning the intention and aim of the Daughters of
Lot, has been observed before by the Jewish Rabbis, as we may see in the most
ancient of their Commentaries upon these words of Genesis, Chap. XIX. v. 32.
Come let us make our Father drink Wine, etc. Upon which words, R. Tanchumah
following the footsteps of R. Samuel, makes this Reflection, That we may
preserve Seed of our Father; it is not said, that we may preserve a Son from
our Father, but that we may renew the Posterity of our Father, because (says
he) they had regard to that Seed, which was to proceed from a strange place,
and what Seed is that? It is the King Messiah.

After this Observation upon this action of Lot's Daughters, it can no longer
rationally be doubted, but that the violent passion which Sarah had for a Son,
proceeded from the very fame impression which made her contrary to the
Inclinations of that Sex, to deliver her Servant into her Husband's Bosom,
especially if we join to this the particular Promise God had made to Abraham,
which she could not be ignorant of.

Sarah sees her self destitute of Children, and her Barrenness having continued
so long a time, she had no hopes of ever being a Mother, what remained
therefore for her, but to think of adopting a Son of her Bondwoman? And in
consideration of this, she persuades her Husband, who had no inclination to any
such thing by any thing that appears (at least precedent to this desire of his
Wife) to take her unto him. He sought the Seed of God, that is, the Seed which
God had promised, as Malachy expresses it, Mal. II. 15.

At least it is certain, Yarg. Jonath. in h. l. and Kimchi in h. l.
that the Jews have taken these words of Malachy in this sense for a very long
time, as they do still to this day.

We may easily perceive, that this was a predominant impression throughout that
whole Family, if to what we have already observed of Lot's Daughters and of
Sarah, we do but add the sorrow Rebecca conceived because of her Barrenness,
and the Contentions happening between the Wives of Jacob, for their Husband's
Company, without which supposal, the relation of such a Matter, would be a
thing of no importance.

Certainly, as it would be ridiculous to suppose, that so wise an Historian as
Moses was, should stoop to the recital of such mean and low particulars (not to
speak worse of them) without aiming at something very high and considerable, so
it is rational to believe, that in all these Relations, he pointed at the
Promise of the Messiah, which at that time was the great Object of the Religion
of the Faithful, which God in process of time did explain by little and little
more distinctly.

The Jealousy also which arose between Ishmael and Isaac, is no less
considerable. Ishmael was the eldest Son of Abraham, and Circumcised as well as
Isaac; he was saved from Death by the Ministry of an Angel; and was the head of
a great People, who from that time to this very day, have always been
Circumcised.

It may be also of great use to take notice here, that Ishmael could not but be
instructed by Abraham concerning the Promise God had made to him, to which he
pretended, as being the Elder, and therefore mocked at the great stir was made
at the weaning of Isaac, as thinking that he being the Eldest, could not be
deprived of the natural right of his Primogeniture. At least, it is very
probable, that except it had been thus, Sarah's anger (approved by God himself)
would not have proved so violent, as well against Ishmael, as Hagar, who
flattered him in these pretensions, nor would Abraham so far have complied with
it.

And forasmuch, as Isaac on the other side, was born to fulfill a particular
Promise, was Circumcised, and saved from death by an Angel; and that besides
all this, Ishmael and he had been equally educated in the practice of Religion,
it is impossible, but that this Conformity of Events (which has been the cause
of such lasting Contests between them and their Posterity) must have engaged
them to inquire into the truth of the Creation, and the Promise of the Messiah,
and into all other Matters which did any way concern them.

We have a like instance, if not stronger for our purpose, in Esau and Jacob,
who were both born of the same Mother, but Esau being the firstborn, we find
the same Jealousy arising between them, as before between Ishmael and Isaac.
Sarah seemed somewhat cruel in casting out her adopted Son Ishmael, and here we
see that Rebecca preferred Jacob before Esau her Firstborn, and assisted him
in robbing his Elder Brother of the Blessing due to him of right: But without
question, her design in all this was to entail this Blessing on her Family, by
making it fall on Jacob, as being afraid (and that not without cause) that Esau
by his Sins and his Marriage with the Canaanites, had made himself incapable
thereof.

Now as this was the occasion of a great dispute between these two Patriarchs
educated in the same Belief and Religion, so it plainly shows us how strong a
persuasion they had of the Creation, and the Promise of the Messiah.

And besides, it is further very remarkable.

First, That Moses represents Esau as a profane person, for which, not only
this reason may be alleged, that he sold his Birthright for a Mess of
Pottage, to which Birthright the Priesthood was always annexed, but we must
further take notice.

That he being educated by his Father in the hopes of this Blessing, he seemed
to laugh at it in all his Actions; for first he Married the Daughter of Heth,
by which he sufficiently intimated, that he neither minded the Blessing nor the
Curse of God; for Canaan and his Posterity had in a very solemn manner been
Cursed by Noah, with a particular regard to the Promise of the Messiah, as I
hinted before.

In the Second place, he Married a Daughter of Ishmael, as if he intended to
renew the Pretensions of Ishmael against Isaac his Father.

In the Third place we see, that when he repented of this profane humor, he
was pierced with extreme sorrow for the Crime he had committed, because he
could not obtain pardon for it.

This Jealousy and difference between Esau and Jacob, is the more
considerable, because Esau was the head of a great Nation, viz. the Edomites, a
People Circumcised as well as the Jews, Jealous of the Posterity of Jacob, and
living upon the Borders of Judea, as well as the Moabites, Ammonites, and
Ishmaelites, but yet put by their hopes by that Oracle, The greater People
shall serve the lesser.

Were it needful to afford a greater Light to these Reflections, I might here
add a very natural one, from the Oath which Abraham made his Servant Eliezer
take, when he sent him to Padan Aram, to procure a Wife for Isaac. We may
easily judge, that he was not willing he should marry a Canaanite as Lot had
done; and that for fear of forfeiting his hopes, and weakening the just
Pretensions of Isaac to the right of accomplishing the Promise, from whence the
Canaanites were excluded by the Prophecy delivered by Noah. But that which made
Abraham to oblige his Servant to swear, putting his Hand under his Thigh; that
is, St. Jerome.
touching that part which was the Subject of Circumcision, and which bore the
mark of the Covenant, deserves a further Consideration.

We find first of all, that the Patriarch Jacob, observes the same Custom, when
he made his Son Joseph to take an Oath, that he should not bury him in Egypt.

Secondly, We find that this Custom of beholding that Member which received
Circumcision, as a part Consecrated to Religion, did by little and little take
place in the Land of Canaan, and gave occasion to the Worship of Baal Peor, so
famous among the Moabites and Ammonites; a very surprising and strange Worship
indeed, and yet Celebrated with Festivals, and Hymns, and was the rise of that
Worship which the Heathens afterward gave to Priapus. What I have here
observed, has been in part acknowledged by the Jews, where they speak of the
Worship of Baal Peor, and the reason which made God prescribe to the Priest the
use of Linen Drawers, that their Nakedness might not appear during the
Functions of their Ministry.

After all that I have now said, concerning those Jealousies which Moses
relates with so much care, it seems that the Solidity of these Observations
cannot be disputed. Especially if we consider, that it is these Jealousies, and
these Pretensions to the Promise of the Messiah that gave rise to the Custom of
calling God, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: for
though he might as well have been called the God of Adam, the God of Enoch, and
the God of Noah, forasmuch as all these Patriarchs were also Depositaries of
the Promise of the Messiah: Yet it is probable that God was called so, because
of the particular promises which had been made first to Abraham, secondly to
Isaac, and lastly to Jacob, and in opposition to the pretensions of some people
near Neighbors to the Israelites, and jealous of their hopes: The God of
Abraham, and not of Lot, as the Ammonites and Moabites Lot's Posterity,
pretended; the God of Isaac, and not of Ishmael, as the Ishmaelites pretended;
the God of Jacob and not of Esau, as the Edomites who were the Offspring of
Esau pretended.

CHAP. XVI.
That this very Persuasion seems to have been kept up amongst the Posterity of
Jacob, until Moses 's time.
IT is yet easier to show; that the distinct knowledge of the Creation, and of
the Promise of the Messiah, did continue from Jacob to Joseph, and so on to
Moses.

The following Arguments will clearly demonstrate it.

First of all, Genes. XXVIII.
we see that Jacob being possessed of the Blessing, and so Depositary of the
Promise, obeyed Isaac's Command, who forbad him to take a Wife, but out of his
own Family; and that accordingly he went to Padan-Aram, to seek and get a Wife
amongst those of his Kindred, as Abraham had formerly sent for one of the same
Country for his Son Isaac.

We see in the Second place, Genes. XXIX.
this Patriarch imitated Lamech in some respect, by his falling into Polygamy:
For who can doubt but he, who was conscious to himself of having surpised, as
he thought, the Blessing designed for his Elder Brother, did act in this
occasion by the same principle which Lamech had formerly acted by? Thus we see
that Barren Rachel follows Sarah's Example, and adopts the Son of that Maid
Servant, whom she gave to Jacob; wherein Leah followed her, and gave one of her
Maids to her Husband: All this was evidently grounded upon the same Principle
which afterward bred those Dissensions betwixt Jacob's Wives about the getting
Children by him: For it is very natural to believe, that Jacob did not conceal
from his Wives his advantages and hopes.

It appears, that Jacob's Children which were born, for the most part in
Laban's House in Chaldea, where they had seen Abraham's Native Country, and
those of their own Kindred, from among whom God had commanded Abraham to
depart, and to go into Canaan, did entertain very lively Notions of those
important Truths, especially after they were strengthened and confirmed by the
Cares and Instructions of old Isaac, to whom they were brought by Jacob; and
after they began to practice in Canaan, the Worship and Religion of their own
Family, and to compare it with the Doctrine they had learnt in Chaldea.

Those several Voyages which God obliged the Patriarchs to undertake, as that
of Abraham out of Ur of Chaldea; that of Jacob out of Canaan (we ought to make
the same judgment of Moses's forty years sojourning amongst the Midianites)
did evidently oblige them to examine more carefully, what was the Tradition
received in the several Countries into which they traveled, and so to imprint
the more deeply into their minds the belief of those important Truths, which
were the Foundation of their Religion. and the sole object of the Meditations
of the faithful.

One sees in short, the effects of these Impressions.

1. By that Custom which seems to have begun in Jacob's time, and which
aftrrwards got the authority of a Law, I mean the custom of taking to Wife ones
own Brother's Widow to raise him up Seed.

2. The Sin of Onan is represented so odious, only because by it, he acted
against the belief of the Promise.

3. We see the same thing in the action of Thamar, Juda's Daughter-in-Law; for
having been deceived by Judah, she in exchange, surpised him into an Incest,
the Commission whereof, according to the Observation of a Greek Commentator,
she sought to perpetuate, Theoph. in Mat. c. I.
only because she had a vehement desire to get Children out of a Family, which
she looked upon as solely entrusted with the Promise of the Messiah, and out of
which he was accordingly to be born.

It is necessary to make that Observation, because we ought always to remember,
that she was formerly a Canaanite, and that consequently she left off and
renounced the Impiety and Idolatry of her Kindred, when she embraced the
Religion and hopes of Jacob's Family. Therefore we see that particular mention
is made of her in our Savior's Genealogy, and of Ruth who likewise gave over
all the pretensions of her own People, and so forsook her Religion to enter
into the Tribe of Judah, as well as of Bathshebah, who was Wife to a Hittite;
whereupon an ancient Father has very well observed, S. Hieronym: in Tradit.
Heb ad 1. Reg. 3.
according to the Jewish Opinion, that Shimei's Revilings against David, when
he went out of Jerusalem, during Absalom's Rebellion, reflected upon his Birth
out of the Posterity of Ruth the Moabitess, as the Jews even to this very day
do understand it.

We may make the same Reflection upon the Consideration of that implacable
jealousy which Joseph's Dreams raised in the Minds of his Brethren.

1. We may reasonably conceive, that he being the Firstborn of Rachel, and the
Wife which Jacob his Father had first made Love to, he had been brought up with
hopes of the Birthright, as well as Isaac, who was but the second Son of
Abraham

But 2. He might besides, very well suppose, that the Crimes of his Brethren
born of Leah (whom in all likelihood he looked upon as the sole, Legitimate
Heirs, the others being born of Maidservants) did rank them with Esau, whom
God had rejected. That outrageous Fury which Joseph's Brethren showed against
him, because they looked upon him as preferred of God by those Dreams to those
that were born before him, is so like that of Cain, of Lot, of Ismael, and of
Esau; that it had, in all probability, the same Cause and Original.

Do we not see afterward, another effect of the same jealousy, in the
affectation that Jacob and his Family showed in the Land of Egypt, when they
refused to live promiscuously with the Egyptians, which were the Posterity of
Ham, and begged of them a Country where they might live by themselves; as we
see on the contrary, the Egyptians showing an extreme aversion against Jacob
and his Family, which was of Sem's Posterity.

Certainly it cannot be denied, that as this separation was an effect of the
Antipathy of those Nations, so it might also be in some respect, the
consequence of Jacob and his Childrens pretensions upon the Promise of the
Messiah, the execution and accomplishment whereof, they stood up for as
belonging to themselves.

To all this we may add, that the Persecution of the Egyptians against the
Israelites obliged them to make particular Reflections upon the Promise which
Jacob on his Deathbed made to them from God: That Persecution was chiefly
intended against the Male Children, Pharaoh commanding the extirpation of them,
because he was afraid of the Jews growing too strong for him, and of their
joining with his Enemies; and perhaps also, because the Jews entertaining a
certain expectation of the Messiah's coming, and so boasting and glorying of it
upon all occasions, the Egyptians designed to frustrate, and cut off their hope
thus, by hindering the accomplishment of the Promise.

However there was no real difficulty to keep up the distinct remembrance of
those important Facts. Jacob died in the year of the World, 2315. Joseph died
in the year of the World, 2428. There are then but 58 years between Joseph's
Death, and Moses's Birth: Moses might have seen not only Amram his own ^^ther,
who had seen Levi, but also Kohath his Grandfather, who had seen Jacob.

And it is for that reason, Genesis L. 23.
that Moses seems to have observed, that Joseph saw his own Children's
Children; that is to say, the third Generation.

One cannot imagine any Circumstances more conducible than these, to the
preserving the distinct knowledge of those important Truths which were the
Foundations of Religion.

CHAP. XVII.
That the Tradition which gives us an Account of the Persuasion which the
Ancients had of the truth of the Creation of the World, and of the Promise of
the Messiah, before Moses cannot be suspected.
I Have showed, I think, evidently enough, that both the Creation, and the
Promise of the Messiah, with all the other things depending upon them, might
have been known certainly by Adam and his Children, and so afterward be handed
down to all his Posterity till Moses's time.

From Adam to Noah there is but one Man, viz. Methusalah, who joined hands with
both.

From Noah to Abraham, there is but one Man, viz. Sem, who saw them both for a
considerable time.

From Abraham to Joseph, there is but one Man, viz. Isaac, Joseph's Grandfather.

From Joseph to Moses, there is (...) one Man, viz. Amram, who might have seen
Joseph long enough.

Those Characters of time which Moses has so carefully observed, do plainly
evidence, that the Creation, and the Promise of the Messiah, might be
distinctly known: For if we suppose a continued succession of Adam's Offspring,
it was not easy to impose upon Men in that matter; and that, because every one
of those who were Contemporaries with Moses, being able to run up his own
Pedigree as far as the Flood, nay, even up to Adam, by as compendious a way as
Moses could do his own; they would have treated those with the utmost degree of
scorn, who should have attempted to forge any thing contrary to what was
publicly and universally known; and so it was equally impossible, that the
truth of things so important as the Creation, and the Promise of the Messiah
were, should be unknown.

Besides, I think I have plainly showed, that many actions recorded by Moses,
though very strange in themselves, and which the Atheists look upon as absurd and
ridiculous, have proceeded from no other principle than from the strong
persuasion of the truth of those Facts, according as in a long Series of Ages,
every one of the Ancients following his own humor and prejudices, framed to
himself a particular Idea differing from the true sense of the Promise of the
Messiah.

It cannot reasonably be objected, that all this is only grounded upon the
uncertain authority of Tradition: For though I grant that Tradition, as to Facts
of another nature, be dubious and uncertain, and not to be too much relied upon
in matter of Belief, yet this has such very particular Characters as keep up
its own authority.

First, it supposes a small number of persons from Adam to Moses, who put it
in Writing.

Secondly, It supposes, that those who have preserved this Tradition, lived
very long, and for the most part, for many Centuries of Years.

Thirdly, It relates to such Facts as every one is desirous to be rightly
informed of, and which he is particularly concerned to examine, as relating to
his own private Interest, because they are the Principles of his Actions, and
the rules of his Conduct both in Civil and Religious Matters.

Fourthly, it supposes such real Marks as served to keep it up; such as the
pains of Childbearing, the Paradise before the Flood, the duration of the Ark
after the Flood.

Fifthly, It supposes a Public Service and Worship, whose Celebration is
repeated fifty two times a year, that the remembrance of it should be preserved
by all Posterity.

Sixthly, It was preserved entire by passing from Father to Son, and we know
that Fathers or Mothers do not naturally engage in a Design of deceiving their
Children.

Seventhly, It supposes strange Controversies betwixt Brothers, the Elder
having almost all been excluded, and the younger, as Abel, Seth, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Juda, chosen to accomplish the Promise of the Messiah, which bred
great Jealousies, and tended much to preserve those Ideas of the truth.

Lastly, It supposes great Contests betwixt whole Nations, who all strove one
with another for the advantage of being the Heirs of the Promise, and
Depositaries of those Verities; as the Moabites, for instance, the Ammonites,
the Ishmaelites, the Edomites, and the Jews: each of them pretending to a
preference before the others, by God himself, and so making it a matter of
Credit and Honor to themselves. All these Characters contribute to the
distinct preservation of the knowledge of any truth.

CHAP. XVIII.
An Explication of Moses 's way of Writing; where it is showed, that in writing
the Book of Genesis, he mentioned nothing but what was then generally known.
THis is a truth which at first I took for granted, and afterward proved it,
the reasons whereof I explained particularly as I went on. But it ought to be
fixed as solidly as the Matter will bear, because it often happens, that those
who do not foresee the Consequences which may be drawn from the contrary
Opinion, do contradict it before they are aware of it; and that too under
pretense of exalting the Divine Authority of the Book of Genesis: which gives
occasion to the Atheists to look upon it no otherwise than as learned Men do,
on the greatest part of Legends.

The Prophetical Spirit acts in two manners.

The First is by way of Revelation, in respect of those things the Prophet has
no knowledge of. Thus the Evangelist St. John has foretold those Events, which
we read of in the Revelations: For those Events being all hidden under the
shadows of Futurity, it was impossible for him to have foretold them, unless
the Spirit of God had immediately revealed them to him.

The Second is by way of direction, in respect of those things with which the
Prophet was himself acquainted, either because he was an Eyewitness of them
himself, or because he learnt them from those who were so.

Now this direction of the Spirit consists in the guiding the Prophets so as
that he may write of his Subject, just as it was either spoken or done. Thus
the Evangelists St. Matthew, and St. John, drew up an Abridgment of those
Sermons of our Savior, which they had heard, and of those Miracles which they
had seen.

And thus St. Luke, and St. Mark, have written of those things which they had
heard from those that were Eyewitnesses of them, as St. Luke particularly
tells us.

Now I affirm, that when Moses wrote the Book of Genesis, he had only the
second sort of Prophetical Influences, and not the first; Although in our
Disputes against Atheists, to convince them by Arguments from Matters of Fact,
we may consider him only as an Historian, who might have written his Book
without any other particular direction, and might have preserved in it the
memory of those ancient Events which were then generally known.

Now what side soever Divines may take in their Disputes against the Atheists,
I may easily establish my Assertion: First, because it is not necessary to
suppose an entire Revelation, where Tradition being distinct enough, is
sufficient to preserve a clear Remembrance of all those Facts.

Now it cannot be denied, but that the Tradition concerning the Creation and
the Promise of the Messiah was of this nature, especially if we consider the
little Extent of it, and the immediate Succession of Moses's Ancestors, down to
himself.

Secondly, If Abraham's and Jacob's Travels through so many places, were, as I
have observed already, very useful to give them a further view of the common
belief of all the several Nations descended from Noah, and of their agreement
in this Tradition, it were unjust to suppose that Moses's forty years
sojourning in the Country of Midian, and that too when he was forty years old,
and consequently had that ripeness of Age and Judgment as is fittest for such
Observations, did not serve to acquaint him with the several Passages he
records of Abraham, as well as of the several Divisions of his Posterity.

Thirdly, We may observe in the Book of Genesis a way of writing very different
from that which we see in the greatest part of Exodus, and in the following
Books; for whereas God speaks to him in those latter Books, which he always did
viva voce. (And the Jews have wisely observed, that herein consisted Moses's
advantage above the other Prophets to whom God was used to speak only in Dreams
and Visions) He uses commonly those words, And the Lord spoke unto me. He marks
out the place where God spoke to him, as well as the time and occasion of God's
speaking to him, which he does not in his Book of Genesis,

Fourthly, The Book of Genesis is not divided into several Revelations, as all
Prophecies are, wherein the several returns of the Holy Spirit of God are all
exactly set down; which was absolutely necessary, not only to ease the Reader,
who might be tired, if he was to carry a long Series of Predictions in his mind
at once, as if it were only one single Vision or Revelation; but also to
condescend to the nature of the minds of men: For according to the Rules of
probability, we cannot suppose them to be filled with so many differing Idea's
at the same time, but a great confusion must necessarily follow.

But supposing that these Observations should be thought insufficient, yet
those that follow will seem capable of convincing the minds of all. There are
in the Book of Genesis certain Characters of its being written in that way
which I spoke of. First, one needs only just look into that Book, and he will
see that the ancientest Facts, which are those of which we most desire a
particular account, are there described in a very short and concise manner. The
History of 1656 years is all contained in Eight Chapters; There are no Actions
described therein with more Circumstances, than only some few of the most
important, the remembrance whereof was still fresh amongst them. The History of
Lamech's Polygamy, and the Murders of which he was guilty, is there set down so
compendiously, that it is very obscure.

Secondly, One sees that he speaks more copiously of all that had been
transacted near his time: He explains and mentions all the particulars and
circumstances thereof. He speaks so shortly of Melchisedeck, that it is doubted
to this day, whether he was not the Patriarch Sem, or some other faithful
worshipper of the true God settled in the Land of Canaan; whereas he sets down
at length all the particulars of the History of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob, whose last Oracles which he spoke on his Deathbed, he carefully records.

Thirdly, He describes with the same exactness all the Genealogies of the
Edomites, their several Tribes, and the Names of their Heads and Captains, etc.
As when he speaks of those of the people of Israel, which indeed he could
easily do, having lived forty years of his life amongst those Nations, as well
as he had other forty years amongst the Israelites.

Those who maintain the contrary Opinion, must of necessity suppose, First,
That Tradition is of no use at all to preserve the Idea of any illustrious
Action.

Secondly, That in Moses's time there were none who knew any particulars of the
History of the Flood, etc. of the Tower of Babel, of the division of Tongues;
though we see plainly, both by the nature of the Facts themselves, in which all
Nations were concerned, and by Moses his description, that the generality of
Mankind were sufficiently instructed in them already.

Thirdly, It must be supposed that Moses has set down the manner how that
Tradition was infallibly preserved so carefully to no purpose, though he took
notice of all the Circumstances necessary for that effect.

Fourthly, They must suppose that Moses, whilst he sojourned in the Land of
Midian, heard nothing either of their Original and Pedigree, nor yet of the
other neighboring Nations who were descended from Abraham, although all these
Nations valued themselves upon their being descended from that Patriarch, and
kept up their several Pedigrees, by which they could trace their Original with
the same care as the Israelites did theirs, because they had the same
pretensions that the Israelites had.

Lastly, We must absolutely take away the Authority of the Oracles recorded by
Moses in Genesis. These Oracles promise to Abraham the possession of the Land
of Canaan for his Posterity, and threaten the Canaanites with several Curses:
Jacob by his Will bequeathed Sichem to the Tribe of Joseph. He expressly marks
out the Country which one of the Tribes was to possess; he gives a description
of the Character and Rank of every Tribe. The accomplishment of those Oracles,
though never so exact and admirable, is of no manner of consequence, if we
suppose that these particular Predictions were absolutely unknown in Abraham's
Family, whereas their accomplishment, which he carefully describes from time to
time, is the most solid demonstration which can be desired, to establish the
Divinity of those Revelations, as well as of Moses his other Books.

CHAP. XIX.
An Answer to an Objection which may be drawn from the Histories of the
Egyptians and Chaldeans, concerning the Antiquity of the World.
WHat I have already represented is sufficient to prove that Moses writ nothing
in the Book of Genesis, but what was then generally known by all the World. And
I know nothing that can be objected with any probability, but what we read in
the most ancient Authors concerning the Egyptian and Chaldean History, and in
the Modern ones concerning that of China. We must then examine both the one and
the other with attention, that we may leave no Difficulties in so important a
Subject.

All that the Atheists can object against the History of Moses, concerning the
Epoch of the Creation of the World as he has fixed it, is what Diodorus
Siculus relates, that in the time of Alexander the Great, there were some
Egyptians that reckoned up Three and twenty thousand years from the Reign of
the Sun to Alexander's time, and that those who reckoned least, yet reckoned
somewhat more than Ten thousand years, which account exceeds the Antiquity
which Moses ascribes to the World in the Book of Genesis, by many Ages, where
he represents the Creation as a Fact which happened some few years more than
Two thousand five hundred before he wrote that Book. How then did Moses write
of things universally acknowledged by all the World? And they may here further
aggravate, what the same Diodorus has observed, That the History of the
Egyptians was not written like that of the Greeks; amongst whom, those who came
first wrote their own Histories, every man according to his own private humor,
which caused that great variety amongst their Historians: whereas amongst the
Egyptians none wrote but by public Authority; the Priests alone having that
particular employment reserved for them to write their Histories in their
several Generations.

This Objection is easily confuted in two words: In short, How could the
Egyptians have always had men to write their Histories by public Authority in
all their succeeding Generations, seeing there were; as Diodorus observes, such
a strange and vast Divisions amongst themselves? If there were but two or three
Ages difference more or less, no body would look upon it, as a material
Exception against the History of such a long Series of time; But who can
imagine that those men who differ no less than Thirteen thousand years in their
Accounts of the Duration of the same interval of time, had yet certain
Histories upon which these things were grounded.

This shows sufficiently, that as Varro the greatest Scholar the Romans ever
had, has divided Antiquity into Fabulous and Historical, which he begins from
the first Olympiad, leaving all which went before to the fabulous part; so we
must of necessity make the same distinction in the Matter of the Antiquities of
Egypt.

But I intend to do some thing more, and to consider this Egyptian History with
a little more attention; out of which, I think, I may draw good Arguments to
confute the vanity of those Passages in it opposed to Moses, and to confirm the
Authority of his Book of Genesis, and the truth of the chiefest Transactions
recorded in it.

I shall not at present take notice, that although the Egyptians, about their
latter times, have maintained that the Elements were eternal, yet they have
sufficiently acknowledged that the World had a beginning, seeing they make no
mention of any thing before their thirty Dynasties, which in all, did at the
most amount to no more then 36525 years.

Neither do I think necessary to mention here that they have sufficiently
acknowledged the beginning of Mankind, seeing they held that men were first
born in Egypt; although they endeavored to make good their pretensions by that
sottish Assertion of the easy production of Frogs out of the mud of their
Fen's, as the same Diodorus tells us.

But there are three things which I must here take notice of, because they do
most certainly decide the question.

The first is, That by that long Reign which they ascribe to their Gods and
Hero's, there is nothing else meant but the motion of the Stars, and nothing
like a real Kingdom. That prodigious number of years does not relate to the
duration of the World, as if it had subsisted so long; but to the return of the
Sun, and the Moon, and the five other Planets, and of the Heavens, to the same
point from whence, according to the Opinion of the Egyptians, they first began
their Course: In a word, it is only the great Astronomical Year, about which,
as Aristole tells us, the Ancients have had so many different Opinions, and the
Egyptians have so little agreed, as the History of their Antiquities, related
by Diodorus, plainly shows. One thing evidently-proves what I here allege,
which is, that they have reckoned up but fifteen Dynasties to Jupiter the last
of the Heroes, that is to say, but fifteen persons to Jupiter, who is Ham the
third Son of Noah.

This comes very near Moses's Calculation, who reckons Noah as the tenth man
from Adam: for it is very likely, that those ignorant people, after a long
process of time, have joined Cain and Abel with Sem and Japhet, and Misraim the
Son of Ham, which makes up the sixteen Dynasties, except we choose to say that
the Egyptians thought fit to join the seven Generations of Cain to those before
the Flood, which comes very near to the same Account. All this, according to
the fantastic Notions of those ancient people, who defied the first men, and
gave them afterward the Names of some Stars, to impress upon their Posterity a
greater veneration for them; and in particular, according to the groundless
imagination of the Egyptians, who were resolved to maintain that the first men
were formed in their own Country. And in short, we find that those Dynasties
for the most part, if we except those of Vulcan, and of the Sun, have been but
of a very short continuance, and even shorter than that which Moses ascribes to
the lives of the ancient Patriarchs, which we have already set down.

The second thing that is observable in the confutation of this false
Antiquity, if one would take what the Egyptians have related of their Dynasties
before Menes, and Jupiter the last of their Heroes in a Historical sense, is,
that there are still sufficient marks of the newness of the World, as Moses
has described it, in the remaining Fragments of the true Egyptian History.

First, We see that Egypt has constantly carried the Name of Ham amongst the
Gentiles, as well as in the Holy Scriptures. It was called so in Plutarch's
time: The Egyptian Thebes was called Hammon No Ezech. 30. which is the Name of
the Egyptian Jupiter, as the Heathen Authors Herodotus and Plutarch testify.
Now it is visible, that all this was for no other reason, but because Egypt had
fallen to the share of Ham, Noah's third Son, who settled there, and whose
Posterity did afterward people Africa, and gave it their several Names, as
Moses particularly observes.

Secondly, One see's that Egypt has more particularly born the Name of
Mizraim, which it bares still, and which was given to it, in respect of one of
its parts, because of Mizraim the Son of Ham. And it would be ridiculous for
one to imagine that those Characters given by Moses, had been allowed of in the
World, except he had had good grounds to describe their original in the same
manner as he has already done.

Thirdly, One see's that all the Dynasties of Egypt, that is to say, all the
several Branches of the Kings who have reigned over the several parts of Egypt,
did all acknowledge Menes for their Common Founder.

This Menes being the same with that Mizraim of Moses, as I shall show
hereafter; It is visible that the Egyptians, who in all likelihood have
ascribed to Menes what they might more justly have ascribed to Jupiter Hammon,
because they would distinguish their Kings from Hero's, have exactly followed
the Idea's of Moses, in representing one as the common Father of all the
several Branches of Kings who divided Egypt amongst themselves.

Fourthly, One see's that the Invention of the Arts most necessary to Human
Life, have been attributed either to Menes the first King of Egypt, or to his
Successors. It was this Menes, or one of his Successors, who invented Laws,
Letters, Astronomy, Music, Wrestling, Physic, Hieroglyphics, Anatomy, and
Architecture. All this plainly shows that the Egyptians had been mistaken, if
they had ascribed to the World as great an Antiquity as one would think they
did, by the vast extent of time which they ascribed to the Dynasties of their
Gods and Hero's. How could the World have continued above Thirty thousand years
without those Arts which are so necessary for the convenience of Human Life?
How could men not have found out, during such a prodigious succession of Ages,
those Arts, the invention whereof the Egyptians do ascribe to their first King,
or to one or two of his Successors, during a very short interval of time.

Fifthly, One see's in the History of Egypt the same decay in Religion that
Moses speaks of. Herod Lib. II. cap 4. Lucian de Dea Sir.
The Ancients unanimously agree that the Egyptians had at first neither Statues
nor Images in their Temples, which perfectly agrees with what Moses tells us of
the times after the Flood: But they tell us also, That the Egyptians afterward
made some Statues, and consecrated in their Temples the Figures of great
numbers of Animals. Some are of opinion, and that probably enough, that this
came from the belief which they entertained afterward of the Transmigration of
Souls into other Animals, an opinion which they thought did necessarily flow
from the Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul.

Sixthly, However, one sees in the sixth place, That as Moses represents Nimrod
one of Ham's Posterity, as the Founder of an Empire in Assyria, where he formed
the manners of the Inhabitants according to the Platform of the Egyptian
Principles; so the Ancients have observed, That the famous Assyrian Belus came
out of Egypt; And it is natural to conceive, Pausan. in Messen p. 261.
that there he planted Idolatry, which began even before Abraham's time; If it
be true as the Jews observe, that the Tower of Babel was a Temple wherein an
Idol was consecrated to worship him. At least, that conjecture has a very
solid ground, if we consider the Idolatry of the Babylonians toward this Bell,
whom they worshipped as a God, according to the Pagans Custom of Adoring the
Founders of Kingdoms after their decease as Gods.

The third thing we are here to take notice of contains a Demonstration of the
Truth of the Book Genesis, if that which is recorded in it concerning the time
of the Flood, be compared with the Dynasties of the Egyptian Kings. I will not
say that those Egyptians, who had any knowledge of the Flood, did exactly mark
out the time of it, as Moses does. But I believe I may be able to show out of
their common opinion's, something very near equivalent.

They are all agreed that Menes was the first King of Egypt, and lived about
Fourteen hundred years before the famous Sesostris, as Herodotus and Diodorus
Siculus do both relate it: Now, who should this King of Egypt be, whom some
call Sesonchosis, unless he is the same with Shishak whom the Scripture speaks
of in the History of Rehoboam, 1 Kings XIV. 26.
even the same famous Conqueror who took Jerusalem in the fifth year of
Rehoboam's Reign. If one calculates the time from the Flood, to the fifth year
of Rehoboam, he will find that this Menes the first King of Egypt, is no other
than the Ham of Moses; and on the other side, that there is very little
difference in respect of that interval of time betwixt the Chronology of the
Egyptians and that of the Scriptures? Thus the Egyptian Account confirms
Moses's Narrative, and the Authority of the Holy Writers, who are very
particular in stating the times of every thing: whereas the Egyptians taking
all in great, could never arrive at that exactness.

This Observation is of very great use, to show the certainty of Moses's
Chronology according to the Hebrew Text: For that of the Septuagint, reckons up
above two thousand years, from the Flood to Sesostris, whereas the Egyptians
did reckon up but a little above fourteen hundred years from Menes the first
King of Egypt to Sesostris.

There is yet less difficulty to answer the Objection, which may be made
against the Book of Genesis from the pretended Antiquity of the Chaldeans. The
same Diodorus Siculus, who says, Diodor. l. 2. Sect. 30, 31.
that the Egyptians proposed so great an Antiquity of the World, tells us also,
that the Chaldeans believed it eternal, and that they boasted in Alexander's
time, that they had learnt Astronomy by Tradition from their Ancestors, who had
all successively made it their study for four hundred seventy two thousand
years together. But there is nothing vainer than these Pretenses.

I shall not stand to show here the folly of their Opinions about the Eternity
of the World: If Aristotle seems to have authorized it, yet it is enough to
confute that Opinion, to consider, that it is repugnant to the common notion of
all the Nations of the World: So that Democritus himself, who pretended that
the World was made by chance, yet durst not oppose the common and general
Opinion of the Worlds being new, though he had the boldness to reject the Author
of it, and that action by which it was Created.

Neither do I intend to be prolix here in confuting the supposition of the
Chaldeans, about their Ancestors following the Study of Astrology for 472000
year successively: The impossibility of the thing in it self is apparent by the
certainty of the Flood, which was acknowledged by all those Nations, of whom we
have any Antiquities, though never so little considerable in Pagan Authors.

But I shall make two Observations, whereof one shows the folly of the Chaldean
Hypothesis, and the other does invincibly establish the Authority of the Book
of Genesis, if it be compared with what we know for certain, and in the
Chaldean History.

The First is, That the most Ancient Authors are of Opinion, that the Chaldeans
are descended from the Egyptians, who looked upon them as a Colony of their own.
Diodorus Siculus says, that the Egyptians maintained, that they had sent out
several Colonies into several parts of the World; that Belus the Son of Neptune
and Lybia had conducted one into Babylon, and that having fixed it near
Euphrates, he established some Priests among them according to the Egyptian
Custom, who were free from all public Charges and Offices, whom the
Babylonians do call Chaldeans, and who according to the Example of the Egyptian
Priests, Ap. Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. c. 5. Pausan. Messen. P. 261.
Philosophers, and Astrologers, did apply themselves to the observation of the
Stars. Hestiaeus, and Pausanias, say the same with Diodorus.

Now one needs only examine here, what the Egyptians do say about the invention
of Astrology, which they ascribe to Menes, that is to say, to Ham, or to
Mizraim, who lived after the Flood, thereby to discover the Foolish Vanity of
the Chaldeans.

It is plain, that the Chaldeans grew so vain, by the growth of so considerable
an Empire as theirs was, that they would be no longer beholding to the Egyptian
Astrologers, whom all other Nations have looked upon as the first Inventors of
that Science, to the inventing and perfecting of which, all Men know that the
Egyptian Climate, where the Sky is always free from Clouds, did very much
contribute.

And it is very considerable, that both the Chaldeans and the Egyptians began
their Year with the same Month, according to Censorinus's Observation, c. XXI.
de die Not.

I know very well, the Ancient Heathens were mistaken when they pretended, that
the Chaldeans went out of Egypt, as a Plantation: There is, no doubt, a kind of
Illusion in this their Opinion; but yet the ground and Origin of it is
uncontrollable, because the Chaldeans are descended from Cush, Ham's Eldest
Son, as Moses tells, Genesis X. Therefore though we should grant, that the Chaldeans
were the first Inventors of Astrology, yet this would be always certain, that
it was found out only since Ham's time, whom the Egyptians did look upon as the
last of their Heroes, or as the first of their Kings.

The other Observation which ought to be well minded here, is taken out of the
true and genuine Chaldean Antiquities. One may prove by the Astronomical
Demonstrations of the Chaldeans, which the People of Israel was altogether
unacquainted with, that Moses followed a Calculation which was then generally
known.

Aristotle the first Grecian, that ever taught the Eternity of the World,
contrary to Moses's History, is the Man who furnishes us with it. He took care
to send over into Greece the Astronomical Observations of the Chaldeans, by
which it appeared, Simplic. in l. 2. de coelo.
that Babylon was taken by Alexander about 1903 years after its Foundation. Now
that Calculation agrees exactly with that of Moses, Genesis XI.
who gives us the Description of the Tower of Babel, and explains the Original
of the Name of that City, which was built some Ages after, by the Confusion of
Tongues which then happened. And truly, it would be very admirable, that the
Heavens in their Motions should have entered into a Confederacy with Moses, to
justify a Chronology invented by him in sport, without keeping to any Rules,
but writing by chance, and without any certain Principle.

CHAP. XX.
An Answer to the Objection which may be drawn out of the History of China,
against the Mosaic Hypothesis, concerning the newness of the World.
I Come now to the other Objection which may be made against Moses's
Calculation, according to the Hebrew Text, as we have it now. It is drawn from
the History of China, whose uninterrupted Series runs up the Succession of
their Emperors to Fobius who Reigned about four hundred years before the Flood.
Some Learned Men have already made use of that Argument, to discredit the
Mosaic Chronology according to the Hebrew Text, and to cry up the Calculation
of the Septuagint, which exceeds that of the Hebrew Text, in the History before
the Flood, by 800 years, and above 700 in the History from the Flood to Moses.
This Objection appears very strong to those who read in the History of
Martinius, that there is not the least interruption in the Catalogue of the
Kings of China from Fobius; that the History of their actions is so certain,
having always been written by a Public Authority, that no Man can reasonably
entertain any doubt about it: And the Missionaries in China, have thought that
there was no other way to reconcile the Mosaic Chronology, with the Chinese;
but in making use of the Septuagint's Account; and wherein they agree with all
the Asiatick Christians, and even those in Europe, who follow the Septuagint in
their reckoning up the years of the World, for the most part: Though St.
Hierome's Translation, which follows the Hebrew Text exactly, is received in
the West.

But after all, there is little difficulty in answering this Objection, and we
may hereupon easily satisfy, those who do not dispute only for disputing sake,
but are ready to examine this Question, with that equity which is requisite in
the examination of all Questions of that nature.

I confess ingeniously, that this History, which is one of the most ancient in
the World, has many Illustrious Characters of certainty, especially if we give
credit to all that Martinius relates of it.

First, It marks out exactly the Series and Succession of all the Kings of
China, from the very beginning and original of that Nation.

Secondly, It records in what Year of each Cycle of threescore years, every
King began his Reign and did such or such an action.

Thirdly, It relates some Astronomical Observations, older than any that have
been made by the most Ancient Astronomers in other Nations.

Fourthly, It was written by a Public Authority, and by such Authors as lived
in the time when the things which they record, were transacted; the immediate
Successor to the Empire taking always care, that the History of his Predecessor
should be written.

Nay, to all this we must add, that the Chinese's way of writing, making no use
of Letters, but of Hieroglyphics, may have prevented these alterations which
might otherwise have been made in their History; the whole Life of a Man being
hardly sufficient, to attain to the perfect knowledge, of a Tongue which has
above Threescore Thousand Figures which must be all learnt before a Man can be
able only to Read and Write.

But, besides that, all this depends upon the sole Authority of Martinius, no
body else beside him having given us, as yet any opportunities of examining
those ancient Monuments of China; we may find out of this very History some
strong Proofs, to confirm that of Moses, and so easily resolve the Difficulties
which may be raised out of it, against the Book of Genesis.

First, F. Martinius observes, that the common Opinion of the Chinese, is, that
the World had a beginning: And though there be some of them of Epicurus's
Opinion, yet there was never any amongst them, that was for the Eternity of the
World, but since the Incarnation of Christ, and the Introduction of Idolatry
amongst them.

Secondly, He tells us, that they commonly acknowledge a God, whom they call
Xangti, which is not the Name, but the Epithet of God, this word signifying
Supreme Governor of Heaven and Earth.

Thirdly, He says that they acknowledge a first Man brought forth out of the
Chaos, in one Night in the Spring, which opinion some amongst them have made
intricate by the addition of their own Fables.

Fourthly, He shows that Sacrifices have been in use amongst them.

Fifthly, That they believe a certainty of Punishments and Rewards after this
Life, for Vice and Virtue.

Sixthly, That they believe the existence of good and bad Angels.

Seventhly, That they assign to some of them the protection of Cities and
Provinces, and pay them great Veneration at the Instalment of their Magistrates.

Eighthly, That they acknowledge them to be Incorporeal Beings, and that it is
but of late, that they have Erected and Consecrated Statues to them.

And Lastly, That they have a very great knowledge of the Flood, which in their
account happened about 3500 years before Jesus Christ.

Here are, we see many truths which are the grounds of Religion, and which were
known to them; from whence we may easily judge, in comparing those Truths with
the History of Moses, that the ancient Chinese did agree with all other
Nations, in the believing the first Principles of Religion, laid down by Moses.

We may likewise observe, that those Antiquities of China, for the most part,
are as like those recorded by Moses, as a Tradition (which cannot but have
received many alterations during such a long interval of time) can be like to
an exact Narrative of Matters of Fact drawn up by an Author who knew very well
what he writ.

First, It appears that what they say, concerning the Thirteen Successors of
the first man named Puoncuus, all descended from him, is agreeable enough to
the History of Genesis, which sets down the successive Patriarchs from Father
to Son. All the difference is, that the Chinese, by a foolish Ambition of
appropriating all to themselves, maintain that those Thirteen Kings were all in
China.

Secondly, What they tell us of the World being civilized under the second of
those Kings, called Thienhoang, after the death of the great Dragon that had
disturbed Heaven and Earth, agrees very well with the History of Seth, who
began to form Mankind to a right notion of the worship of God, when he
separated them from Cain's Family.

Thirdly, It is very probable that when the Chinese have reckoned up thirteen
Kings lineally descended from the first man, and his Successors, they have
included in that number Cain and Abel, who though they were both the Sons of the
first man, yet were not reckoned up by Moses, because his Scope was only to
give an Account of the Lineal Descent of Adam's Posterity by Seth.

They believe that under Ginhohang there was a kind of Golden Age, the Earth
being then fruitful to admiration, and that under his Successor Men being
extremely simple, and altogether ignorant of the several Arts necessary to
Human Life, as of Characters and Letters, one Sujus, to supply the want of
them, contrived a way of keeping up the memory of things, by tying several
sorts of knots upon a Cord.

All which sufficiently evinces, that the belief of the Worlds being lately
created according to Moses's Description, was as much received by the ancient
People of China, as by all other Nations.

And here it is further observable, That the Chineese themselves according to
Martinius's account, do suspect all the Historical Records of their Empire,
before King Fobius, looking upon them as false and ridiculous; and indeed the
People of that Country before Fobius, living like brute Beasts, without any
settled Government, Laws, or Arts: This alone is enough to confute those
amongst the Chinese, who maintain now adays, that the duration of the World
before Confucius, who lived about 500 years before Jesus Christ, was of no less
than Three millions two hundred threescore and seven thousand years. For hereby
it clearly appears, That they have foolishly affected to surpass the Chaldeans
in their vanity, who believing the Eternity of the World, pretended in order
both to prove their Antiquity, and to give credit to their Astrological
Observations, that Astrology had been exercised amongst them for 472000 years
before Alexander's entering into Asia.

After all, it is certain that their Calculation of 3000 years, from Fobius to
Jesus Christ, is only incompatible with Moses's Chronology, accord to the
Hebrew Text, and not at all with that of the Septuagint.

But moreover, what can be more palpably fabulous than the whole History of
Fobius, whom the Chinese suppose to have begun his Reign 2952 years before
Jesus Christ? First, he is called the Son of Heaven, because, they say, he had
a Mother and no Father; and that his Mother conceived him by the Banks of a
Lake near the Town of Lanthieu, where as she was walking, she saw the footsteps
of a man upon the Sand, and was at the same time surrounded on a sudden with a
Rainbow.

Secondly, The Situation of that Town which is in the West of China, does
demonstrate that the first Inhabitants of China came thither from the Western
parts of the World, and that consequently they were of Shem's Posterity,
according to Moses's account in the Tenth of Genesis.

Thirdly, Although there be perhaps no incongruity in their ascribing to him the
Study of Astronomy, and the invention of several Institutions necessary to
Human Society, as Laws, etc. yet what they add, that he was the first inventer
of several Figures, which he had seen upon the back of a Dragon, sufficiently
shows, that either the whole story is but a Fable, or that he was a Cheat, and
imposed upon the simplicity of ignorant people.

What probability is there (seeing it is supposed China, was then all over
infested and overgrown with Barbarism) that in his time it should be recorded
in writing, 1. That he invented, instead of those Knots before mentioned, the
Hieroglyphics, which are almost as obscure. 2. That Men were then
distinguished from Women by the difference of their Garments. 3. That Marriages
were then fixed and regulated which before were as promiscuous amongst Men as
amongst Beasts.

What they say of his being the Author of a Musical Instrument of 36 Cords,
shows evidently the falsehood of the Story; for there is nothing more
improbable, than to suppose that he should arrive to such perfection of
improvement in Music as that comes to, when that Art had but very lately been
invented. It is all that men could attain unto, after they have long improved
this Art, the beginnings whereof, without doubt, as of all other Arts, were
very rough and imperfect.

Surely the Egyptians were more reasonable when they attributed the invention
of the Lyre with three strings to Mercury, Saturn's Secretary, who is the same
with Noah.

The History of China takes notice that the beginning of Husbandry and Physic
was under Fobius's Successor, it does not mention whether he was his Son, or
no; but it only gives an account of the first War, wherein he was routed by a
petty King, one of his Subjects, who succeeded him in the Empire.

And what is most singular in that Record, is, that therein is ascribed to that
Usurper, 1. The invention of the Cycle of 60 years, which serves to fix their
Chronology. 2. The method of regulating Weights and Measures. 3. That it was by
his means and encouragement that some of his contemporary Subjects found out
the Sphere, Arithmetic, Laws, Judicial Astrology, several Musical Instruments,
the Art of Dying, and of Coining, the Joyners and Carpenters Trade, so far as
to make Boats and Bridges. They pretend that he never died, but that he was
translated alive into that place which the Chinese do assign for Eternal
Happiness. Lib. II. cap. 7. Hist. Not.
It Is Pliny's observation, that this way and custom of Deifying the first
Inventors of Arts, necessary to Human Life, is very ancient; but if it be an
old Custom, it is also a pregnant sign of the Ignorance that reigned amongst
those ancient people that used it. Therefore we may as justly suspect the
History of the Chinese, among whom it is in use, as the Egyptian Accounts,
which were much of the same nature in Alexander's time, as we are informed by
Diodorus Siculu^. The Posterity or the Successors of those famous men have
always affected in process of time, by such means, to immortalize their Names,
to the end they might raise up themselves and their Families as well to Power
and Authority, as to Honor and Veneration, above all other men with whom they
conversed.

But however, we may reasonably conjecture that those several passages recorded
in that History, having for the greatest part of them, a great conformity with
the Transactions related in Moses History, which was not unknown to the
Chaldeans, with whom the Chinese had Communication and Correspondence; all
those Pretenses and claims of theirs to the invention of these Arts, is an
honor which they have borrowed from others to lend it to the Founders of their
Empire; just as the Egyptians have appropriated to their first Kings, some Arts
which were found out by the Patriarchs before the Flood; or as the Greeks have
made their first Princes the first Inventors of those very Arts, the Invention
of which the Egyptians ascribed to their first Kings.

And this Reflection will appear the more probable and natural, if we consider
what they relate, that under the fourth Successor of Fobius, there arose an
Impostor Famous by his Delusions, who endeavored to alter the Religion of the
Chinese, and to bring in Idolatry amongst them; which brought great Misfortunes
upon China. For hereby it is evident, that the Chinese in their History have
disguised, and so appropriated to themselves, some Passages which relate to
Nimrod's time, since the Original of Idolatry is to be referred to the time of
building of the Tower of Babel, which was intended for an Idol Temple, if we
will believe what passes for a received Opinion amongst the Jews.

Chuenhious is said to have been the Restorer of the Worship of one God, and to
have annexed the Priesthood to the Kingly Power; and to have regulated the
Calendar, and to have found out the Ephemerides of the five Planets, after an
entire Conjunction of those five Planets, before the day of the Conjunction of
the Sun with the Moon, and to have fixed to that day, the beginning of the
year, which agrees with our beginning the year in January.

But yet it is to be observed,

1. That notwithstanding this pretended Astronomical Observation, there have
been several Alterations made of the beginning of the year according to the
fancy and pleasure of several Emperors, which shows that there was no constant
rule observed in that Country.

2. That Martinius seems to have approved of the Calculation of this
Conjunction of five Planets in Aquarius, to accommodate the false Astrological
prejudice of the Chinese, with that of several Authors, who looking upon the
Flood as a natural event, have groundlesly imagined, that it was brought to
pass by the virtue and influence of such a Conjunction, and that it was a
certain sign of a Flood. It Is this foolish and whimsical Fancy which has made
some Grecians preposterously sedulous in seeking out that dreadful year, the
Winter whereof, was to drown the World with a Flood, and the Summer to burn it
with a general Conflagration, as Censorinus Cens. de die not. c. 18
and Arist L. 1. meteor. c. 14.
Aristotle have observed it. It Is a Judicious Remark which Origanus Tom. 1.
Ephemer. P. 481.
has made upon the Observations of those Astrologers, who from the Conjunction
of the Planets in Humid Signs, use to foretell prodigious Rains, for he shows,
that there is nothing more groundless and uncertain than such Observations: And
he gives a famous and remarkable Instance of that uncertainty to the eternal
shame of Astrology, which is this; John Staffler, as Cardan tells us, having
observed such a Conjunction of all the Planets in Pisces, in the year 1524.
foretold that there should come a general Flood, whereof several People being
afraid, retired to the tops of high Mountains; but without any cause, for there
was never seen a greater Serenity of Weather.

3. Martinius was certainly mistaken, when he ascribed to Chuenhious the
regulating the Ephemerides of the five lesser Planets; seeing there are no such
Ephemerides in China, according to all the Relations we have of that Country;
nor yet any of the Sun and Moon so exact, as we have in Europe; a pregnant
Demonstration of which, is that the Missionary Jesuits have been raised up to
the dignity of the chiefest Mandarins in China, only because their skill and
learning in Astrology, was found to exceed that of any the most Learned Men
amongst the Chinese, by many degrees.

These things I thought fit to observe, to show that there is nothing in the
History of China, which they so much cry up, that can any ways invalidiate the
Authority of Moses's Accounts in his Book of Genesis, but what rather confirms
it, if it be considered with attention.

It was not without reason, that I have supposed, that the memory of those
Ancient Transactions, was conveyed, though confusedly, to the Chinese; we have
already intimated one of those probable means of conveyance of this Tradition,
by their Commerce which the Chaldeans, who were well informed of the greatest
part of those several Transactions, and who had great intercourse with the
remotest Nations of Asia, toward the East. To this we may add another
Argument, yet more certain and sure; which is the continual Commerce, that has
always been betwixt the Indies and China, and the Communication which the
Inhabitants of the Neighboring Countries of the Red Sea, have always had with
all the Eastern Nations of the World. For it is plain, that this Commerce gave
a great opportunity of Communicating to those Eastern Nations, the knowledge of
all those Passages which were known to the Chaldeans: Just as the like Commerce
with the Western Nations of the World, proved a means of conveying to them the
knowledge of the most part of the same things, which in process of time became
the ground of the most Ancient Fables amongst the Greeks, among whom those
Fables made up the best part of their Divinity.

But besides all this, we may mention here another very likely means of
conveyance, viz. the Commerce of the Chinese with the Tartars, among whom the
Jews of the ten Tribes were dispersed and settled, within a short time after
their Captivity in Assyria. For as those Jews had with them the Books of Moses,
so they easily gave a great insight and knowledge in ancient History to those
Nations, that have appropriated it to themselves, as may be made out, by
comparing their Fabulous History, with those Books of Moses, which contain in
effect, all that relates to the Original of those Nations.

But whatever judgment be made of those forementioned means of conveying the
Ancient Tradition to the Chinese, I think that I have good ground to affirm.

1. That the Historians that have written the Lives of the first Emperors of
China, were not Contemporaries with those Emperors, and that consequently they
have not recorded things so well known, as it was supposed.

2. That the Fables intermixed in their Histories do sufficiently evidence the
easy and credulous temper of those Authors, which takes away from them all
credit and belief.

3. That the greatest care of those Authors was to persuade the World of the
pretended Antiquity of their Nation, and so to raise the Honor and Reputation
of it by glorious Stories and Fables.

4. That their affectation in giving us an Account of Astronomy and Judiciary
Astrology, was only to bring into Credit and Reputation those Arts, the end and
scope of which is to impose upon Simple Men; which is a ridiculous Affectation,
and such as has exposed the Chaldeans and Egyptians to the just Contempt and
Derision of all other Nations.

5. That there is amongst them a Diversity of Opinions contrary to one another,
about their Antiquity; just as there were some amongst the Egyptians, who
reckoned up 23000 years from the Reign of the Sun to Alexander; when some
others reckoned b^ a little above 10000 years.

6. That the Chinese according to one of their own Opinions, must say, that the
Earth was without almost any Inhabitants for 30000 years together, and above;
whereas we see that in the space of five or six thousand years, it is become
inhabited as we see it; and that within a little more, it will be so
overstockt, as that it will not be able to yield Provisions enough for all its
Inhabitants, as a Learned English Man has of late proved it by a Mathematical
Demonstration; which shows, that the Chinese wanted certain grounds to go upon,
in several Accounts which they give of many Transactions, and in the relating
of which, they are besides most confident.

Lastly, That therefore, what is reported, that these Chinese Authors did all
write with public allowance after every King's Decease, might indeed be so
about the latter times, as it was practiced in Egypt; but that it is as
absolutely false, that the Chinese had ever in former times, such Public
Historians, and as it is false, that the Egyptians had formerly any such,
although they were as confident to say they had, in Alexander's time, as the
Chinese are now.

But this, I think, is sufficient for the clearing of that matter. We must now
answer the last Objection of Atheists against the Authority of the Book of
Genesis.

CHAP. XXI.
Wherein the last Objection of Atheists, is answered.
AS I intend to clear all the Difficulties which may arise about this important
Matter, in the Minds of those that shall peruse these Observations; I think my
self obliged to prevent and resolve, the only plausible Objection, I know
remaining, after all what I have said upon this Subject.

Perhaps some will be apt to reply here that they indeed confess Moses to be
the Author of Genesis, and that, if that Book had really been Supposititious,
it could never have gone under his Name, nor be received as his, in after Ages.
But that yet all this does not prove sufficiently the truth of those
Transactions recorded in that Book. Because Moses may have forced upon the
People of Israel, the belief of them, by those Laws that he enacted amongst
them, by which it was Death for any Man to dare to contest the truth of any
thing he had written in his Books. This I think, is all, that the most
Contentious Atheists can think of, to undermine the Authority of Moses's
History.

But this Objection is easily answered, for it consutes it self. For,

First, It supposes the truth of these great Miracles, by which God established
Moses the Head and Captain of the People of Israel; which Miracles are every
whit as hard to believe, as the several Accounts of other things which we read
of, in the Book of Genesis.

We find accordingly, amongst the Heathens themselves many Monuments of those
Miracles done by the Ministry of Moses, when he brought the Israelites out of
Egypt: As I intend to show in my Observations upon the other four Books of
Moses.

Secondly, They must at least suppose, that Moses has given a true account of
several Passages, in which he could not impose upon other Nations, which did
not acknowledge his Authority, as for example, all that relates to the building
of the Ark, the greatest piece of Architecture that was then in the World; and
to the raising of the Tower of Babel, the greatest Building that ever was, and
part of which is yet extant, for all these things were as so many Witnesses of
the truth of those Transactions which he related.

Thirdly, They must likewise suppose, that he has related several other
Passages as exactly as he did those, as for Example, That of the Division of
Tongues, which is an Appendix of the History of the Tower of Babel; that of the
Destruction of Sodom, the Original of the Neighboring Nations of Canaan, that
of the Jews, of the Moabites, of the Ammonites, of the Ishmaelites, and
Edomites; for it is ridiculous to conceive, that this Lawgiver should ever
hope to persuade other Nations to believe any false Stories about Matters so
well, and so generally known, as those were amongst themselves.

Fourthly, They must suppose further, that he has given a true account of the
Original of the Israelites, whose Head and Governor he was. How great and
absolute soever the Authority of Moses might be, it is ridiculous to imagine,
that ever he would have derived the Original of the Israelites from any other,
than from their true Ancestors. This appears the more necessary in that we see
by the accounts he gives of things, and Pedigrees in Genesis, that he wrote
that Book especially from the History of Abraham, on to the end of it, only to
show the Rights, and just Pretensions of the Israelites, upon the Land of
Canaan.

Fifthly, They must yet further acknowledge, whither they will or not, the
truth of the accounts he gives, concerning the Original of the Pretensions and
Divisions, which were kept up amongst the Twelve Tribes of Israel; now these
Pretensions having no other ground, than the Oracles which are related in his
History; they sufficiently prove the Authority of those Oracles against all the
Pretensions and Objections of the Atheists.

What violence soever they may pretend that Moses might use to force an
Implicit Belief of his History and blind Obedience to his Laws, yet no Man of
common Sense and Reason can ever think, that he would have filled the Accounts
he gives of things of that nature, with Lies, or that if he had done it, he
could ever have expected, that his false Accounts of them, should ever have
been credited by the Neighboring Nations, or even by his own Subjects.

But without urging here several other Absurdities, which plainly show, that
there is no distinction to be found, betwixt the Accounts of things which Moses
recites as publicly known, and those which he relates of his own Head, and
private knowledge; there being, as I have already showed, betwixt all those
several Accounts, such a natural Coherence, and necessary Concatenation, that
they cannot be divided from one another, without destroying the whole frame of
his History: I say, that it is impossible, that the Law, by which he makes it
death, for any one to contest the truth of his Narration, should make the
sincerity of it suspected.

I do not urge here, that there is an evident Absurdity to suppose, that Moses
would ever have related together all those Transactions, as the grounds of
Religion, if they had been absolutely unknown in the World before him.

Neither do I mention here, that suppose Moses had been so imprudent, as to
attempt such an undertaking, yet there is no reason to believe, that a whole
Nation, and that a very numerous one, would have long persevered in a
Profession forced upon them by mere Violence and Tyranny.

Nor do I think it necessary to observe here, that the People of Israel were
neither so patient, nor so easily persuaded by Moses, nor yet so submissive to
him, as these Objectors do imagine.

That is plain, and apparent enough from all their Seditions and Conspiracies
against him.

Nor do I judge it necessary to observe here what is plain enough of it self,
viz. that Moses had no Successor any ways concerned, to countenance and defend
these pretended Fictions and Fables of his History, Joshua his immediate
Successor was of another Tribe; and so were all the succeeding Governors of
Israel, until the Maccabees came.

But what I think deserves best to be observed here, is, that after Moses and
Joshua's Decease, the People of Israel was brought under the Subjection of the
Canaanites, and consequently freed from the Terror of that Law of Moses's
making, by which it was Death for any one to contest the Authority of his Laws,
and the truth of all his Writings; there is but a little more than forty years
interval betwixt the Conquest of Canaan by Joshua, and the Bondage of the
Israelites under the Neighboring Nations. Had it not been a fit time then, to
cast off the Yoke of Moses's Laws, and to publish the pretended Lies and
Impostures of his History? Was not the Comparison which the Israelites could
easily make betwixt the Mosaic Writings, and the Tradition generally received
in the Country of their Captivity, a natural and ready means to undeceive them.

Yet notwithstanding all this, we see that they obstinately entertain the
belief of the several Transactions recorded by Moses, and stand firmly to all
their Pretensions: Nay, we see them have recourse to the Remedy of Repentance
which Moses prescribed them to use in those sad Misfortunes which he foretold
should befall them, and out of which he promised, at the same time, that God
would miraculously deliver them; which indeed was done accordingly, even
fourteen times within less than four hundred years, as is manifest from the
Book of Judges.

Can there then be a more pregnant Argument, that if Moses made it Death by one
of his Sanctions, for any of the Israelites, to contest the truth either of his
Writings, or of his Oracles, and Miracles, it was not to force the belief of
them without examination, but rather only to prevent the corruption of that
People, and their mingling and confounding themselves with the Heathens, which
God intended to hinder on purpose, because he would have the Messiah to be born
according to his Promise, out of that Nation, which to effect, he thought fit
in his infin^^e Wisdom, to employ the rigor of some Capital Laws, to keep that
people unmixt and distinguished from all other Nations of the World, till the
Messiah was born.

CHAP. XXII.
The Consequences of what we have proved in our foregoing Observations upon the
Book of Genesis.
THese several Observations which I have made upon the Book of Genesis, are
all, I think, very natural and easy; and if I am not mistaken, sufficient to
prove solidly, the truth of Moses's Account, of the Creation of the World, and
of the Promise of the Messiah, which is the foundation of the Christian
Religion.

The Conclusion that I draw out of the Premises is, That,

First, I assert, that Moses that famous Hebrew, who was designed to be the
Heir of Pharaoh's Daughter, is the true and sole Author of the Book of Genesis.

Secondly, I maintain, that this being once granted, he could not, according to
his way of Writing, record those important Transactions, he relates otherwise
than they really came to pass.

Thirdly, I maintain, that tho he had not been an Eye. Witness of the Creation
of the World, yet he has made the Description of it according to such an
Authentic Tradition, as cannot be reasonably doubted of, because it was then
the Universal Tradition, not only of the Moabites, of the Ammonites, of the
Ishmaelites, and of the Edomites, who were all of Sem's Posterity, and amongst
whom he had been traveling for forty years together; but also of the
Egyptians, of his own People, and in a word, of all Men then living in the
World.

Fourthly, I maintain, that he never was found fault with, nor contradicted,
till true Reason and Sense, if I may say so, was lost and banished from amongst
Mankind, till the Egyptians, for example, they who used before, to look upon
the Greeks as mere Children and Idiots, were fallen into so great a Stupidity
and Deprivation of Sense, as to believe and maintain, that Men were first born
in Egypt, because forsooth, Frogs did naturally, as they thought, breed out of
their Muddy Fenns and Marshes.

Fifthly, I maintain, that for many Ages after Moses. no body did ever
publicly declare for the Eternity of the World, nor yet for its Fortuitous
Production. These Opinions are mere Absurdities and Chimeras, brought forth
into the World by the Chaldeans and Greeks, only about Alexander's time, or
perhaps an hundred years before him, i. e. about eleven or twelve hundred years
after Moses's Decease.

Sixthly, I maintain, that seeing there is no particular time to be found,
wherein the reading of the Law was interrupted and discontinued for any
considerable time amongst the Jews, seeing it continues still to this very hour
amongst them every Sabbath day, in the several places of the World, wherein
they are dispersed; and seeing besides, that it is certain, that this Law,
which enjoins the Observation of the Sabbath, in remembrance of the Creation,
could never be imposed upon them, without their perceiving and declaring
presently the Novelty and Supposition of that Account, and consequently of the
Book wherein it is related.

Seeing all this is certain, I do positively maintain, that the truth of the
Creation can never be better proved, than it is by the Book of Genesis, because
in it Moses has followed the Tradition of all the Ages that preceded him, and
only recorded in Writing, what was then generally known of all Men in the
World; and that in a time when every Man was able to run his own Pedigree up to
Adam.

Lastly, I maintain, that as the certainty of the Creation cannot reasonably be
doubted of, without rejecting at the same time all those Proofs from Facts
which I have brought to strengthen my Assertion. So there is all the reason in
the World to entertain the belief of it, as of a matter of Fact which is
indisputable: As being Related by the most Ancient Historian, Confirmed by the
most Ancient Tradition, Believed by the most Ancient People of the World, who
did not only believe it, but also, had always had, according to God's Command,
the Memory of it Celebrated amongst them and their Ancestors, in all their
Generations fifty two times in a Year, from the very beginning of the World.

REFLECTIONS Upon the Four Last BOOKS OF MOSES, To Establish the TRUTH OF THE
CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

PREFACE.
WHen I began at first these Reflections upon the Book of Genesis, I designed
only to demonstrate the certainty of the Creation of the first Man, and so to
show by Arguments from matters of Fact, that neither the Creation of the World,
nor yet the Promise of the Messiah, which God made to Man after his sin, can
reasonably be disputed or doubted of.

I designed after that, to establish the truth of Christ's Resurrection, by
such another undeniable Argument, viz. by showing, that the Apostles, were Eye
Witnesses of it, and instituted a solemn Day in every Week, to celebrate and
perpetuate the Memory of it, amongst Men, from their time down to the end of
the World. And this I thought was sufficient to demonstrate the truth of the
Christian Religion: For as the Jews by the continual Celebration of the
Sabbath, every Week, could easily run back to the Creation of the World, which
was the occasion of the Institution of the Sabbath, so the Christians may by
the Weekly Observation of the Lord's day prove Christ's Resurrection, which
occasioned the Institution of the Lord's day. If we consider the thing in it
self, there is no less Absurdity to dispute our Savior's Resurrection, than
the Creation of the first Man.

Now if this Argument holds, as there can be no easier, so neither can there be
a stronger proof of the truth of the Christian Religion for provided we be once
well assured of the certainty of Christ's Resurrection, we must acknowledge him
to be the true Messiah, and consequently embrace his Religion.

But it seems in the heat of Meditation, I was insensibly carried further, in
my Observations upon the Promise of the Messiah, than I thought at first to be.
Therefore, instead of passing now, as I proposed in the beginning, to the proof
of Christ's Resurrection, which is a solid and compendious way of demonstrating
the truth of his Religion, I find my self engaged according to my present
Method, to continue to make the like Reflections upon the other Books of Holy
Scripture, that I may yet more fully demonstrate, that Jesus Christ is the true
Messiah, whom God promised to Man immediately after his sin.

And this I intend to show so plainly, as will make it evident, that God has
really accomplished his first designs, and exactly performed all his Promises
relating to the Messiah, according to the first Idea's, he gave of his coming
to the Ancient Patriarchs

First, Then I design to trace up the Method that God was pleased to use, to
make the Messiah known without mistake, when ever he should come into the World.

Secondly, I will make some Reflections upon the several Notions he gave of him
long before in his Oracles, to Characterize his Person, his Offices, his
Actions, his Sufferings, his Glory, etc.

Last of all I will show, that we have all this whole Project and Design
exactly accomplished in the History of the Gospel, as it was written by
Christ's Disciples. Now as this Method which God has particularly chosen to
make the Messiah known, appears also in the other Books of Moses. So I think it
will not be amiss for me particularly to view and examine these Books, that I
may have occasion to illustrate several things in them, which deserve a
particular attention, especially when they are considered together, and as it
were at one view.

For the Prophecies being thus considered together in their Connection and
Progress, do more plainly evidence God's Design, and may better convince or
confound the Jews. Therefore I intend accordingly to consider those Oracles
with attention, and to join them together, that so they may in their
Conjunction cast forth the brighter Beams of Light, to the Conviction of all
Infidels who may happen to peruse this Book.

For I am persuaded that, after the perusal of my Observations in it, an
ordinary attention in the reading of the Gospel will be sufficient to convince
any Man, that Jesus Christ is the true Messiah, which is all I intend to prove,
as the Conclusion of this Treatise.

Now as the examination of the Patriarchs Religion according to the account
Moses has given us of it in his Book of Genesis, has taken up the first part
of it; so I design to examine in this second part the Israelites Religion, and
to follow in my search the account which Moses gives of it in his other four
Books.

And as to effect this, it is very important to establish beforehand the
Authority of those four Books: so I intend to show first of all, that Moses is
the true Author of them, and that they have Intrinsic Characters of undeniable
certainty.

Then Secondly, It will be natural for me, to show, that Moses in the writing
of them, had the Promise of the Messiah in view, as particularly promised of
God to the Patriarchs of his own Nation, and as being consequently the
principal, if not the sole Object of their hope.

Thirdly, I intend to show, that if we seriously examine Moses's Laws, we shall
find in them such a Method observed, as is both very agreeable to the
manifestation of God*s design in Genesis, and very worthy of his Wisdom,
especially if we consider what he was pleased to reveal unto us of his
Intentions, by the Prophets who followed Moses.

REFLECTIONS Upon the Four Last BOOKS OF MOSES, To Establish the Truth OF THE
CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
CHAPTER I.
That it cannot reasonably be doubted, but that Moses is the Author of Exodus,
and of the three other following Books.
THis is a Truth which may be grounded upon several solid Arguments.

I might observe, That Moses has always been acknowledged, by the very
Heathens themselves, not only to be the most Ancient Historian, but also the
most Ancient Legislator in the World.

I might likewise observe, That there is a particular connection betwixt the
Book of Genesis and the other Books of Moses, as well in regard of the general
Design of their Author, as of the Matters treated of in them. For Example, We
see that the greatest part of the Laws and Transactions which we find written
and recorded there, derive their Original from those Transactions and Passages
that we read of in Genesis. Thus we may plainly discern that the pretension of
the Israelites upon the Land of Canaan, was grounded upon the Promise that God
made to Abraham to give it to his Posterity, in the fourth Generation. Thus we
may see, That the Amalekites could have no other reason to make War against the
Israelites, than the old Alliance that was formerly made betwixt Amalek and the
Canaanites, which without doubt engaged his Posterity to be the first Opposers
of the establishment of the Israelites in the Land of Canaan. Thus we see that
the Seditions of the Israelites against Moses under Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
did proceed from the Order of the Birth of the Children of Israel, as it is set
down in Genesis, because the eldest thinking themselves wronged of their
Birthright, thought they might justly Rebel against Moses in order to recover
it.

But I haste to things more material than these. And first it is here
observable, That those Books were not only religiously kept in every Family of
Israel; but that they were also once solemnly deposited in the Tabernacle as a
public Record, and that by Moses himself a little before his death, that they
might be a Testimony against that People, as we read it Deuteronomy XXXI. 26.

Secondly, It cannot be denied that Moses did straightly charge both Joshuah,
and the Heads of the People, to read them frequently and carefully, for it is
expressly said so, Joshua 1.8. Nay, we see about 500 years after, the holy Man
David, who had made, during his life, Psalm. I.
the supreme felicity of a man to consist in the reading the Law of God day and
night: We see, I say, that holy Man give in his Deathbed the same Charge to
Solomon, I Kings.

Thirdly, Moreover it is certain that there were many Laws and Sanctions
contained in those Books, which are the Foundation of the History of succeeding
Times. And this is the reason why we read nothing in the Book of Joshua
concerning the several Blessings and Curses which were to be pronounced upon
the Mounts Ebal and Gerizim, because the form of them was to be borrowed from
the Books of Moses which were Public and Authentic. The same Reflection may be
made upon the Law of the First Fruits, and upon the Prayer which was to be made
upon the Tithes of the third year; as likewise upon many other Laws.

Fourthly, It is certain that those Books were read over every seventh Year,
according to the Injunction of that Law, which we find Deuteronomy XXXI. 10,
11. which was commanded to be done for the instruction of Posterity, as it is
intimated in the Thirteenth Verse of the same Chapter. Whereupon it may not be
preposterous to consider here God's Methods, to prevent all Forgery and
Imposture in this Matter.

We see that it was, during the Longaevity of Human Life, a constant and
universal Custom amongst all the Patriarch's to Moses's time, to put (when they
lay on their Death beds) their Posterity in mind of the most important Truths,
and of the Fundamental Articles of Religion, because as all Admonitions and
Exhortations made at such a time, are always looked upon as sincere, so they
seldom fail of being favorably construed and better entertained, than they
would be at any other time. We have as instances of this ancient Custom, the
Examples of Abraham, of Isaac, of Jacob, of Joseph, etc. who in that, I make no
doubt, followed the Custom of their pious Ancestors, who in all likelihood
derived it from Adam himself. That Custom we see was of an admirable use to
perpetuate the memory of illustrious Transactions: What was then spoken by
those pious venerable men, was a kind of a public Sermon, because it was
delivered before those numerous Families, which met then altogether about the
Bed of their common Head and Father; and that upon such an Occasion as did
extraordinarily excite their attention.

To this Custom succeeded another, which was, that when the greatest Captains
and Judges of the People of Israel, were sensible of their approaching Death,
then they usually called the People together, to give them such Exhortations,
Reproofs, and Admonitions, as they judged most proper, either for their
encouragement, or for their Reformation; nay, and that even in some occasions
many of them have affected to have their Speeches made public, and deposited
in the Tabernacle: Thus did Moses and Joshuah, and the greatest number of the
Judges, and Samuel, and Solomon, etc.

We know that the Books of Moses were formerly read every Sabbath day; as St.
James does attest it in Acts XV. And tho there be no express command about it
in Moses's Writings, yet we find there, something equivalent to it, in the
strict charge given by him to all the People, to be continually conversant in
his Books, and to instruct their Families at all times in the Laws and
Doctrines delivered in them; for it is plain, that if the Israelites were bound
by that command of Moses to read his Books every day, they were more
particularly obliged, by the same command, to read them on the Sabbath day,
which was made a day of rest by God; particularly on purpose, that all Men
might the better attend on that day to the reading and meditating God's Laws,
and the performing all other Religious Duties.

We know besides that those Books were continually explained both by the
Doctors of the Law, and the Levites, who were on purpose dispersed through the
whole Land of Canaan, that they might the better attend and perform the Duties
of their Ministry.

We see that Moses in his Writings has exactly kept a kind of Journal, which
cannot easily receive any alteration. If we read hereupon what relates to the
sojourning of the Israelites, and the several removals of their Tents in the
Desert, we shall be easily convinced by the very form and style of those Books,
as we have them now, that they were formerly publicly received, and were
exactly transcribed out of the Original, and that if in Process of time they
suffered any alteration, it was only as to some Appendices or Postscripts
inserted by Esrah, or some other Prophet, by way of Explication.

We see in those Books a History written without disguise or partiality, exact
in relating all Circumstances, of Places, Times, and Persons, even in the
Narration of things of small importance for the main drift of the Author; there
are besides, some Passages recorded in them, which any Author, who lived after
Moses's time, would certainly have left out, if for no other reason, yet at
least to abolish the memory of some actions dishonorable to some great
Families, and whole Tribes of Israel.

Again, we read in them the Songs, and other Public Monuments which were made
upon extraordinary occasions, to preserve the memory of them the better.

I have but three Observations more to make here, and then I have done with
this Chapter.

The First is, That those Books have been constantly quoted by all the Authors
amongst that People who followed Moses, and that their Quotations do exactly
agree with the Text of those Books, as we have them now, which is a certain
sign, as well of the Sincerity, as of the Antiquity of that Author. They were
as much esteemed in Israel as in Juda, both People did observe them as their
Law: The Prophets that arose from time to time, did always, and upon all
Occasions acknowledge, and maintain their Authority.

Thus we find in the Book of Joshua, quoted out of them, what relates to the
Curses and Blessings, to the Prophecies, and Divisions of the Land of Canaan,
amongst the Tribes of Israel. The whole History of the thirteen Judges, whom
God raised up amongst the People, is nothing in general, but an account of the
accomplishment of that Promise, which God had made formerly by Moses, to raise
up from among that People such Men in the time of their Afflictions and
Captivities, as would be the Assertors of their Liberty.

We see there in particular, the Execution of Moses's order, concerning Caleb,
Judge I. 20. Judge. VII. 3. Judge. XIII. 3.
and of that Law in Deuteronomy, which prescribes the manner of dismissing from
the Army those that are fearful and faint-hearted; and of that other concerning
the Nazarites, etc.

Thus we see, that the Rule and Laws prescribed in those Books, continued in
force in the time of Ruth, David's Great Grandmother, that appears plainly, by
their Observation of those Laws, which enjoined the next Kinsman to take to
Wife the Widow of his Deceased Relation, and to redeem his Inheritance. As for
David and Solomon, they are continually alluding to something or other
delivered in those Books: Nehemiah quotes them in Chap. XIII. of his Book, and
that was in the year of the World 3563, and so does Malachy in the IV. and V.
Chapters of his Prophecy, in the year 3580.

The Second Observation, which is very material, is, that the Author of those
Books, has inserted in them an express prohibition of adding any thing to
them, as we see it Deuteronomy IV. 2.

It is then impossible, seeing that the whole people of the Jews have always
acknowledged the Divine Authority of those Books, that they should ever have
attempted the alteration of any thing in them.

Nay, we see, not without wonder, that after the greatest part of the ten
Tribes of Israel were transported into Assyria, those that were sent from
Assyria to inhabit their Country, did receive that Law, and that their
Posterity have kept it all along to this day, as uncorrupted as the Jews,
although they continue their Mortal Enemies, and have been exposed to all the
Changes, and Revolutions, that can befall a Nation, during the long interval of
2400 years.

The Third Observation, which deserves a singular Attention is, That
notwithstanding the great and many Corruptions, which the Commonwealth of
Israel fell into, yet these Books have still been kept up in the same form that
we have them now: It appears out of the History of Josiah related, 2 Kings
XXIII. 21. That after the Book of the Law, of Moses own writing, was found in
the Temple, the King commanded all the People to keep the Passover unto the
Lord, as it is written in the Book of this Covenant: Now we have the
Institution of the Passover, Exodus XII. which shows, that Josiah by the Book of
this Covenant, meant the Books of Moses, such as we have them now adays, and
such as they were when Moses deposited them into the Sanctuary.

It is important to consider well, all that is related in the forementioned
Chapter of II Kings, for we may gather out of it, that it was according to the
Directions of this Law, that they began to reform all the Superstitions and
Idolatries which had been introduced in their Religion, and countenanced by the
Royal Authority, from Solomon's time to Josiah; this Chapter relates and
commends the proceeding of Josiah, only in opposition to the ill government of
his Predecessors, and to the public Monuments of their Superstitions, which he
abolished in obedience to God's Laws, contained in the Books of Moses.

However, it is certain, that it was no easy matter, to impose herein upon
Posterity.

For First, The Transactions recorded in the Books of Moses, did not only
relate to the People of Israel, but also to most of the Neighboring Nations.

Secondly, The Memory of them continued so lively and universal, that almost
1500 years after Moses, the Names of those Magicians spoken of, Exodus VII. 11.
were, as yet known, not only amongst the Jews, as we see it by an express
Passage of S. Paul, who speaks of them, Hist. Not. l. 30. c. 1.
and mentions their Names, 2 Timothy III. 8. but also among the Heathens, as
both Pliny and Numenius do attest it.

I point only at those general Proofs at present, because I have already made
use of them, and showed their force in my Observations upon Genesis, and
because I intend to repeat, and improve some of them hereafter in this
Treatise. But now, in order to follow my present design, I must come to the
more particular Consideration of the things contained in these Books, which
will much conduce to the Confirmation of the same Truth.

CHAP. II.
That both the Character of Moses 's Person, and the nature of the things he
relates has always made men read his Books with attention.
The Subject of some Books is such, as that alone would recommend them to the
attention of any Reader, though their Author had no reputation in the World; but
when besides the importance of their Subject, the Author of them is famous and
of great repute, then to be sure, they never fail to be read with serious
attention, and preserved with as great a care. The Books of Moses have both
these advantages, so that they cannot reasonably be suspected of the least
alteration or Forgery.

The first Character that we discover in these Books at the first viewing of
them, is the great singularity, and admirable diversity of their Style, and of
the Matters they treat of.

We do not see that other Legislators did ever affect to act the parts of
Historians; no, they content themselves with their absolute power, to make
Laws, without giving any reason for the Sanction of them: Therefore we see,
that there is commonly nothing more dry and sapless than all their Regulations,
about both Civil, and Religious Matters.

But Moses we see has followed a more reasonable, and more satisfactory
method, all his Regulations are grounded upon the great Transactions which he
relates; he enacts no Law of any consequence, but he intimates to the Jews, at
the same time, the Reasons which challenge their Obedience, and makes them by
that means reflect both upon the several Mercies of God bestowed upon them, and
call to mind the great Miracles they had been eye witnesses of.

I confess indeed, that the use and scope of some of his Regulations, is very
abstruse, especially now, that we are ignorant of the several Heathen Customs,
which God designed to abolish from among that People newly come out of Egypt,
where during their Captivity they had complied, and accustomed themselves in a
great measure to the Rites, and Religion of their Masters the Egyptians. But
yet how abstruse soever the design of some of those Laws may now appear to be:
We have good ground to affirm, that the general scope of them all was, to keep
that People from Idolatry in distinguishing them from all other Nations, as
also to quicken their Desires and Expectations of the Messiah, the Promise of
whose coming had been made by God in the very beginning of the World, and
renewed several times to the Heads of their Nation.

However we see in the Books of those Laws, Religion, and Policy so interwoven
together, that the latter seems to subsist only by the support and assistance
of the former, which is contrary to the custom of human Legislators, who do not
so much regard the establishment of Religion, as the preservation and welfare
of the State and Commonwealth.

If any Jew had a mind to be informed about the Tradition of his Ancestors, and
the transactions of old, Moses has preserved it with such care, with so many
marks of Fidelity, and so clear and plain, that there is no other History
besides his, that can give any satisfactory Information about the Original of
things: All the Fables of the Heathens, which yet make up the most ancient
Tradition they have, being nothing else but a corruption and depravation of the
several Truths that Moses relates in his History.

If any Jew desired to see the beginnings of that Common wealth of which he was
a Member; Moses gives an accurate account of them.

If any Jew desired to know the Original of Mankind, or what was the true
happiness of Man, and what he ought to do, in order to be a partaker of that
happiness, Moses teaches all that with great evidence and exactness.

If any Jew had a mind to know the occasion of those Songs that were so much in
fashion amongst those of his Nation; he might easily satisfy his Curiosity, by
reading Moses's History.

If any Jew desired to know what sort of Exhortations they were, which the
Founder, both of their Religion and Commonwealth, had formerly made to their
Forefathers; Moses relates a great many of them in his Books.

If any Jew had a mind to receive instruction about the Original, and cause of
those Temporal Blessings, he enjoyed in the Land of Canaan, which God had
possessed his Nation of, after the Expulsion of those People that had been the
Inhabitants of it for many Ages, Moses gives as good account of all that, as
can be desired.

If any Jew had a mind to know the Original of the several Calamities that
befell his Nation on several occasions; Moses acquainted them both with the
Cause and Remedy of all their Afflictions.

Lastly, If the Jews desired to be informed of the future condition of their
Commonwealth in after Ages; Moses foretells it in so particular and clear a
manner, that they might look upon his Prophesies, not as certain Prophesies
only, but as a plain History of future Events, begun and traced out, before
their Accomplishment.

All this is so much the more considerable, to oblige us to read the Books of
Moses with care, that we may justly observe three things in his person, which
as they raise him above all common Authors, so they cannot but strengthen the
belief, and increase the Esteem and Veneration, which we ought to have for his
History.

The first is, That whereas all Men are careful to conceal their own
Infirmities, and whatever is dishonorable to their Familles: Moses on the
contrary seems to have affected to record all the things that could blemish the
memory of his Ancestors, and derogate to his own Reputation. He blemishes
Jacob's memory by his relating, how he preferred Joseph the Son of his Beloved
Wife, to Reuben his Eldest, whom he unjustly deprived of his Birthright, in
favor of the other, which injustice is expressly forbidden by one of Moses's
Laws.

Thus he lays an eternal blot and reproach upon the memory of Levi, the Head of
his own Family, when he mentions his Cruelty and Violence against the
Sichemites, and the dispersion of his Posterity amongst the other Tribes of
Israel.

Nay, what is more, he vilifies his own Birth, by forbidding any Marriage
betwixt an Aunt and her Nephew, seeing he relates that he himself was born of
Jocabed both Aunt and Wife to his Father Amram; he describes his own
Incredulity with all the Ingenuity imaginable, when he represents the several
Miracles which God wrought by him, he seems to speak of himself only to lay
open his own failings and sins; such a sincerity and Impartiality we know
confirms and increases mightily the Authority of any Author.

The Second thing is, That Moses not regarding the advantage and honor of his
own Family, left the Government of Israel to Joshuah, one of the Tribe of
Ephraim, and so reduced his own Children, and their Posterity to the low
condition of the rest of the Levites, who were of an inferior Rank to that of
Priests; for we do not see that they ever after renewed the pretensions which
they might otherwise have had to succeed Moses; now such neglect of his Family
shows, that Moses's Principles were raised much above the ordinary pitch of the
generality of Law givers, who were absolute and supreme over their People.

The Third thing observable here is, that Moses had no share in the Conquest of
the Land of Canaan; it all was subdued after his Death: Nay, it was that
Conquest, that fixed, and settled the Commonwealth of Israel, which was before
unsettled, and as it were ambulatory in the Desert. Now how could such a
singular design, as Moses describes in his Law, be put in execution by any
other than by him that formed it. It was Joshua that made this Conquest of the
Land of Canaan, and possessed the Jews of it; now, to be sure if that People had
not been then fully persuaded of the Divine Authority of Moses's Law, they
would never have failed after so great an alteration to make use of their Power
and Liberty in throwing off the troublesome yoke of his Laws; nor yet would
Joshua and all his Successors in the Government, ever have maintained the
Authority of those Laws, if they had not looked upon Moses, not only as an
extraordinary Man, but also as one particularly Commissionated by God to make
that Body of Laws, for the regulating of his People.

We read in those Books of Moses's dying in the Mountains of Moab; now that
being supposed, how is it possible, that if the People of Israel had not been
fully convinced that God himself gave their Law to Moses with all the
Circumstances mentioned by him, they would have continued to keep up such a
ridiculous and ill grounded Conceit. If he had really by his Tyrannical
Authority forced the Israelites into a compliance to his Laws during his Life,
why did they not as soon as he was dead, with the fear of his Authority shake
off the yoke of his Laws, and all respect for his memory.

One thing we may remark as very surprising in the Relation of that
Legislator's Death; which is that his Body was not found after his Death.

For we do not see that that People, which otherwise kept up and carried about
with so much care, the Bones of Joseph and his Brethren, in order to Bury, and
Deposite them in the Sepulchers of their Ancestors (for both Joseph and his
Brethren were interred in Judaea) did ever build a Tomb to their Lawgiver, or
so much as pretend to show his Sepulcher.

Josephus was of Opinion, that Moses wrote himself, the account of his own
Death, for fear the Jews should ever imagine, and so give out that God had
taken him up into Heaven. I see, I confess, no solidity in that Conjecture of
his, but yet it may give us occasion to make a Reflection hereupon, I think,
more natural and easy, which is, that God had a mind, as Joshua intimates it,
to confirm the many Characters of Divinity that appeared in the Law of Moses,
by taking away from before the eyes of the Jews his Corpse, which they would
certainly, if they had not been so prevented, have kept with more care than
those of all their Patriarchs and Kings. The Description of the manner of
Moses's Death, shows evidently, that he was not only in great esteem during his
Life, but that even his Death did much conduce to the increase of it, and to
make Men look upon him, as one gloriously raised up above the common condition
of Men, and in a manner not obnoxious to the Infirmities and Miseries incident
to human nature. But after these general Reflections, I must come to those that
are more particular.

CHAP. III.
That the truth of the Miracles related by Moses, cannot reasonably be doubted
of.
WHoever will examine with attention, the four last Books of Moses, shall find
in them several Passages recorded, which deserve a particular Consideration.

As First of all, the Miraculous Birth, the extraordinary Education, the
Heroical Courage, and the Divine Call and Commission of Moses, and the several
Miracles which he wrought in Egypt, to bring the Israelites out of it, and lead
them to the Borders of Canaan.

Then Secondly, All the Moral, Ceremonial, and Political Laws which Moses gave
to that People, from God.

And Lastly, Moses his Prophecies concerning their future Condition, their
Victories, their Captivities, their Transportations, concerning the Destruction
of Jerusalem, the coming of the Messiah, and the dispersion of their whole
Nation.

All which Passages have as evident and authentic proofs of their certainty,
as things of that nature are capable of.

Let us first begin with the Narration of the Miracles recorded in the
beginning of Exodus.

Wherein we see, that after Moses had represented the Death of Joseph, and of
all the generation, that came down with Jacob into Egypt, he writes his own
History, and represents himself as another Noah, saved out of the Waters, to
save and deliver that Holy Family.

The whole Relation which he makes of all those particulars, is very strange,
and extraordinary; but yet his Circumcision, and the instruction of his Mother,
to whom he was given, by the Daughter of Pharaoh to be nursed up, and the
Conversation of that Princess who had adopted him, and made her self a
Proselyte as the Jews endeavor to prove, Jalk. in h. l. ex Vaiikra Rab.
from 1 Chronicles. IV. 18. And his Education in the Court of Egypt, and his
acquaintance with all the Grandees of that Court, did concur together to
acquaint him with that remarkable preservation of his person, and persuade him
of the certainty of it.

For how could either Moses impose, or be imposed upon in that matter? Was not
that Barbarous cruelty of the Egyptians by which they compelled the Jews about
the time of Moses's Birth, to throw their Children into the River Nilus,
notoriously known of all Men? Were not the Public Buildings, and strong
Cities, viz. Pythom, and Rameses, so called from the Name of King Rameses
Miamum, standing in the sight of all Men? And was it not publicly known by all
the World, that the poor Israelites were the Slaves and Drudges who were made
use of to erect those Buildings.

Neither could the manner of his Education be unknown to him, nor yet to any of
the Hebrews, for we do not join here to Moses's Narration, what Josephus
relates of his Person, of his Feats in Meroe, and of his Marrying an Ethiopian
Princess, etc.

As Moses's Miracles were done in the presence of the Egyptians and Jews, so
they testify, that he had really received his Calling, and Commission from God
in the Desert, and that just in the manner as he describes it himself.

Now, no Man can dispute the truth of those Miracles, if he but minds the
following Considerations.

First, It cannot be denied, that the People of Israel was brought out of Egypt
by Moses. Their Law, which the present Jews do still observe, speaks every
where of that famous Action of his; there was never any Man disputed the
certainty of that Achievement. All ancient Authors make mention of it, Joseph.
contra App. l. 1.
Manethon gives an account of the time, of the manner, and of many other
principal Circumstances of that Exploit.

Trogus Pompeius, Justinus, and Tacitus, do also speak of it, only Tacitus does
groundlesly, I suppose, of his own head, relate, that the Jews were expelled
out of Egypt, because of their Leprosy: I say groundlesly, for it is known,
that on the contrary, Leprosy was a common Distemper amongst the Egyptians,
and that they infected the Israelites with it, so that there is no likelihood
they should be expelled by the Egyptians for a Distemper that they got from
them.

We know besides, that the Law of Moses which calls the Leprosy the Distemper
of Egypt, did banish the Lepers out of the Congregation of the People; and then
the nature of David's Curses against Joab, because of his murdering Abner,
shows sufficiently, that the Leprosy was looked upon by the Jews, as a
Distemper most commonly sent immediately from God. Nay, Trogus Pompeius
himself, Justin. l. 36.
observes that the Magicians caused Moses with the People of Israel to be
expelled, because they themselves were struck with a kind of Scab and Itch; and
that they were afraid, least the contagion of it should infect the whole
Kingdom of Egypt. Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 8.


And here I must not forget the mentioning the Testimony of Numenius a
Pythagorean Philosopher, who relates, that both Jannes and Jambres were chosen
by the Egyptians, to oppose Moses, and hinder the effects of his Miracles and
Prayers, which had brought down many grievous Plagues upon Egypt, just about
the time of the Jews Banishment out of that Country.

But Secondly, If the Leprosy, which the Israelites brought from Egypt, be a
indisputable proof of their sojourning there; it is as certain, that the going
out of that mixed multitude of Egyptians, who so far espoused the Israelites
Interest, as to leave and forsake Egypt their own Country to accompany them,
could have no other cause or pretense than the Miracles of Moses, whereof they
had been Eyewitnesses; so that the Posterity of those Egyptians that were thus
incorporated into the Body of the People of Israel, were in after Ages, as so
many Witnesses of the truth of those Miracles, which formerly persuaded their
Fathers to join with Moses, and so to share Fortune with the Hebrews.

Thirdly, It is certain, that the Jews could not so much as mention any of the
Miracles, which they pretended were done formerly for the deliverance of their
Fathers, without exposing themselves to the scorn of all the World, if all
those Miracles, and their Deliverance, had not been certainly and generally
known to the Egyptians, and to all the Neighboring Nations, by whom they were
often subdued and brought into subjection after the Decease of Moses, and
Joshuah.

To all these Reflections we may add, that the Commemoration of the Israelites
going out of Egypt, with all the Miracles wrought by Moses, was renewed yearly,
not only by the solemnizing the Feast of the Passover, which the Israelites did
constantly keep to the time of their dispersion, and which they do still keep
in all parts of the World, but also by two other very sensible ways.

The first whereof, was the Separation which God made of the Tribe of Levi, in
order to Consecrate it to his Service, instead of the firstborn of the People
of Israel, whom he had spared, and preserved in Egypt, with great Solemnity, in
regard both of Men and Beasts, as we read, Numb. III. so that every Levite was
as a living Memorial of that great Miracle, wrought at the Israelites going
forth out of Egypt.

And the Second was the Law concerning the Redemption of every Firstborn, both
of Men, Numb. XVIII: 16.
and Unclean Beasts; which is observed to this hour amongst the Jews: It is
clear, and evident, that there is in all those Laws, a deep impression of those
several great Miracles which compelled Pharaoh to let the Israelites go.

Lastly, It is very observable here, that the Memory of the deliverance of
Israel out of Egypt, wrought, as by many Miracles, so especially by the death
of all the Firstborn of Egypt, which was the occasion of the Institution of
the Passover continued amongst the Egyptians till after Jesus Christ: For till
then they used to mark with red their Sheep, their Trees, their Houses, and
Lands, the day before the Passover, as one may see in Epiphanius; which Custom
could proceed from no other cause, than from the Egyptians fear of the like
Plague and Mortality, that was once inflicted upon their Forefathers; and from
their hope of preventing it by such a kind of Talisman, whereby they thought
Moses had formerly saved the Israelites harmless from that great Plague, only
by sprinkling the Blood of the Lamb of the Passover, on the upper Door post of
their Houses.

CHAP. IV.
A Continuation of the Proofs of the truth of the Miracles wrought by Moses.
THese Arguments might be thought sufficient for the evincing the truth of
these Miracles which Moses relates; but yet something more may be added.

As those Stupendous Miracles, by which the famous deliverance of the
Israelites was effected, could not be doubted of, by those who had been
eyewitnesses of them; so they were afterward confirmed by several other
Miracles, which being as great, and almost of the same kind, continued for many
years in the sight of the whole People of Israel.

God made a Pillar of Fire, and of a Cloud, attend upon the Israelites, to
guide them, the one by Day, and the other by Night. He divided the Red Sea to
open a passage through it for his People, L. 9. praep. Ev. cap. ult.
the Memory whereof (says Eusebius) was preserved to his time, by those of
Memphis: The Israelites took the Spoils of the Egyptians drowned in the Red
Sea, as they were pursuing them: They made a Song upon the occasion of that
wonderful Deliverance; they were fed with Manna, a kind of heavenly, and
miraculous Food; they drunk of that Brook of Water, that was following them
wherever they went: All those Miracles, with many others, continued for forty
years together without any Interruption, and do therefore firmly establish the
truth of those other Miracles which Moses relates, because there were none of
them wherein the people could be imposed upon by any trick or illusion, and of
the truth whereof every one could not satisfy himself, by his own experience.

I do not speak now of several public Monuments of those Miracles; as for
Example, the Rod of Aaron which blossomed in a Night; the Manna which was kept
in the Tabernacle. The Brazen Serpent, which having continued to Hezekiah's
time, was broken down by him, only because the People offered Incense to it.

From all which it must be acknowledged, that there was in the whole Series of
the Jewish History both many pregnant Evidences of the truth of the first
Miracles, and a constant Series of Miracles which having been foretold by
Moses, did the better confirm the truth of those which he relates as done by
him on purpose to vindicate, and defend the Liberty, and Honor of the people
of Israel.

Because I did just now intimate, that the Memory of the Jewish Deliverance,
did continue for many Ages after amongst the Egyptians: I think my self obliged
to add here, some Arguments to prove, that neither such a Transaction as that
was, nor yet any of the like nature and importance, could ever be forgotten in
the Land of Canaan.

There is nothing that in outward appearance seems more ridiculous, than what
is related concerning the Gibeonites coming to Joshuah's Camp; their Equipage
showed that they had a mind to persuade the Israelites that they came from a
far Country. The Treaty which they extorted from Joshuah by fraud, is very
singular.

And there can be nothing more remarkable, than their subsistence amongst the
people of Israel, notwithstanding that they were of the number of those
Nations, which God had commanded to be destroyed; and their being destined by
Joshuah's appointment, to carry the Wood and the Water, necessary for the
service of the Tabernacle, from whence they were denominated Nethinims, and
thereby for ever after distinguished from the Israelites.

But after all, there could be nothing more agreeable to God's Wisdom, than the
preservation of that people amongst the Israelites. Their Fathers were the
Witnesses of Moses and Joshuah's Miracles. Those Miracles obliged them to seek
the alliance of the Hebrews, and to cheat them into it by a fraudulent Treaty,
because they despaired of compassing their design by any other means. Therefore
their subsisting amongst the Jews, and their Servile Office which exposed them
to the eyes of the whole Nation, could not choose but be of an extraordinary
use, to make that people preserve, and cherish up the Memory of those Glorious
Actions, which every Gibeonite had perpetually before his Eyes.

The same Remark may be made upon the continuing of Rahab's Family amongst the
Israelites, after the Destruction of Jericho.

It is certain, that the Jews have always believed, that besides those first
Miracles related by Moses, many others have been done since for their sakes,
both to possess them of the Land of Canaan, and to keep or restore them to the
possession of it; nay, of those latter Miracles many are very like unto the
former: As for Example, the Death of 185000 Men in the Army of Sennacherib; the
returning of the Shadow backwards ten degrees upon the Sundial of Ahaz; the
wonderful preservation of the whole Nation, by the means of Esther, which was
the occasion of the Institution of the Feast of Purim amongst them, and several
other Miraculous Transactions related in the Jewish Authors, of which I will
only name three, which did preserve the Memory of the greatest, and most
important Miracles related by Moses.

The first is the continual Miracle of the Urim and Thummim of the High Priest,
which by its frequency, did confirm the truth of Moses's Relation, concerning
the several Apparitions of God, in order to lead his people, and to give them
Laws.

The Second is the Miracle of every seventh year, Levit. XXV.
during which, though the People of Israel did neither Sow nor Reap, God,
according to his Promise, did supply them with plenty of Provisions, by making
every sixth year extraordinarily plentiful. Now this Miracle was a kind of a
Memorial of that other great Miracle, whereby God did feed his People with
Manna, for forty years together in the Desert, still doubling the proportion of
Manna every sixth day.

In effect, as that Law which commanded a Sabbath of rest unto the Land every
seventh year, was constantly observed, which would never have been done long,
if that people had not always been fully convinced by their own experience of
its Divinity.

And again, as that Miracle was so publicly known, that God by his Prophets
did often threaten the Jews to deprive them of the fertility of the sixth year,
because of their transgressing the Sabbath.

So it is plain, that no Man can reasonably doubt, or dispute the truth of that
continual Miracle, which that Law both supposes and promises.

The Third is the Miracle of a continual protection during the time of those
three great solemn Feasts, in which the people were obliged by God's Command to
attend his Service in the Tabernacle, or at Jerusalem. For this Law requiring
attendance from all the Jews of the Age of Twenty and upwards, it engaged them
to leave the Frontiers of their Country naked, and destitute of Men, and so
exposed to the Inroads of their Enemies; but at the same time it gave them
occasion to experience the same Divine Protection, which, as they read in
Moses's Writings, their Fathers had formerly so often experienced against all
their Enemies.

It is certain, that there was never any Commonwealth in the World, which had
any such Fundamental Law; the danger to which a Country is exposed by the
Observation of it is too visible not to be avoided. Therefore the Jews to be
sure, would never have acknowledged that Law to be Divine, nor yet submitted to
it, if they had not been secure of God's Protection to prevent all the
Mischiefs, and Inconveniences that might arise from their Observation of that
Law; so that suppose they had been at first so stupid and unwary as to receive
it from Moses, yet they would never have observed it so constantly and so long,
if they had not had a constant Trial of God's Protection on all occasions; and
if they had not looked upon it as a necessary Consequence, and Accomplishment of
those Promises, which he had made both to them and their Fathers.

However, it is certain, that it was the Will of God, that the Jews should
altogether rely upon that Miraculous Protection of his: Nay, the distrusting of
it, was so offensive to him, that he inflicted an Exemplary Punishment upon
David, for an Action, which though innocent of it self in a Prince, did yet
directly contradict that Trust which the Israelites were bound to set upon
God's Protection. For when David caused the People to be numbered, God sent a
Pestilence amongst his people, which abated his pride, and thus taught him
effectually to rely more upon God for the future, than upon the Multitude of
his people.

CHAP. V.
That Moses 's Description of the manner of God's giving him his Laws, is
evidently true.
IT is also equally easy to show the truth of Moses's Description of the
manner of the promulgation of God's Law in the Desert, and of the several parts
of it, Moral, Political, Ceremonial.

I shall not stand to consider here the Admirable Equity, and most absolute
perfection of the Moral Law, and show that it could have no other Author but
God alone: Neither will I urge in this place, the extraordinary care God had to
regulate the most Minute Ceremonies, that there might be nothing left
undetermined in all the Acts of Religion; as also the great, and Divine Wisdom
that is discernible in all those Ceremonial Laws, which besides their useful
opposition, to the then Pagan Customs, do most of them, either mind Men of
their Duty, or represent and typisie the things that were to come to pass under
the Gospel.

In short, I will not aggravate any farther the Consideration of the Admirable
Wisdom that appears every where in the whole Body of the Political Laws which
God gave to the Jews to settle them into a firm and solid Form of Government;
that Wisdom is such, and so visible, that it plainly demonstrates the Divinity
of them to any Man that will but compare the whole Body of them, and their
absolute perfection, with the Defects of all Human Laws, and the several
Changes and Alterations they have received from time to time.

But I shall lay aside these Remarks, and choose to come to those that do not
require so much Learning, nor so great an intention of thought.

The First of which is, That the Moral Law was given in the sight and hearing
of all the people of Israel, and that the promulgation of it upon Mount Sinai,
was accompanied with extraordinary marks of Glory, and made only after many
previous Purifications prescribed to the whole Congregation in order to receive
it.

It is true indeed, the Ceremonial Laws which were annexed to it, were not
delivered to the people with so much Pomp and Majesty; but as they were also
given in the same Desert, and in the presence of the Elders of the people
assembled together near the Tabernacle, after they had earnestly entreated
Moses, that God would no more speak to them himself, it is evident, that they
are no less authentic than the Moral Law, therefore we see that they were
accordingly received by that people, notwithstanding the Troubles, Expenses,
Avocations, Straights, and Hardships, which they might meet with by it.

Now is it in the least probable, that if this people had not been convinced,
that Moses did really familiarly converse with God for forty days and forty
Nights upon Mount Sinai, they would foolishly without any cause, of a sudden,
have submitted to such a troublesome yoke of Laws, many whereof were opposite
both to their Opinions and Ancient Customs.

It is well known for Example, what Jealousy there was all along amongst the
Tribes of Israel, even from the time of their Ancestors, yet we do not see that
in those Laws there is any notice taken of it, or regard had to it, but that on
the contrary they seem to foment that Spirit of Division, when they deprive
Reuben of his Birthright, in favor of Joseph's Posterity, and of the
Priesthood in favor of Levi, and of the Kingdom, in favor of Juda.

Nay, we see, that even after Moses had composed the difference that was once
betwixt the Tribe of Levi, and the followers of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, they
were hardly brought to acquiesce to his Decision; and how could he then
possibly have raised his own Tribe, the Tribe of Levi, to such prerogatives,
and to such a plentiful Condition above all the other Tribes, as he did by
assigning the first Fruits and Offerings to the Levites and Priests. How could
he, I say, have done that without meeting with some opposition from the rest of
the People, except they had all been convinced by the Miracle that God wrought
to decide that Question, when it was disputed, that he himself was the Author
of that Constitution.

Thus we read, that long after, when King Uzziah boldly presumed, to act
against Moses's Law, Numb. XXV. and to assume to himself the Dignity of
Priesthood, and to do the Functions of it; he presently received the punishment
due to his presumption: So that being struck with a sudden Leprosy, he was
confined to his Dying Day. Is it any ways probable that a Prince, especially of
his Temper, would have submitted to such a Confinement, and meekly resigned his
Crown to his Son, if that punishment inflicted upon him, had not fully
convinced him of the Divinity of that Law, which he had transgressed and
violated by his Temerity and Presumption.

The Third Reflection is, that the greatest part of those Laws being intended by
God to inspire his people with an Irreconcilable Aversion against all those
Nations, amongst whom they were going to settle; they were so framed, as not
only to be opposite to the Laws and Customs of Egypt, from whence they came,
but also to those received amongst the Hivites, Amorites, and other Nations, of
whose Countries they were going to possess themselves.

Thus we find in the XVIII. of Leviticus, Laws against all Incestuous
Marriages, which without doubt, were ordinary amongst the Canaanites, and
Egyptians, who therein followed the Examples of the Ancient Patriarchs, who
Married within those forbidden Degrees; there we find also the Sacrifices to
Moloch forbidden, the practice whereof, those Nations, in all likelihood,
defended by the Example of Abraham's Sacrifice.

Now it cannot reasonably be thought, that a whole Nation would of a sudden
receive such Laws as deprived them of a Liberty and Freedom they had always
hitherto enjoyed, and condemn of their own accord, those Sacrifices that had
the fairest pretense of Religion imaginable, and to use many Ceremonies
contrary to those received amongst them, if they had not had a strong, and
extraordinary Motive for so doing.

There is another thing besides, that challenges our Consideration, viz. the
exact Description which God gave to Moses of the Tabernacle, of the several
parts of the Ceremonial Worship, which was to be performed in that Sacred
place, and of the manner how this Tabernacle with all its Appurtenances,
Utensils, and Ornaments, was finished.

For as this Tabernacle was then the Center of the whole Jewish Religion, (as
the Temple was afterward by succeeding to it) so it was a solemn proof of the
Divinity of Moses's Laws, and of the Worship that was performed there.

Is it conceivable, that a whole Nation should contribute to the building of
it, should see it Consecrated, and taken to pieces, and set together again
every day, and should read all the particulars relating to its Construction,
and not discern whether there was any truth and reality in all that was told
them concerning the Religion which their Governor fixed in that place wherein
he pretended many Revelations were made.

CHAP. VI.
Some other Proofs that confirm Moses 's Description of the manner how the Law
was given and Promulgated,
BUt if it is so easy to establish the Divinity of the Law of Moses, by
showing the truth of the Matter of Fact, according to the manner of God's
Promulgation, as Moses relates it, we may further collect the truth of it, by
joining these following Reflections to those already made in the foregoing
Chapters.

Certainly if Moses had been the first Founder of a Kingdom, and had been
succeeded in it by his own Children and Posterity for many Generations one
after another; we might perhaps, have had some ground to suspect, that his
Successors, consulting their own Interest and Honor, would have been very glad
to persuade their Subjects, that the first Founder of their Kingdom, had some
Communication with God, and that it was from him he received the Laws and
Constitutions which he gave them concerning Civil and Religious Matters.

But it is observable, that Moses was so far from investing his own Children
with the Supreme Authority after himself, that he Translated it into another
Tribe, and Constituted Joshuah of the Tribe of Ephraim for his Successor in the
Government; as for his Posterity he took little care of it, but reduced it to a
Rank inferior to that of Aaron's Family, which he preferred to the most
honorable Functions of the Priesthood; leaving to his own the meanest, and
most inconsiderable Employments; all which shows evidently that none of those
who came after Moses were moved by any private Interest of their own, to defend
the Truth and Authority of his Laws and Writings, but only by the certain
knowledge they had, that they were all Divine.

Neither ought we to omit to consider here the manner how Moses decides
beforehand such Questions, and determines such Controversies, as could not be
raised, but after the Conquest of Canaan, which was made by his Successor only
after his Death. And how those Laws were constantly observed in all the
succeeding Generations of that people, and submitted unto by the very Judges
and Kings themselves; tho there be nothing more common than for a Conqueror,
such as Joshua was, to admit of no other Fundamental Laws in that State he is
the Founder of, than those which he is the Author of; nothing is more usual,
than for Statesmen to affect the exposing the Conduct of their Predecessors,
especially when the form of Government is altered, and from Democratical, or
Aristocratical, is changed into Monarchical, as it happened amongst the
Israelites. How then could Moses's Laws still keep up their Authority in all
Changes and Revolutions? How comes it to pass, that in all the Successions of
Judges and Kings, there was never any of them attempted to suspend, or annul
Moses's Laws, much less to enact and give any others contrary to them?

Again, how came it to pass, that in all the Divisions and Factions that Nation
fell into, there was never any Jew, endeavored with any success, to undeceive
the rest of his own people, so as to make them shake off the troublesome Yoke of
Moses's Laws. No doubt only, because the generality of that Nation never
disputed the Divine Origin and Authority of them.

It were an easy thing to demonstrate by the whole Series, of the Jewish
History, that all those Laws which in Moses's Writings are inlay'd one within
another, and represented as occasioned by several Transactions related there,
have all been equally received of the Jews, and have all been put together in a
Body by themselves before Moses's Death, as it may be proved out of the XXXI.
of Deuteronomy.

It appears, that those Laws were public, and in great esteem amongst that
People, to whom God gave them, upon whom he laid an indispensable Obligation to
read them every day, and to consult them upon every emergent business.

It appears, that they were known equally of all degrees of Men, Sexes, and
Ages, which were all obliged to pay Obedience to them upon pain of Death.

It appears, that those Laws were not only publicly kept in the Tabernacle,
but also privately read in every Family.

We see, that a whole Tribe, viz. the Tribe of Levi was appointed by God to
explain them, and in order to that they were dispersed throughout the whole
Land of Canaan, and exempted from the Cares and Troubles that necessarily
attend Husbandry, by the plentiful Provision of Tithes and Offerings that was
allotted to them.

We see that God obliged all Jews to read and meditate upon them continually,
especially every Sabbath day.

Nay, and we see moreover, that God every Seventh Year would have them read
publicly in a more solemn manner, before the whole Congregation of that
people, who during that Year, were obliged to rest from all their ordinary
Labors and Employments, and so had nothing else to do all that while, but to
read the Law, to examine it, and to meditate upon it.

Lastly, It appears, that those Laws were yet the more Solemn and Authentic,
because they obliged the Jews to celebrate three such Feasts as were to be
publicly kept by the whole Nation, and consequently apt to refresh their
Memories, and put them in mind, thrice a year, not only of the surprising
Miracles that God had done for them; but also of the manner how he gave and
promulgated his Laws; the Miracles giving rise to the Laws, and those Laws
being themselves a means of preserving the Memory of those Miracles, because of
the frequent Commemoration of them which was therein enjoined.

Now these things being so, let every one judge, whether the truth of Moses's
Account of God's giving, and promulgating by his means that Body of Laws which
he has inserted in Exodus, and the following Books, can possibly, or at least,
reasonably be disputed, or doubted of. But I come now to conthe Oracles
recorded in Moses's Writings in order to demonstrate the Truth and Divinity of
them.

CHAP. VII.
That there is no just Exception can be made against Moses 's History, in what
relates to the Oracles, which he has recorded in his Books.
THere are several sorts of Oracles in Exodus, and the other three following
Books.

First, There are some whereof the accomplishment did soon follow the
Prediction.

The Deliverance of the Jews out of the Egyptian Bondage is of that number;
Moses does promise and foretell it; nay, and he executed it himself: And all the
people to whom it was promised and foretold, were themselves Witnesses of the
accomplishment of that Prophecy; and it was that accomplishment which
established the Divinity of his Commission.

So is the other Prophecy concerning the Conquest of the Land of Canaan, and
the several Divisions that were to be made of it amongst all the Tribes of
Israel, Moses foretelling exactly what Lot every one should have, and giving
besides, a Description of the Country that every Tribe was to inhabit.

Those that were Born in the Desert, were Witnesses both of the Prediction, and
the Execusion of it, although it was by the casting of Lots, that all the Tribes
got their several Partitions.

But Secondly, There are some other Oracles in Moses's Books, the
accomplishment whereof was not to follow the Prediction till after a long
interval of time.

Such are the Prophesies that foretell the future Subjection of the Israelites
to the Canaanites, and the several Deliverances out of that Subjection, which
God was to effect by the hands of Judges, whom he was to raise up for that
purpose.

Such again are the Prophesies which relate to the future change of their
Common wealth into a Kingly Government.

Thirdly and Lastly, We see that Moses foretells all the Accidents, Changes,
and Revolutions that were to befall the Jews as long as their State should
stand: At least, we see that his Predictions are very plain, concerning their
several Captivities, and Removals, and their return into the Holy Land; as also
the Sieges of Samaria and Jerusalem; and the irrecoverable dispersion of the
whole Nation, which we see at present.

But whatever difference there may otherwise be, betwixt all these Predictions,
we may say, that every one of them, has as pregnant Proofs of its certainty
and truth, as any thing of that nature is capable of.

For First, As to the first sort of Predictions, the accomplishment whereof,
Moses relates himself.

It plainly appears, that his account, cannot in the least be suspected of
Imposture; because he wrote it amongst a whole Nation, which could not possibly
be imposed upon in that case, seeing he supposes, and takes it for granted, all
along in his Relation, that those Predictions were beforehand publicly and
generally known of all the people.

As for the accomplishment of the second sort of Prophesies, we have the
Relation of it in such other Books as were written after Moses's Death, as in
the Books of Joshua, of Judges, and several others, which relate the
accomplishment of them, as of Prophesies written many years, and even some Ages
before, by Moses.

Besides, to this we may add, that the account which we find in those Books,
concerning the accomplishment of Moses's Prophesies, is interwoven with such
Histories, as suppose, without any Affectation, that his Prophesies, as well as
his Writings, were in the hands of all the World, and distinctly known by every
Jew.

And what is further observable, is, That the Jews have always had Moses's
Books in such an Esteem, because of these several Illustrious Prophesies that
are contained in them, that they have always looked upon him as the most
excellent of all their Prophets. They assert at this very day, that the other
Prophets had commonly no other knowledge of future Events, than that which was
communicated to them by Dreams and Visions; whereas Moses had it by an
immediate Revelation of God himself, who used to speak to him Face to Face,
without any Enthusiasm when he was perfectly awake.

Now, how could ever the Jews have been so strongly prepossest of that high
Opinion both of Moses, and his Predictions, if we suppose, that they never saw
the accomplishment of any of them?

That would certainly be as strange an Illusion as ever was: For it is besides
observable, that those Prophesies of his, were not written by themselves and
kept secret from the generality of the people; but that they were inserted into
the several Speeches which he made to all the people some time before his
Death; and which are written, and kept together in the same Volume, to be a
standing Monument, both of his Prophecies, and of his Ministry among the Jews.

Now there is a vast Difference betwixt a Book that is all made up of
Prophesies, and so kept secret, and seldom read, as the Books of the Sybils
were; and a Book wherein the Prophesies it contains, are interwoven with a
History, wherein there is so great a variety of Matters, as draws to it, and
fixes the attention of every Reader; and wherein they are mingled with a whole
Body of Political and Ceremonial Laws; and intermixed with the accounts which
Moses gives of all the great Transactions which gave the occasion to so many
several Revelations and Prophesies recorded in his Books.

I am persuaded, that it is impossible for any Man to make those Reflections
upon the Opinion which the Jews entertained of Moses's Prerogative, and upon
the manner that his Prophesies, so much reverenced amongst them, were exactly
accomplished, and not be convinced of their Divine Authority.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Testimony of the Jews, is a constant proof of the truth of the
Oracles related by Moses.
BUt least any Body should think it strange, that I should build the truth of
Moses's Prophecies, upon the Testimony of the Jews, I will restrain its
authority of it within just, and certain Bounds.

First, Although the Jews bear Witness in their Sacred Books, that the greatest
part of Moses's Prophecies are already fulfilled, yet they say some are not: As
for instance those which relate to the Messiah's coming. But their obstinate
blindness, is not a just prejudice against such an important truth, to be
convinced of which, we need only to compare Moses's Words, with the Actions of
Jesus Christ.

Thus for what relates to the Destruction of Jerusalem, we need only compare
Moses's Prophecy of it, with the Description Josephus their own Historian,
has made of the same in his History of the Siege and ruin of that City, and
of the dissipation of all the Nations of the Jews.

But without the Jews Testimony, in what regards the accomplishment of those
Prophesies, whereof the execution was deferred for a very long time, it is
easy to convince any the most Incredulous Man of their Truth and Divinity, if
he please but to make this one Reflection, which is, that when Moses relates
amongst the Oracles of the Patriarch Jacob, a particular Prophecy concerning
the Messiah's coming, and when he mentions that of Balaam concerning the rising
of that Divine Star, he subjoins also at the same time that concerning the
Vocation of the Gentiles to the Faith, and brings it in as a certain sign and
consequence of the Messiah's being come into the World.

Now if we examine the meaning of Moses's Predictions, about the Vocation of
the Gentiles, which the Prophets that came after him did better explain and
illustrate, we shall be apt from thence to conclude, that he in effect
foretold, that God in the days of the Messiah would follow quite another
Method, than that which he had used before until the time of Moses, viz.

That whereas God might seem to restrain then the Privilege of his Covenant,
to one people alone; which was in effect to restrain the honor of the
Messiah's Birth, to one sole Nation of the World, to one sole Tribe of that
Nation, to one sole Family of that Tribe, to one sole Branch of that Family,
and so to one sole person of that Branch: He would (after the Messiah's coming)
take a contrary Method, and call all men to Salvation in him.

Now that being supposed, the truth of all Moses's Prophesies cannot be
questioned. And whatever the Jews Opinion be concerning the accomplishment of
some of them: It is sufficient for us, that they have carefully and faithfully
preserved the Books, wherein those Prophecies, which we see so exactly
fulfilled, are contained.

For, we cannot reasonably suspect Moses, or any other Jew of forging the
Prophesies which foretold the calling of the Gentiles, not Moses, seeing all
his Laws do tend (as I shall show hereafter more at large) to establish that
restriction, I was just now speaking of, which was to continue to the Messiah's
coming. Not the Jews, seeing that none of them can still endure to hear of the
removal of that Restriction, by the calling of the Gentiles; and that they are
all possessed with such a Spirit of Envy and Jealousy against all other Nations,
that they perfectly hate and abominate them. But besides, we cannot desire a
better, nor a more authentic accomplishment of those Oracles, which are so
opposite to the Jewish Principles and Prejudices, than that which we our selves
are Witnesses of.

The same Reflection belongs to the other Prophesies of Moses concerning the
total Dissipation of the Jewish State; as also to the dreadful accomplishment
of them in our days. The most resolved Obstinacy can suggest but one Objection
in this matter, which is, that either the Christians, or the Jews have
falsified Moses's Writings, and inserted those Prophesies, which we now find
there, concerning the Vocation of the Gentiles, and the dispersion of the Jews,
after those things were come to pass.

But First, The Books of Moses, which both Christians and Jews have, are
Written in Hebrew, and penned in such a Style as evidences their Antiquity, and
as would be inimitable now.

Secondly, That these Books have been all Translated into Greek, almost 300
years before Jesus Christ, and about 350 years before the destruction of
Jerusalem. Neither the Jews, nor yet the Christians were any longer sole
Masters of them, when the Heathens had them also in their hands.

Besides, those who were Converted to Christianity from Judaism and Heathenism,
did not only find these Prophesies of Moses in the hands of Jews and Heathens,
long before the Conversion of the Gentiles, and the Destruction of Jerusalem,
but did also make use of them to evince against the Jews, that the Messiah was
already come.

Thus, I think, I have sufficiently demonstrated the Truth and Divinity of all
Moses's Prophesies which we find in Exodus and the following Books.

CHAP. IX.
That it appears by the nature of his Relations, that Moses had the Messiah in
view when he wrote the Book of Genesis.
I Have showed in my former Reflections upon Genesis, that those who lived
before Moses's time, had a distinct knowledge that God would certainly raise up
a Deliverer amongst them, although they were not certain of the manner of his
appearance. And I have besides, I think, sufficiently proved, that the various
Idea's which the Ancients entertained of him upon the first Promise made by God
of his coming, were the occasion of several Criminal Actions committed by the
Patriarchs, and by those of other Nations, who had the same pretensions with
them.

I am now to prove that Moses himself had the same knowledge, and lived in the
same expectation with the Ancients that preceded him. It is of more importance
to be shown, and that henceforth no Body may wonder, if I pretend that the
greatest part of the Laws he gave to the Jews, both in reference to Civil and
Religious Matters, and the greatest part of his Prophesies, as also those
others mentioned by Prophets that lived after him in that Jewish Commonwealth,
do all suppose a distinct relation to the promised Messiah.

And to make this evident, I beg leave to offer to the Reader's Consideration
some general Reflections upon Moses's History in Genesis.

First, It cannot be denied that Moses was one of the greatest and wisest
Historians that ever was: There cannot be a greater design, nor a more
difficult Task than his was to write the History of 2400 years: He gives an
account of the Creation of the World in general; and in particular, of that of
Man, of his sin, of the Promise God made him after the Fall, of the Flood, of
the Original of all the Nations that were in his time.

His way and manner of Writing is also very extraordinary: The Majesty of his
Style is tempered with an admirable plainness; he describes all sorts of
Passions to the Life; he is admirable in his Characters of the Men he speaks
of, and of God himself. To be convinced of this, let any Man read his
Description of Abraham's Sacrifice, and of the several Passions Joseph and his
Brethren were moved and affected with, when he made himself known to them.
Besides all that we may observe two very surprising things in the Book of
Genesis.

The First is, That Moses recites there such things as seem to be unworthy to
be taken notice of, by so Grave and Wise a Historian as he was: He gives for
instance, an exact and particular account of all the Circumstances of Ahraham's
Purchase of the Cave of Machpela, for a Burying place for his Wife: He sets
down all the particulars of the Incest of Judah with Thamar; and he relates the
manner how Leah with her Sons Mandrakes obtained leave of Rachel to enjoy her
Husband for one Night, with a surprising exactness.

The other is, that Moses records a whole Series of horrible Crimes, which seem
to be as so many blemishes and odious Reflections upon the Memory of those whose
History he writes.

Now it is not reasonable to suppose that Moses being so prudent, as he is
confessed to be, could have been so injudicious, as to choose and pick out such
Passages and Actions as are in themselves either trivial and of no moment, or
horrible and odious, to fill up with them a Book wherein he gives a Description
of the Creation of the World, where he sets down the Oracles of God at every
turn.

It is natural therefore to judge, that he had some particular prospect in his
Eyes, which could be no other than that of the Promise, which alone justifies
his recital of trivial things, and of Crimes in such a serious History as his
is.

I shall not repeat here what I have already observed upon the Crimes which he
relates in Genesis; I add only, that he had the same design and prospect in his
Narration of such small and inconsiderable Transactions.

Thus by his account of the purchase of the Cave of Machpelah, his intention
was to show how God intended by this Sepulcher, to affix Abraham and his
Posterity after him to the Land of Cannaan: his Scope and Prospect was the same
when he records the Burial of Rachel at Ephrathah.

As for the Crimes Moses relates, I have before proved, that he designed
thereby to show, how all the Faithful before his time, had their minds
altogether taken up with the thoughts and hopes of the accomplishment of the
Promise: And herein we may say, the Wisdom of Moses is very conspicuous and
discernable in the choice he made of those Actions to perpetuate the Memory of
the excessive desire which the Ancients had to accomplish the Promise.

And let no Man object here, that it is very strange to see, that during so
many Ages, the Promise of the Messiah occasioned no other than wicked actions.
For as it appears by all Circumstances, that those Crimes related by Moses,
were committed in different times, and long after one another, so it is plain,
that he has recorded those Actions on purpose, to show what impression the
true knowledge of the Promise of the Messiah made upon the mind of those that
had it in its perfection and integrity.

If Moses had inserted in this Book of Genesis, any long Discourse as made by
Adam about that matter upon a Sabbath day, or if he had given us a Relation of
what such an one as Seth, or Enoch, or Sem used to teach concerning that
Promise in their Religious Assemblies.

It is certain, That besides the inconvenience of a tedious Repetition which he
must have made of the same things in every particular account he gives of the
several Generations that preceded him, he could never have persuaded his
Readers so well as he may do now.

First, Men would have been apt to suspect, that those Speeches upon the
Promise of the Messiah, were of his own making, and like those Set Harangues we
find in Xenophon, or Livy.

Secondly, The Crimes that were committed, to get thereby some advantage: As
for Instance, The Murder of a King committed by his Heir, and Successor to the
Crown, shows in the Murder a much greater Ambition, and Affectation of the
Throne; and supposes in him a distinct and clear knowledge of his Rights and
Pretensions to the Empire.

CHAP. X.
That the same Persuasion appears throughout the whole Conduct of Moses, until
his Death.
BUt it is not only by those and the like Reflections which may be made upon the
choice, Moses has made of the things which he recites, that we may gather that
he had always the Promise of the Messiah in view; for he being descended from
Abraham, there is no doubt, but that from his Youth up, he was brought up in
the Religion, and consequently in the hopes of that Patriarch.

But moreover we have reason to think, that the Idea of this Promise of the
Messiah, was much more lively and strong in that Family, ever since Jacob on
his Deathbed had foretold, and promised to Judah, that it was out of his Tribe
he was to be Born. As for Joseph, to whom that Promise might have been applied
by the Children of Israel, because of his Power and Glory in Egypt; the
Egyptian Persecution that followed sometime after his Decease, resolved all
Scruples and Mistakes that might otherwise have been entertained in that
matter, and so convinced all those poor Sufferers, that their Messiah was as
yet to come.

To all these strong Presumptions whereby we may guess, what the thoughts of
Moses might be, concerning the Promise of the Messiah, we may add the
Consideration both of his Words and Actions, which do very plainly establish
the same Truth.

St. Heb. XI.
Paul in his Epistle to the hebrews, mentions two particular Actions of Moses,
which, as they challenge our Admiration, so they deserve our serious
Consideration, because they clearly, I think, evidence, That Moses was fully
persuaded of the future accomplishment of that Promise.

The First is, That he refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter,
choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater Riches
than the Treasures in Egypt, for he had respect unto the recompense of the
Reward. From whence could a Resolution so opposite to the ordinary prudence,
and natural inclinations of other Men proceed in him, if it was not, as St.
Paul observes it, from a very extraordinary Source, viz. from that strong
Persuasion which he had, that how calamitous soever the then present condition
of the people of God might be, yet God had chosen it therein to accomplish that
great promise which was the Joy of all their Ancestors from Adam down to them,
the remembrance whereof he renewed, by illustrating those Oracles which Jacob
pronounced upon his Deathbed.

The other is, That Moses always adhered to that Miserable people, and stood by
them in all their Calamities and Pressures. It Is true, he left them, and
retired once into Midian to save his Life, and avoid the King's Indignation,
but he returned to them into Egypt as soon as he had received his Commission
from God, to deliver them out of their Misery and Bondage: Now he showed again,
by so doing, that he had a certain knowledge of that great Promise of God made
to that people, and a full assurance and persuasion of its future
accomplishment.

Moses informs us indeed, how he refused at first the Commission God gave him
to deliver his people from the Egyptian Slavery, and how he excused himself
upon his own incapacity, and being unfit for so great an undertaking: But yet
he makes at the same time so visible an Allusion to the Prophecy concerning
the Shiloh ( i.e. sent) O my Lord, (said he, to God) send, I pray thee, by the
hand of him whom thou will send, that he could hardly express and declare his
mind about it more plainly.

But we shall be the better convinced of his allusion to the sending of the
Shiloh; if we reflect upon Moses's being of the Tribe of Levi, of which God had
pronounced nothing concerning the future accomplishment of the Promise, he
could not be ignorant of his being himself Excluded of that Privilege, and
that after all, what glory soever the Miraculous preservation, and Illustrious
beginnings of his Life, might seem to pretend and promise to him, yet he could
not expect to rise much higher than Joseph had done before him, although he would
reassume the former Post, to which his Adoption by Pharaoh's Daughter had once
raised him.

We see that Moses continued always of the same mind, and entertained still the
same Notion, and hopes of the Promise of the Messiah, even after God had
revealed to him, that the time of his appearing into the World, was not yet
come: This, I say, we see by his Speech to the people of Israel, related in the
XVIII. Chapter of Deuteronomy, The Lord thy God (says he to them) will raise
up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me,
unto him ye shall hearken; he does not say a Priest, or a King, though the
Messiah was to be both; but he says, a Prophet to teach them not to mistake
any of their Priests or Kings for the Messiah, but to expect and regard less in
his person, the external honor of Aaron's Family, and the worldly Grandeur of
Kings, than the privilege of Divine Inspiration, which was absolutely
necessary to him as the Founder of the True Religion.

CHAP. XI.
That Balaam 's Prophecy, which Moses relates, is a further Argument of the
same persuasion in him.
AS we ought to show that Moses had a very clear and distinct knowledge of this
Promise; so I think it will not be amiss to make here a particular Reflection
upon what he relates Numb. XXIII.

The Moabites being descended from Lot's eldest Daughter, it is very natural to
conceive, that Balac their King was so desirous to have the Israelites cursed
from God, and by one of his Prophets only because he designed thereby to secure
himself of the Divine Blessing; or which is the same thing, of the privilege
of the accomplishment of the Promise, to which he thought he had a just claim
and pretension by his being one of Lot's Posterity.

And this Observation upon Balac's pretension and action, is the more just, and
well grounded because the Notion of the Curse which he intended to have had
pronounced against the Israelites, is directly opposite to the terms of the
Promise which God made to Abraham, in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed, which words, as I observed before, do import a direct
opposition, to Lot's pretension.

Now all this being supposed, one needs only consider the terms of the
Prophecy spoken by Balaam in favor of Jacob, to see that Moses has related
it, only to show,

First, That although those Neighboring Nations to Judea had degenerated, and
corrupted themselves much by their Communication with Ham's Posterity, yet they
preserved a strong, though confused Notion of their Ancestors pretensions, and
acted according to that prejudice of theirs in all Matters and Occurrences of
great moment.

Secondly, That it might be an Authentic Determination of all the several
Contests and pretensions, which had divided the Posterity of Terah until that
time.

It is like a Definitive Sentence; first in favor of Abraham against the
Moabites, and Ammonites, who were descended from Lot: Secondly, in favor of
Isaac, against the pretension of the Ismaelites, descended from Ismael:
Thirdly, In favor of Jacob, against the pretension of the Edomites, descended
from Esau.

For when he foretells, that there shall come a Star out of Jacob; he decides
the three forementioned Controversies. Jacob having been preferred to Esau,
Isaac to Ismael, and Abraham to Lot. Now Jacob could not be preferred to the
Moabites, but he must be so too to the Ammonites, Ismaelites, and Edomites.

This Prophecy, as any one may see, is absolutely necessary, because it
resolves all the Questions and Controversies, which did excite so many
Jealousies amongst all those Neighboring Nations.

This Oracle of Balaam is yet the more remarkable, because, that
notwithstanding it was pronounced at the entry into Canaan, the possessing and
inhabiting of which Country was one of the chiefest Characters of the
Israelites distinction from all other Nations, yet in it Balaam makes a very
distinct mention of the future calling of the Gentiles to the Faith; he calls
them the Children of Seth, to intimate that in the time of the Messiah, the
restriction made and observed by God before that time, was then to cease, and
that there should be no more distinction betwixt the Jews and Gentiles, who
were all the Children of Noah, and all equally descended from Seth by him,
because then all Nations were to be called to the Communion of the Messiah.

I know that some by the Children of Seth understand the Inhabitants of a
certain Town in the Country of Moab, mentioned in the XV. of Isaiah, according
to the Septuagint.

But the Arabian Interpreter of the Samaritans, Abusaid. M.S. in the French
King's Library, Note 4. upon Genesis IV. 26.
brings very good Arguments to prove, that that place of Scripture is to be
understood of the Messiah, and shows that he is called the head of the Children
of Seth, because Seth was the head, and common Father of all Men since the
Flood, and at the same time of all the faithful before the Flood; and that
those words of Genesis IV. 26. Then began Men to call upon the Name of the
Lord, relate to Seth, and not to Enos, as it is commonly believed.

Besides, this Prophecy by these words, I shall see him, but not now. I shall
behold him, but not nigh, determines, that the Birth of the Messiah was not
near, but was reserved for a further time.

Lastly, It is a very singular thing, that this Oracle should be represented to
us, as coming out of the Mouth of a Prophet, who was chosen by God out of the
Family of Abraham; because the Author of it decides these Important Questions
and Differences, without any visible partiality, and without being by assed by
the pretensions of his Birth.

Now there are three things in it which clearly prove, that it could not be
unknown to Moses.

The First is, That immediately after this Prophecy, which was as public and
well known amongst the Moabites, as any Prophecy could be; after the tedious
preparation, and the many difficulties which Balaam made to come to Balac:
After the many Ceremonies and Mysteries which he used upon that occasion; and
notwithstanding the great and panick terror of the Moabites, at the approach of
the Israelites: Nay, and notwithstanding the express Threats, and Ominous
Prophesies of Balaam against that people; notwithstanding all this, I say, we
see the Daughters of Moab imitating the carnal prudence of Lot's Daughters, and
courting the alliance of the Israelites, as if they had had a mind to make
themselves amends that way, for the loss and wrong they had suffered by the
Sentence which Balaam pronounced in favor of Israel.

We see, I say, that Moses immediately after he had related the Prophecies of
Balaam, tells us, that the Daughters of Moab invited the People of Israel to
the Sacrifices of their Gods, and that the People of Israel accepted of the
invitation, and accordingly feasted, and began then to defile themselves with
the Daughters of Moab.

Now, that such a thing should happen presently after Balaam had uttered his
Prophecy, shows evidently, that there was some Relation betwixt those two
Transactions. And this may be further made out, from the manner and nature of
the punishment which God inflicted upon the Israelites for their Criminal
Commerce with the Moabites, although the pretense of it might be grounded upon
the design which the Daughters of Moab had formed according to the Principles
of their Education, to share in the accomplishment of the Promise, by their
conceiving and getting Children by those whom Balaam's Prophecy had invested
with the right and privilege of accomplishing that Promise.

The Second is, That accordingly about two hundred years after Moses, we see
that Ruth the Moabitess left her own Country to settle and live at Bethlehem,
and affected besides to marry there again, one of the Tribe of Judah; no doubt
because she had got in her own Country a certain knowledge of that famous
Oracle, which afterward made her easily yield to the Counsels, and receive
Instructions both of her Mother in Law, and of her own Husband, who was of the
Tribe of Judah, and no doubt, had the Books of Moses, wherein were inserted,
both the Prophecy of Jacob in favor of Judah, and that of Balaam, in favor
of the Israelites against the Moabites.

The Third is, That the Jews have now for several Ages constantly maintained, I
Kings II. 8.
that Simei's Curses against David, which afterward he called Maledictionem
pessimam, (...) contained an upbraiding Reflection as well upon the meanness of
his Birth, as being descended from a Moabitess, as upon his Adultery, etc. This
is related by St. Jerome, or some other ancient Author, who writ that
Discourse, de Traditionibus Hebraeorum, upon the second Chapter of the third
Book of Kings. This Jewish Interpretation would be very pro^^ble, if that was
but true what Rabbi Solomon says upon the II. Chap. of the first Book of
Kings, v. 19. that when we read there, that Solomon caused a Seat to be set for
the King's Mother, we ought to understand it of Ruth the Moabitess, and not of
Bathsheba; we know the Jews ascribe a much longer Life to Zarah the Daughter of
Asher, one of Jacob's Sons, for they are still of the same Opinion as they were
in St. Hierome's time, that she was yet alive in David's time.

No Body can condemn this Reflection upon Ruth, if he will but consider, that
her Faith having been so rewarded, that the Messiah came our of her Posterity;
she is particularly made mention of in his Genealogy; and that on the other
hand her History has been preserved amongst the other Books of the Old
Testament, as a kind of prescription, not only against the Moabites
pretensions, long before condemned by Balaam's Prophecy, but also against
those of the Ismaelites, and Edomites who had no better claim to the Promise
than the Moabites, having no other than that of a general Call, and of their
Birthright before Jacob's Posterity.

CHAP. XII.
That one may see also in Moses 's Law, plain Footsteps of God's Design, in
distinguishing these from whom he would have the Messiah to be Born.
IT was altogether necessary for the execution of my design, to establish well,
the Authority of Moses's Books, upon which I intend to make some Reflections: It
was likewise necessary to show, as I think I have done sufficiently, that Moses
was perfectly acquainted with God's Promise concerning the Messiah. Therefore,
I believe, I may now come to show, that both Moses, and those that came after
him, had all an Eye upon the Messiah in their chiefest Regulations.

But to give a greater insight, and understanding into the things that I am to
say, I think it may not be amiss, to remind the Reader, and to lay before him
once more, the several Characters of God's Conduct in that matter, that he may
be the better able to judge of the whole Series of his design.

I have heretofore showed, that Moses's intention was to establish two things
in the Book of Genesis.

The one, that all Men have derived their Original from Adam, whom God Created.

The other, That Men having sinned, God promised to reinstate him by one of his
own Posterity,

The First of these, was then solidly proved by a plain matter of Fact, when I
showed, that such a Tradition as Moses relates about the Creation of the World,
cannot reasonably be doubted of.

As for what concerns the other, viz. The Promise of the Messiah, which was the
chiefest Object of Man's hope and comfort: I have also showed, I think, that
the Notion, and Expectation of it was very strong and lively, and the original
cause of all the extraordinary Actions recorded by Moses.

But as this promise was not to be fulfilled for many Ages; so God made it only
in very general terms, and had still reserved to himself the Revelation for
after Ages, as he thought fit, both as to the manner and time of its
accomplishment. It is therefore absolutely necessary that we should consider
also how God preserved all along the distinct knowledge of it amongst men.

Now in reading my Reflections upon Genesis, one must needs have observed that
God, even in those early times of the World, did restrain the privilege of
accomplishing that promise by little and little to some particular Men; till at
last he openly declared, that he had settled it in the Tribe of Judah; as we
read it Genesis XLIX.

Thus we see, that God in the very beginning of the World restrained that
Prerogative to Seth's Family, and excluded Cain's from it; then afterward of
all Seth's Family he restrained it to Noah alone and his Family; then of Noah's
Family to Shem alone; then afterward of all Shem's Posterity, to Abraham
alone; then of Abraham's Sons, to Isaac alone; and of Isaac's, to Jacob alone;
whose Son Judah was alone invested with that privilege, and all his Brethren
excluded.

It is moreover observable, that in those seven forementioned Restrictions
which God made, he seems to have affected, to prefer the youngest to the
eldest; as it is evident in his choice, if not of Noah and Shem, who was elder
than the other Sons; yet certainly in that of Seth, who was younger than Cain;
of Abraham, who was the youngest of Terah's Sons; of Isaac who was younger than
Ismael; of Jacob who was younger than Esau; and of Judah who was one of the
youngest of Leah's Sons.

So likewise if the Reader would judge of God's design, by the event alone, he
might justly conclude, that God by this affected choice intended to raise
continual Jealousies betwixt the Eldest (who pretended that the privilege of
accomplishing the promise, did belong to them because of their Birthright)
against their youngest Brothers, whom they saw preserred by God's immediate
choice.

One may also further add, That God seems to have strengthened these
Jealousies, by introducing sometimes a sort of Conformity amongst the
pretenders to the execution of this promise: Thus, for instance, as Abraham had
two Children, so Lot had two; as Jacob had twelve Sons, so Esau also had
twelve; and sometimes one may find, that those particular persons who are
preferred, are charged with very severe Accusations.

Now after all these general Refiexions, it is natural for us to consider, what
care God has upon all occasions particularly taken, to distinguish and
protect, those whom he had invested with the right of accomplishing the
Promise, that their state and succession might never be uncertain.

'Twas this design, no doubt, which obliged God to make Seth the Depositary of
his Service and Worship, that he might thereby save Noah from the Flood, and so
procure to Shem his Father's Blessing.

'Twas for this Reason that he called Abraham out of his own Country, and made
him Travel from place to place to make him thereby famous in the World, and to
invite Men by that means to inquire after his Profession, his Hopes, and his
Religion.

Again, it was for this, that he obliged this Patriarch to the practice of
Circumcision, which was a real distinction, and an indelible Character, and
that he likewise confined him to a certain place, by fixing him in some sort to
the Cave of Machpela, which he had purchased of the Children of Hamor.

Lastly, It was for that reason, that God would have the Posterity of Jacob
distinguished from all other Nations of the World, and that he prohibited all
alliance with them, as also all Imitations of the Customs, and Religious
Ceremonies practiced amongst them.

Now all this being supposed, I say, that whether we consider the end and
principal design of Moses's Laws, or whether we examine his several Prophesies,
which do particularly characterize the Messiah; we shall find that God did all
along continue in his first design of distinction; and consequently of keeping
up the Jealousies of those that had any pretensions to the privilege of
accomplishing the Promise; or which is all one, that he has prosecuted the
same design to Jesus Christ's time, in whom Christians do maintain, that the
first Promise was accomplished, God having then, and not till then, both put an
end to all those Differences and Distinctions, which were only intended to make
the Messiah the better known, and the more certainly discerned at his coming,
and then to cease; just as Scaffolds are taken away as soon as the Building is
finished: And having also on the other hand rectified the Principles from which
flowed that Spirit of Jealousy, amongst those who had the same pretension.

We see, that accordingly God excluded all other Nations from the right of
accomplishing this Promise.

We see, that even in the Family of Judah, who was himself the youngest of the
first Set of Leah's Children, he restrained the execution of it to the youngest
Brothers.

We see, that he raised occasions of Jealousies, even amongst the Tribes of
Israel.

In a word, we see, that of all those means which can distinguish any one
people from all other Nations of the World, or one Tribe from twelve, one
Family from all other Families of the same Tribe; and one particular person,
from all the rest of his Family, none were omitted, but (on the contrary) all
made use of by God, to follow this his first design.

This I intend firmly to establish, by examining the thing gradually from
Moses's time, (by whose Ministry God enacted, and published those Laws, by the
means whereof, he intended the Messiah might certainly be known) to the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom we believe, that the Promise was accomplished.

CHAP. XIII.
That the manner of God's Promulgating his Law amongst the Israelites, did much
conduce to the distinguishing them from all other Nations.
I Do not barely design here at first to observe the several Resemblances,
which are observable betwixt the things related by Moses in Genesis, and those
which one finds in the following Books.

Neither will I merely establish here that, as Jacob's going down into Egypt
with all his Children, and the protection that they all received there, from
Joseph, did serve to fulfill the Prediction which God made of that Event by
Joseph's Dreams; so we may say in general, that the sending of Moses, his
Miracles, and his whole Ministry to the time of his Death, when he entrusted
Joshuah with the Conduct of the Jews, were a litteral accomplishment of the
first part of the Promise, which God had formerly made to Abraham, to deliver
the fourth Generation of his Posterity out of the Captivity, which it was to
fall into, and then to bring it into the Land of Canaan to possess it.

Moses indeed represents that people according to the Tenor of the Prophecy,
as groaning under the hard pressure of a cruel Captivity in Egypt, when Joseph
and his eminent Services were both forgotten.

Afterward he tells us, how they were miraculously delivered out of that
Captivity.

And then Lastly he informs us, that after he had carried them through many
difficulties in the Wilderness he brought them at last to the very Borders of
Canaan, and so left them ready to conquer and possess it, according to God's
Promises, and their pretensions grounded upon those promises which had been so
often repeated to them ever since Abraham's time.

Joshua, Moses Successor, and in all likelihood, the Author of the Description
of his Death, is he that accomplished the other part of God's promise to
Abraham, by introducing the Israelites into Canaan, and actually possessing
them of it: So there is nothing can be imagined more precise in this whole
matter.

But it is not all this only that renders both the person and Ministry of Moses
so glorious: There are several other things in Exodus, and his other following
Books, which do much better deserve our Consideration.

Those Books contain, as I have already observed an exact History, of all that
God did in order to give a certain form to the Commonwealth of Israel, a fixed
place, and a particular Service, that is in order to follow his great design of
having the Messiah known without mistake, whenever he should be Born amongst
the Jews; and this is my chiefest aim in the Reflections upon Exodus and the
other Books of Moses.

First, we might say in general, That the observance of the Sabbath, and the
use of Circumcision, did distinguish the Jews; but yet, I have showed, that the
Sabbath was a Law common to all Nations in the World, and that Circumcision on
the other hand was common both to the Ismaelites and Edomites: And this will
oblige us to make some particular Observations upon that matter; and we must
consider how God took care to distinguish that people, by giving them his Law.

It is in general evident, that the care which God took to give the Moral Law
to that whole people, did eminently distinguish them from all other Nations,
whom he permitted to walk in their own ways, as St. Paul expresses it; to be
sure it shows them that he resolved to fix them to himself, and to hinder them
from following, both the Idolatries of other Nations, and those Inundations of
Vice, which ruin all Societies.

And without doubt, the surprising pomp which accompanied the promulgation of
God's Law, and which was recorded by his order, before those that had been the
Eyewitnesses of it, did much contribute to persuade them that God had a
particular regard and kindness for their Nation, and that he honored them with
his particular Guidance.

We may make the same Observation upon God's giving them a Political Law, and
upon the care that he was also pleased to take of regulating their Civil
Government, and preventing the difficulties which are commonly occasioned by
such Accidents as cannot be foreseen by any Human Legislators, which cause
great Revolutions and Changes in all Governments, all which show sufficiently,
that his design was to raise them up to, and to maintain them in as great
prosperity and welfare, as possibly could be procured to a Nation by perfect
Laws, and a well Constituted Government; even the many Ceremonies which God
gave them, are a further Demonstration of God's design to distinguish them from
other Nations.

It seems not to have been God's intention at first to lay upon them such
numbers of Ceremonies: For it was only after the Commission of the sin of the
Golden Calf, that God laid upon them that heavy and troublesome yoke, on
purpose to employ all their time, and so keep them from falling into Idolatry
again. But however Tanchuma, Jalkut. in Pent. fol. 228. Col. 3.
a famous Jewish Author observes, that there was nothing left in the World, but
what God took care to give the Israelites some Laws about; as for Instance, If
any Jew went out to Plow, he was forbidden to do it with an Ox and an Ass: If
to Sow, he was forbidden to Sow his Field with several kinds of Seed: If to
Reap, he was forbidden to Reap the whole Crop: If any one went about to Bake
Bread, he was commanded to take of out his Dough, so much as to make a Cake
thereof to Consecrate it: If any one did Sacrifice any Animal, he was charged
to give away to the Priest, the right Shoulder of it, with both the Cheeks and
Inwards: When any one found out a Nest of Birds, he was obliged to let the Old
one fly away: If any one went a Hunting, he was to shed the Blood of his Game,
and then to cover it with Dust: When any one had planted any Fruit Trees, he
was to count the first thereof as Uncircumcised for the three first years: When
any one found a Sepulcher, even there certain Cautions are prescribed: If any
one Shaved himself, he was forbidden to Mar the corners of his Beard: When any
one built a House, he was to take care there should be Rails, and Mezouzoth
made to prevent all danger: They were obliged to put particular Threads in
their Garments, and there are many other things, which were apparently
commanded to distinguish the Jews, by obliging them to the practice of these
and such other Laws as took up all their time. But if we may say in general,
that the whole scope of the Ceremonial Law was to employ the Jews: We may yet
more justly say, that it was in particular intended by God to inspire into his
people a horror against all Idolatrous practices, and an Aversion against all
Commerce with Idolaters: And this may be further discerned, if we examine those
Laws in particular.

One see's this perfectly by the manner of God's pronouncing some Meats
unclean, and his forbidding to eat the flesh of some Animals. For we may find,
that the greatest part of these Animals were Worshipped amongst the Heathens.
Thus the more Learned amongst the Jews prove, that the Goat and the Ram were of
that number, but so no doubt were all the Animals which were usually offered in
Sacrifice to God, as particularly the Bull: Now there is nothing which
alienates two Nations from one another more, than when one of them Eats, or
Sacrifices, that which the other makes the Object of its Religion.

One of the most Learned Authors that ever the Jews had, has diligently
observed, that God gave many Ceremonial Laws directly contrary to those Rites
which the Zabij used in their Superstitions, Spencer de Leg. Mos. Lib. 2.
and a learned English Doctor has lately proved it very largely; as to the
Ceremonies which God commanded to be used in the Sacrifice of the Paschal-Lamb,
and in the manner of their building of the Altar, and of their going up to it,
in the prohibition of seething a Kid in his Mothers Milk, and of offering Honey
in their Sacrifices, in the prohibition of their forcing their Children to pass
through the Fire to Moloch, in the Law which prohibited their eating Blood, and
rounding the Corners of their Heads; and making any Marks in their Flesh, and
in I do not know how many other Laws of that Nature, the design of whose
institution is not so evident now since the Rites of all those Ancient
Idolaters are utterly abolished, and but imperfectly recorded in some Ancient
Authors.

Thus we see, that we need only make a very little Reflection upon God's
Conduct, in giving all his Laws to the Israelites, thereby to judge, that the
main scope of those Laws, was to put a bar betwixt the people of Israel, and
all other Idolatrous Nations, which should be a visible, and a constant
distinction, till the Messiah should be born, who was to make all those Marks
of Discrimination to cease entirely.

CHAP. XIV.
That God seems to have designed to keep up a Spirit of Jealousy in the very
Bosom of the Jewish Nation.
WE have seen in general, that God by giving his Law to the Israelites,
intended to discriminate them from all other Nations of the World, and in
particular from those Nations which had showed themselves to be jealous of that
distinction; I mean from the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Ismaelites, and the
Edomites, as I shall hereafter show. I have likewise observed, that God by his
Conduct, and his Oracles, did also excite a Spirit of Jealousy amongst the
several pretenders to the Promise. I come now to show that God has followed
the same design in his Law, and that he has made use of that Jealousy as of
another means, to make that People, which he had separated from all other
Nations, keep up always amongst themselves a lively Notion, and Expectation of
the Messiah.

Perhaps the Reader may think, that these Reflections may interrupt the Series
of the Observations I have undertaken to make upon Moses's Law: But besides
that I shall resume them presently, so one may easily discern, that these two
Remarks concerning the Spirit of Distinction, and the Spirit of Jealousy, kept
up in the Bosom of this people, ought to be well considered by those that
desire to know the Genius of God's Laws, and the original Causes of all the
Transactions related by Moses, and by the other sacred Authors, who acted in
pursuance of that Design which appears in those Laws which Moses gave to the
People of Israel.

I begin with two general Reflections, which, I think are very useful in the
explication of God's Conduct upon this Occasion.

Two things, as I have already observed, have conduced to keep up that
Jealousy, whereof Moses has given so many instances in the Book of Genesis.

The first is, The Preference which God has commonly given to the younger
Brothers before the elder.

The second is, The choice which God has made of such particular persons as
appeared absolutely unworthy of God's choice.

So that here one see's a continual Series in the Jewish History written by
Moses, and by the Prophets, who made the same Observations upon that Model
which Moses had given them.

First of all, The Tribe of Judah is preferred before all the other Tribes of
Israel, and particularly before the Tribe of Reuben, which afterward
occasioned the Insurrection of some Reubenites in their Sedition against Moses,
wherein Corah, Dathan, and Abiram perished: Just as God's preferring Abel
offended Cain, and as Joseph's Brethren conspired together to put him to death,
because of his Dreams, which foretold his greatness and their fall.

Secondly, One see's that Phares, Judah's youngest Son, is preferred not only
before all the other Children of Judah, but even before Zerah the eldest of the
Twins which Judah had by Thamar; just as Jacob was preferred before his Brother
Esau, though they were Twins, and Esau born the first of the two.

One see's afterward, That God having chosen Jesse of all the Posterity of
Phares, David the youngest of all his Sons, was preferred before his Brethren,
when God was pleased to translate the Kingdom to the Tribe of Judah, and to the
Family of Jesse. Just as we saw before, that, in the Election of the first
King, whom the Israelites desired to be set over them, that he was chosen by
Lot by an extraordinary effect of Providence out of the Tribe of Benjamin, though
the youngest of all Jacob's Children.

Thus one see's that Solomon the youngest of David's Children, was preferred
before his Brothers, and that the same Solomon built the Temple of God in the
Tribe of Benjamin, though he himself was of the Tribe of Judah.

We shall afterward see, That the Messiah was descended from David by Nathan,
Son to one of David's younger Children, and by Resah Zorobabel's youngest Son,
from whom the Blessed Virgin drew her Original.

The second Remark is about the care God has taken by his choice of some
particular persons to accomplish the promise, to furnish those with pretenses
and objections, who might be interessed, to oppose the Restrictions which God
had made in favor of their equals; for as they served to keep up a Jealousy
amongst all the pretenders to the Promise, so they also served to preserve a
distinct knowledge of it, and to make them inquire more diligently after it.

In short, as we see that the Ismaelites might upbraid Sarah both with her
frequent Rapes, and with her Cruelty to Agar and Ismael: As the Edomites might
upbraid Jacob's Posterity with Rebecca's supplanting their Father Esau, and
cheating him of his Blessing; so likewise we may observe, that God not only
chose Thamar to have the Messiah descend from her; but also would have her
Incest with her Father in-Law recorded. What might all the other Tribes of
Israel say, were there then no honest Women in Israel, that the Messiah's
Ancestors must descend from those that were born of an Incestuous Commerce?
What probability is there, that God should choose the Tribe of Judah? Had not
all the other Children of Judah a fairer pretension to this privilege, than
Phares could have? And might not their Posterity revive against the Posterity
of Phares, that severe Law against Bastard Children which we read of Deuteronomy.
XXIII.

God chose in the like manner Ruth the Moabitess, and had her History written,
and his choice recorded, as if he had intended to prepare an excuse for those
of the Israelites who afterward would refuse to submit to David. What
probability is there might they say, that God would have the Messiah to be born
of a Moabitess, seeing it was by his order, that Moses caused all those
Israelites to be put to death, who after the pronunciation of Balaam's
Prophecy, held any commerce with the Daughters of Moab? Was there any
likelihood that such a thing could be possible, especially seeing there was a
Law which God would have to be inserted in Deuteronomy, which excludes the
Moabites from the possibility of ever being admitted into the people of God.
But at least, was not this choice of Ruth the Moabitess, a fair cause of
Jealousy to all the other Families of Judah?

God caused the Adultery of Bathsheba, the Mother of Solomon, to be carefully
recorded, as it were on purpose to excuse the Rebellion of those who afterward
sided with Jeroboam, against Rehoboam and his Authority.

Is it probable, (might these Rebels say) that God would have chosen that
Bloody Cruel Man David, that Adulterer, that he and Bathshebah should beget the
Messiah together?

Had Jesse no other Children besides David? And if David must needs have been
the Man, why should Solomon born of Bathshebah be preferred before all his
Brothers?

There are three things considerable in this Matter.

The First is, That God having given to Joshuah, the conduct of the Israelites,
after he had formerly raised Joseph so much above his Brethren by his
advancement in Egypt, and given to his Tribe two portions of the Land of
Canaan; he permitted, that Jeroboam should rise up against Rehoboam, Solomon's
Son, and not only so, but should likewise, according to the Prophecy related,
Genesis XXVIII. 17. build a Temple at Bethel, as being jealous against Solomon,
who built one upon Mount Moriah, according to the Prophecy we find in Genesis
XXII. 14.

The Second is, That this separation, gave a fair pretense to raise the
Reputation of the Prophesies which Jacob uttered upon his Deathbed in favor
of Joseph; which Prophesies ran in terms so very high, that they not only gave
color to Jeroboam's pretensions to the Kingdom, but did also lead the Ten
Tribes into an expectation, that the Messiah should be born, not in the Tribe
of Judah, as Jacob had expressly foretold Genesis XLIX. but in the Tribe of
Ephraim, according to the constant Custom of God's preferring the younger Sons
of a Family before the Elder, in the matter of this Promise.

The Third is, That even the greatest part of the two Loyal Tribes received at
last the interpretation which the other ten made of that Prophecy. At least,
it appears, that many of the Jews have endeavored to prove, that the Messiah
should come from the Tribe of Ephraim, by interpreting several Prophesies that
way, which according to their account and their prejudices, were expressed in
such terms, as could not be understood of him, that was to be born in the Tribe
of Judah, and out of the Royal Family of David.

CHAP. XV.
That Circumcision was a means of distinguishing the Israelites from other
Nations.
BUt I must now resume my Observations upon Moses's Laws. Circumcision was,
without question, one of the first, and most sensible means whereby God did
distinguish Jacob's Posterity from all other people. I will therefore begin
with it,

First, The very signification of the Word Circumcision, implies a real, and
corporeal distinction: Hist. l. I.
Even Tacitus understood it so when he says, Circumcidere genitalia instituere
Judaei ut diversitate noscantur. But besides, by it God's Covenant was, as it
were, Printed, and Ingraved in the very Flesh of all Abraham's Posterity.

God has explained it thus himself in several places; and one may affirm, that
this was very agreeable to God's design, which was, as we have intimated
before, to hinder that people, from which the Messiah was to be born, from
mingling with the other Nations of the World, which would have made the
Pedigree of the Messiah suspected, or at least much more difficult to be traced.

I will not relate here, the several Notions of Divines about the use of that
Ceremony, but only content my self to make two very natural Reflections upon it.

The First of which is, That it was particularly in respect of the Messiah,
that God would have that Mark made upon that part of Man's Body which is
inservient to Generation. As the Messiah was to come into the World by
Generation, according to the words of the first Prophecy concerning him, and
also according to the further Revelations of God to Abraham, about that
promise, so God could do nothing more agreeable to the Idea the Israelites had
of the Messiah, and of his Birth, than to distinguish them, by a Relation to
that Blessed Seed, which he promised them; as God designed, without all
question, by that means to oblige the Jews to remember the first promise made
to Mankind; so no doubt, he intended by it to fix their minds upon the
consideration of that favor he had showed to them, as well as to Abraham, to
distinguish them from all the people of the Earth, that the Deliverer of the
World might be born in their Commonwealth, and from one of their Posterity.

The Second Reflection is, That it was the same prospect of the Messiah, which
made God condemn those to death, who should either remain Uncircumcised
themselves, or leave their Children so.

Is it not a very surprising thing, that so much rigor and severity should be
used in exacting the Observation of a Ceremony, which was merely indifferent in
its nature, and had no Moral goodness in it self? But hereby it appears the
more evidently, that God designed, that the use of Circumcision, by which he
distinguished Abraham's Posterity from all other Nations of the World, should
be a kind of immovable Bar, to hinder the Jews from mingling with all
Strangers.

Indeed there are three things which may be objected against these Reflections.

The First is, That it does not appear, that this Ceremony was counted such a
proper sign of distinction, seeing the use of it has been sometimes
intermitted: As for instance, when the whole Nation of the Jews left it off for
forty years in the Wilderness.

The Second is, That if the chiefest end of Circumcision was to distinguish
that people, with design to make the Messiah known: There was no need that that
yoke should be laid upon all the Jews, but only upon the Family from which he
was to descend, or at the most upon the Tribe wherein that Family was comprised.

The Third is, That Circumcision was common both to Esau's and Jacob's
Posterity; and even used amongst the Egyptians, and the Inhabitants of Colchis,
as we may learn from Herodotus, and some other Heathen Authors.

But after all, it is an easy thing to satisfy a Man's mind in all these
appearing difficulties. I confess, that one is surprised to see that God should
not oblige the Jews to be Circumcised in the Wilderness, for which several
Reasons are given.

First, That God being displeased with that Generation, would not allow, that
they should be honored with this Token of his Covenant; others say, that their
journying in the Wilderness gave them a Dispensation from the observance of
that Ceremony. But we may give a better, I think, and more natural account of
that matter, if we do but follow the Idea which occasioned my second Reflection.

The going forth of some Egyptians with the Israelites out of Egypt, was a Type
of the calling of the Gentiles, as I will show somewhere else: It was then
necessary, that as all Ceremonies, and Circumcision in particular, were then to
be abolished, to take away all distinction from among Seth's Posterity, so the
use of Circumcision should at that time be suspended.

However, God would not have the Suspension of that Ceremony, to continue till
they were entered into the Land of Canaan.

First, To prevent the intruding of some Canaanites into the Body of the
Hebrews.

Secondly, To the end that these Israelites who were to enter into Canaan,
being as well Uncircumcised as the Egyptians Children, and being all made
afterward equal by Circumcision, should have no occasion to upbraid them with
their different original.

The Second Objection may as easily be answered: One might think at first, that
indeed the Messiah had been more easily known at his coming, if the use of
Circumcision had been enjoined only to the Family, or at most, to the Tribe
from which he was to descend: But besides that, it had exposed that Family, or
that Tribe to great Persecutions, it had certainly much diminished that Spirit
of Jealousy which was kept up by the Conformity of the several pretenders,
which on the other hand was of mighty use to preserve a distinct Idea of the
Messiah, and a desire of his coming.

As for the Third Objection, there is no difficulty in it: It Is true, some
Jewish Interpreters imagine, that Joseph took occasion to prescribe the use of
Circumcision to the Egyptians, after Pharaoh had commanded his people to do
what soever Joseph should bid them to do: But that Conjecture is groundless:
For it appears, that the Egyptians who went out of Egypt with Moses, were not
Circumcised. It Is true, that Nation did some Ages after Moses, take up the
Ceremony of Circumcision; and it is very likely, that it was some Egyptian
Colony which introduced the use of it into Colchis: But the observance of that
sole Ceremony amongst those Nations could cause no confusion, because none of
them pretended to derive their Original from Abraham, but had as Historians
observe, quite different Reasons from those which the Jews had for their
practice of Circumcision.

As for the Ismaelites and Edomites, the greatest part of the Jews are of
opinion, that God did discriminate their Circumcision from the Circumcision
which was practiced by those Nations, by his Institution of what they call the
Perigna after the Circumcision; which they endeavor to prove by a passage in
Joshua, wherein it is said, that God ordered Joshua to Circumcise again the
Children of Israel the second time. But others of them laugh at that Criticism,
because it appears that those words do relate to the second solemn Circumcision
which that People did observe after their deliverance out of Egypt: Therefore,
without running to this answer, one needs only follow the Idea we have already
made use of, which is drawn from God's design of keeping up a Spirit of
Jealousy, by some Conformity betwixt the Circumcision practiced by the Jews,
and the Ceremonies used amongst those Rival Nations.

Why then were some of the Neighboring Nations of Canaan, descended from
Abraham Circumcised? As for Example, the Ismaelites in Arabia, who were
Circumcised at thirteen years of age; the Posterity of Abraham by Keturah, viz.
the Midianites who were in the Country of Moab, and the Edomites descended
from Esau, who did all practice Circumcision?

Certainly, It is evident, that as God set the Israelites in the midst of all
those Nations, who by virtue of their Ancestors Birthright, or some other
pretensions, put in their claim with the Jews to the execution of the Promise,
on purpose to excite the attention of this people who were surrounded with
these Rivals. So he did for the same reason permit, that the Ismaelites, the
Midianites, and Edomites should practice the Ceremony of Circumcision, almost
in the same manner that the Israelites did.

But that we may the better apprehend the force of this Reflection, we need only
consider the Jealousy, which is caused amongst the several Sects of
Christians, by the Conformity of Sacraments, which is so far from uniting them
with one another, as it might justly be expected; that on the contrary, one may
say, that this Conformity in some things alienates them from one another, and
breeds Reciprocal Jealousies amongst their several Parties, especially when
they come, to reflect upon the other Controverted Articles, that cause the
Separation.

Moreover, it is reasonable to consider that God had provided a sufficient
distinction, betwixt that people, and other Nations, by giving them many other
Laws, which had no other visible use than that of Discrimination; as for
Instance, the three great Feasts which the Jews were obliged to keep.

The Feast of the Passover, was the memorial of the accomplishment of God's
Promise to Abraham to deliver his Posterity out of the Country wherein they
were to be in Bondage after 430 years; and consequently could not be observed
by the Ismaelites, nor by the Edomites who had never been Captives in, nor
delivered out of Egypt in the fourth Generation.

The Pentecost was a public Monument of the Promulgation of the Law, and all
its parts, amongst the Children of Israel, and consequently peculiar to that
Nation.

Thus the Feast of Tabernacles preserved the memory of that solemn action of
the Israelites continuance for forty years in the Desert.

It were needless, after such remarkable distinctions, to observe here, (which
yet was certainly designed for that end) that God took care to distinguish that
people by some Injunctions, which they were to observe, in the fashion of their
Clothes, of their Beard, of their Philacteries, of their Mezouzoth, of their
Thaleth, of their Zizith, and many the like things, the observance of all which
served to hinder any confusion of the people of Israel, with their Neighbors.

CHAP. XVI.
That the Law of Moses engaged the Jews to the study of their Genealogies, that
they might certainly know that of the Messiah.
BUt if God took care to distinguish his people from all other Nations by such
an indelible Mark, in the practice whereof there was no fear of any trick;
seeing no Man would Circumcise himself without thinking upon it more than once,
as the History of the Sichemites assures us; so one sees, that he took as great
a care to divide them into Tribes, and the Tribes into Families, that they
might subsist and continue in a kind of a Separation from one another, although
they were at first but one single Family, and one single Nation.

Now to what purpose, I pray, were all those Distinctions, if they had not been
designed, to manifest the Messiah at his coming.

We see then, that they could have no other use, for as God had decreed, that
the Messiah should be born out of the Tribe of Judah, so it was necessary, that
the several Genealogies of that Tribe should be very publicly known.

And therefore one sees that God secured this, not only with all necessary
care, but even with a Caution greater than could have been reasonably desired.

He engages all the Tribes of Israel to preserve with a kind of affectation,
their several Genealogical Tables; he neglects none of the means that might be
useful to distinguish the Tribe of Judah from other Tribes, and the Family from
which the Messiah was to be descended from all the other Families of the same
Tribe.

Indeed I am not ignorant that anciently one might see some other Nations using
the Distinctions of Tribes amongst themselves, much after the same manner as
the Jews did, and that they were careful to preserve their Genealogies in order
to derive their Original from the same common Father: Thus we ought to
understand what we read in History of the Tribes amongst the Athenians. Thus
Hippocrates runs up his own Pedigree to the twentieth Man of his Ancestors, and
Herodotus mentions several Instances of the same care.

But one sees that this affectation was infinitely greater among the Jews.

For we see, that they did not only rank themselves every one under the
Standard of their own Tribe, at their going forth out of Egypt, but that God
did also engage every Man to know his Tribe exactly; nay, he compelled them all
in a manner, to study their own Pedigrees, that every one might claim, and reap
the benefit of the Law of Jubilee, which had the force of an Entail in respect
of every Family, as I am now going to show.

There are three things observable in that Matter.

The First is, That it was by a superabundant precaution, that God would engage
the Tribes to continue distinguished from one another, and to preserve and
study their several Pedigrees; namely, he intended by that means to prevent the
Objection, which might otherwise have been made, that it was impossible for a
Tribe, and a Family in that Tribe to continue distinguished from the rest of
the Nation, for so many Ages; for certainly, if all the Tribes in that Nation,
and all the Families in every Tribe, did continue, by God's Providence, so long
distinguished from one another, there is no doubt to be made, but he could
preserve the single Tribe of Judah, and the Family of the Messiah distinguished
from all other Tribes, and Families of the people of Israel.

The Second Remark is, That it was for this distinction sake, that the Books of
the Old Testament were filled with Genealogical Tables; to what purpose else
had Books of that importance, and which treated of such great Subjects been
filled with Genealogies? Moses's Books are full of them: The first Book of
Chronicles resumes those Genealogies with all possible exactness: There is
nothing more considerable in the Book of Ruth, than the Genealogy of David and
his Family.

The Third Remark is, That if the Genealogy of the Priests seem to have been
better known, than that of other. Families, by reason of their being the
Public Ministers of Religion, which seems to give the advantage of certainty
of distinction to the Tribe of Levi above that of Judah, in that particular;
yet we find, that all the Families of the whole Nation took much the same care
to preserve their own Genealogies; so that if after the Babylonian Captivity,
some particular persons were excluded from the Priestly order, to which they
pretended, because they could not make out their Pedigree: So likewise all were
thrown out from the other Tribes, that could not justify their Lineal Descent.

Nay, there is something further, deserves to be taken notice of, as being very
singular in that of Judah: and one ought here to consider a Mystery of God's
Providence, and admire the Wisdom of his Conduct, in pursuing the design which
Moses first sets down, and upon which one sees, that the whole Jewish State was
formed; for when God resolved, that the Messiah should descend from the Tribe
of Juda, and the House of David, he made it more particularly known and
distinguished, than any other Family in the whole Nation, and for that reason
he sets David upon the Throne.

Every one knows, that in every Kingdom the Genealogy of a King, and of the
Royal Family, is of all others the most publicly known.

Now if the Blood Royal alone is always distinguished how much more must it be
so, when that Supreme Dignity is conferred upon such a Family, as God had
particularly chosen, to have the Messiah, who is set forth as the desire of all
Nations, to be born out of it.

From hence I will boldly conclude, that the only end for which God raised
David's Family to the Throne, was because the Messiah was really to be born out
of that Family, reduced to a low, and private Condition, which Isaiah foretold,
saying, Isa. XI.LIII.
That a Rod should come forth out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch grow out
of his Roots; and in another place, That he should grow up as a Root out of a
dry ground, which was very agreeable to the Character of a Prophet, and to the
low state of Humiliation, in which our Savior was to appear in the World.

CHAP. XVII.
A Solution of some Difficulties in these Genealogies.
INdeed the dispersion of the Ten Tribes seems to be a very Natural Objection
to those who would dispute the Reflections which I have already made upon these
Genealogies.

But after all, there is nothing in it but what confirms the more the said
Reflections.

And we may say, that the entire dispersion of the whole Tribe of Ephraim, and
of the others which adhered to it in Jeroboam's Rebellion, is a Mystery of
Providence which challenges our admiration, as much as the raising up that
Family to the Throne, out of which the Messiah was to be born.

To apprehend this the better, we need only call to mind the pretensions of the
Tribe of Ephraim: This Ephraim was the younger Brother of Manasseh; but Jacob
had given him the Birthright, just as Isaac before had given it to Jacob, tho
it did of right belong to the elder Brother.

Jacob had particularly blessed Ephraim, and even made it a Form of Blessing
for after Ages, as we read in the Book of Ruth, that there was one made for
Pharez. Jacob had given to Joseph two Portions in the Land of Canaan, and
Ephraim had the Birthright before Manasseh, by God's order; it was then very
natural for the Tribe of Ephraim, as all Tribes did apply to themselves the
several privileges promised to their respective heads, to look upon
themselves, as having a particular right to God's Blessing.

And they thought this right of theirs was plainly made out, as by Joseph's
Dreams, so especially by the Words of that Prediction which Jacob gave in
favor of Ephraim, the words of which run so very high, that after such a
prejudice, there might very well be a fair pretense for the hope which the
Tribe of Ephraim had once to see a Messiah come out of their Tribe, as those of
Judah expected one out of theirs.

If to all this we add, That Jeroboam's Rebellion was authorized by a
Prophetical Inspiration, and by a special sign of God's Approbation; and that
on the other hand he desired to propose to his people the two Calves which he
set up in Dan and Bethel, as Symbols of the Deity, only to pursue the Idea's of
Pharaoh's Dreams, which Joseph interpreted, the representation whereof, did
clearly show both the greatness of Joseph, and the particular care of God's
Providence over him. Talm. in Succa c. 5. in Gem.
It was then natural, to the Men of Ephraim, to feed themselves with such
hopes, as the Jews teach us they did, when even to this very day they speak of
a Messiah of the Tribe of Ephraim.

What did God then do, to obviate these pretensions of the Tribe of Ephraim? He
dispersed them, together with the other nine Tribes that submitted to the
Authority of its Kings, and so confounded them with all those Tribes which
followed their fortune, that tho there should be still some Ephraimites in the
World, yet it would be impossible for any of them to justify his Pedigree so
clearly, as that any Messiah really descended from that very Tribe, could by
establishing his Genealogy, put his being of the Tribe of Ephraim beyond all
contest.

Now according to this Notion of things it is visible (if we may be allowed to
enter into the Counsels of God,) that he did particularly preserve the Tribes
of Levi, and Benjamin, with the Tribe of Judah, which was the only Tribe that
was to be preserved of necessity.

First, Because as St. Paul to the Hebrews observes, there was nothing ever
said as to the Messiah, of the Tribe of Levi.

Secondly, Because God would by that means confound the more effectually all
the claims of the Tribe of Ephraim.

For in short, If the Tribe of Ephraim was invested by God with the Kingdom
over nine Tribes of the people of Israel, so had the Tribe of Benjamin been
raised up before to the Sovereignty over all Israel, over the Tribe of Judah,
and even that of Ephraim it self.

If the Tribe of Ephraim was descended from a younger Brother, to whom Jacob
had given his Blessing in prejudice of Manasseh his elder Brother, (which is
considerable because God has almost constantly preferred the younger before
the elder) so the Tribe of Benjamin was descended from him that was both the
younger Brother of Joseph himself, and the youngest of all Jacob's Children,
notwithstanding which, the Tribe of Benjamin did freely yield to the Tribe of
Judah, and granted that the glory of giving Birth to the Messiah, was wholly
due to them.

Be it as it will, there are two Reflections more which must be made concerning
these Genealogies which appear very natural in this place.

The First is, That both St. Matthew, and St. Luke do begin their Gospel with
the Genealogy of the Messiah.

The other is, That some time after St. Paul condemns the study of Genealogies,
which was still much in use amongst the Jews, as vain; Why therefore is there
such a different conduct amongst the Disciples of the same Master?

Certainly, whoever shall consider with attention the grounds which I have laid
down before must acknowledge, that both St. Matthew, and St. Luke, ought to
have begun their Books, as they have done, with the Genealogy of the Messiah.

For First of all, It was necessary that the descent of the Messiah from
Abraham by David, should be clearly made out: it was requisite therefore that
they should set down such a Genealogy as was known by the whole Jewish Nation:
Now this they have done with very great care, and the thing was so easy, and
so well known, that even a Blind-Man of the Neighborhood of Samaria, the chief
City of the Kings of Ephraim, did publicly call Jesus the Son of David.

But on the other side, St. Paul's forbidding the study of Genealogies, does
not at all contradict the method of those two Evangelists.

In short, he pursues the very same Notions: He saw, that the Converted Jews
applied themselves to the study of Genealogies, which was then so great a part
of the study of their Nation: It is still practiced among the Jews, to that
degree, Maimon. Praef. ad Jad. Chazaka.
that since their dispersion they gave an exact Relation of all the Doctors and
Rabbis amongst them who have preserved the Tradition, and who were Proselytes
of Justice: What therefore was to be done in this case? He took it for granted,
that God had engaged every Jew to study his own Pedigree with care, for no
other end but only to have that of the Messiah distinctly known whenever he
should come.

But the use of these Genealogies being once over, by the Messiah's coming into
the World, he observes with reason, that it was no longer necessary to keep up
the vain study of all those Genealogies.

So that we see he speaks against the study of Pedigrees, much upon the same
grounds as in other places he inveighs against Circumcision; for since the
chiefest use of Genealogies, as well as of Circumcision, was to distinguish
Abraham's Posterity from the rest of Mankind, till the Messiah was come; the
use of these two Observations was naturally to cease after he was once come.

It is, no doubt, for the same reason, that whereas the Jews in the Apostle's
time took great care upon all occasions, to take notice of the Tribe from which
they were descended, as well as to set down the Names of their Fathers, yet one
sees that the Apostles did not all affect it. And if St. Paul mentions his
being a Benjamite: It was for a particular reason, for otherwise as he preached
down the distinction betwixt Jews and Gentiles, so he declared himself with the
same Earnestness against the distinctions which were observed amongst their
Tribes.

CHAP. XVIII.
That the manner whereby the Law of Moses fixed the People of Israel to the
Land of Canaan, was to keep them separated from other Nations.
ONe of the chiefest means, which God made use of, to distinguish his people of
Israel from the rest of Mankind, was so to fix their Affections upon the Land
of Canaan, that they should look upon it, as a Country which belonged to them
by a particular concession from God, which derogated from the Canaanites right,
to whom that Country fell in the Division of the Earth that was made amongst
the Children of Noah, or which reestablished the Posterity of Shem in their
just Rights, Haeres. LXVI. n. 84.
to whom, if we may credit the ancient Tradition, related by St. Epiphanius,
this Country did really belong by virtue of that Division amongst the three
Sons of Noah, tho afterward they were driven out of it by the Posterity of Ham.

Moses seems to have expressed this truth, when he says Genesis XII. that when
Abraham came to Canaan, the Canaanite was already in the Land; that is, he had
already invaded it, neither can we refer what he relates in the XIV. Chapter,
concerning the War which the Kings from the East came to make against the Kings
of Sodom and Gomorrha to any thing else.

'Twas then for this reason, that long before Moses's time, God took Abraham
out of Chaldea, from amongst Shem's Posterity to bring him into Canaan amongst
the H^vites, the Amorites, and other Nations all equally descended from Ham,
whom God had cursed.

God could have placed Abraham any where else; but he chose to bring him into a
Country, which the Posterity of Ham had seized upon already, rather than into
a place possessed by the Posterity of Japhet, on purpose that the Jealousy
might be the greater betwixt Abraham and the Inhabitants of the Country into
which God had brought him.

Nevertheless God did not give him at first an entire possession, but only
promised him that his Posterity should enjoy it, and in the mean while invested
him beforehand, with a Right to it, by the purchase of a Field for a Burying
place, wherein his Wife, himself, and his Children were Buried; by which means
he strongly fixed his own mind, and the hopes of his Posterity.

In short, it is evident, that all the glory which Jacob found in Egypt when he
was invited thither by Joseph, did not make him forget the Right which he
claimed upon that Land, by virtue of the Sepulcher both of his Father and
Grandfather that was there. For Moses informs us, that he desired to be carried
thither after his Death, and that he did expressly require this Duty from Joseph
and his other Children, who paid it in sovery solemn a manner, and with a
Mourning so very great and famous, that the Name of Abel-Mizraim continued to
that very place, where the Canaanites saw the Solemnization of that Funeral by
the Sons of Jacob, who were attended by great numbers of Egyptians.

One see's that Jacob's Children still entertained the same hope: Joseph
solemnly engaged his Children to carry his Bones into the Land of Canaan: And
one may judge, that the other Patriarchs were not less solicitous to require
the same Office at the hands of their Children, Jalkut. ex Siphre. fol. 311.
col. 2.
as St. Stephen supposes it Acts VII. agreably to the common opinion of the
Jews: All which shows, that Abraham's Posterity had their Hearts set upon his
Sepulcher, as upon the Pledge and security of God's Promise, that they should
be once possessed of that Land where he was Buried.

And as the carrying the Body of Jacob into Canaan, sufficiently showed what
were the claims of the Israelites; so the same was very evident by their care
in keeping themselves unmixt with the Egyptians, all the time they sojourned in
Egypt. The Splendour of Joseph was a natural engagement for them to settle
themselves there for ever; besides, their vast increase forced them in a manner
to it. For a long time the Miseries which they endured, invited them to seek
the Alliances of the Egyptians by Marriages, and to mix themselves with a
people who were their Masters, and so to renounce hopes which appeared to be so
very groundless. They seemed to have been warranted by Joseph's Example, who
had Married an Egyptian. However, one never finds that they tried that method.
One see's on the contrary, that there was little correspondence between the
Hebrews and Egyptians in their Sacred things: For the Hebrews sacrificed to God
the abomination of the Egyptians, that is, those very things which the
Egyptians worshipped.

One see's afterward, by the great number of Flocks which they drove along
with them at their going out of Egypt, that they had continued to follow the
profession of their Ancestors, who were Shepherds, a very odious Employment to
the Egyptians.

One see's at last, that after the many Miracles which Moses wrought in the
Egyptian Court, that this people followed God's Conduct, and went out of that
Country, to possess the Land of Canaan, which none of them had ever seen, and
yet they looked upon the obtaining it as a Blessing they could not miss of.

There are several things very remarkable upon that Subject.

The First is, That some Egyptians went out with the Israelites to dwell with
them in the Land of Canaan, which was done, not only that there might be some
indisputable Witnesses from among the Enemies of God, of the truth, and
greatness of the Miracles which Moses had wrought amongst them, which also was
a presage of the calling of the Gentiles to the Faith, by their insertion into
the Body of the Jews: but also that there might be some Witnesses of the
extraordinary affection which the people of Israel had for the Land of Canaan,
and of their claims to it by virtue of God's promise, that he would put them
into possession of it. For otherwise it is not a common thing that a Colony of
Slaves should be suffered to run away, much less that they should persuade
their Masters to forsake their own Country, and their settlements at home, to
go and conquer another for them.

The Second Remark is, That God made the Jews travel for forty years in the
Deserts of Arabia, not only to make them forget any Ties they might have had to
return again into Egypt, and to accustom them to depend wholly upon Divine
Providence; but also to redouble their desires after the possession of this
Land of Promise.

It was for the same reason that God forbad them so straightly either the
mingling with, or the settling themselves amongst the Midianites, tho Moses had
given an Example by Marrying Sephora; or the Edomites, or the Ismaelites, or
the Moabites, or the Ammonites, tho all those Nations were descended from
Therah, their common Father, or from the Patriarchs.

In execution of which severe prohibition, God commanded the Jews to put all
those to the Sword who should make any alliance with those Nations, as we have
instance of it, Numb. XXIII. after the description of Balaam's Prophesies.

And it could be for no other end, that he so straightly charged the Israelites
to cut off the Hivites, Ammorites, and other Nations of Canaan even to the
Women and little Children; but in pursuance of his first design to prevent all
mixture, of his People with those Nations, which without that extreme rigor
would infallibly and insensibly have come to pass.

I know very well that God preserved the Gibeonites, by ratifying that
Alliance, which gave leave to those People tho of the Posterity of Ham, to
continue amongst his own people in the Land of Canaan; but tho God did in
effect preserve the Gibeonites amongst the Jews, yet he forced them to undergo
the Drudgery, and Servile Offices of the Tabernacle, and that they might be
kept, as unquestionable Witnesses of the Hebrews pretensions, and of their
miraculous Conquest of the Land of Canaan; for the continuance of that Nation
in the heart of the Country, and their submitting to the drudgery of carrying
Wood, and Water for the use of the Tabernacle, tho they were at first of
another Religion, was, as I have observed already, a continual Subject of
admiration to the Posterity both of the Jews and of the Gibeonites themselves.

CHAP. XIX.
That the Law tied the People of Israel to the Land of Canaan, and by several
other means established the distinction betwixt Tribes and Families amongst
them.
ONe may say, that one of the most effectual means which God used to fix his
people to the Land of Canaan, was the Law which he gave them to mere thrice a
year, and Celebrate three Solemn Feasts together, which hardly gave them leave
to travel far into other Countries, and engaged them every time they met, to
renewin the public Acts of their Religion the memory and the Idea's of their
hopes: And they conduced to this Design of God in this manner.

Those Feasts were Celebrated at three times which were the most commodious
Seasons of the year for Traveling, betwixt the Months of March and October:
The Celebration of the Passover was upon the fourteenth day after the
appearance of the Moon in March: The Pentecost was fifty days after, and the
Feast of the Tabernacles lasted from the first to the tenth day of September.

In short, the Law which obliged the Jews to assist at the Celebration of those
Feasts, required the appearance of all the Males of Twenty years of age and
upwards, so very rigorously, that there was no Dispensation; for all (without
exception) were then obliged to appear. So that even during the Dispersions of
their Nation, the Jews, who lived out of Judea, assisted always at the
Celebration of those three Feasts with great care.

This was a visible way of keeping the Tribes of Israel distinct, by giving
each of them a separate portion in the Land of Canaan, and by fixing them
inseparably to it; as the whole Nation was in like manner distinguished, by its
being placed in a Country entirely by it self.

We see accordingly, that God has observed that Method, by giving a Law which
injoyns the Division of the Land of Canaan, to be made into as many Portions as
there were Tribes, only excepting the Tribe of Levi, because the Levites, as
being the public Ministers of their Religion, were dispersed amongst the other
Tribes, that they might more conveniently attend to the Instruction of the
people.

I shall not here take notice of the Miracle which was evident in that
Division, which was an exact accomplishment of the Oracle which Jacob and Moses
uttered a little before their Deaths.

But I shall observe, First, That as the design of God was to divide that
people into Tribes, that the Tribe of Judah, from which the Messiah was to be
born, might be the better distinguished and known, so he would, for the same
reason, allot the Cave of Machpelah, the Sepulcher of the Patriarchs, to the
share of the Tribe of Judah, as also Ephratah, the place where Rachel was
Buried, which was afterward called Bethlehem, the Town where David had his
Birth, and which was foretold told by the Prophet Micha under the Name of
Ephratah, as the place where the Messiah should be born in the fullness of time.

We must besides, take notice of two particular Regulations, by which God fixed
his people in the Land of Canaan, and preserved a distinct Idea of this first
division of that Country.

The First is the Law of Jubilee.

The Second is the Law of Lineal Retreats.

In short, by the Law of the Jubilee which returned every fifty years, and by
which every one that could justify his Pedigree, was reinstated in the
possessions of his Ancestors: God obliged that people to keep up a
distinct-knowledge of the first division made under Joshua, Joshua XIV, etc.
and which is described in that Book which contains his History, much more
effectually than if he had made a Law for that very purpose: So that tho the
Field of Ephratah had been never so often alienated, yet it always returned to
the Tribe of Judah, and so afterward into David's Family, because it was at
first the Lot of his Ancestors.

This Law of Jubilee preserved a distinct knowledge of the several Tribes, and
Families, and it also kept up a distinct Idea of their Genealogies, which must
be preserved entire of necessity, that they might maintain their right to the
inheritance of their Ancestors.

It would be to no purpose to object against this Observation, that it was
impossible to know certainly which Tribe, and much less which Family every
Estate did belong to, because one see's that the first Proselytes who went out
with the Israelites, shared the Land of Canaan together with them; for one
see's on the contrary,

First, That God would not allow any of the Moabites, and Ammonites to become
Proselytes before the tenth Generation.

And Secondly, That he debarred the Edomites from being admitted to make
profession of Judaism before the third Generation, which excluded them for ever
from any possessions in the Land of Canaan.

And Thirdly, one ought to observe the difference betwixt an Egyptian
Proselyte, and a Native Jew: The Quality of a Proselyte, gave permission to an
Egyptian to live amongst the Jews, and to profess their Religion, but it gave
him no right to possess any of their Land.

And then besides that, Massa Biccour. c. 1. S. 4
those Egyptian Proselites had a particular way of praying by themselves,
different from that of the Jews, as the Jews still testify. They could not
possess any Estate in Land amongst them: This is so true, Numb. XXVII.
that it was once round necessary to make a particular regulation for the
Daughters of Zelophehad, that they might have their division, which was granted
only under certain Conditions, because the Land was not to be divided, but
amongst the Males of the people of Israel.

But this is very considerable, that by this Law of the Jubilee, God fixed the
Jews to the Land of Canaan, by giving the Children a power to look upon
themselves, not only as the presumptive Heirs of their Parents, but to consider
their Parents only as Usu-fructuary's, since all their Possessions in Land were
so Entailed, that the Children, or right Heirs of any Man could not miss of the
Reversion, because whatever alienation was made, it could last but for a time
to the year of Jubilee which restored all the alienated possessions, absolutely
and entirely to the right Heirs.

Now that this Law was always looked upon as a fundamental Law amongst the Jews,
Leviticus XXV. 23. 1 Kings XXI.
appears clearly from the words in Leviticus, and from the History of Naboth,
which holy Man rather chose to die than to comply with the injust desire of
Ahab, who would have forced Naboth to sell his Estate absolutely
notwithstanding God's express prohibition.

The exemplary vengeance which God took upon Naboth's Murder, and the relation
of it recorded in Scripture is a further confirmation of this same truth: If a
King of Israel durst not at first infringe that Law, if it was not violated by
any other than Jesabel, who was a Foreign Princess: If the Transgression of
that Law was punished in such an exemplary manner, who can doubt but that it
was particularly observed in the Tribe of Judah, as a Fundamental Law by which
God tied up his People inseparably to this very Country.

One needs only make some few Reflections upon those words which God makes use
of Ezekiel. XLVI. to agree to what I say, if those Reflections which I have made
already upon Naboth's Murder be also added to them.

One may observe upon the same Subject, that tho God had several times
subjected the Jews to a Foreign power, yet he never suffered the whole Nation
to be all carried away out of Canaan at one time; nor yet to continue in
Captivity for the time of two whole Jubilees; they were but seventy years in
Babylon, which was the furthest place that they were ever carried into.

From whence we may naturally conclude, that their Genealogies could not be
confounded in so short a time, because many that were at the Consecration of
the second Temple had seen the first, nor could the distinct knowledge of the
several divisions of their Estates be obliterated; because those of every Tribe
who continued still in the Land, might visibly keep them up.

And we here of necessity ought to observe in the first place, what we may read
in the XXXII. Chapter of Jeremiah, Jerem. XXXII.
concerning the sale of a Field which Jeremiah bought.

And Secondly, what we read Nehem. the Vth where he is troubled to see the
alienation of their Fields, which was a consequence of their misery.

And Thirdly, The manner how that people were restored to their Estates,
according to the Fundamental Laws of their State.

Another very effectual means to fix that people to the Land of Canaan, and to
preserve their Families there certainly without confusion, was the Law of
Lineal Retreats, which God instituted for this very purpose.

For in short, when this Rule was once laid down, that upon the failure of an
Heir in any Family, that the next Kinsman was the Heir at Law, it appears
plainly, that every one was obliged for his own interest, to inquire with
diligence into the Genealogical Lives of his own Tribe, that he might instruct
himself in the state of the several Families of his kindred, and of the several
degrees of Proximity of Blood, whereby they might be related, because the exact
knowledge of these Lists, and of those several degrees of Kindred were
absolutely necessary to make use of this Right of Lineal Retreats.

There were two other Laws which contributed also to this; one whereof
regulated all that was to be done, when there were none but Daughters left in a
Family: A famous instance of which, we have in the History of the Daughters of
Zelophehad set down twice by Moses on purpose no doubt, that it should be the
more taken notice of, as I intend to show particularly in another place.

The other Law regulated all that the next Kinsman of any one that died
Childless, was obliged to do in respect of the Relict, and of the Estate of the
Deceased, if he intended to redeem it. One finds in the Book of Ruth, an
illustrious Example of the Execution of this Law, which may be found Deuter.
XXV.

Now after all this, let any one judge, whether there could be any stronger
Ties than these to oblige the people of Israel to continue in the Land of
Canaan, and whither the division which God made of it, betwixt their several
Tribes and Families, was not an infallible means to distinguish them certainly
one from another.

CHAP. XX.
That the Laws which Moses made concerning the state of Virginity, did
principally relate also to the Messiah, which holds also as to several other
Laws.
HItherto I have showed the care which God took to distinguish his people of
Israel from all other Nations of the World, and I afterward showed what care
he took to keep the distinctions which he first set up amongst the Tribes. And
I afterward explained those Laws which he gave to oblige every Family in each
Tribe to remain distinct. And I afterward made it manifest, that the division
of the Land of Canaan was a very proper means to execute this design of God.

All which shows, that God intended to make it easy for every Man to
distinguish the Messiah, when it should be once known that he was to be born
out of the Family of Jesse, as it was afterward foretold by several express
Oracles.

But as there ought to be something supernatural in the Birth of the Messiah,
who was to be born of a Virgin, so we ought to see what care God took in his
Laws, that the Birth of the Messiah, even in this very Article, might not be a
Fact too difficult to be acknowledged and established.

In the First Promise which God made to Man in these words, That the Seed of
the Woman, should bruise the Serpent's Head, being joined with Isaiah's
Prophecy, Behold, a Virgin shall Conceive, etc. Is. VII. It is visible, that
for the accomplishment of these Oracles, one ought to suppose, that the Messiah
must be born of a Virgin, as the Christians profess to believe: Why should God
otherwise have taken care, to insinuate from the very beginning of the World,
that the Messiah was to be born of the seed of a Woman, without mentioning any
thing of a Man, if he had not supposed, that he should be born, without the
Operation of a Man? And why should Isaiah propose the Conceiving of a Virgin,
as an Effect wholly Supernatural?

In short, God did therefore by his Laws not only secure the State of
Virginity, that this thing might not be ambiguous when it should be
accomplished, but (as we shall see here) he has by these Laws made it extremely
Illustrious.

First, Besides that, God would have the punishment of Death inflicted upon
them that were at any time found guilty of sins against nature, Exodus XXII.
Deuteronomy. XXII. Levit. XVIII. Levit. XX. Deuteronomy. XXIII. 17.
as also upon them, that should be proved to have had any incestuous Commerce
with those that were nearly related to them, and to whom either the nearness of
Blood, or of Affinity, gave them a more free, and familiar access. He moreover,
straightly commanded, that all Prostitutes should be put to death without any
mercy.

Secondly, He is not only contented to forbid Fornication and Adultery in
general, by condemning to death, Exodus XXII. Levit. XX. Deuteronomy. XXII.
those that expressly should be convicted of it, and by awarding the same
Sentence against him that should happen to corrupt a Contracted Virgin, and the
Virgin her self. But he also hinders Men by two ways from falling into sins of
impurity, he permitted, on the one hand, a Divorce where the Wife did not
please her Husband, and on the other hand he allowed of Polygamy. This
Toleration made that Virgins on the one side, not remaining too long Unmarried
were not apt to be easily corrupted, and on the other side Men were not very
forward to debauch those Women whom they did not intend to Marry, or to keep
when Married, for he that was compelled to Marry a Virgin whom he had seduced,
Deuteronomy. XXII.
was expressly forbidden to put her away for ever after.

It is natural to observe the design of those Laws amongst the people of the
Jews. In short, Massec. Avoth. c. 5.
the desire of Issue made them Marry very young; most of the Men were Married
at eighteen years of Age.

Therefore all Virgins thought it a shame to be unmarried; therefore God makes
them speak in the third of Isaiah, in that manner, when seven Women would marry
one Man, without asking any thing for Diet, or Clothes, provided only that he
would take away that reproach of living without having Children. 'Twas this
desire of Posterity, which made the Women look upon barrenness as a Curse.

Again, this vehement desire of Children made Eunuchs to be regarded, Lucian de
Eunuch, p. 537. Lucian de Dea Syria. p. 1069.
as Men particularly abhorred of God, not only by the Jews, but also by the
Heathens themselves: Although afterward they passed for Holy Men, because they
designed to imitate what (as they were told) had happened to Noah, by his Son
Ham, which introduced the Custom amongst the Assyrians of Castrating
themselves, that they might be Priests.

Thirdly, Deuteronomy. XXII.
God commanded, that any Virgin which was Betrothed to a Husband, and was
corrupted in her Father's House, or that was Ravished without calling for help,
should be punished with Death; so that all the Virgins were indispensably
engaged for fear of losing both Life and Honor together, to preserve their
Virginity with all possible care.

But here is a fourth Law concerning this matter, whereby God obliged the
Parents of all contracted Virgins to take a more than ordinary care of them,
when he commands Deuteronomy. XXII. 21. That a Virgin for whom the Tokens of Virginity
were not found, should be brought out to the door of her Father's House, and
there be stoned to death, by the Men of the City, for so her Parents were by
that means, made partakers of the punishment of her Crime, and their
negligence, was severely punished by such a shameful Execution as dishonored
their whole Family.

Fifthly, God submitted Women to the Examination of their Husbands to whom they
were Married: Nay, one would think that he intended to raise the Jealousy of
Husbands, when he gives them leave to bring their Wives to a public Trial, and
to punish them with Death, when they did not preserve the Tokens of their
Virginity.

It was for that reason that he commanded, that the Parents or near Relations
of the young Married Women thus complained of, Deuteronomy. XXII.
should produce upon all such occasions the Tokens of the Virginity of those
Daughters which they disposed in Marriage, which was usually done with many
Solemn Circumstances and Formalities.

And here are three things, which deserve to be attentively considered.

The First is the Custom that was amongst the Jews for Parents never to let
their Virgin Daughters go out of their Houses, which Custom made them be called
Concealed, in opposition to those that went abroad; that is, that were
Prostitutes.

The Second is another Custom which the just desire of preserving the Virginity
of their Daughters against all Accidents, had introduced amongst that People,
which was, that all their Virgins did wear a sort of Fetters, which are called
in the Talmud, Cevalim, which are discribed by the famous Moses, the Son of
Maimon, in this manner: Cevalim sunt compedes in forma periscelidis, Ad Massec.
Sabbath. c. 6. J 4.
inter quos interposuerunt catenulas, illis compedibus ornabant se Virgins, ut
non incederent passu magno, ne contigeret ipsis damnum in Virginitate sua. This
Description may be thought to be one of the foolish phancies of the modern
Jews, if we did not meet with proofs of the practice of that Custom in more
ancient times. In short, one see's in the third of Isaiah, that Chains are
reckoned up amongst other Ornaments of the Daughters of Israel, which God
threatens to take away from them, when he would force them to go Captives into
Babylon.

The Third is an ancient Tradition mentioned in the Pirke Eliezer in the XVI.
Chapter, Solent Israelitae digito educere Virginitatem, ne incidant in
dubitationem vel suspicionem, juxta illud, Sumat Pater, and Matter puellae, etc.

In a word, it seems, that for fear least these Tokens of Virginity should be
thought to be obscure and ambiguous by their Husbands, that God has provided
for the securing of the Virginity of their young Women before Marriage by a
Miracle, the experience whereof was ordinary and common amongst so jealous a
people. Numb. V. Joseph. l. 3. Antiq. p. 95.
I mean, the Waters of Jealousy, which all Women whose Carriage was suspected
by their Husbands, were obliged to drink, by which God did either miraculously
justify them, or else he began to inflict a punishment upon them, which was so
much the more dreadful and exemplary, as it proceeded from the hand of God
himself. This Miracle lasted to the destruction of the second Temple, as the
Jews themselves tells us in that Title of their Talmud, Sota c. 9.
which concerns Women suspected of Adultery.

However, as God works no Miracles without great reasons, so he here made a
Law, the observance whereof was very rigorous, which was, that he would not
suffer any Women to be Married when there was the least probability, that they
had their Courses, but that they should be separated at that time, as unclean.

The Reason of this Law was, because it was then almost impossible, but that
the lewd Women might have imposed upon their Husbands, in the Marks of their
Virginity, which at that time are very uncertain; not to say, that as a
politic Lawgiver, he might prescribe the observation of this Law, least the
Commonwealth of the Jews should have been overstocked with weak, and sickly
people.

Lastly, one see's that God himself has fastened a Blot upon Leprous persons,
Isidor. Pelus l. 5. Ep. 117. Joseph. Antiq l. 3 p. 94.
because they were supposed to have been Conceived when their Mothers had their
Courses: And hereupon was that Law of God founded, which debarred Lepers for
ever from the Right of coming into the Congregations of his people.

One ought to make the same Observation upon those that were unlawfully
begotten, for they were deprived of the Right of entering into the Congregation,
and how innocent soever they were, as to the lewdness of those who gave them
their Lives; yet they were thus with them made partakers of the punishment of
their sin.

If one considers all these several Laws attentively, one shall find on the one
hand, that several of them were of very little moment, except we suppose, that
God intended to secure the state of Virginity by them beyond all danger: And on
the other hand, one shall find that some of them are very severe about things,
which do not seem to deserve so terrible a rigor.

But if we consider them according to God's design, as he has afterward
particularly explained it. They will appear, I am confident, to be all very
worthy of the Wisdom of such a Lawgiver.

One needs only reflect upon that method of God, that I have now explained to
see, that nothing can be conceived to be better managed, than this Model
according to the design which God himself had drawn.

One may make the same Observations, and examine the same strokes of the Wisdom
of God, in several other precautions, which he made use of to make the Messiah
be perfectly distinguished according to the several Characters under which he
was to be proposed afterward by the Ministry of the Prophets.

One sees, that the Messiah being to be born of a Virgin, was to be a
firstborn, and for that reason, we find many Laws which distinguish in
general, the privileges of the firstborn.

So it appears by the XVIII of Deuteronomy, that the Messiah was to be a
Prophet; and therefore, God afterward gave notice by the Prophets of all those
Lights which should particularly appear in him. In prospect of this, God gave
by the Ministry of Moses, such Characters as would distinguish the true
Prophets from those who endeavored to usurp that Name.

It appears also, that because God was to Communicate to the Messiah, a power
of working Miracles (which Moses intimates, by saying, that he was to be a
Prophet like unto him.) Therefore Isaiah specifies the Character of those
Miracles in XXXV. Chapter of his Prophecy, and God explains in particular, the
Laws concerning the Blind and the Lame, and for the same Reason, he gives an
account of all sorts of Leprosy, that it might be distinctly known which was
incurable.

It is easy to those who will attend to the Laws of Moses, to see that they
were subservient to this design of God, in pursuance of those Prospects which
we have already set down.

CHAP. XXI.
That it was the design of God by all these Ceremonies, and particularly by
that Veneration which he inspired the Jews with, for the Tabernacle to preserve
the Ideas of the Messiah, whom he had promised, in their minds, by
distinguishing them from all other Nations.
AFter all those Observations which I have made upon the several Laws that God
made use of to execute his design of fixing his people to a certain place, and
there to keep them separate; it is natural to judge, that the Ceremonial Laws
which he gave them for the regulating their outward Worship, were also intended
for the same end. This I must show in respect of the Holiness which God
ascribes to the Land of Canaan, and in respect of the whole Service of the
Tabernacle, of its Misterious Construction in all its parts: And in respect
also of the raising of the Material Temple afterward, to be as it were the
Center of their whole Religion.

It was certainly for this purpose, that he particularly Consecrated several
things to himself, as the first fruits, and the firstborn, and that he set
apart certain times, as the first day of the Month, and certain Solemn Feasts,
besides the Sabbathday, which was Celebrated long before. And he also
Consecrated several places, as the Towns of refuge; and yet more particularly,
the Tabernacle and the Temple: But it was especially for that reason, that he
had Consecrated certain Rites and Ceremonies, certain Sacrifices, both of
Animate and Inanimate things, and certain Offerings of Gold, and Silver,
Perfumes, etc.

One see's, that he rejected any first fruits that did not grow in the Land of
Canaan: One see's, that tho some Sacrifices were common to the Jews and their
Neighbors, yet he distinguished them by so many Circumstances, that they were
much different from the others: Thus he forbids them to make use of Statues
before which other Nations used to Sacrifice at that time, and he commanded
them not to Sacrifice upon high places, where the Heathens used to make their
Offerings very early in the Morning, at Sunrise, which gave rise to their
Worship of the Rising Sun.

But there is nothing more discovers the design of God, than the Laws by which
he fixed their Worship, first to the Tabernacle, and afterward to the Temple,
at the places where God did particularly reside. One may say, that it was for
that reason, God commanded the representations of Angels, and of his Law, and
of the Manna to be preserved there, all which besides, that they were Memorials
of the Ancient Apparitions, and favors of God to that people, they were
express figures of God's Glory, of his Will, and of his miraculous power; he
added also a Candlestick with seven Branches, a Table covered with Loaves, and
an Altar of Incense, which were figures of the Seven Planets of this visible
World, of the Blessings which we enjoy by Nature, and of those acknowledgments
which we owe unto God for all these: He commanded also, that none should offer
Sacrifices, in any other place except the Temple.

He would not permit that any but those who were purified according to the Law
should enter into it, he excluded all Uncircumcised persons for ever, as Moses
had formerly been commanded to pull off his Shoes in the Desert, at his
approaching to the burning Bush, so every one that entered into the Temple was
to enter barefoot, as a mark of that respect which had formerly been exacted of
Moses.

And what other reason but that, could oblige him to give both at the
Consecration of the Temple, and afterward so many sensible Marks of his
presence; that Cloud which was called his Glory rested there. The Urim and
Thummim which was an Oracle for that whole Nation, was there; there was a daily
Sacrifice offered up for the whole People, there were celebrated the three
Solemn Feasts of the Passover, of Pentecost, and of Tabernacles, he forbid them
to Sacrifice any where else, and he gave frequent, and illustrious Oracles at
that place.

One ought also to observe, that after his Temple (to which all the glory of
the Tabernacle was transmitted) was fixed at Jerusalem, he ordered it to be
such a sensible mark of his presence, that when we read the History of Israel's
March in the Desert, we find, that the Tabernacle was the Image of the Temple,
and built after its Model; so that as the Tabernacle stood always in the midst
of the Tents of the Levites, and the Levites in the midst of the whole Camp of
all the Tribes of Israel, who were all listed under their proper Standards: So
one see's afterward, that the Temple, the Levites, and the people of Jerusalem
were placed, according to their different degrees of Holiness, as they were to
approach to the most Holy place, which was the Habitation of his Holiness.

Certainly, one may say, that the building up of a Tabernacle, or of a Temple,
seems to be directly contrary to the nature of Religion, according to which,
God who is a Spirit, will be Worshipped in Spirit, and in Truth: So that this
seems to have been quitted for a time, when he commanded the building of a
Tabernacle.

But really there was nothing more agreeable to the design which God had formed
at first, as to that people; he intended to make it visible, and it appears,
that nothing could be more effectual to make it so, than the double necessity
to which that whole People was reduced to, to meet in a Body several times
every year in the same place, and to offer all their Sacrifices in the
Tabernacle, and to be there perpetually employed in the Ceremonial Service,
which did inseparably draw them thither, and fix them there.

The end of all those visible Assemblies, was to perpetuate the knowledge of
the principal Verities of their Religion, and especially to renew perpetually,
the hopes of that people, as to the Messiah, who was promised to them from God.

For God having shortened the long Life's which Men commonly enjoyed in the
beginning, before they went out of Egypt, so that five or six persons could no
longer preserve the Tradition of 2000 years, as they had done till Moses's
time, God was of necessity obliged to make use of some other means to supply
that defect.

He had already made use of several before, amongst which, was that which we
find prescribed Deuteronomy. XXVII. where he ordered the building of an Altar with
rough stones, whereupon the Names of the twelve Tribes, and the whole Law were
to be ingraved.

He afterward followed other Methods, and thus we see, that Samuel following
Moses and Joshuah's Example, repeats before a Solemn Assembly of the people met
at Gilgal, for the Consecration of Saul, the things that came to pass during
the Government of Bedan or Sampson, of Jepthah and his own.

But yet the best way was to fix this people to one Tabernacle, wherein we see
that besides the Monuments which preserved the Memory of the great Miracles
that God had wrought at the Foundation of the Jewish Commonwealth, as the Pot
of Manna, Aaron's Rod that blossomed, the Plates of the Altar that had been
made out of the Censers of Corah, Dathan, and their Confederates.

One see's, that the Law, and the Books of the Covenant were deposited there by
God's order, and the principal Transactions and Deliverances that were wrought
by God in the behalf of that people, were continually Celebrated with Hymns and
other Tokens of public Thankfulness.

It was, no doubt, upon this account, that he caused the Book of the Law to be
laid up there, with many Ceremonies and Expiations; and that he enjoined it to
be read publicly in the presence of the whole Congregation every seven years.
One see's, that he commanded, that every Family should read this Book
continually, and that all should entertain their Wives and Children from their
tenderest years, with the design of the Law, Night, and Day, in the Country,
and in the Town, at all times, and in all places.

One see's, that God engaged them to it not only by an express command, but
also by an indispensible necessity, because he made it death for any Man to
violate any of those Ceremonial Laws, from a principle of obstinacy, no pardon
could be obtained for the Transgressions committed through ignorance, before
they were expiated by certain Sacrifices, the Forms whereof were scrupulously
prescribed in the Law, and which could be violated upon no account whatever.

If one considers those things, he may say, that the Jews had scarce one moment
free in their Lives, so pressing was the necessity which lay upon them to
consult the Law of God, the regulations of which were so very exact and
particular, that there, no actions public, or private, could happen, but what
were regulated, and determined by those Constitutions.

If a Beast was born, the Owner was to examine whether it was the firstborn,
or no, whither it was clean, or unclean, and whither it was to be Redeemed,
with several other things of this nature.

If a Woman was big with Child, there were many questions to be asked: When she
came to Lie-in, several very different Ceremonies were practiced, according as
the Child was a firstborn, or not. The Law enjoined various Purifications
according as the Woman brought forth, a Son or a Daughter.

God had prescribed a great number of Laws for all the Accidents of Life, for
Marriages, for Successions, for Funerals, for Mourning, for unforeseen
Accidents, as the Death of a Man that was killed without the design of his
Murderer, for the several Crimes that might be committed, in their several
Pollutions, and Sequestrations, etc.

It seems, that this whole people, from the time that they came, to the use of
their reason, to the time of their Death, was still continually obliged to keep
up a Correspondence with the Priests and Levites, whom God had for this purpose
dispersed amongst all the Tribes of Israel, and to consult the Law and the
Testimony to be instructed in the manner of governing themselves: But
particularly, they were to look upon the Temple and the Tabernacle, as the
Center of their whole Religion: And how could they do this, without carrying
their Prospect at the same time to those great Promises of the Messiah, of
which the Israelites were Depositaries: I say, upon those Promises, which
raised up so many Jealousies betwixt their Forefathers, and the Ancestors of
those Neighboring Nations, with whom they had always some Controversy, and
were to be considered as glorious and honorable to the whole Nation.

CHAP. XXII.
That it appears by the Books of Moses, that this whole Model which God had
framed, was to last but until the coming of the Messiah.
BUt if we find in Moses's Law a severe restriction in all that belongs to the
execution of the Promise of the Messiah (which shows, that God intended to have
that Nation distingnish'd from all others, till the Blessed Seed was come;) if
we find, that he restrained that Promise to one Tribe, one Town, one Family,
one particular individual person in that Family, that they might not be to seek
in a confused Crowd of a whole people, made up of several Millions of persons,
or in a whole Tribe, or even in a City filled up with several Families: If upon
this account his Birth was restrained to one People, one Tribe, one little
Town, and one single Family which was settled there, the Jews could not but
observe, that it was God's design to break all those Restrictions, and to
follow quite another Method, when the Messiah was once come.

For in the First place, the first Promise of the Messiah, was expressed in
very general Terms, which mentioned a common benefit to all the Sons of Adam.
This Promise was made before God had rejected Cain's Posterity, by preferring
that of Seth; it was made before the Restriction was made to Noah in Seth's
Family, and to Shem in Noah's Family.

Secondly, God, who by Circumcision had distinguished Abraham and his Posterity
from the rest of the Family of Sem, did expressly promise to Abraham, that in
his Seed all the Nations of the World should be blessed: This Promise was made
also, before God had restrained the Promise to the person Isaac in prejudice of
Ishmael, and then afterward to the person of Jacob, in the prejudice of Esau.

Thirdly, One see's this same Truth yet more clearly explained out of Jacob's
Oracle concerning Judah, Genesis XLIX. wherein Jacob expressly foretells, that the
Messiah should be the expectation of the Nations; that is to say, the Comfort,
the Glory, the Hope, and the Joy of all the Nations of the Universe.

As this was a Capital Truth, so God proposed it by Balaam, at the Israelites
entering into Canaan, that they might thus understand, that all those
distinctions, which their separation living in Canaan from the rest of the
World, might keep up, were not always to last.

But this particularly appears out of Moses's Law, which allows of several
sorts of Proselytes, receiving some without tying them to the observance of all
the Ceremonies in the Law, which it would never have done, if it had been
absolutely necessary to be a Jew before they have a share in the benefits of
the Promise.

Secondly, It supposes, that God was to remove that People out of Canaan into
remote Countries, and to disperse them, as it were, into the uttermost parts of
the World, which was done by Divine Providence, only to publish the Promise of
the Messiah, to establish the Belief in the Prophets* and so to facilitate the
calling of the Gentiles to the Faith.

Thirdly, He declares expressly, as St. Paul observes, that he was to call his
people, that which was not his people, that he might by that means provoke the
people of Israel to Jealousy. This Notion of Jealousy mentioned by St. Paul,
deserves to be taken notice of with very great care, if we reflect upon the
Spirit of Jealousy, which reigned amongst the Israelites, and their Neighbors.

I shall take notice in another place of the great number of Oracles of David
upon the same Subject, although he otherwise insults upon the Moabites, and
Edomites, upon all occasions, and shows as much Aversion, and Jealousy against
those Nations, as was possible for one that lived in a continual War with those
people.

I shall also make some Reflections upon Solomon's Marriage with the Princesses
of Tire, of Sidon, and of Egypt; that is to say, with the Posterity of Ham,
which was united to that of Judah, to take a part with them in the Blessing;
from whence it came to pass, that the Song that was written upon that Marriage,
was preserved as a piece divinely inspired, and ought to be considered, as a
happy presage of the calling of the Gentiles to the Communion of the Messiah.

One may also join here the manner of Solomon's giving to Hiram's Subjects, who
had helped him in the building of the Temple, the Country of Chabul, which was
enclosed within Judea, although those people were of the Canaanites Posterity,
upon whom Noah had particularly pronounced, Genesis IX.
Cursed be Canaan.

One may also see, that as God had permitted his people to be Transported into
Chaldea, and Babylon, and had raised up there Prophets amongst them on purpose
to acquaint the World with the glorious hopes of the Jews, so he caused the
Books of Scripture to be Translated into Greek about 300 years before our
Savior's Birth, not only to prevent all suspicion of falsehood in the minds of
the Gentiles, if they were produced of a sudden after the Birth of the
Messiah, but also to instruct the Heathens by little and little of the Right
which all Nations had as well as the Jews to that Promise; that they might take
their share in it whenever they should be invited to it by God, and especially
to take away the Scandal which was to follow upon God's destroying the Form of
that Commonwealth by the Romans, according to Daniels Prediction.

All these things, no doubt, engaged the Jews who read the Books of Moses to
make particular Remarks upon them.

But they ought to have observed three things especially: The First was, That
although God had at first chosen their whole Nation, yet he was pleased to
disperse afterward almost ten parts of thirteen; which plainly showed, that
this choice which he had made, was only an Oeconomical choice, and for a
particular design.

The Second is, That although he was very severe and punctual in exacting
obedience to the Ceremonial Service, yet he had fixed the most part of their
observances to certain places, to certain times, and to certain persons: It was
easy to judge, that when God bounded them in this manner, it was only for an
Oeconomical Service prescribed only upon a particular prospect, which was one
day to have an end.

The Third is, That experience convinced them that although God seemed to have
fixed his Service to the Temple, yet he suffered the Chaldeans to destroy the
first, and did not restore to the second, the first Marks of his presence, when
it was rebuilt by the order of Cyrus.

From whence it was natural to conclude, that such a glory as retired by little
and little from that place which God had chosen, was only designed to be there
for a time, till God should extend his Service, by calling all the World to his
Religion, and so making the whole Universe his Temple, as we see it done in our
days, by the calling of the Gentiles to the Religion of our Savior.

FINIS.
REFLECTIONS Upon the BOOKS OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE To Establish the TRUTH OF THE
CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

Volume II.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
IN my Reflections upon the Book of Genesis, I have showed the means God made
use of to imprint the Idea's of the Creation of the World, and the Promise of
the Messiah, during that long Tract of 2500 years, before the Children of
Israel departed out of Egypt, and before the History of it was penned by Moses.

They that consider that God at first prescribed the Law of the Sabbath, to fix
the belief of the Creation of the World, and that this Law has been constantly
observed since the beginning of the World, until Moses, and is still to this
day observed amongst the Jews, easily apprehend, that this Fact of the
Creation, could not be more incontestably proved, or more firmly grounded.

In like manner an attentive Reflection upon the Oracles which I have mentioned,
and which alone at first were the foundation and hope of the Religion of the
Patriarchs, and were afterward recorded in the Book of Genesis, is sufficient
to persuade any one, that it was impossible, but the memory of the Promise of
the Messiah, should be deeply engraven in the minds of the Israelites, though we
should suppose, that the Spirit of Jealousy, which God had raised amongst the
several Pretenders to the execution of that great Promise, did not much
contribute to preserve the remembrance of it; as I have shown very carefully,
that it was very useful for that purpose.

I have in my Reflections afterward proved upon the four last Books of Moses,
that God prosecuted the same design in the Laws which he gave to the People of
Israel, as well as in the peculiar Forms and Regulations of their Government
and Religion; the great design of which Rules, was only that the Messiah at his
appearance in the World, might be unquestionably known.

Whoever shall read the Reflections which I have made upon this matter, will
easily perceive, that the long Life of the Patriarchs, was of great efficacy,
to make so fresh and lively an impression of those illustrious Facts, the
Creation of the World, and the Promise of the Messiah, that there was no need
of very frequent Oracles to confirm the same, as indeed we find that in the
space of 2553 years, only five or six principal Oracles were given, which have
a particular Relation to the Messiah, as I shall show afterward.

Now this Reflection being once supposed, as the Life of Man was afterward
considerably shortened at the time of Moses, so one may judge, that this Promise
ought to be more frequently proposed, and more clearly explained. And we ought
to suppose that in proportion to the delaying of the Promise, and the shortness
of Men's Lives which discouraged their hopes of ever seeing a Promise fulfilled,
which their Ancestors whose Lives were much longer, could never attain to the
more distinct knowledge which God gave of this great object, was in order to
stir up strong desires in the minds of the Israelites, as well as of the
Gentiles, to whom God was afterward to renew the Ideas of it: and consequently
we find, that a greater number of Oracles and Prophesies, were required from
time to time, to entertain and strengthen the belief of a Promise, the
accomplishment whereof was so considerably deferred.

And indeed, this was exactly the Method which God followed, the Spirit of
Prophecy having in a most illustrious manner been employed to preserve the
Idea's of the Promise of the Messiah, and to increase them in the minds of the
Jews, until the time of the accomplishment it self; and God has so exactly set
down by the Prophets, the several parts of his design, as there needs not be
afterward any difficulty in discerning the prosecution of that design which he
had formed at first.

I intend in this Third part of my Reflections on the Writings of the Old
Testament to explain this Method which God has followed, in showing how he
has accommodated himself to the state of the Jews, whom he had made the
Depositaries of his Oracles, and proportioned them to their understanding and
desires.

For the more happy execution of this Design, and a clearer discovery of this
Conduct of God, which seems somewhat obscured, by intermixing these Predictions
concerning the Messiah, with a great number of Events, during that Series of
Ages, whereof we have the History written by his own order: I think my self
obliged first of all to explain the Reasons why God was pleased to interweave
the Oracles which relate to the Messiah, with other Matters, that seem to be of
a very different nature; and then shall lay down the Rules which one ought to
follow in applying the ancient Prophesies to the Messiah.

After these Preliminary Reflections I suppose, that in order to a fuller
discovery of the Series of God's design and a more distinct knowledge of the
Progress of the Revelation of this Matter, that I ought again to resume, and to
set before the Eyes of the Reader, the five or six principal Oracles which God
has given concerning the Messiah, from the beginning of the World to Moses,
together with that Oracle which he uttered by the mouth of that illustrious
Legislator.

One will easily judge without my undertaking to prove it, that the Idea's of
these Oracles were familiar to the Jews, until David, during the space of 400
years, after which God began to discover the same more particularly, in
choosing David to be the Person, in whose Family that Prophecy should be
accomplished, because the Messiah was to be born of his Seed.

And so I shall immediately pass on to the consideration of those Oracles which
David himself uttered on this Subject, which deserve so much the more
attention, because God, who at that time changed the Government of the Jews,
did considerably augment the Idea's which the Ancients had concerning the
Promise of the Messiah.

Lastly, I shall collect under certain Heads those Oracles which were uttered
by the Prophets concerning the Messiah, some hundred of years before the
Captivity of the Jews in Babylon, and soon after; and forasmuch as the Light
concerning this matter was at that time much increased, and the Oracles
themselves are much more clear and distinct, as giving many more particular
Characters of the Messiah, so I shall content my self briefly to touch upon
them, in following the principal Characters which they give concerning the
Messiah.

After which I shall have nothing else to do, but to make some Reflections upon
the state of the Jews, from the time of the last of the Prophets, until that
wherein the Christians pretend that this Promise and these Oracles were
accomplished in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Though the multiplicity of the things which I am to handle, and which I intend
to do with the greatness briefness that is possible, might seem to oblige me to
omit the examining the succession of the History of the Jews; yet God having
been pleased to intermix the History of the Jews, and many other Transactions,
with these Prophecies, it obliges me in this third part to make also some
Reflections upon the Historical Books of the Old Testament. And indeed, this
will be of great use to prove the truth of these Oracles, and the manner how
God has constantly followed that Draught, which he at first formed to himself;
as also to make it appear, that notwithstanding the different Revolutions of
the Jewish Commonwealth, he has always continued those Means, which he chose
at first, to facilitate the distinct knowledge of the Messiah, whenever he
should appear.

It is very necessary to explain this Series of the Design of God, to make the
Authority of these Prophecies more firm and unmovable; those Laws, the
observation of which served to distinguish the Family of Judah, and that of the
Messiah, being so many Boundaries and Limits, within which God was pleased to
confine himself, that his Conduct in this matter might be the more easily
observable and known.

And forasmuch as in my Reflections upon the Books of Moses, I have begun by the
firm establishment of the Truth of those Books, on which I made my Reflections,
without which that Work would have wanted all its strength; so I intend also in
this part to follow the same Rule, and accordingly I shall at first establish
the Truth of the Historical and Prophetical Books of the Old Testament: for if
one ought to prove that these Prophecies were well known and very famous, then
it will be expected from me that I should solidly demonstrate the Truth of
those Books in which those Oracles are recorded, before I can of right conclude
that the Facts which are related by other Authors, are the accomplishment of
these Prophecies.

This design would naturally engage me to prove the Truth of every one of these
Books in order particularly; but as I have not only proved the Truth of the
Books of Moses already, but that moreover I intend in my reflections on the
Books of the New Testament, to demonstrate the Truth of them beyond all
contest; and besides, that the Historical and Prophetical Books of the Old
Testament are so essentially linked with those of Moses, and the Disciples of
Jesus Christ, that it is impossible to acknowledge the Truth of the one,
without owning at the same time the Truth of the others, I believe I may be
dispensed with, as to the proving the Truth of every Book of the Old Testament
in particular; And therefore because I intend to be very short, I will confine
my self to some general Reflections upon those Books of the Old Testament, which
were writ since Moses, but such, as I hope, will be sufficient to satisfy an
equitable and intelligent Reader.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE First Part of the Second Volume.
Chap. 1. THat there is in the Historical Writings of the Old Testament, an
uninterrrupted Series of Events, which have a natural and necessary dependence
for more than Ten Ages. Page 1. Chap. 2. That there is a strict Connection
between the Sacred History, and the oldest Monuments which we have of profane
History. 8 Chap. 3. That there is an uninterrupted Series of Events foretold by
the Sacred Oracles, of which we may see a very great number accomplished in
every Age. 15 Chap. 4. That how common soever Oracles may have been amongst the
Pagans, yet nothing amongst them can justly be compared with those which are
found amongst the Jews. 24 Chap. 5. That the Books, in which we may find these
Oracles, were never forged. 28 Chap. 6. That the manner of Writing the
Prophetical Books of the Old Testament, shows that those Oracles could not have
been forged after their Completion. 35 Chap. 7. For what reason the Oracles,
which relate to the Messiah, were interwoven with other things, which seem to
be very widely distant. 45 Chap. 8. General Rules for the understanding of
ancient Oracles, and for the Application of them to the Messiah. 51 Chap. 9. Of
those Oracles concerning the Messiah which are to be found in the Book of
Genesis. 60 Chap. 10. Of the Oracles which concern the Messiah in the Book of
Psalms. 71 Chap. 11. Considerations upon the Sufferings of the Messiah, and
upon his glorious Ascension into Heaven, foretold by David in the XXII. and CX.
Psalms. 80 Chap. 12. That the Messiah was to have a Forerunner, and what was to
be his Character. 89 Chap. 13. That the Messiah was to be born before the
dissolution of the Jewish State, and the destruction of the second Temple. 93
Chap. 14. That the Messiah was to be born of a Virgin of the House of David.
101 Chap. 15. That the Messiah was to be born at Bethlehem of the Family of
David, which at that time was reduced to a private state. 107 Chap. 16. That
the Messiah was to work great Miracles, for the establishing of his Mission,
and of the Truth of his Doctrine. 111 Chap. 17. That the Messiah was to be an
illustrious Prophet. 114 Chap. 18. That the Messiah was to propound a new
Covenant from God with all men. 119 Chap. 19. That the Jews, by a dreadful
effect of their blindness, were to reject the Messiah. 125 Chap. 20. That the
Messiah was to dye; and an Account of the several Circumstances of his Death.
130 Chap. 21. That the Messiah was soon after to rise again. 136 Chap. 22. That
the Messiah was to ascend into Heaven, and send down from thence the miraculous
Gifts of Prophecy, Languages, etc. 140 Chap. 23. That the Gentiles in the time
of the Messiah were to be called to the knowledge of the true God. 144 Chap.
24. That the Jews were to be rejected in the time of the Messiah. 152 Chap. 25.
Of the time which succeeded the publishing of these Prophecies, till the Coming
of the Messiah. 157
The Contents of the Chapters of the Second Part of the Second Volume.
Chap. 1. That there appears a very just Connection between the Idea's of the
Old Testament, and those of the New, the latter borrowing light from the
former. Page 175 Chap. 2. That the Idea's of the Messiah continued very fresh
in the Minds of the Jews at the time of the Coming of our Savior Jesus Christ.
183 Chap. 3. That the Commonwealth of the Jews did still subsist, and follow
the Model which God had formed, in order to the certain knowing of the Messiah.
189 Chap. 4. That all the Distinctions necessary for discovering of the
Messiah, still continued in the State of the Jews at the time of our Lord. 197
Chap. 5. That the time pointed out by the Prophets for the Coming of the
Messiah, is the very time in which Jesus Christ appeared to the World. 202
Chap. 6. That Jesus Christ had precisely such a Forerunner, as the Prophets had
described to precede the Messiah. 207 Chap. 7. That Jesus Christ was born of
the Family of David, then reduced to a mean Condition, as had been aforetold by
the Prophets. 213 Chap. 8. That Jesus Christ was conceived by the Virgin Mary,
without any Operation of Man. 222 Chap. 9. That Jesus Christ lived and preached
after the same manner as the Prophets had foretold the Messiah should do. 229
Chap. 10. That the Miracles wrought by our Savior, clearly prove that he is
the Messiah. 237 Chap. 11. That the Predictions of our Lord Jesus Christ,
clearly prove him to be the Messiah. 242 Chap. 12. That Jesus Christ died
precisely in the same manner as it was foretold that the Messiah should dye.
250 Chap. 13. That Jesus Christ was raised again the third day, according to
the Prophets, and afterward ascended into Heaven. 258 Chap. 14. That Jesus
Christ sent to his Apostles, and to the primitive Christians, the miraculous
Gifts of his Holy Spirit, as he had promised in the Ancient Prophecies. 270
Chap. 15. That according to the Prophecies, the Apostles of Jesus Christ have
called the Gentiles to the profession of the Christian Religion. 277 Chap. 16.
That the Christian Religion is founded on proofs of Fact, and that consequently
nothing in the World is so certain as the truth of it. 284 Chap. 17. That it
cannot be questioned, Whether the Books of the New Testament were written by
the Apostles. 292 Chap. 18. That one cannot doubt of the faithfulness of the
witness of the Apostles, concerning those Facts which they relate. 298 Chap.
19. More Reasons to manifest the faithfulness of the Apostles. 304 Chap. 20.
That the whole Model of the Religion and Commonwealth of the Jews, is at this
day so entirely destroyed, that the Messiah could no more be known. 311 Chap.
21. That the greatness of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, and the
Division which is amongst Christians, cannot be any prejudice to the proofs of
the truth of the Christian Religion. 317
REFLECTIONS UPON THE Historical and Prophetical BOOKS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT, To
Establish the Truth OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
CHAPTER I.
That there is in the Historical Writings of the Old Testament, an
uninterrupted Series of Events, which have a natural and necessary dependence
for more than Ten Ages.
THE first general Proof which I make use of to establish the Truth of the
Historical Books of the Old Testament, after Moses, may be lawfully drawn from
the uninterrupted Series of Events, which are related by those Authors who have
written the History of the State and Church of Israel.

We may observe several considerable Epocha's of this History, which takes in
about One thousand and forty years.

The first part takes in all that happened after Moses 'till the establishment
of the Kingdom, which is related in the Books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and the
First Book of Samuel.

The second contains the History of the Kings of Juda and Israel, 'till the
Destruction of Samaria and Jerusalem.

The third contains an Account of what passed during the Jewish Captivity, and
after their reestablishment.

Now there is not one of these Books which concern the History of this People,
in one or other of these Epocha's, which has not certain Characters of the
truth of its Relations, by the necessary Connection which it has either with
those Events which went before it, or with those which followed it, and this by
a natural and immediate dependence. This ought to be confirmed by some
Observations.

The Book of Joshua, which contains the Conquest, and division of the Land of
Canaan, is the Execution of Moses's design, who brought the People of Israel
out of Egypt, to go and make themselves Masters of a Country, which the Jews
pretend that God promised to Abraham. The Division of this Land amongst the
Tribes, is the Title which each Tribe had to its Possessions in it; and this
Division subsisted a great while very distinct, and well known by the several
Tribes of this People, There happened no considerable Change, but only when the
Kings of Assyria carried the Ten Tribes into Captivity, after the taking of
Samaria, in the Three thousand two hundred and eighty third year of the World:
The Country continuing in the same state, under the two remaining Tribes,
without any Change ensuing upon their Transportation into Babylon, as I have
observed in the Nineteenth Chapter of my Reflections upon Exodus, and the
following Books.

This Book has a very natural Influence upon the following Books, as is
manifest from the History of the Alliance which the Gibeonites got from the
Jews by surprise. It serves for a foundation to all that happened for Four
hundred and thirty years after, in David's Reign, under whom the Commonwealth,
being already changed into a Monarchical Government, had in all appearance
undergone a great Alteration.

The Book of Judges has an essential Relation to the Books of Moses and Joshua,
the most part of the Captivities of the People of Israel, being a Consequence
of their Quarrels with the Nations which they had subdued, or with their
Neighbors, as the Moabites and Ammonites descended from Lot, who were. jealous
of this People that was descended from Abraham.

There we may see, for Instance, the Israelites upon the Defensive part,
because God forbad them to set upon the Moabites, and the Ammonites; whereas
these last pretended that Israel had usurped some part of their Country.

It must be granted, that there is nothing so remarkable markable as the
Actions of these Judges, whom God raised up to deliver his People from those
different Captivities, through which they passed for Three hundred fifty six
years together. But we may find the Memory of some of them preserved by those
public Hymns which were famous throughout the Nation, and by these illustrious
Monuments of their Judicial Authority, which were preserved amongst them, and
which kept up a Remembrance of them amongst the Israelites, and the Neighbor
Nations.

For this ought to be observed with care, That since the Jews could not invent
any thing upon this Head, which would not be well known by all the Neighboring
Nations, as the Tyrians, who kept up their own Government 'till Alexander's
time, who subdued them entirely, and the Moabites, whose Empire continued for
Fourteen Ages after Lot's time, until the Destruction of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar, it was not easy for any fabulous Relations in this matter, to
obtain Authority.

The Book of Ruth, seems not to have any thing considerable, but the Conversion
of Ruth a Moabitess, who relied upon the hopes of the House of Juda, out of
which she had married her Husband. But we may take notice of three things
besides; 1. Of the exact Practice of that Law which obliged them to marry the
Widow of a Relation who died without Issue. 2. Of their lively remembrance of
the Deeds of their Ancestors, as of Juda's Incest with Thamar, which was looked
upon however, as a fountain, and a pattern of Blessings. 3. Of the Lineage of
David, whom this Author represents as deriving his Pedigree from a Moabitess,
which not making much for the Honor of a King of Israel, does at the same time
confirm the Truth of the Relations which are contained in that Book.

The First Book of Samuel contains the History of Eli's and Samuel's
Judicatures, of the change of the Government from a Commonwealth to a Monarchy
under Saul, of David's Anointing, Readiness Rejection and Death.

The Second contains the History of David, his Victories, his design of
building a Temple, a design which God left to Solomon to execute, his Wars with
the Ammonites, his Crime with Bathshebah, his Son Absalom's Insurrection
against him, and his great Successes against his Enemies. There is nothing in
these two Books, which has not an exact Connection with what went before, and
what follows. One see's throughout, an exact Relation to the Law of Moses; One
see's throughout, Monuments set up in several Places, to preserve the memory of
particular Actions; One see's also in the Wars of the Israelites with their
Neighbors, a constant Series of those old Differences, which were the Fruits
of the Jealousy of these Nations against the Children of Israel.

The Books of the Kings, which the Jews reckon but as one Book, contain an
Abridgment of Solomon's Establishment in the Place of David, of the Glory of
his Empire, which was carried by David to the Banks of Euphrates, according to
the ancient Prophecyes, of his Marriage with the King of Egypt's Daughter, of
the Building of the Temple, and his own Palace, with the help of Hiram King of
Tire; One see's the manner of the Queen of Sheba's visit to Solomon, of his
Alliances with the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Edomites, the Zidonians, and
the Hittites; thinking by these Marriages to have put an end to the old
Quarrels between his People, and these Nations, who were jealous of the People
of Israel. All this was done in the Forty years of Solomon's Reign; and as
there never was so famous a Reign in Judea, so never was there any, of which
there are left so many Monuments, as well there, as in the Neighboring
Countries.

One see's afterward in the same Book, the Division of Solomon's Empire into
two Governments, that of Juda, which continued from Solomon's Death, during the
Reign of Eighteen Successors, for Three hundred eighty six years, to the taking
of Jerusalem by Nebuchaanezzar; and that of Israel formed by Jeroboam, which
lasted Two hundred fifty four years, under the Reign of Nineteen Successors,
until the taking of Samaria the Capital City of the Kingdom of Israel.

The History of the Chronicles which was written about Twenty six years after
that of the Kings, carries the History down to Cyrus the Founder of the Empire
of Persia, who gave the Jews their Liberty again. The Books of Ezra and
Nehemiah contain the History of what passed under his Successors, to the time
of Artaxerxes for almost Eighty two years.

It was in this Interval that the Deliverance happened which the Jews received
under Esther, Wife to one of the most powerful Kings of Persia, the Memory of
which the Jews celebrate every year in all places, the Thirteenth and
Fourteenth days of the Month Adar, (which answers to our February) by virtue of
Esther's Law.

After these general Remarks with which I shall content my self at present, I
ought to make some Reflections, which cannot be omitted without taking away a
great deal of force from those Proofs which establish the Truth of this Matter.

The First is, That as these Histories have a necessary Relation to the Laws of
Moses, so they could not have been neglected by a People, who in their
Religious and Civil Conduct, were absolutely regulated by those very Laws.

The Second is, That all the Actions related in this History, have passed
altogether in the bosom of a People, the Extent of whose Country is not Twenty
Leagues in breadth, nor Eighty in length.

The Third is, That this People having observed the Law of the Seventh year,
and of the First year, or Year of Jubilee, (which Law you have in the Twenty
fifth of Leviticus) from their first Conquest and Division of the Country,
Forty seven years after their coming out of Egypt. This Observation has served
for a double Cycle, to fix the remembrance of those Actions, and to make it
pass from one Generation to another. And so, the greatness of that Promise
which God made to Hezekiah, Esai. XXXVII. 30. and II Kings XIX. 29.) may easily
be understood; that although Sennacherib's Invasion would in all probability lay
waste all Judea, yet they might eat the Fruits of the Earth in quietness, the
Fourteenth year of Hezekiah, and the next year they should eat the Fruits that
would grow up of themselves without Tillage, and that on the Sixteenth year
they should have liberty to till the Ground, as formerly; which shows, without
any force upon the words, that the Fifteenth year of Hezekiah's Reign, was the
Sabbathical year, in which the Jews were forbidden to Cultivate the Ground.

The Fourth is, That it appears in effect by the Series of this whole Story,
that things were written so, as to agree with the public Records which were
extant amongst the People: This is manifest, if we consider how often the
Sacred Penmen refer us to the Histories and Annals of those Kings of whom they
speak, and of whom they only quote the principal Stories in short in pursuing
their Design, which was entirely to bring an Account of the state of the
Religion and the Government of the Jews and Israelites, under one view.

Let us go on to other Proofs to establish this Truth.

CHAP. II.
That there is a strict Connection between the Sacred History, and the oldest
Monuments which we have of Profane History.
AS there was but few very Ancient Writers of Profane History, and as we have
but small Fragments of them dispersed here and there, preserved for the most
part by the care of Josephus the Jewish Historian, and of Eusebius in his Books
De Praeparatione Evangelica, so we ought not to be surprised, if but few of the
more illustrious Passages and Events of the Jewish History be taken notice of
by Pagan Writers. The People of Israel being otherwise engaged by the
Observation of the Mosaic Law, to keep close to that Country where it was
established; this made their Neighbors have less knowledge of their History.

However, there is enough left to show with how great fidelity and exactness
the Sacred Writers penned the History of their own Nation: In short, we may
find amongst the Heathen Historians and Poets, (who were their first
Historians,) several Relations which show that the Matters of Fact related by
the Sacred Writers, were well enough known to them, and in the same manner that
they are related in those Historical Books which were writ after Moses.

The Memory of Joshua and his Conquests was famous amongst the Heathens: There
are ancient Monuments extant which prove that the Carthaginians were a Colony
of the Tyrians, who escaped from Joshua; as also that the Inhabitants of Leptis
in Africa, came originally from the Zidonians, who forsook their Country,
Procop. Van dalicorum lib. II. c. 10. Polybius Frag. CXIV Salust. de Bello
Jugurthino.
because of the Miseries which afflicted it.

The Fable of the Phoenician Hercules arose from the History of Joshua; the
overthrow of the Giants, and the famous Typhon, owe their Original to the
overthrow of Og the King of Bashan, and of the Anakims, who were called Giants.

The Tempest of Hail spoken of in the Eleventh of Joshua, was transformed by
the Poets into a Tempest of Stones, with which, as they say, Jupiter
overwhelmed the Enemies of Hercules in Arim, which is exactly the Country where
Joshua fought with the Children of Anak.

One finds the Memorial of the Actions of Gideon preserved by Sanchoniathon a
Tyrian Writer, who lived soon after him, and whose Antiquity is attested by
Porphyry.

One finds in the manner of Jephtha's Sacrificing his Daughter after his
Victory over the Ammonites, the Original of the Sacrificing of Iphigenia,
Variae Historiae Lib. V. cap. 3.
it being usual with the Heathens, as Aelian judiciously observes, to attribute
to their later Hero's the Glory of the Actions of those who lived long before.

We have an Account of a Feast which was observed by the Heathen Romans in
April, the time of the Jewish Harvest, Ovid. Fastorum Lib. IV.
in which they let loose Foxes with Torches fastened to their Tails, which
certainly came from the Story of Sampson, and was brought into Italy by the
Phoenicians.

One finds in the same History of Sampson and Dalilah, Ovid. Metam. Lib. VIII.
Fab. I.
the Original of the Story of Nisus, and his Daughter, who cut off those fatal
Hairs, upon which the Victory depended.

Nicolaus Damascenus has preserved the Account of the Victory which David
obtained over the Syrians of Zoba, Joseph. Antie. Lib. VII. cap. 6.
upon the Banks of the Euphrates, as it is described by the Sacred Writers.

There are Monuments extant which describe the part which Hiram King of Tire
had in the building of the Temple of Solomon, almost the same with the Account
which the Sacred Authors give us of his part in the Erection of that great Work.

One finds in Herodotus an Account of the taking of Jerusalem by Sesostris King
of Egypt, Joseph. Antiq. Lib. VII. cap. 6.
as it is described in the History of Rehoboam.

One finds the History of the Kings of Syria related by Nicholaus Damascenus in
the same manner as it is described by the Sacred Writers, when they give us an
Account of the Victories which the Kings of Syria obtained over the Kings of
Samaria.

One finds that the Story of Phaeton is solely founded upon the Translation of
Elijah in a Chariot of Fire. II Kings II.


All that I have taken notice of happened before the time of the first
Olympiad, from whence the learned Varro has observed, That the first Knowledge
of History began amongst the Greeks; whence also it is that they call all the
precedent Time fabulous, the Greeks having before nothing but Fables, into
which they had turned whatever ancient History they were acquainted with.

Since that time, we do not find fewer Marks of the Truth of the Sacred
Histories.

One see's in the Pagan Writers the Reign of Tiglah-Pileser, who is the same
with the younger Ninus; as also the destruction of the Syrian Monarchy by his
means, as it is described to us in the Sacred Historians. Nicholas Damascenus
in Josephus, Antiq. Lib. VII. cap. 6.

One see's amongst the Heathens, Castor. in Eusebius.
the Succession of Shalmaneser as it is described in the Scriptures.

One see's the manner of Sennacherib's conquering the most part of the Towns of
Palestina, Menander apud Joseph. Lib. IX. cap. ult.
of Tire and Sidon, described in Heathen Writers, particularly as we have it in
the Scriptures.

The manner of Sennacherib's Succession to Shalmaneser, of his desolating the
Country of Palestine while he carried on his Victories, is described by the
Heathens, Herodot. Lib. II. and Berosus in Josephus Lib. X. c. 1. exactly as
the Sacred Historians relate it.

The Memory of Tirbakah King of Aethiopia, Strabo Lib. I. and XV.
as of a great Conqueror, is preserved amongst the Heathens; for it was his
coming, in short, which obliged Sennacherib to arise from before Libna, whence
he intended to go and besiege Jerusalem.

One finds amongst the Heathens the remembrance of the manner of the
Destruction of all Sennacherib's Army, for his Blasphemies against God, which
the Egyptians disguised to appropriate to themselves. Herodot. Lib. II. cap.
141.

One finds the ruin of Ashdod by King Psammetichus described by Heathen
Authors, Herodot. Lib. I. cap. 104. Lib. II. cap. 1. Lib. VII. cap. 10.
as we have it in the Sacred Scriptures. Herod. Lib. II.

One finds an Account of the ways by which the Medes lost the Empire of Asia
under Cyaxares, after his Conquests over the Assyrians in the Heathen Writers,
much the same as it is described in Nahum. H. 5.

The Account of the taking of Ninive by Nabopollasar, Alexand. Polyhistor. ap.
Syncellum.
and by Astyages, is much the same in Heathen Authors with the description of
it in Nahum, Esaiah, and Ezekiel.

The manner of Josia's undertaking a War against Pharaoh-Necho King of Egypt,
when he was overthrown in the Plains of Megiddo, Herodot. Lib. II.
as it is described by the Heathens, agrees with the Relation which are given
of it in the Holy Scriptures.

The Victories of Nebuchadnezzar over the Egyptians and the Jews, II Kings
XXIII. 29, 30.
the carrying away of the consecrated Vessels of the Temple, and of the Jews to
Babylon, are described by the Heathens.

The manner of the yielding up of Tire to Nebuchadnezzar, as they describe it,
Annal. Phoenicic. ap. Joseph. Lib. I. contra Apionem.
agrees with what Ezekiel says Chap. XXVIII. 18, 19.

One finds in Heathen Authors an Account of the stately building of Babylon by
Nebuehadnezzar, Beros. Abyden.
which is described exactly in the Scriptures.

One finds also in them, Herodot. Lib. II cap. 163 and 169.
That the death of Pharaoh-Hoptha or Vaphres as they call him, happened
according to Jeremiah's Predictions, Chap. XL. 30.

One finds also the taking of Babylon by Cyrus, Herod. Lib. I. cap. 178.
as it is described by the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. LI. 46.

One finds also that the Death of Belshazzar happened exactly as Daniel had
described it, Xenophon. Histor. Lib. VII.
Chap. V.

One see's there an Account of Xerxes's great Undertaking against Greece,
Herod. Lib. VII. capp. 5, 6.
as Daniel had foretold it, Chap. XI.

Here then is an Agreement which is perfect enough in several Articles, to
which we might add a greater number, if we had a greater number of Pagan
Historians: But as we cannot find after the Reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus,
Histories amongst the Jews of equal Authority with those which were written by
and after Moses, as Josephus the Jewish Historian observes; so we cannot
compare the Jewish and Pagan Histories together afterward, in that form we
have done hitherto.

But it is easy to observe four things, which are very considerable, upon this
Head.

I. That the Credit of the Sacred Historians may be grounded upon the great
number of Remarks we have made already, or else nothing will ever establish it.
For how can we conceive that all sorts of Historians, of all Nations and all
Ages, Babylonians, Assyrians, Tyrians, Egyptians, and Greeks, could agree so
exactly with the Jews in those Facts they relate, if the Jewish Authors had not
exactly followed the Rules of Truth?

II. That as the Prophecies of Zechariah and Daniel describe, with an almost
incredible exactness the considerable Events which happened in the Countries
near to Judea, and in Judea it self, in a time which was not expired until the
Sacred Writers had given over writing amongst the Jews, so there was need of
almost nothing else, but to look over the Books of Daniel, to see what happened
from day to day. And here we may observe, That the Reason why Porphyry thought
the Book of Daniel was forged after the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, was
because this Book seemed to him to be rather a History than a Prediction, which
he justified in making a sort of Commentary upon this Prophecy, by comparing
with it the Pagan Historians which were then extant.

III. That as the Jewish Commonwealth came under the Power of the Greeks, who
were Masters of Learning, and of the Art of writing Histories, so there is
little need of any other Witnesses beside the Greek Authors, as Josephus
demonstrates, in effect, by proving that the Greeks were well enough acquainted
with the Affairs of the Jewish Nation.

IV. That we do really find after the time of Artaxerxes, a very great part of
the Jewish History composed by the care of some particular Men, with sufficient
exactness, though it be not of equal Authority with the Sacred Writers.

CHAP. III.
That there is an uninterrupted Series of Events foretold by the Sacred
Oracles, of which we may see a very great number accomplished in every Age.
AS we may very reasonably say, That all the History of the People of Israel,
has a very exact dependence upon the Writings of that famous Legislator; so we
may also observe, That there are scarce any considerable Events which make up
the Body of this History, which do not deserve a particular Remark, either as a
fulfilling of Moses's Prophecies, or of those other Prophets whom God raised up
after him to reform the Errors of that Nation. And it is a very considerable
thing, That in all the Series of Events foretold by the Prophets, there was not
one Generation amongst all the Offspring of the People, but what saw the
Accomplishment of several of these Oracles. A little attention and care in
comparing the Chronology of the Oracles with that of the Events, will
sufficiently justify what I say. I shall content my self with observing their
different Orders, which will satisfy a Judicious Reader, since my Design does
not engage me necessarily to do a thing which would carry me too far, and which
may be done with little Application.

We may consider four sorts of Oracles; 1. Those which have respect to
particular Facts nigh at hand. 2. Those which have respect to particular Facts,
but at a greater distance. 3. Those which have respect to Facts which belong to
the whole Jewish Nation. 4. Those which have respect to Facts which belong to
Foreign Nations, either bordering upon Palestina, or further from it. Now there
is nothing so exactly fulfilled, as these four sorts of Oracles.

You have, for particular Facts, which were nigh at hand, and foretold by the
Prophets, the Oracle of Moses concerning the advancement of Joshua, and the
Conquest of Palestine, which happened soon after.

You have Debora's Oracle of the Victory promised to Barak.

You have Samuel's Oracle of the Advancement and Rejection of Saul.

You have an Oracle of the same Samuel, of the Advancement of David.

You have Nathan's Oracle concerning Absalom's Revolt.

You have Ahijah's Oracle concerning the Advancement of Jeroboam, and the
Division of Solomon's Kingdom into Ten Tribes, and into Two Tribes, whereof the
lesser part was to continue in the Possession of Solomon's Heirs.

You have Ahijah's Prediction of the Death of Jeroboam's Son.

You have a Prediction of the Advancement of Jehu in the place of Jehoram King
of Israel.

You have Elijah's Prediction of the exemplary Punishment of Ahab and Jezabel.

You have the Prediction of Jehoiakim's Death made by Jeremiah, Chap. XXII. 18,
19. and Chap. XXXVI. 30. which happened Ten years after.

You have the Prediction of Jechoniah's Miseries made by Jeremiah, Chap. XXII.
3.

You have Jeremiah's Prediction of the Death of the false Prophet Ananiah, but
Seven Months before it happened.

You have an express Designation of Zorobabel to conclude the Re-building of
the Temple, made by Zechariah, Chap. IV. 9. and which was completed in Four
years.

It is therefore fully evident, That the Prediction of particular Facts, which
were to happen in a very short time, served to establish the Authority of the
Prophets. And in effect one see's that they proceeded upon the Authority which
those Predictions of nearer Events gave them, to foretell other particular
Events at a greater distance.

So you see that Moses foretold after a sort, after Jacob, the manner how the
Land of Canaan was to be divided, though the thing was to be done by Lot.

You see the same Moses foretelling the several Captivities which the People of
Israel suffered after the Conquest, and the Method of God's raising up several
Judges, to the number of Fourteen, to bring them out of those Calamities.

You see the same Moses foretelling that the Temple should be built in the
Tribe of Benjamin, tho it was the least.

You have Joshua's Prediction of the way how the Re builder of Jericho, should
be exemplarily punished, which was accomplished in Ahab's time, (I Kings XVI.
34) about 570 years after this Prophetical Imprecation of Joshua.

You have the Prediction of a Prophet, who was contemporary to Jeroboam, about
the Birth of Josiah, which was not till 350 years after, (I Kings XIII.) and of
the manner of his destroying the Altar which Jeroboam built.

One see's a Prediction of the overthrow of the Kingdom of Samaria, within 65
years by Isaiah, in the Reign of Jotham.

One see's the Destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, foretold by several
of the Prophets.

One see's the taking of Tire by Nebuchadnezzar, foretold by Isaiah, Chap.
XXIII. 15, 17.

One see's the Promise of its Re-establishment, Seventy years after its
Destruction.

One see's the Promise of Cyrus's Birth made by Isaiah, Chap. XLIV. 45. as of
one that should restore Liberty to the Jews, and give them opportunities of
Re-building their Temple at Jerusalem.

One see's the Prediction of the manner how Antiochus Epiphanes would treat the
Jews in his Life time, and how he should be punished for his Cruelties and
Sacriledges.

One see's the Prediction of the Courage of the Maccabees, who should oppose
the Tyranny of that Prince, and purify anew the Divine Worship.

So that it is plain, That the foretelling of these particular Facts, which
were at so great a distance, revived the Memory of these Prophets amongst the
Jews in every Age, and made them read them with a singular attention.

One ought also to make the same Reflection upon those Oracles which have
respect to the particular Events of the state of the Jews, and its Continuance
until the time of the Messiah, after which the Prophets foretell its Ruin and
Destruction without Remedy.

In short, one may say, That there was no Revolution never so little
considerable, of which we do not find very many, and very particular
Predictions, foretold by several Prophets upon very different Occasions, and
particular Circumstances.

One see's in the Books of Moses exact Descriptions of the Pilgrimages of
Abraham's Posterity, of their continuance in Egypt, of the Oppression they were
there to undergo, of their prodigious Increase, of their robbing the Egyptians
at their departure, of their methods in conquering the Land of Canaan, of the
way how Kings should arise from Abraham; which was accomplished in the
Ishmaelites and Edomites, and at last in the Israelites.

One see's express Predictions of the several Judges whom God should raise up
to the People of Israel.

One see's an express Prediction of the Advancement of the Tribe of Juda to the
Kingdom.

One see's a Prediction of the future Subjection of the Edomites to the power
of the Kings of Juda, and of their conquering of the Countries which lie along
the Banks of Euphrates, which was fulfilled in David's time.

One see's an express Division of that Kingdom into two very unequal parts.

One see's great numbers of Predictions concerning the state of the Kings of
Juda and Israel: II Kings X. 30.
For Instance, you have an Oracle concerning the Destruction of Jehu's Family
in the Fourth Generation.

The Destruction of the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes is expressly foretold, and the
Term is very exactly set down.

The Ruin of Jerusalem, and of its Kings, is also expressly foretold.

The time of the Captivity of the Jews in Babylon, and

Their Re-establishment by Cyrus after Seventy years are also very distinctly
foretold.

The Desolation of Judea under the Empire of Alexander's Successors, is
foretold very exactly.

Their Re-establishment after these Desolations, and the way by which they were
to be defended by the Maccabees, who should become their Kings is likewise
foretold.

In short, one see's express Predictions of the Ruin of Jerusalem, and of the
whole Nation under the Roman Empire, after the coming of the Messiah.

As the People of Israel had always great quarrels with the Neighboring
Nations; so one finds that amongst the Oracles which particularly regard the
state of the Jews, the Prophets have interwoven a great number, which concern
those strange People, with relation to those Differences which were kept up
between the People of Israel, and them.

So one see's the Egyptians and the Canaanites punished, in the Execution of
the Oracles pronounced against the Descendants of Cham.

One see's the Prediction of the Ruin of Benhudad King of Syria, and of his
House, foretold to the Tenth Generation.

One see's the Prediction of the Ruin of Egypt and Tire, which happened under
Nebuchadnezzar.

One see's the Prediction of the Ruin of the Moabites, which was under the same
Nebuchadnezzar, after that Kingdom had subsisted almost Fourteen Ages from its
first Foundation.

One see's frequent Oracles concerning the Ruin of Niniveh, and its Empire.

One see's Oracles concerning the Ruin of Babylon, which happened under Cyrus:

One see's Oracles of the Destruction of the Persian Empire by Alexander.

One see's Oracles concerning the manner of this Princes conquering the
greatest part of the World, and of his leaving his Empire divided into four
Kingdoms.

One see's frequent Oracles concerning the state of the Empire of the
Seleucidae, and the Ptolemees, who had particular Quarrels with the Jewish
Commonwealth.

One see's the Alliances which were to be between the two Kingdoms foretold,
and the small Success which should arise thence in terminating their
Differences.

One see's Predictions of the Treatment which the Jews should meet with in
those Kingdoms.

One see's a Prediction of the Retreat which Egypt was to give to the Jews, and
of the Temple they were to build there.

One see's an exact Prediction of the manner of the profanation of the Temple
by Antiochus Epiphanes for Three years together.

One see's the Prediction of the Ruin of these two Governments by the Arms of
the Roman Empire.

It is very natural to make some Reflections upon such a various multitude of
Oracles.

I. That there are no Books in the World which are formed like those which we
find in the hands of the Jews.

One finds there a History exactly pursued, and in a natural dependence, from
the beginning of the World, for 3500 years.

One finds there a Series of Oracles which foretell all sorts of Events, so
inseparably united with the History, that it is impossible to find by what
means the Prophecies could have been so brought to support the History, and the
History to support the Authority of the Prophecies.

One finds Oracles so clear, and so particular, especially in the Book of
Daniel, That Porphyry a mortal Enemy to the Christians, was forced to assert
that the Book of Daniel was forged after Antiochus Epiphanes's time; a
ridiculous Imagination! For this Prophecy was translated into Greek more than
One hundred years before, and was in the hands, not only of the Jews, but of
the Egyptians also, mortal Enemies to the whole Jewish Nation.

This also is very surprising, That since the Jews, after their Dispersion,
preserve these Histories wherever they are, as the Accomplishments of the
Oracles, and these Oracles as Predictions of those Events of which their
History is very full, they should never think of proposing to us any Books of a
like Nature, considering that now for One and twenty Ages they have had no
parallel Authors, who have both writ History, and pronounced Oracles.

II. But, as these Reflections lead us on to others, so we ought to enter upon
them by considering what the most unreasonable Obstinacy can oppose to the
Authority of the Historical and Prophetical Books of Scripture.

CHAP. IV.
That how common soever Oracles may have been amongst the Pagans, yet nothing
amongst them can justly be compared with those which are found amongst the Jews.
ONe of the greatest Objections which can in all probability be made against
this surprising Series of Oracles, which are found in the Books of the Old
Testament, is taken from that great number of Oracles which are found amongst
the Pagans. This Objection deserves to be considered, because it will more
clearly demonstrate the Authority of the Prophetical Books, which are in the
hands of the Jews.

I confess there have been false Prophets: And indeed, since God has given us
Marks to distinguish them from true Ones, which may be seen in the Books of
Moses, it cannot be denied but there have been some false Prophets. And that
moreover, the History of the Prophets discovering to us Impostors frequently,
we may freely acknowledge, that amongst the Pagans, and the People bordering
upon Judea, there have been Men who have boasted of Predictions of things to
come, as well as amongst the Jews.

I confess also, That some Heathen Writers speak of certain Oracles, which in
all appearance are very well circumstantiated, and of which they relate a very
exact Accomplishment.

But several things ought to be observed upon this Argument, which deserve an
attentive Consideration.

I. We see that their most celebrated things have been only an imitation of
what was done amongst the Jews. The Egyptians imitated the Urim and the Thummim
of the Jewish High Priest. And they appropriated to him the right of giving
Oracles: And so we see they are given by a Voice from Heaven, which the Jews
saw was granted to their Prophets. We may see it in the History of Socrates's
Life, and in Apuleius, p. 339.

II. We see that the same Pagan Historians take notice that very many, even the
greatest part of their Oracles, were very ambiguous, and false. The
Philosophers, and Tully particularly, openly laughed at them ( Lib. I. II. de
Divinatione.) They thought it a ridiculous thing that Apollo Delphicus, the God
of Poetry, should give his Answers in very bad Verse, and at last be reduced to
Prose. Eusebius quotes a Discourse of Oenomaus a Greek Philosopher, who wrote
against Oracles, to decry them as Impostures.

III. We see, that those Oracles which had acquired the greatest Reputation by
their Accomplishment, were borrowed from the Prophets of the Synagogues. We
have an illustrious Example in the Birth of Cyrus, which the Prophet Isaiah had
foretold, about the Year of the World 3292. and concerning which they pretend
to show Prophecies of Nebuchadnezzar and Craesus, Abydenus. Herodot. Lib. I.
cap. 55. and 91.
about the Year 3492. which shows that if the thing was really known to them,
they could not have known it but by the Prophetical Writings which were amongst
the Jews, and which could not have been concealed from them, because the Jews
read them with care, to comfort themselves under that Captivity to which they
were reduced by Nebuchadnezzar.

IV. It is in effect proved by examining their Oracles, most of which were
either false or forged. This Eusebius has clearly proved, [ de Praepar.
Evangelica, Lib. IX. cap. 5.] The Proverb of the Sibyll's, or Delphick
Priestess's, favoring of Philip, is commonly known. It was easy for these
Heathen Princes to biass their People with such Predictions. Lib. IV. de
Praeparat. Evangel. Lib. IV. initio.
But what Eusebius says, puts the thing beyond all Question, for he expressly
shows, That when the Priests were put to the Rack, they confessed the whole
contrivance of those Oracles, which they pronounced to abuse the Credulity of
the People.

V. We ought to observe, That we cannot find great numbers of Oracles upon the
same Subject, whereas one see's that the Prophets followed (as it were) Moses's
Model of the State of the Commonwealth of the Jews, and that they frequently
concur in foretelling the same Facts from one Generation to another.

VI. We ought to remember that these Oracles were not kept within the Limits of
one single State or Nation.

VII. It may be said that they were not publicly known, having been only
proposed in private places, before a very few, and in short, that they were not
actually known to the most part of the Neighboring People; whereas one see's
that the Jewish Prophets gave their Oracles in the most solemn Assemblies, and
when they were committed to Writing, they were known to all those who had any
Commerce with that Nation. So that Isaiah's Prophecies were questionless known
to Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus, who looked upon himself as designed by God to
restore their Liberty to the Jews. We may make the same Judgment of the Book of
Daniel, which was known to Alexander without all question, as one may collect
from the favorable Reception the Jews found from him.

VIII. We ought to observe, That these pretended Oracles were given, for the
most part, in favor of those Princes, who could satisfy the greediness of the
Priests. Whereas the Prophets among the Jews lived in the most dis-interested
manner in the World, and usually pronounced nothing but Reproaches and Menaces
of cruel Calamities to those Princes who had the Government in their Hands.
Their Ministry consisted in a courageous opposition to the Corruptions in their
Laws, and their Religion, and in censuring their Princes and Governors with a
singular Intrepidity; and indeed, we see that most of them met with the
punishment of their Boldness, and made trial of the most cruel Tortures.

IX. Last of all, We ought to take notice, that as the Oracles which are
mentioned in Heathen Authors, were only of Facts of small importance to those
People, amongst whom it is said that they were pronounced, so we do not find
that they thought themselves much concerned in their preservation; whereas one
see's that the Jewish Nation were so persuaded of the Truth of these Oracles,
with which they were entrusted, that nothing to this very day could ever oblige
them to discontinue the reading of them, whatever Disputes they may otherwise
have with the Christians, who make use of them to establish their Pretentions,
notwithstanding all the Claims of the Synagogue.

When this is laid down, it would seem as if I might reasonably conclude, That
the wonderful variety of Oracles which are to be found amongst the Jews, cannot
be at all weakened by those Oracles of which we find so frequent mention in
Pagan Writers.

But we ought to go further, in explaining two things, which will perfectly
clear this matter; One is, That the Historical and Prophetical Books of the Old
Testament, after Moses, can be no Forgeries: The other is, That in truth, those
Oracles which we find inserted in those Books, could not possibly have been
forged after their Completion.

CHAP. V.
That the Books, in which we may find these Oracles, were never forged.
I Have observed formerly, That it is absolutely necessary that the Authority
of those Books, in which these Oracles are inserted, be established, before we
can build upon the Authority of the Oracles. And indeed, if we cannot clearly
show that these Books were written, and publicly known, before the Things
happened, which are said to be Accomplishments of those preceding Oracles, it
would be natural to call in question the Authority of these Oracles. But it is
very easy to satisfy an equitable Reader herein, and to establish in general,
or severally, the Existence of these Prophetical Writings, before the times in
which those Facts happened which we propose as the Accomplishment of those
Prophecies.

I shall make use of two sorts of Reflections to establish my Proposition. The
First consists in general Considerations upon the Books themselves: The Second
has respect to particular Facts, which are uncontested, and whence the same
Truth very naturally results.

I. We ought to observe, That whereas in Genesis Moses makes use of no other
Epoch to fix the time of any Event, but the years of the Life of some famous
Patriarch: As for Instance, He fixes the Flood to the 600 year of Noah's Age;
Exodus XIX. Numb. XXXIII. 38.
in Exodus and Numbers he uses the time of their coming out of Egypt for his
Epoch; in the Books of the following Authors, the years from their departure
out of Egypt were carefully set down 'till the Fourth year of King Solomon's
Reign, which was 480 years after their departure. This was a Character to fix
the time of all those who lived after that Epoch^

II. The Building of the Temple began a new Epoch amongst the Jews, as appears
from II Chron. VIII. 1. though they began after that time to reckon by the years
of the Kings of Juda and Israel, as appears by the Books of the first Prophets.
Which is a Character sufficiently certain, to distinguish those who lived after
Solomon, with the time when they lived.

III. It Is plain, That the Babylonish Captivity, and afterward their
subjection to the Persian Empire, obliged them to fix their Events, and to date
their Prophecies, by the years of the Governments of those Foreign Kings. [See
Daniel, Ezechiel, Zechariah, and Haggai.] So the Author of the Book of
Maccabees refers to the years of the Seleucidae. Now, that we may the better
perceive the force of this Observation, we must remember three things. 1. That
the Authors who lived after the carrying away of the Jews into Babylon, make
use of some Chaldee Terms, which are not to be found in the foregoing Prophets.
For we may see in the Books of Haggai, Ezech. XL. 1. Daniel X. Zach I. Hagg. I.
Zechariah, and Malachi, the same style with Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel. 2. The
Authors of these Books, give names to the Months, which they had not before the
Captivity. The Jews only called their Months, Talm. Rosch. Hassanah. c. 1.
First, and Second, etc. and so they gave Names which were unheard of before.
3. The Authors of these Prophecies take particular notice of any newly
instituted Fasts; thus we see that the Prophet Haggai mentioned those Fasts of
which we have nothing in the Law, but which were instituted during the
Captivity.

We must blind our selves of purpose, to conceive that any Impostor could forge
Books, which have so exact a Relation, and such certain Characteristicks to fix
them to the time in which every Author lived, and to the Circumstances wherein
he wrote. We must of necessity grant, That before such an Impostor could bring
about such a Design, he must have made himself Master of the whole Profane
History, to fix so exactly the History of the Jewish Nation, and of those
Oracles which have been given in Circumstances which are unintelligible without
the help of Profane Histories of different Nations.

I come now to Facts which cannot be contested. It is sufficient that those
Facts be acknowledged as true, to establish in general the Truth of those Books
whereof we teach.

I. It cannot be denied, that the Jews preserve these Oracles to this day, with
great fidelity.

II. It cannot be denied, that they are in the hands of Christians, who
preserve them as well as the Jews, since they have been separated from them;
that is, for almost Seventeen Ages.

III. It cannot be denied, that these Prophecies have been exactly read by the
Jews, because of those Oracles upon which they believe, to this day, that the
whole happiness of their Nation is founded.

IV. It cannot be denied, that the Jews have read these Books exactly to refute
the Disciples of Jesus Christ, who have pretended from the first Age of their
appearing, that Jesus Christ is the Messiah marked out by these Oracles. In
short, whereas the Christians pretend to prove by the accomplishment of the
ancient Oracles, that Jesus Christ was the Messiah: It is known, that the Jews
endeavor to this day to wrest the sense of these Oracles, and to show that
there are many things which are not literally accomplished, and which by
consequence cannot be applied to Jesus Christ.

V. It cannot be denied, that most of the Controversies of the Jews with the
Christians, only regard the Application of the Text of the Prophetical Authors.
The Christians explain them in a Mystical Sense, the Jews maintain that they
ought to be explained Literally.

VI. It cannot be denied, that about 300 years before the Birth of our Savior,
the Prophetical Books were translated, and put into the Hands of the Egyptians,
having been carried to, and translated at Alexandria, by a public Order of the
whole Nation, for the satisfaction of a King of Egypt. The History of that
Version which put those Sacred Books into the Hands of the Greeks, and the Jews
who dwelt in Egypt, is the most famous thing in the World, and which made those
Books perfectly known.

Here we have now these Books in Hebrew, and in Greek, that is to say, in the
Primitive Language of the Jews, and the Vulgar Language of the Empire which
Alexander founded.

It is known, that from that time the Christians took care to make great
numbers of Translations into all the Vulgar Tongues, after the preaching of the
Gospel; and that they preserved those ancient Books as the first Elements of
their Religion.

Now it will be sufficient to acknowledge those Truths, to consider;

That those Oracles were true which foretold things which happened almost four
Ages after their Prediction. Thus, for Instance, the Destruction of Jerusalem;
the Overthrow of the Jewish State; the calling of the Gentiles to the Service
of the God of Israel; the Destruction of the Syrian and Egyptian Monarchies;
are all contained in the Books of Daniel, Haggai, Zachariah, and Malachi.

Now there is not more difficulty to conceive, that such Authors as Isaiah,
Amos, Joel, should have foretold the same thing Eight or Nine hundred years
before, than there is to believe that they were foretold by those who lived but
little above Four Ages before they actually came to pass. There is therefore no
difficulty in conceiving that these ancient Oracles were proposed as we see
them, and in those times to which we find them fixed.

But we ought to go further into this matter, and to establish the same thing
by the consideration of the things themselves.

I confess that we might have a suspicion of those Oracles which are not
related upon the Faith of a public Volume. As for Instance, those of Elijah,
Elisha, and Uriah the Son of Shemaiah, who seem never to have published any
thing.

But here we are to observe, 1. That usually the Authors who publish the
Oracles, are not the same with those who tell us of their accomplishment. 2.
That the Oracles of which we now speak, were upon Subjects perfectly known, and
upon very illustrious Exigencies. What more illustrious than the Destruction of
Ahab's Family, foretold by Elijah? What more extraordinary than the manner of
Jezebel's Death, foretold by the same Prophet?

In short, we ought to take notice, I. That these Oracles were written for the
most part in complete Volumes: We have Sixteen Prophets sufficiently
distinguished by their proper Volumes.

II. Each of these Authors has a very different Character from the rest; so
that some, as Daniel for instance, write in a peculiar Language one part of his
Book being in Chaldee.

III. Every one has some relation to the rest: So those who lived together,
often treat of the same things: So Isaiah for instance, Joel, Amos, Hosea. But
they had separate Idea's, and particular Oracles, and a turn which perfectly
distinguishes them one from another.

IV. One needs only read their Works to find that they wrote in different
places. Amos was of Juda, and went to prohecy in Israel, that appears plainly.
Ezechiel and Daniel prophesied in Chaldea; that is seen by reading their Works.

V. There is a natural dependence between the Books of Moses, and those of the
Prophets in general; For the Prophets were continually reproaching the Kings
and People with the Crimes which they committed against the Law of God proposed
by Moses.

VI. There is a natural dependence between the Writings of the former, and of
the latter Prophets. Dan. IX. 2.
So Jeremiah is quoted by Daniel, as foretelling the time when the Desolations
of Jerusalem were to have an end; this he proposes, not as if he had learnt it
by a Revelation, but as a thing which he had found out by an attentive
examination of the Prophecy of Jeremiah.

VII. There is an exact Connection of these Oracles with the History of the
time, which is often interwoven with the Prophecies. One see's it in the Books
of Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Daniel; the other Historical Books not being
altogether so particular, as these Prophetical Books are.

VIII. In short, one see's that these Books are interwoven with Oracles
concerning ancient Events and People which have now no Existence, so tha^ that
hinders us from suspecting any Forgery.

I shall not repeat here the common Arguments which establish the Credit of
these Books, I brought in most of them when I established the Authority of the
Books of Moses. I shall only make some Reflections here, to establish the same
Truth.

CHAP. VI.
That the manner of writing the Prophetical Books of the Old Testament, shows
that those Oracles could not have been forged after their Completion.
I Have several things to taken notice of, to make this Truth more sensible.
The first is taken from the necessary connection of all the parts of the History
of the Old Testament, the truth of which I have proved by several Characters.
This History is exactly written by several Authors: Now the History of the
Prophets, and of their Oracles, is so exactly framed into the History, that it
is impossible to take it out, without confounding the whole.

The Books of Samuel, which were written by Samuel, by Nathan, and by Gad, as
appears by I Chron. XXIX. 29. contain the History from the Year of the World
2888, to the Year 2987.

The Books of the Kings contain the History of the Kings, and of the Prophets,
from the Year 2989. to the Year 3442.

The Books of the Chronicles recapitulate the History, from the beginning of
the World, to the Year 3468.

Ezra writ his History from the Year 3468. to the Year 3538.

Nehemiah continued it from 3550. to 3563.

Here is therefore on the one side an uninterrupted Series of History; and on
the other side a continued Succession of Prophecies.

David, who began to Reign in the Year 2950. with several other Prophets of
that time, writ the most part of the Psalms, which are full of Oracles, and
which were sung by the People, as a part of the Divine Service.

Isaiah began his Prophecy in 3246. and died in the Year 3306. Hosea, Micah,
and Nahum were contemporary with him.

Jeremiah begun his Prophecy in the Year 3375. and lived at the same time with
Zephaniah.

Daniel was carried into Babylon in 3401. and prophesied until 3470.

Ezechiel prophesied at Babylon in 3509.

Haggai and Zachariah prophesied in 3590. soon after Ezra, in the time of
Nehemiah.

Malachy seems to have lived until the Year 3589.

Can we therefore in the least imagine that a History should be so intermixed
with Prophesies and Oracles, without conceiving at the same time the Truth of
both by an invincible necessity?

But we may make a second Reflection hereupon.

There are three general Characters which distinguish Prophets very sensibly
from the generality of Authors.

I. They were public Censors; Let us but read the History of Isaiah's conduct,
who called all the Heads of the People, Rulers of Sodom; or that of Jeremiah,
Chap. XXXVI. or of any other of the Prophets in general.

II. They were Comforters of the People, when they had brought them to
Repentance by their preaching. There are as many Instances of this, as there
are Prophets.

III. They foretold remarkable Occurrences, happy or unfortunate, long before
there was any probability that they should happen.

It is impossible to consider these Characters, without seeing that the state
of Affairs was that which gave a foundation for their Sermons: So that one must
of necessity have framed their History of new, to give ground for a Forgery.
This change in the style of the Prophets, follows the Circumstances of the
Jewish State exactly. All that Isaiah or Jeremiah say, will hold no longer than
whilst you suppose the State of the Jews to be as corrupt as the History of
that time represents it. But if you suppose it to be as the History does
distinctly explain it, nothing can be imagined more forcible than their
Sermons. For as they joined Oracles with Promises in their thundering Sermons,
so one see's that they cannot be parted.

One may make another Reflection upon this matter, by showing that these
Oracles, and these Books were so famous amongst the Jews, that no Forgery can
be supposed.

The times in which they were writ, are a great proof, for they appeared upon
very remarkable Occasions.

One may rank the Prophets into four Orders, according to the several times in
which they appeared: David, and the Prophets of his time; Those who lived
before the Babylonish Captivity; as Jonah, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Isaiah,
Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Jeremiah.

Those who prophesied during the Captivity; Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel.
Those who lived after their Return from Babybylon; Haggai, Zechariah, and
Malachy.
Now we have an equal Assurance of all these Prophets, that they were famous.

Who can deny the Oracles of David to have been famous, when they were
preserved amongst their public Hymns?

One see's that Micah's prediction saved Jeremiah whom they would have
condemned for prophesying the Ruin of the Temple under Jehoiakim, when Micah
had prophesied the same thing under Hezekiah, that is to say, about One hundred
and twenty years before this Prediction of Jeremiah: Here Is an Event which
assures us without affectation, That this Prophecy was very well known: were
not therefore the other Prophecies which were in the hands of the Jews very
well known by the whole Nation?

The other Prophets lived in very remarkable times: Isaiah under Jotham, Ahaz,
and Manasseh impious Princes: the last of which put him to a cruel Death, for
the freedom of his Censures and Predictions.

There was in the time of every Prophet, a great number of Circumstances which
may be enlarged upon, and which will further prove, That their Works must of
necessity have been very public, and very famous amongst the Jews.

We must not here neglect what does more particularly regard the persons of the
Prophets.

I. Some of them were Priests, that is to say public Ministers of their
Religion. Jeremiah and Ezechiel were of that number: This may be observed in
reading of their Works, and in observing the nature of their Revelations, which
were for the most part accommodated by God to those Idea's about which the
Prophets were most employed.

II. Some were very illustrious by their Birth: Thus David, for instance, was
King of Israel, Isaiah was a Prince of the Blood, and Daniel was one of the
Princes of Judah; which may be easily found out by considering the Majesty of
their Style, and greatness of their Expressions.

III. Some were very contemptible by their Employment, and by their Birth: So
Amos, for instance, and those other Prophets whose Father is barely named,
without joining to it any honorable Title, if the Jews observation has any
strength.

Now, it is well known, that though the gift of Prophecy made him who had it
sufficiently famous, yet the Character of the Person often made the Prophecy
famous. Sometimes indeed the meanness of the Person, as in Amos, made the Work
to be more regarded, every Body taking occasion from the ancient Profession or
the Prophet, to consider the Prophecies which he published with more attention.

One ought to observe, with care, That those Prophets whose Writings are
preserved, as well as those who did not write, were continually struck at by
false Prophets, who opposed them with great heat. Since then we have no
Prophecies preserved, but of those whose Predictions were accomplished, the
Event justifying the Truth of their Predictions, with regard to particular
Facts near the time which they had foretold to establish their Authority,
whereas the Predictions of others, wanting this Character, were neglected, and
at last absolutely lost: It appears plainly, That those which remain were
things of the greatest Reputation among the Jews.

Besides, I may add, That one needs only read their Books to see that they not
only foretold obscure things, or what particularly concerned their State; but
also things of a more splendid Nature, the overthrow of Kingdoms, of Cities,
the Destruction of whole Nations, the Destruction of their own City, with its
re-establishment; Matters which would render their Books very illustrious, and
which would cause them to be read, not only by the Jews, but also by the
Neighbor Nations, the Ammonites, Moabites, Assyrians, Persians, Egyptians, etc.

Is not this therefore a very particular thing, and that which made the
Prophets very illustrious, That the great luster of the Prophets continued but
for a certain time: There have been none since the Year 3553. their Glory
appeared in the History of Eight Ages, but it does not extend it self any
farther: Now why, I pray, should there be no Impostors after Malachy, as well
as there were Impostors before him?

One may imagine perhaps, That the Prophecies were immediately dispersed, some
being uttered in one place, and some in another: Some in the Kingdom of Judah,
and others in the Kingdom of Israel: Some in Babylon, others in Egypt, which
might give Opportunites for Impostors. But,

I. This Objection may be strongly retorted back: For how can we conceive, that
in the Division, which separated the Israelites from the Jews, those of Judah
would charge themselves with the Writings published in a Kingdom so much an
Enemy to them, without examination, when every thing which comes from thence,
ought to appear suspected.

II. They were all collected into particular Volumes: But the Prophecies of
Hosea, Isaiah, and Jeremy, and the most considerable of the rest, are preserved
in Books which contain many other things.

III. They are all exactly joined with the History of the same Nation, each one
in a place where there was an equal concern to preserve, and to gather them
together. But besides, they were all collected into one Body. In short, the
LXXII. Interpreters translated them into Greek in the Year of the World 3727.
and so submitted them to the Examination of the Egyptians; and this also keeps
us from doubting of their Truth.

This Translation was made but One hundred thirty and eight years after Malachy
the last of the Prophets.

But what Judgment soever may be made of these Reflections, the Design whereof
is only to establish the Reputation of these Prophecies, and of the Books
wherein they are written, that so no room may be left for any suspicions of
Forgery: I shall add two Considerations to what I have said already, which
ought to appear convincing to every attentive man.

I. One can suspect none but the Jews as Forgers of these Oracles: Now, not to
say any any thing of the Absurdity of supposing that a whole Nation should have
subscribed to such an Imposture; all the Jews throughout the World, were after
their return from the Captivity, strongly prepossessed with an opinion of the
Messiah's being a great Temporal King: and they have the same belief to this
very hour, in all places of the World, wherever they are dispersed.

This being once laid down, I affirm it to be impossible that the Jews should
forge Oracles which assert expressly, That the Messiah should be put to death in
so very odious a manner. For, as I shall afterward show, the oldest Doctors
attributed to the Messiah, all those Oracles which speak of the Death of the
Messiah according to the Christians, and which they themselves in process of
time were forced to interpret of two Messiah's, one exposed to a world of
Miseries, and the other only glorious: Or at least, I may say it is impossible
that the Jews should consent to a Forgery which thwarted their common Idea's
and Pretensions in so very sensible a manner.

II. The second Consideration establishes the same Truth with no less firmness,
which is that the Call of the Gentiles to have a share in the Blessings of the
Covenant which God made with the People of Israel, was the thing in the World
from which the Jews had the greatest aversation; they looked upon the Blessings
which the Messiah was to communicate, as advantages entirely reserved for those
of their own Nation: How then can we conceive that the Jews should forge so
many Oracles which should thwart their Prejudices so sensibly? or how can we
imagine that a whole People would authorize with their approbation an Imposture
so contrary, and so very opposite to their own Opinions?

But it is no hard thing to imagine, That when the Jews were once persuaded of
the Authority of their Prophets, either by their Miracles, or by the ready
Accomplishment of every Oracle which they had publicly pronounced, that they
should receive their Books, with a profound submission, and preserve them with
the utmost care. But it appears to be an incomprehensible thing, for a People
to receive Impostures contrary to their Prejudices, and Impostures reiterated
so often, without any ground, but what a vast number of Records never before
heard of would produce.

But I suppose these Reflections will suffice to establish the Truth of the
Historical and Prophetical Books of the Old Testament: So that there will be no
need of alleging particular proofs, which might demonstrate the Truth of each
Book in particular, which would carry me out to too great a length.

I shall now consider the Oracles themselves, and I shall show the progress of
the Light of this Revelation, with respect to the Promise of the Messiah; That
this progress may be the better observed, I shall do three things, as I have
formerly observed, without which the mind of a wise Reader will not receive
satisfaction.

I. I shall explain in a few words the Reason why these Oracles are interwoven
with several Histories, or Prophecies which seem to have no Relation to the
Promise of the Messiah.

II. I shall give such Rules as will serve to justify the Application which
both Jews and Christians have equally made of several Oracles only to the
Messiah.

III. I shall set the Oracles according to the Order of Time, which will
manifest the Advancement and Progress of that Light which is to be found in the
Revelation it self: As indeed, it is natural to conceive that God should
explain himself more clearly, in this matter, in proportion as the things
themselves were nearer to their Completion.

CHAP. VII.
For what Reason the Oracles, which relate to the Messiah, were interwoven with
other things, which seem to be very widely distant.
ONe of the greatest Difficulties which may be raised against the Oracles of
the Old Testament which concern the Messiah, is that surprising mixture which
one see's of those Oracles, and of other Subjects which seem to be widely
distant from any Idea of the Messiah.

There are none so profane, as to deny, that if in the same Author, and in the
same Chapter, any man should read in one continued Series Predictions which
should explain the miraculous Birth of the Messiah, his Family, his Preaching,
his Miracles, his Sufferings, his Resurrection, his Ascension into Heaven, the
Sending of the Holy Ghost, the Calling of the Gentiles: but that the History of
the Gospel would sufficiently justify Jesus Christ to be the promised Messiah.

But they take it to be a very strange thing, that the Apostles should apply
several passages in ancient Authors to the History of Jesus Christ, though the
whole Contexture of their Books do not seem to oblige us to make any such
Interpretations.

They therefore suppose that the Apostles made several fortunate Allusions to
the more remarkable passages in those ancient Authors, which may pass for
Predictions of those Events, which afterward happened; just as Nonnus wrote
the History of the Gospel in Homer's Verses; and as Eudoxia made a Cento out of
Virgil's Poem, which contained the same History, though neither Homer nor Virgil
had any of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion then in view.

That this apparent Difficulty may be solved, it will be necessary to examine
Three things: I. The Matter of Fact it self. II. The Reasons which gave
occasion for the doing of it. III. The Impression which this Fact has produced
in the minds of men to this very time.

For the First; Though it is well known that common use does not allow men to
join Foreign Idea's in the same Discourse, yet we may easily conceive that God
might and ought to do it, if we will allow what may be easily collected, that
he resolved to send the Messiah into the World: Such a practice was the more
natural, because the ancient Patriarchs before Moses, and Moses himself, who
formed the Commonwealth of the Jews, had prepared the minds of the People to
such sort of Expressions as were raised above the present Subject.

And certainly if one takes but the pains to consider the wisdom and beauty of
the Authors who writ these Prophetical Books on the one side, and the Character
of the Writers of the New Testament on the other, he would perceive, that if
these words, That it might be fulfilled, were of necessity to be changed into
these, As one may perceive a sort of Completion of such or such Passages in the
Old Testament, yet notwithstanding that, the most part of those Quotations
would evince an exact Accomplishment, and the Oracles which they allege would
bear a just proportion to those Events which are related by the Evangelists in
our Savior's Life.

Can any thing be more singular than the Prophecy in the Seventh of Isaiah, of
the Messiah's being born of a Virgin; of the piercing of his hands and feet
Psalm. XXII: of the mixture of Gall which was offered him to drink, hinted at
Psalm LX. 22. of his being sold for Thirty pieces of Silver: Zechar. XI. 3. or
then several others of a like nature, which at present I shall not stand to
reckon up.

It must be confessed however, that these Oracles are interwoven for the most
part with Matters relating to Events happening in the time when each Prophet
lived, or which seem to be applicable personally to the Prophets.

Three Orders or Reasons may be conceived, which will justify the Wisdom of
God in the ordering of these Oracles in a way which seems so contrary to the
common practice of the World.

The first Order contains Reasons drawn from the person of the Messiah himself
of whom we speak.

The second Order contains those which arise from the consideration of the
People amongst whom the Messiah was to be born.

The third contains those Reasons which respect other Nations amongst whom the
Messiah was to be preached. I shall examine these three sorts by themselves,
and I hope that we may gather from thence, that the Eternal Wisdom presided
over this mixture of these Oracles which relate to the Messiah, with other
Idea's which seem to be wholly foreign to the Subject.

In short, it may be urged, That the belief of a Messiah formed of so apparent
Contradictions, cannot easily be received of the sudden. A Messiah of the Seed
of David, whom David calls his Lord: a Messiah, who complains that he is
forsaken by God, whom however he ought to adore: A Messiah born with the
weaknesses of Youth, who at the same time is called a mighty God, and the
Father of Eternity, etc.

However, these Idea's which seem so opposite ought of necessity to have been
so separated by the Prophets, least they should have been looked upon as
Chimerical Descriptions, and incompatible in one and the same Subject.

A second Reflection which may be made upon this Matter, is, That the Jews were
bound not only to preserve their Oracles, but also to execute them in part;
Thus for instance, there was a necessity for them to reject the Messiah, to
deliver him up to the Gentiles to be crucified; there was a necessity that
their punishment should be as signal as their Crime, and that they should be
dispersed over the World, after the Destruction of Jerusalem, as the Prophets
have clearly shown. Now how could all this have ever been effected, if the
Description of the Messiah by the Prophets had been as Historical as that of
the Apostles, or the Evangelists, who gave us only a Narrative of Matters of
Fact.

In a word, was it not the interest of the Gentiles, to whom the Gospel was to
be preached, that these Oracles should be scattered up and down the Writings of
these ancient Authors? They were to be Called upon the Rejection of the Jews:
The Jews were bound to preserve the Books of the Old Testament, after they were
cast off by God, that the Authority of these Books, and these Oracles, might be
beyond all contest, as Testimonies with which we are furnished by the adverse
Party, which ought to have place, until the fullness of the Gentiles should
profess Christianity. Let any one therefore judge if it was not necessary in
this state of Affairs, that there should be some obscurity in the Prophetical
Descriptions, and by consequence that this interweaving of foreign Idea's with
those which concerned the Messiah, as also this dispersion of the Oracles
through different places of the Sacred Writers was not necessary, and so much
the more as they were uttered upon several Occasions by different Authors.

And we may affirm it, as a certainty, That according to the purpose of God,
this obscurity did not hinder either Jews or Pagans from perceiving those
ruling Idea's of a Messiah, when they read the Old Testament. Neither was the
dispersion of these Oracles through so many different places, any greater
hindrance to their application; since the Jews laid it down as a constant
Maxim, That the accomplishment of every thing which we find to be foretold as
great and illustrious by the Prophets, ought to be looked for in the Person of
the Messiah, when the Events of a nearer Date did not answer to the greatness
or magnificence of the Predictions.

Several Ages had passed from the time in which the Prophet had foretold that
the Messiah was to be born at Bethlehem, and yet we see that the Idea of it
continued very fresh amongst the Jews, in our Savior Jesus Christ's time, as
is plain from the Answer which they gave to Herod.

There are several other Examples might be given, which show that the Jews in
our Savior's time applied the very same Oracles to the Messiah which we do;
and without question, if it had not been so, the Apostles would first have
proved that these Oracles had relation to the Messiah, which they took for
granted, as a thing constantly acknowledged, whereas now they only endeavored
in the Gospel to justify that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, by showing one by
one that all the Characters which the Jews attributed to the Messiah, were to
be found in him.

Besides, it is manifest from our Savior's explication of the CX Psalm, that
though the Jews could not conceive the Solution of that Difficulty which
naturally appears in those words, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my
right hand, yet afterward they immediately applied that Oracle to the Messiah,
without seeking after any other Subjects to which they might apply it, as the
Jews endeavor to do at this day.

But after these Remarks upon the mixture of those Oracles which relate to the
Messiah, with others which seem to be of a more foreign Nature, we ought to
come to some general Rules by which we are to apply the ancient Oracles to the
Messiah.

CHAP. VIII.
General Rules for the Understanding of ancient Oracles, and for the
Application of them to the Messiah.
I. AS it appears very natural to conceive, That the most ancient Revelations
ought to be expressed in the most general terms, because they were furthest
from the time of their accomplishment, and so one ought to find in them a more
imperfect delineation of the Design of God: yet it is visible however, that
they ought to contribute very much to the understanding of those later Oracles,
because if these later ones do really contain a more particular explication of
his Design in sending the Messiah into the World, yet they ought always to
follow those Idea's which God at first made use of to make his Design known in
the World.

II. It is natural to grant, That when God had told the Jews by Jacob and
Balaam, that the coming of the Messiah was not suddenly to happen, if he
intended to bring them to a certain knowledge of the Messiah after a long
Revolution of years, by those Ceremonial and Judicial Laws which he
established, that he ought to breed them up in an expectation of the Messiah,
by lively Idea's, and by Oracles which should particularly explain the manner
and circumstances of his Appearance.

III. It is no less natural to acknowledge, That when God promised some
illustrious Person, or some great advantage to the Jewish Nation, he did it
only to entertain the People with an expectation of the Messiah, and upon that
account, that he might and ought to join the Promise of the Messiah with it, as
the principal Object which the Jews ought always to have in view, until it
should actually happen.

In short, there are two sorts of Oracles in the Old Testament: The first are
such as it is impossible to apply to any other besides the Messiah; as for
instance, Genesis III. 15. Deuteronomy. XVIII. 15. Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 10.
The place of his Birth; The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head;
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of
thy Brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken. Whereupon he that added
the Relation of Moses's Death, takes notice that after that there arose up no
Prophet in Israel like unto Moses.

The second are such as seem to agree in part to some body else besides the
Messiah, though we may find there also such particular Characters, that it is
impossible to apply them perfectly; and in their utmost extent, according to
the whole force of their expression to any other Subject besides the Messiah.
And so Balaam seems to have spoken of David, Numb. XXIII. as Julian the
Apostate maintains, and of his Victories over the Moabites in the same place
where he promises the Messiah, and where he speaks of the manner of his
subduing the Children of Seth; And so David in the second Psalm speaks of the
oppositions which he met with, in his advancement to the Throne, but in Terms
too Great and too Emphatical to be applied to him alone.

Those Principles which I have now established, that God promised the Messiah
in general terms, but without any intention of sending him into the World,
until several Ages had been passed, gave rise to these two sorts of Oracles. On
the one side, there was a necessity of explaining this Promise distinctly from
time to time. And on the other side, there was a necessity of accommodating
himself to the Desires of the Jews, by joining these Idea's with every thing
that was great and considerable in those Events, and in those Persons to whom
the Prophetic Spirit intended to add a luster by its Predictions.

The Jews are agreed at present, as they were also in our Savior's time, in
the application of the most part of those Oracles in the Old Testament, which
the Christians apply to the Messiah, and if they dispute some of them, which
they explain in a sense perfectly forced, yet at least they cannot dispute
these following Truths.

I. That the most part of those Oracles which we apply to the Messiah, were
applied in the same manner by the Jewish Doctors in our Saviors time: As the
CX Psalm, for instance, which has relation to the Nature and Glory of the
Messiah; the II Psalm, which has respect to the Conspiracy of the Princes and
the People against the Messiah; that place in Micah which fixes the Birth of
the Messiah to Bethlehem, etc.

II. That as they thought themselves obliged to make two Messiahs, because of
the apparent Contradictions which are to be found in those various Events which
are applied to the Messiah in those Predictions; some perfectly glorious, and
others every way contemptible: so there is no injustice done, in explaining
those Oracles which at first seem only to have relation to one single person,
of the Messiah, and of some other person.

III. That since they themselves believe, That their Ancestors might lawfully
pass from one sense to another in their Explications of those Oracles, so that
they were permitted to apply an Oracle to some other Subject, which did not
seem to agree exactly enough to that Subject which their Ancestors had first in
view, as the particular Subject concerning which the Oracle treated: So it is
not only just, but necessary too, to pass from one Subject to another as the
Apostles have actually done.

IV. That we ought to pay a much greater deference to the Opinion of the
ancient Jews, than of those, who have been sowred by their Miseries and
Disputes to such a degree, that they have lost that principle of Equity which
keeps Men from denying the most evident Truths, and which have been the most
universally acknowledged by a whole Nation, that was not prepossessed with so
great a degree of Obstinacy.

But we ought to observe, besides, That this seeming Confusion of those Oracles
which relate to the Messiah, with other Subjects treated of by the Prophets,
arose from several Causes.

I. From the Prophet's often joining the Idea's of the principal Promise, the
sending of the Messiah, with the promise of those means which were absolutely
necessary for the accomplishment of that promise, as the preservation of the
Jews for instance. So the Captivity of the Israelites in Egypt, and their
departure from thence, with their settling in the Land of Canaan, which he had
promised them before, were foretold, as necessary means in the order of
Providence, to the Execution of the great Design of God.

For so the Babylonish Captivity, and their Deliverance there from, which are
both foretold, are foretold as steps toward the execution of the promise of
sending the Messiah.

And so likewise when they foretold the Persecutions by Antiochus, and the
other Neighboring Nations, they also foretell the deliverance which God would
grant to the Jews, and their re-establishment until the Birth of the Messiah,
which was the accomplishment of that great Promise.

II. This seeming Confusion arose from the writing of these Books piece by
piece, which afterward were put into this order, without having always a
regard to the time in which they were writ, and without taking notice of all
the occasions which engaged the Prophets to write. And thus we see the
Prophecies which relate to the Messiah joined to several other Transactions,
and to several other Predictions, whose connection is not always so very evident.

III. It arises from the writing of the Prophecies each by themselves, so that
all those of the same Prophet were put together as they came out, making only a
new Chapter in the Work; whereas they ought to be considered rather with
relation to the Matter, than to the Order in which they lie in the Book, as we
have it at the present. For the Prophets often borrow their Light from what
they themselves had said some time before, or from what some other Prophet had
foretold, which ought to be observed particularly of those who lived about the
same time.

But besides those Rules which I proposed in the beginning of this Chapter, and
besides those Observations of the joining the Oracles which relate to the
Messiah with other Subjects, I must add two Rules more, which may be useful in
determining the sense of great numbers of Oracles which are expressed in
figurative terms. The first is, That it is natural to conceive that when the
Prophets were to speak of the Messiah, and when they were intent upon the
Description of his Kingdom, they should make use of Expressions which seemed to
foretell a sort of overturning of nature, which should happen at that time: But
then these Expressions ought to be understood in a figurative sense, in the
same Spiritual sense in which the Christians understood them, as the famous
Maimonides allows in that passage of Isaiah, Lib. de Regibus, cap. XII.
where the Wolf and the Lamb are said to feed together.

Secondly, Since the Messiah is described as one who should unite in his own
Person, the Glory of the Divinity, and the meanness of the Human Nature
together, we ought to understand those Oracles in such a manner, that what is
great in those Prophetical Descriptions, should not contradict the more
contemptible part, when we consider the Messiah as clothed with all the
meannesses of the Human Nature. These Idea's which are often joined in one and
the same Oracles, ought to be exactly applied to the different consideration
which the Prophets had of the Messiah, or to those various States through which
they themselves assures us that the Messiah was to pass.

An intelligent Reader will easily judge, that I might have added a third Rule
to the two former; which is, That when a person, who has all the Characters of
a Prophet, applys an old Oracle to any Subject, one cannot reasonably dispute
his application. This the Christians assure us was done by the Apostles in a
very great number of Oracles. But because this supposes a Prophetic Character
in the Apostles before it has been established by solid proofs, I shall wave
the proposal of it at present.

After these general Remarks I shall gather together those Oracles in the Old
Testament, which relate to the Messiah; I might here follow the order of the
Matters, by bringing under each Article those Oracles which relate to it, which
would give a great Light to the Subject, as Eusebius has rightly observed, and
as he has practiced himself in his Books de Demonstratione Evangelica. However,
I rather chose to follow the Order of Time in which these Oracles were uttered,
which did not seem improper to explain those Truths which are contained in
those Oracles.

In short, this is of great importance: I. Because it is very natural to
consider the Series of God's design, and the connection which may be found in
those Idea's which are made use of to express it.

II. Because of the necessity of the increase of the Light in the Revelations,
proportionably as the time drew near; so that, it is of use to observe how the
Divine Wisdom followed this natural Order in making the later Oracles clearer
than the former, and in hinting by little and little a greater number of
Circumstances, by which it was necessary to explain them.

III. Because this serves to give us a very strong proof, That God intended to
furnish us from the Scriptures themselves, with that which should fix us in a
Belief of this Capital Truth in our Religion. In short, when the Truth of each
of the Books in the Old Testament is once approved, and their Age set down, it
appears that several Prophets did agree wonderfully without any concert, in the
explication of the same Truths at several Times, and in several Places and
Circumstances, which hinder men for the most part from agreeing in the most
common Matters, which are the Subjects of their Reflections.

I have already considered that the Wisdom of God followed Rules very
conformable to the Condition and Inclinations of the Patriarchs, when it spoke
of the Messiah. We may see the same Conduct in the following times.

So since God had promised Children to Adam in Abel's stead, one may see that
he also promised David a Son who should set upon his Throne. He explains almost
all the Circumstances of his Coming, his Humiliation, his Exaltation, the
Oppositions he should meet with, the Victories he should obtain, and his
Offices, Prophetical, Priestly, and Royal.

One see's afterward that the Prophets explain in a more particular manner all
these Idea's which David had already proposed. Isaiah speaks of his Birth by a
Virgin, of his Spiritual Gifts, of his Miracles, of his Sufferings, of his
Resurrection, of his Calling of all Nations in to his Worship, and of his
Casting off the Jews.

Those who come after point out the place particularly, and the Town where the
Messiah was to be born; they describe his Covenant, and the Calling of the
Gentiles to the Service of the God of Israel.

In short, they describe both the Character of the Forerunner of the Messiah,
and the Empire under which he was to appear, and the very Year in which he was
to dye, as Daniel particularly does.

I cannot undertake to relate all the Oracles which are contained in the Books
of the Old Testament, they are so very numerous. But I hope at least to mark
the more principal, and the most illustrious ones, and to explain them in such
a manner, that all shall be obliged to acknowledge, I. That God designed to
give infallible proofs to his Church, of his design in sending the Messiah into
the World, and to preserve the continual remembrance of him, as of a Person who
was promised to give all Comfort to his Church, and whose coming should bring
Salvation to all Mankind. II. That the care which he took in specifying all the
Circumstances of his coming into the World, show that he designed to prevent
the Scandal which the abject Life and Death of a Messiah might produce, and the
false Judgments which Men might form of the Works of a Divine Wisdom, when they
only judge of them by the outside. III. That he designed to give an infallible
proof, that this sending of the Messiah, was the Work of his Wisdom and
Fidelity, which at last accomplished a thing, the Design whereof had been
proposed to Mankind immediately after the Fall.

CHAP. IX.
Of those Oracles concerning the Messiah which are to be found in the Book of
Genesis.
I Begin with those Oracles which are contained in the Book of Genesis, since
it is convenient to touch them all over again in few words.

The first Oracle is comprised in these Terms, Genesis III. 15. I will put Enmity
between Thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed; it shall bruise
thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel.

This Oracle has considerable advantages, though it is expressed in figurative
Terms. God uttered it in the beginning of the World, after he had given
Sentence against Adam, and the Woman, and the Serpent in a very sensible
manner, even under a Human shape, if we may dare to affirm it. He uttered it
before the Head of all Mankind, which ought to make it considerable to all his
Posterity. He expresses it by an Allusion to the nature of the Temptation, and
to the form of the Serpent, which the Tempter had took upon him. He preserves
thereby the memory of the Temptation, by inspiring all Mankind with an
invincible Hatred against all Serpents in general, though the Tempter had took
the shape but of one particular kind, for an Instrument to accomplish his
Design.

In short, this Oracle clearly shows, I. That it should be particularly the
Seed of the Woman: Adam not being touched at. II. That the Seed of the Woman,
that is to say the Messiah, should destroy the power of the Serpent expressed
by the Head, that is to say the power of the Devil. III. That this Seed should
however receive a considerable wound from the Devil, though it should only touch
his Heel, the least considerable part of the Messiah. IV. That all the
Blessings which God should give to Mankind after the Fall, should be grounded
upon the sending of this Seed into the World: This is more clearly expressed by
God's telling Abraham, Genesis XXII. 18.
That in thy Seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed.

That this Oracle Genesis III. has relation to the Messiah, is plain: I. Because
it is the Source and Abridgment of the whole Revelation. II. Because all the
ancient Jews in effect understood it so. III. Because the Apostles, in
following the Idea's of the Synagogue plainly referred them to the Messiah,
Targum in h. l.
by the Allusions which they make to them: John XII. Romans. XVI. II Cor. XI. 1
John III.

The second Oracle which relates to the Messiah, is contained in these Terms,
when God spoke to Abraham; In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed.

This Oracle is very illustrious: I. By the person of Abraham, whom God made
the Depositary of it, and who made himself ready to Sacricrifice his own Son.
II. By the frequent Repetitions which God made to this Patriarch, using in
effect all those ways which he afterward followed in his Revelations to the
Patriarchs, for fifty years together, from the Year 2083. to the Year 2133. of
the World. III. Because it was accompanied by the Circumcision, so that though it
foretold that the Advantages should be in common to all Nations, yet it limited
the Messiah to be born of Abraham's Seed.

It also intimates very clearly, I. That the Blessings which it promises should
be in common to all Nations. II. That this Blessing should be quite of another
nature from Temporal ones, as the increase for instance, and the power of
Abraham's Posterity, which had been promised to him before. S. Paul's Reflection
Gal. III. 8. That God spoke of Seed in the singular Number is very remarkable,
and so much the more, because the Jews make a like Observation upon a parallel
place in the Old Testament.

As God repeated this Promise when he spoke to Isaac in the Year 2200, and to
Jacob in the Year 2245. Genesis XXVIII. 14. And thy Seed shall be as the Dust of
the Earth; and thou shall spread abroad to the West, and to the East, and to
the North, and to the South: and in thee, and in thy Seed, shall all the
Families of the Earth be blessed, so one ought to repeat again the same
Reflections. This ought only to be added, That God restrained the honor of
bringing forth the Messiah to Jacob the Son of Isaac, that the Edomites might
not come in to challenge the right, as I have very particularly explained in my
Reflections upon Genesis.

We come now to the Oracle which Jacob gave in the Year 2315. It is one of the
clearest Predictions in the whole Bible, and it is expressed in these Terms:
Judah, thou art he whom thy Brethren shall praise; thy hand shall be in the
neck of thine Enemies: thy Father's Children shall bow down before thee. Judah
is a Lions whelp; from the Prey my Son thou art gone up: he stooped down, he
couched as a Lion, and as an old Lion; who shall rouse him up? The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Law giver from between his Feet, until
Shiloh come, and unto him shall the gathering of the People be. Binding his
Fool unto the Vine, and his Asses Colt unto the choice Vine; he washed his
Garments in Wine, and his Clothes in the Blood of Grapes. His eyes shall be red
with Wine, and his Teeth white with Milk. Genesis XLIX. 8. -- 12. I know very
well, that some of the Jews have pretended, that Moses ought to be understood
for Shiloh; But this is so ridiculous an Opinion, that there is not the least
probability to maintain it: What Scepter had Judah before Moses came? How was
Moses the Expectation of the Gentiles, and the Object of their Hope?

And indeed, the Body of the Jewish Nation are agreed, that this Oracle was
meant of the Messiah, so Onkelos the Chaldee Paraphrast, so the Jerusalem
Targum, and Jonathan's, so R. Solomon Jarchi, Abenezra, and Kimchi are agreed.

Now these Reflections may be naturally drawn from this Oracle which Jacob
uttered upon his Deathbed.

I. This Oracle is found amongst a great number of Oracles which concern the
other Tribes of the Israelites, and which were accomplished as to every Tribe.

II. This Oracle contains several particular Events which relate to private
Transactions in the Tribe of Judah.

III. This Oracle was, as it were, Jacob's Will in favor of Judah, at a time
when he divided amongst his Children their Portions which they were to expect
from him.

IV. This was a Preference of Judah, who was but the fourth, to Reuben who was
the eldest, and who by consequence ought to have been the Head of his Family.
The Scepter, and the Authority of Legislator was promised to Judah, which did
not belong to him by the right of his Birth.

Jacob therefore prepared his Children to look for an accomplishment of those
Promises made to Abraham in Judah, as well for the Kings who were to be
descended from him, as for the Nations of the Earth, who were to be blessed in
Abraham's Seed.

But we must go yet further; I shall therefore observe, I. That this Prophecy
particularly regarded the Tribe of Judah, as all the preceding and following
Oracles concerned those Tribes, whose Heads were then named by Jacob.

II. That this Prophecy concerns the Tribe of Judah, as settled in the Land of
Canaan, by a distinct establishment from the other Tribes. In short, it is
certain that the Tribe of Judah had some superiority; Thus God for instance
commanded that Tribe to march the first, Numb. II. and X. Its Heads offered
their presents first, Numb. VII. 11, 12, 83. In Joshua's time this Tribe took
its Division without drawing Lots for it. One see's that God ordered the Tribe
of Judah to lead the People out to the Conquest of the rest of the Country. One
see's the same Prerogatives in the Book of Judges, though they were often of
other Tribes. From David's time to the taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar,
the Kings were all of that Tribe; and Zorobabel afterward headed those who
returned out of Chaldea. The Book of the Chronicles names the Tribe of Judah
first; Herod was the first King who was wholly a Stranger.

III. That Jacob supposed that the Tribe of Judah should be in possession of a
Form of Government, and of a Community till the coming of the Messiah: This was
all very proper, and indeed we see that this Tribe continued under its own
Governors, after the other Tribes had been transported, II Kings XVII. 18. It
almost swallowed up Benjamin and Levi, who settled in their Country; and indeed
Josephus assures us, That there were but few of the Ten Tribes who came back
again into Judea under Ezra, for the greatest part of them stayed beyond
Euphrates. And we see that at last they gave their Name to the whole Country.

IV. That this Oracle was fulfilled by degrees. This I have observed already of
the preheminency of the Tribe of Judah before David's time, which was a step to
the advancement of it to the Throne. And the lessening of their Dignity, which
was to be entirely taken away when the Messiah came, had also the same
Gradations. David was set upon the Throne over all Israel; but his House lost
the Government over Ten Tribes in his Grandson Rehoboam's time. His Successors
were Tributary to the neighboring Princes: whereas David carried his Empire to
the Walls of Babylon, though afterward the Babylonians subdued the Jews, and
deposed the Kings of Judah. At last they absolutely lost all that Authority
which they had hitherto kept. They recovered a little in the Person of
Zorobabel, and though they were soon after invaded by the Seleucidae, yet the
Maccabees preserved them a little, till Herod and the Romans took away all
those Remnants which they had yet left.

In carrying these Views of this Oracle further, we may yet further observe, I.
That God intended to oblige the Israelites to wait for the Scepter in the Tribe
of Judah. It must be there before it could depart thence. It was natural to
conceive, that the Jews were to look yet much further than David. Those words,
It shall not depart, denote a continuance of the Scepter in the House of David
for some considerable time.

II. It is easy to comprehend a lessening of the Dignity in the term Lawgiver,
[See Judges V. 14. (...)] which God seems to have made use of, as a Mark of the
Fall, which I have observed in the Person of Zorobabel, who as to the time was
about the middle of the Oracle.

III. In a word, it is easy to acknowledge that this Oracle assigns the Epoch
in gross for the time of the coming of the Messiah, viz. the Ruin of that
Authority and Power which the Jews, properly so called from the Tribe of Judah,
should enjoy after their re-establishment. God could not explain himself more
particularly, in stating the precise time when this thing should happen.

There are two other very considerable Oracles; one uttered by Balaam in the
Year 2553; before the King of the Moabites, who had sent for him to curse the
People of Israel that lay in the Plains; the other uttered the same Year by
Moses the famous Legislator of the Jews; the first is inserted by Moses in the
XXIV Chapter of Numbers; the other is in the XVIII of Deuteronomy.

The first is in these words; I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him,
but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise
out of Israel, and shall smite all the Corners of Moab, and destroy all the
Children of Seth: And Edom shall be a Possession, Seir also shall be a
Possession for his Enemies, and Israel shall do valiantly. Out of Jacob shall
come he that shall have Dominion, and shall destroy him that remains of the
City.

One ought to observe, that Balaam's Character, the presence of the King and
the Elders of Moab, and all the Circumstances in which it was uttered, do
advance its Authority considerably.

But the turn of his Expressions is equally singular and remarkable: I. He
speaks of the Messiah as of a Star, hinting out to us the Celestial Nature of
the Messiah: whereas hitherto God had only described him under the Figure of a
bare man: though the other was made sufficiently intelligible, when the
Destruction of the Empire of the Tempter, and the right of procuring a Blessing
unto all the Nations of the Earth which he was personally to enjoy, were
attributed to him; things infinitely beyond the power and condition of Mankind
to perform, were attributed to him. II. He observes, That this Person of whom
he speaks such magnificent things, ought however to be descended from Jacob;
which ratifies Jacob's Prophecy in favor of Judah. III. Though he hints very
clearly at the effects of those Blessings and Temporal Victories which Jacob's
Posterity was to obtain over their Neighbors, yet at the same time he
infinuates plainly enough, that the bestowing of the Blessing which all the
Nations of the World should obtain, was to be reserved to Jacob's Seed; when he
refused to retract those Promises of Blessing which God had made to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, to which Oracles he made a sensible Allusion.

And it is very important to consider that the Jews always applied this Oracle
to the Messiah, as may be seen by their Chaldee Paraphrast; and it was
acknowledged so generally, that the famous Achiba, who lived under the Emperor
Hadrian, pretended that Barchocheba was the Messiah, because his name was
Chochab, which is a Star in Hebrew; as if God intended to mark that Impostor
for the true Messiah, by foretelling what name he should be called by.

The Oracle which Moses uttered a little before his Death, is very
considerable. The People being terrified with the manner of God's speaking to
them upon Mount Sinai, desired that God would no longer speak as he had done
before, but that Moses should give them an Account of whatever God should
command. Hereupon God consents to their Request, and promised them by Moses,
that he would raise them up a Prophet like unto Moses, to whom they ought to
hearken, upon pain of being cut off.

He that made the Addition to the last Book of Moses, wherein his Death is
described, takes notice, that there never rose up afterward a Prophet in
Israel like to Moses: If it was Ezra who made that Addition, then here is a
plain and clear decision against the Jews, some of whom assert that Joshua or
Jeremiah was the Prophet whom Moses promised: If it was Eleazar, who lived in
Joshua's time, then here Joshua at least is excluded from this privilege of
being designed by Moses.

But it is to no purpose to stop at such frivolous Objections: One needs only
observe Moses's Character to take notice of four certain Marks of Moses's
Prophecies, which advance him infinitely above all the other Prophets. I. He
had all the sorts of Revelations which are generally found amongst all the
Prophets. II. He was illustrious for great numbers of Miracles. III. He not
only reformed the Errors and false ways of Worship then prevailing amongst the
Jews, but he set up a new Worship, and a new Form of Religion. IV. He
introduced this Law, and this way of worshipping God, by such a conversation
with God, as one see's amongst two intimate Friends: In which of the Prophets
may these four Characters be found.

The Galileans themselves testified plainly that these Characters ought only to
be found in the person of the Messiah, when they saw the Miracles of Jesus
Christ, John VI. 14. and the Jews acknowledged the same in our Saviors time,
when they applied that Oracle to the Messiah, John I. 45.

But if these Oracles were obscurely hinted at in this Oracle, one may see them
clearly applied to the Messiah in the following Oracles, proportionably as the
Revelation increased, and as God unravelled the Idea's of these ancient Oracles
by explaining them more particularly by those Prophets whom he afterward
raised up. This may clearly be seen, if we pass on to those Oracles which were
uttered by David, and the other Prophets who lived about his time.

CHAP. X.
Of the Oracles which concern the Messiah in the Book of Psalms.
THese were the Oracles which were the subjects of the Meditations of the
Faithful from the Year of the World 2553, in which Moses dyed, until David's
time, who was particularly chosen by God to be the only man of his Family,
which was also separated from all the other Families of Judah, who came from
Pharez, from whom the Messiah was to be descended.

I have observed in another place, that in all probability God raised David to
the Throne, only to make the Genealogy of that Family better known, from which
the Messiah was to spring.

As this double advancement of David, one to the Throne of Israel, the other to
be the Father to the Messiah, ought to have inspired him with lively
Resentments of Gratitude, and as his Oracles would be much more famous, being
uttered by a Royal Prophet, and the rather because God employed him in the
making a just Regulation of the Service of the Sanctuary; so we see that David
employed his Pen in giving more distinct Idea's of that Messiah which he
promised them.

The Name Messiah properly signifies a person consecrated by anointing to be
King, Priest, or Prophet. This Name was particularly applied by David, and the
Prophets who lived after him, to that holy Seed which God had promised to
Abraham's Family by Isaac, by Jacob, by Judah, and by David; and one may
observe in David's Psalms, and in the Prophets of his time, that they gave the
Name of Messiah to the promised Seed, under one or other of these three Senses.

The Characters both of a Prophet and a Priest, though each of them are august
enough, yet yield to that of a King. These are the different Idea's which
David, and the Prophets of that time followed in all the variety of their
Descriptions.

But it is not my Design to give a particular Account of all those Oracles
which describe these different Characters, for fear of being excessively long:
So I shall content my self with observing two things: I. That David alone
uttered more Oracles than all the Prophets who came before him. II. That these
Oracles of David concerning the Messiah are clearer than all the precedent ones.

Now, I say, that David alone uttered more Oracles than any one Prophet who
came before him; Thus in the XL Psalm he explains the Decree by which the
Messiah became the Servant of God, and clothed himself with the form of a
Servant, to offer unto God a more perfect Obedience than that which had
formerly been offered by Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices. He describes the
measure and the Nature of his Ministry, which was to consist in the instruction
of the People, in Righteousness, Truth, and the Salvation of God. Psalm XL. 7.
-- 11. Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire, mine Ears have thou
opened: Burntoffering and Sin offering have thou not required. Then said I, Lo
I come; in the Volume of the Book it is written of me: I delight to do thy
will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within my heart. I have preached Righteousness
in the great Congregation: Lo I have not refrained my Lips, O Lord, thou
know: I have not hid thy Righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy
Faithfulness, and thy Salvation: I have not concealed thy loving Kindness, and
thy Truth, from the great Congregation.

In the XVI Psalm he describes the inviolable stedfastness of the Messiah to
the Service of God, who had sent him to form a great People; with the manner of
his deliverance by God from all the powers of the World, by raising him up from
the dead, and afterward receiving him into Glory. Psalm XVI. 8. etc. I have
set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be
moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices; my flesh also shall
rest in hope. For thou will not leave my Soul in Hell; neither will thou suffer
thy holy One to see corruption: Thou will show me the path of Life; in thy
presence is fullness of joy: at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

In the XXII Psalm he describes the Agonies through which the Messiah was to
pass, the manner of his Death, the Victory which he should obtain over his
Enemies, and the Conversion of those very Nations which had cast him off.

In the CIX Psalm he speaks of the Oppressions of the Messiah, pronouncing
great numbers of Imprecations against that very person who should signalize
himself by persecuting his Innocence. Hold not thy peace O God of my praise:
for the mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against
me; they have spoken against me with a lying tongue, Verse 1, 2. Set thou a
wicked man over him, and let Satan stand at his right hand. When he shall be
judged, let him be condemned, and let his prayer become Sin. Let his days be
few, and let another take his Office, Verse 6, 7, 8. Because that he remembered
not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man, that he might even
slay the broken in heart. As he loved cursing, so let it come to him: as he
delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him. As he clothed himself
with cursing like as with his Garment, so let it come into his bowels like
water, and like oil into his bones, Verse 16, 17, 18.

In the CXIX Psalm he carries this Argument further, in his Description of the
Zeal of the Messiah for the House of God, and of those insultings which he
should meet with, and the manner of their giving him Vinegar and Gall to drink,
with the hardening and rejection of those who had used him in that manner. Save
me O God, for the waters are come in unto my soul. I sink in deep mire, where
there is no standing: I am come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me,
Verse 1, 2. Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord Ged of Hosts, be ashamed for
my sake: Let not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of
Israel. Because for thy sake I have born reproach; shame has covered my face.
I am beoome a stranger unto my Brethren, and an Alien unto my Mothers Children:
For the zeal of thy House has eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that
reproached thee, are fallen upon me, Verse 6, 7, 8, 9. Reproach has broken my
heart, and I am full of heaviness: and I looked for some to take pity, but
there was none; and for comforters, but I found none. They gave me also Gall
for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink. Let their Table
become a snare before them; and that which should have been for their welfare,
let it become a trap. Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not; and make
their loins continually to shake. Pour out thy indignation upon them, and let
thy wrathful anger take hold of them, Verse 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

In the XCVII and XCVIII Psalms he describes the destruction of Idolatry when
the promised Savior should appear, and when God should raise him upon his
Throne. The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice; let the multitude of the
Isles be glad thereof. Psalm XCVII. 1. Confounded be all they that serve graven
Images, that boast themselves of Idols: worship him all ye Gods. Zion heard,
and was glad, and the Daughters of Judah rejoiced; because of thy Judgments, O
Lord: For thou Lord art high above all the Earth: thou art exalted far above
all Gods, Verse 7, 8, 9. O sing unto the Lord a new Song, for he has done
mavelous things: his right hand, and his holy arm have gotten him the
Victory. The Lord has made known his Salvation: his righteousness has he
openly showed in the sight of the Heathen. He has remembered his Mercy and his
Truth toward the House of Israel: all the ends of the Earth have seen the
Salvation of our God. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord all the Earth: make a
loud noise, and rejoice and sing praise, Psalm XCVIII. 1. -- 4.

In the LXVIII Psalm he explains the glory of the Messiah, and his Ascension
into Heaven, with the effusion of those gifts which he was to spread abroad for
the Conversion of the Nations, that God might dwell amongst the most
rebellious. Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall soon stretch out
her hands unto God: Sing unto God, ye Kingdoms of the Earth: O sing praises
unto the Lord. To him who rides upon the Heavens of Heavens, which were of
old; lo he does send out his voice, and that a mighty voice. Ascribe ye
strength unto God: his excellency is over Israel, and his strength is in the
Clouds. O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places, the God of Israel is
he that gives strength and power unto his people, Verse 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.

The Prophets who lived in the time of David, or soon after, pursued all his
Idea's. One see's that Nathan, II Sam. VII. foretells Solomon's glory, and the
honor which he should have in building that Temple of which David had formed
the design before, in such a manner, that he clearly shows three things which
will by no means agree with Solomon. I. That God should raise up a Son to David
after his Death, and place him upon his Throne; whereas Solomon was born, and
advanced to the Throne by David himself. II. It was promised that his
Government should be endless; this is not applicable to the Royal Posterity of
David, who had but Twenty Successors who bore the Title of Kings. III. That God
particularly promises to be the Father of this promised Son, which is not more
applicable to Solomon, than to David, to Josiah, or Hezekiah.

One see's that Corah's Posterity gave that Account of Solomon's glory upon his
marriage with the King of Egypt's Daughter; He speaks of a Throne much more
august then that Princes was, and he represents to us a God consecrated with
Oil of Gladness above his Fellows. This exactly sets forth the august Character
of the Messiah, and his Anointing to be the King of all Nations, their Prophet,
and their Priest. Psalm XLV. 1. My heart is inditing a good matter: I speak of
the things which I have made touching the King: my tongue is the pen of a ready
writer. Verse 7, 8. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the Scepter of thy
Kingdom is a right Scepter. Thou love righteousness and hate wickedness;
therefore God, thy God has anointed thee with Oil of Gladness above thy
Fellows. Verse 16. Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy Children whom thou may
make Princes in all the Earth.

One see's the same Prophets inviting all Nations in the XLVII Psalm to
acknowledge the Kingdom of God: which Daniel afterward describes as that which
the Jews already knew was to be governed by the Messiah.

One see's Asaph describing in the L Psalm the manner of the Messiah's
assembling all People, and of his rejecting the ancient and Legal Service, and
prescribing a Spiritual one, even Sacrifices of Vows, and of Praise. Verse 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. And the Heavens shall declare his Righteousness: for God is Judge
himself. Hear O my people, and I will speak, O Israel; and I will testify
against thee: I am God, even thy God. I will not reprove thee for thy
Sacrifices, or thy Burnt-offerings, to have been continually before me. I will
take no Bullock out of thy House, nor He-goat out of thy Folds. For every Beast
of the Forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills.

One sees the Author of the LXXII Psalm describing the glory and happiness of
Solomon's Kingdom in such a manner, that he carries his views as high as the
Messiah at the same time; He foretells the continuance of his Kingdom as long as
the Sun and Moon endures; that all the Kings of the World should bring Presents
to him, and that all the Nations of the Earth should worship before him Verse
5. They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and Moon endure, throughout all
Generations. Verse 8. He shall have Dominion also from Sea to Sea, and from the
River unto the ends of the Earth. Verse 11. All Kings shall fall down before
him, all Nations shall serve him. Verse 17, 18, 19. His Name shall endure for
ever; his Name shall be continued as long as the Sun, and Men shall be blessed
in him; all Nations shall call him blessed. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
who only does wondrous things: And blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and
let the whole Earth be filled with all his Glory; Amen and Amen.

One sees that Ethan the Ezrahite, who is represented to us as the wisest Man
in that Age after Solomon, explains the promise made to David of a Son who
should reign for ever, and whose Throne should be immovable in the LXXXIX
Psalm. This agrees to none but the Messiah, whom he describes as the Firstborn
of the Princes of the Earth, and as the Son of God in a manner, which is not
applicable to any of David's Posterity, except only to the Messiah. Verse 19,
20. Then thou spakest in Visions, to the holy one, and say, I have laid help
upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the people. I have
found David my servant; with my holy Oil have I anointed him. Verse 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29. My Faithfulness and my Mercy shall be with him; and in my Name
shall his Horn be exalted. I will set his Hand also in the Sea, and his right
hand in the Rivers. He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the
Rock of my Salvation. Also I will make him my Firstborn, higher than the Kings
of the Earth. My Mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my Covenant shall
stand fast with him. His Seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his
Throne as the days of Heaven. Verse 33.34, 35, 36, 37. Nevertheless my loving
kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.
My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.
Once have I sworn by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David. His Seed
shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before me: It shall be
established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful Witness in Heaven.

One needs only read over the Psalms which I have now taken notice of, and
which are almost all applied by the Jews to the Messiah, to see the great
Number of Oracles which God gave in David's time, concerning this matter; not
to speak of those which describe the Calling of the Gentiles, which fill up the
Book of the Psalms almost entirely.

I come now to the proof of the second Article, which is to show, That the
Oracles which David uttered are much clearer, and much more particular than
those which were given before. This I hope to prove beyond all contradiction,
by considering two Psalms, the one whereof describes the prodigious Humiliation
of the Messiah; and the other describes his Advancement at the right hand of
God; two of the greatest Truths declared by the Prophets, and two the most
singular of all the Characters which belong to the promised Messiah.

CHAP. XI.
Considerations upon the Sufferings of the Messiah, and upon his glorious
Ascension into Heaven, foretold by David in the XXII and CX Psalms.
IT cannot be denied, when one reads the XXII Psalm, but that the person there
spoken of, is described figuratively, as one exposed to the severest
Sufferings, from which he is afterward delivered by the Divine assistance, and
advanced to rule an Empire which extends it self over all the Nations of the
World, and afterward universally adored.

I. He that speaks, cries out as if God had forsaken him, and had stopped his
Ears unto his Cry.

II. He describes himself as a Worm, and no Man, as the reproach of Men, and
one despised by the people.

III. He takes notice, that those who were witnesses of his Sufferings, made a
mock at them, bidding him trust in God, that he might deliver him.

IV. He ranks his Enemies amongst the Bulls of Bashan, and raging Lions, who
(according to the Prophetical way of speaking) are the chief Men in the Nation.
Amos IV. 1. Ezech. XXII. 25.

V. He joins the Dogs with them, that is, profane persons or the Gentiles.

VI. He represents his Hands and his Feet as pierced with Nails.

VII. He shows that he was stretched out before, in such a manner that they
might count all his Bones; this expresses the Idea of a Man fastened to a Cross,
and exposed to the view of all the World; as he afterward describes himself to
be quite dried up, from the loss of Blood when he was crucified.

VIII. He takes notice of their parting his Garments, and

IX. Of their casting Lots upon his Vesture.

In short, one see's throughout all the expressions of this Psalm the Image of
a Death which was equally shameful and cruel.

The other part of the Psalm gives us an Account of the deliverance of that
person who is mentioned in this holy Hymn.

I. He obliges himself, to praise the Name of the Lord in the most numerous
Assembly.

II. He observes it as an effect of this deliverance, that all the ends of the
World should remember, and turn unto the Lord, and that all the Kindreds of the
Nations should worship before him.

III. At last, he takes notice that the Kingdom of God should spread it self
over all the Nations of the World.

One may judge by the History of David, whethis Psalm is applicable to him;
therein we may see all the Crosses which he underwent particularly represented,
during all the former years of his Reign. But there we have no Account, that
David ever suffered any thing like that which is so exactly described in this
Psalm. And this may be said further, that when David took any Occasion to paint
out his Sufferings to us, he has put in several strokes which only relate to
the Messiah, and which show us in a very lively manner, that he was to pass
through much greater Trials than any of those from which David had been
delivered.

The later Jews, who endeavor to verify this Prophecy in Esther or Mordecai,
agree with us at the bottom, that David carried his views further than barely
his own Sufferings. And those also who apply it to the poople of Israel, must
acknowledge the same Truth even against their wills.

But the more ancient Jews were more equitable in their applications of the
XXII Psalm to the Messiah. They applied it to him in earnest, even after the
time of Jesus Christ, when the comparison of these Characters of the Messiah,
which may be found so exactly in the Death of Jesus Christ, led them to an
opposition of this Truth.

And certainly there needs very little equity to acknowledge that this Oracle,
or rather this heap of Oracles belonged to the Messiah, by the confession and
agreement of the Jews in our Savior's time.

I. They had not then resolved to make their advantages of the Writer's fault,
who writ [(...)] like a Lion, instead of [(...)] they have pierced my feet, as
they have done since. In short, Aquila who lived 100 years after Jesus Christ,
and the other Jewish Interpreters, Symmachus and Theodotion, translated that
passage as we now read it.

II. The Notion which the Synagogue always had of the Sufferings of the
Messiah, obliged them to suppose two Messiahs, one suffering, and the other
glorious, rather than to contradict that Truth openly, which is expressed by
these Oracles in soparticular a manner.

III. Nothing can be imagined to be more ridiculous, than to suppose that Jesus
Christ should quote the first words of this Psalm upon the Cross, thereby to
engage all Mankind to take notice of the accomplishment of this ancient Oracle
in all his Sufferings, if we suppose that this Psalm even by the confession of
the Jews, had no relation to the Messiah.

The same Reflection may be made concerning the Apostles, who have quoted so
many passages of this Psalm to prove that Jesus Christ was the Messiah; because
one may find in his Death, and in the Circumstances of it, such a litteral and
exact accomplishment of this ancient Prophecy.

But if it should be objected, That after all, this agreement of the Synagogue
can make no more than a strong prejudice; this may be easily answered; by
considering that when the Psalmist speaks of the extent of his Kingdom over the
whole Earth, it was that Circumstance which determined the Synagogue in their
application of this whole Psalm to the Messiah; because as the Jews themselves
acknowledge, this extent of Empire is one of those Characters, which according
to the ancient Oracles, is applicable to none but the Messiah. In short,
(because it is of great importance, I shall repeat it here again) common sense
led those who considered these ancient Oracles, to compare them (as naturally
they ought) with those that went before, and to determine the scope and intent
of the later ones by the relation which they had to the precedent ones; and
there was only need of one considerable Clause to make a certain determination
after they had made such a comparison. This the Jews were certainly convinced
of, when they acknowledged that the last words of David, II Sam. XXIII. 1-8.
were to be applied to the Messiah, by comparing them with Balaam's Oracle of
the Messiah, Numb. XXIV.

We may therefore take it for granted, That David did not absolutely speak of
himself in the XXII Psalm, and that he carried his views as far as the Messiah,
that he gave a great number of Characters to his Posterity, whereby they might
distinguish, notwithstanding the greatness of his Sufferings, and even the
better by his very Sufferings, than which no clearer marks can possibly be
given; because there is nothing more involuntary than enduring of Miseries, nor
nothing which depends less upon the choice of the person who is to undergo
them, than the particular kind of punishment, or than the Circumstances which
must accompany his Death, when it is once left to the unjust power of violent
Enemies.

We come now to the CX Psalm, which in a very few words contains several very
important Characters of the Messiah, which are very distinctly expressed.

If one considers it exactly, it seems to have been composed after that Nathan
had acquainted David with the Glory of his Son which God had promised him; such
a Son who should build a House wherein God should dwell for ever, and who
should sit upon a Throne which should never be overturned; whereas David had
only formed a Design of Building a Temple to the Lord.

In short, one see's that the Spirit of Prophecy had given him a view of the
Glory of this august King who should be born of his Seed, and of the Glory of
his Kingdom which should never be destroyed. David advances this King not only
above all MEN, by calling him his Lord who was himself a King; but also above
the Angels, by making him sit at the right hand of God in the Kingdom of
Heaven. This is personal. He also describes the Glory of his Office, by
considering him as a Priest of a higher order than that of Aaron, from whom
Melchisedech received Tithes in the person of Abraham: And, in a word, he
acquaints us with the progress of his Kingdom, and the greatness of his
Victories. Let us examine all these Characters by themselves.

I. He brings in God speaking to the Messiah, whom he calls his Lord; Sit thou
at my right hand, until I make thy Enemies thy footstool. This points out to
us, 1. That the Messiah ought to be advanced to Glory. 2. That God intended to
subdue his Enemies by little and little, whilst the Messiah should be in his
Glory; as it was foretold in the Second Psalm.

II. He observes, That the Empire of the Messiah was to begin at Jerusalem, or
Sion, which was then to be under the power of his Enemies.

III. He expressly points out the quick extent of the Kingdom of the Messiah,
with the Character of those who should submit to him without constraint or
violence, which was much practiced under Moses's Law.

IV. He positively asserts, That the Messiah should be established a Priest
after the order of Melchisedech, which would overturn the whole Levitical
Priesthood, which then was to have an end: Yet the very same King who designed
the Draught of the Temple which Solomon built some time after, undermines the
Foundations of this material Building, and clearly supposes that the Levitical
Ministry, which was fixed to Solomon's Temple, should last no longer than until
the Coming of the Messiah.

V. He particularly takes notice, That the Messiah should, by the Divine
Assistance, destroy all that should oppose his power, and should bring all
things under his Dominion, as a Conqueror who should overturn all things with
the utmost violence.

Nothing can be greater than these several Oracles; nothing can be more
particular than his description of the Glory to which the Messiah was to be
advanced after that prodigious Humiliation which is described in the XXII
Psalm; But what can we suppose to be the reason of David's speaking of the
Messiah in this Psalm? This I am further to consider.

One may say that the Jews did not constantly apply these Prophecies to the
Messiah, before the Coming of Jesus Christ without good grounds: They could not
apply them to any of David's Successors; none of David's Successors was both
King and Priest. Uzziah was the only man who dared to usurp the Priesthood; and
he was punished by God himself. The Maccabees were not of David's Tribe, but
were Levites, and none of them ever went up into Heaven to set at the right
hand of God. Besides, their Kingdom did not begin in Sion, and they never
brought any other Kings under their Authority. They applied it therefore to the
Messiah, pursuant to the Maxim which they drew from a frequent meditation upon
the ancient Oracles, that we ought only to look for an accomplishment of those
Prophecies in the person of the Messiah, which they could never sind to be
fulfilled any where else, when at the same time they knew that the exactness
and truth of those Predictions could not be any ways contested.

In short, it plainly appears that they did unanimously apply it to the Messiah
before Jesus Christ came into the World, from the manner of their confessing it
to our Savior, when he pressed them with the CX Psalm; though they could not
explain the manner how David should call the Messiah Lord, when they allowed
him to be his Son, Matthew. XXII. 48.

One see's nothing so frequently urged by the Apostles as this CX Psalm; they
use it upon all Occasions to prove that Jesus Christ had the Characters of the
true Messiah, such as David had given him in the CX Psalm, supposing still, as
a thing beyond dispute, that David spoke of the Messiah in this famous Prophecy.

So that what Evasions soever the Jews may endeavor to make use of, yet they
cannot deny but that their most famous Doctors since Jesus Christ, have upon
several Occasions followed the old Notions of the Synagogue in this matter. One
finds in their Writings great numbers of Testimonies which confirm this Truth.
I shall not mention them at present, because they are well enough known, and
because I would make haste to come to that new degree of Revelations which God
gave to those Prophets who gave new Characters of the Messiah to the Jewish
Nation for some Ages after David's time.

They are in too great a number to be spoken of, one by one, and I am forced to
range them under certain Heads; though I intend at the same time to make more
particular Reflections upon some of those which give us an account of the most
remarkable Truths, and so by that means furnish us with the most sensible
Character whereby we may know more certainly the person whom God proposed to
his People in such a manner as the Savior of Israel, and whom he had before
called The Expectation of the Gentiles.

CHAP. XII.
That the Messiah was to have a Forerunner, and what was to be his Character.
WE shall make it manifest in the sequel of the Discourse, That the Messiah was
to appear in a very despicable state, and consequently that his Appearance
would be very distastful to those who expected him in the splendor of a great
King and Conqueror. To oppose this preconceived Opinion of theirs, the Divine
Wisdom thought fit to appoint one to be his Forerunner, who should call the
Jews to Repentance, and a Reformation of their Lives, and form in them a true
Notion of the Ministry of the Messiah, as of a Person who was to prescribe to
them Laws of the greatest purity and holiness. And indeed, in examining the
holy Scriptures, we find, That the Appearance of the Messiah was to be ushered
in by a Person thus distinguished; the following Prophecies are very express to
this purpose.

The first of these we find in the XL of Isaiah, verse 3. where the Prophet
speaks thus, before the Destruction of the first Temple; Isai. XL. 3.
The voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make straight in the Desert a High way for our God. Abenezra.
The Jews acknowledge that this Chapter speaks of the comfort the Messiah was
to procure for his People, and that the Voice mentioned here refers to those
who were to declare and proclaim his Coming.

We meet with a second Prophecy in Malachy, who prophesied after the Rebuilding
of the Temple, and who having shut up the Vision, precisely points at the Time
wherein he was to appear, viz. during the second Temple, Chap. III. verse 1, 2,
3, and 4. Behold, I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me: and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple; even the
Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in, behold he shall come, says the
Lord of Hosts. But who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall stand
when he appears? For he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap. And
he shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver: and he shall purify the Sons
of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord
an Offering in Righteousness.

The Jews own that these words also of Malachy, R. Saad.
speak of the Forerunner of the Messiah.

But we ought to observe in the foregoing Passages, 1. That they have a
manifest Relation to the Time of the Messiah's coming; should the Jews deny
this (as indeed they unanimously acknowledge it) it would be an easy matter to
convince them, 1. By urging the Authority of the Evangelists, who apply these
very Passages to the Ministry of John the Baptist. Thus we find that St.
Matthew and St. Matthew. III. 1 Mark I. 2
Mark make a manifest Allusion to these two Prophecies: Zachary also, the
Father of John the Baptist, applies that of Isaiah to his Son; and his
Authority is the more considerable, because he was a Priest. 2. By an attentive
considering the Passages themselves. 3. By the common consent of the Jewish
Church, who by a generally received and undoubted Tradition, that Elijah the
Tishbite (the Septuagint in their Translation of that place of Malachy telling
us as much) was to be the Forerunner of the Messiah; and we find, that in the
time of our Savior, the Multitude and his Disciples supposed the same thing:
And the Jews at this day have the same persuasion, viz. That Elias is to come
before the Appearance of the Messiah; from which Tradition of the Jews the
Christians of old did, and many at this day do believe, That Elias shall resume
the Functions of his Ministry before the last coming of Jesus Christ to Judge
the Quick and the Dead.

2. We may observe, That the Character of the Forerunner of the Messiah, being
that which the Jews had much in their eye, it was needful for it to be as
notable and extraordinary, as was that of the Prophet Elias; whose Ministry was
without dispute the most remarkable and illustrious of all the Prophets since
Moses; which gave the Prophet Malachy occasion to call him Elias, much upon a
like account as the Prophet Ezekiel calls the Messiah, Ezekiel. XXXIV. 23, 24.
David.

But above all things, we must carefully observe the several Marks the Prophets
give us of this Forerunner.

The Prophet Isaiah gives us these following particulars: 1. That his Ministry
was to be very signal, and attended with general Respect and Veneration. 2.
That he was to preach in the Wilderness. 3. That he was to call Sinners to
Repentance. 4. That he was to confound those who were most eminent in
Authority, and to comfort the Poor and Humble. 5. That he was immediately to
precede the Messiah. 6. That his Ministry was to usher in that grand Revelation
of the Glory of God in the presence of all Flesh, i. e. before all Nations of
the Earth, who were to be called by the Messiah to his Religion, according to
the express Declaration of the Prophets.

The Prophet Malachy does most distinctly represent to us, 1. That the Mission
of this Forerunner was not far off, Behold, says he, I send my Messenger. He
speaks of it as of a thing at the Door. Now it is evident, and the Jews
themselves own it, That from the Time of Malachy, there was never a Prophet
till the Appearance of John the Baptist.

2. It tells us that this Elias was to call Sinners to Repentance, and to
prepare the way before the face of the Lord.

3. That he was immediately to precede the Messiah; this he expresses by
saying, And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the
Angel of the Covenant whom ye delight in. It is evident that he speaks here of
the Messiah, whom he calls, Psalm II.
not only the Angel or Messenger of the Covenant, but also the Lord; The Lord,
forasmuch as God had promised him as a King to the House of David; and the
Angel of the Covenant, because God by him was to make a new Covenant with the
Nations of the Earth, as Jeremy declares Chap. XXXI.

CHAP. XIII.
That the Messiah was to be born before the dissolution of the Jewish State,
and the Destruction of the Second Temple.
THE preceding Mark of the Messiah, leads us to this we are now to speak of,
and affords it considerable Light. I will not repeat here what I have already
set down concerning that Prophecy, Genesis XLIX. verse 10. concerning the Time
when our Savior was to appear in the World: It is evident at first sight, That
that Prophecy evidences Three things: 1. That the Scepter was to be in the
House of Judah, before ever the Shiloh was to come. 2. That the Scepter was to
give way to an inferior Dignity, which the Prophet sets forth by the word
Lawgiver; and which did take place till the time of Zerubbabel, and his
Successors. 3. There was a necessity that this last Dignity also was to come to
an end, which happened not till the Advancement of Herod the Great to the
Throne of Judea. And it is easy to confirm this Truth, by other Oracles which
give a further Light to this our Explication.

We have several that are very remarkable upon this account: The first is that
of Daniel, Chap. II. verse 40, 41, 42, to 46. where he first takes notice of
the Succession of several Monarchies, until that of the Messiah. 2. The Time in
which the Messiah was to appear. I confess he does not determine the Time very
precisely, mentioning only the Monarchy during which he was to be manifested;
but to make amends for this, when he comes to explain the particulars of this
Prophecy, which before he had proposed in general terms; he does not only point
at the time of his Appearance, but the very Year of his Death, and he does it
with that exactness, that it is impossible to be mistaken about it.

See what he says in the IX Chapter of his Revelations, Verse 24, 25, 26, 27.
Seventy weeks are determined upon thy People, and upon thy Holy City, to finish
the Transgression, and to make an end of Sins, and to make Reconciliation for
Iniquity, and to bring in Everlasting Righteousness, and to Seal up the Vision
and Prophecy, and to Anoint the most Holy. Verse 25. Know therefore, and
understand, that from the going forth of the Commandment to restore and build
Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be Seven weeks, and threescore
and two weeks, the Streets shall be built again, and the Wall even in troublous
times. Verse 26. And after the Threescore and two weeks shall MESSIAH be cut
off, but not for himself. And the People of the Prince that shall come, shall
destroy the City and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a Flood,
and unto the end of the War desolations are determined. Verse 27. And he shall
confirm the Covenant with many for one week, and in the midst of the week he
shall cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, and for the over-spreading of
Abomination, he shall make it desolate, even until the Consummation, and that
determined shall be poured on the desolate.

For the understanding of this Prophecy which is so exact, and all the Events
it refers to, so particularized, it is to be observed:

1. That by the Weeks Daniel here speaks of, Seven Years are designed,
according to the Style of the Law, Levit. XXV. 8. when it speaks of the Year of
Jubilee; so that Seventy Weeks make out 490 Years, which is acknowledged by the
most Learned amongst the Jews, Jachiades, Abarbanel, and Manasseh Ben Israel.

2. That the Prophet writing in Chaldea, followed the Account of the Chaldean
Year, which consists of 360 days, as appears clearly from other passages of
this Book, where he resolves the Years into Days, without regarding the several
Days which in a just Calculation were to be intercalated.

3. That the Prophet expresses a certain Epoch, from whence the counting of
these Weeks is to begin, viz. an Order to rebuild the Temple, which cannot be
applied to that of Cyrus, which was in a manner of none effect; nor to the
Edict of Darius Son of Hystaspes, which had regard only to the re-establishing
of the Temple; nor to that of Artaxerxes given to Ezra, in the Seventh Year of
the Reign of that Prince, because that contained only some particular
Privileges for the Ministers of the Temple: but to the Edict which Artaxerxes
granted to Nehemiah in the Twentieth Year of his Reign, which contains a
particular Grant, to rebuild the Temple with its Fortifications.

4. For though there be but 483 Solar Years from the 20 of Artaxerxes to the
first of Cajus Caligula, yet we shall find the just Number of 490 Years, if we
follow the Chaldean way of Calculation, in which they reckon 360 Days to a
Year. And indeed we find just 483 such Years from the 20 Year of Artaxerxes to
the time wherein all Judea was in expectation of the Messiah. It was then Jesus
Christ was baptized. He suffered Death Three Years and a Half after his
Baptism, viz. The Nineteenth Year of Tiberius, before the Seventh Week was
ended, and the Term pointed out by Daniel was expired.

I know that some famous Men begin the Weeks of Daniel, from the Second Year of
Darius Nothus, and make them to end with the Destruction of Jerusalem, which
happend in the Year 490, accounting from the Second Year of the said Darius;
and they conceive themselves obliged thereto, by an Argument, they believe
invincible, because from the Second Year of Darius Nothus to the Thirty Second
of Artaxerxes Mnemon, they find just Forty nine years, that is the Seven Weeks
designed by Daniel for rebuilding of the Ruins, and fortifying of the City; and
the rather because Nehemiah returned to Artaxerxes in the Thirty second Year of
his Reign, having finished that work, Nehemiah XIII. 6. But this Opinion cannot
stand, for these two Reasons which seem to me to be unanswerable: The first is,
Because they suppose that Daniel ends his Seventy Weeks at the Destruction of
Jerusalem, whereas indeed he says no such thing, but expressly tells us that
the Messiah should be cut off in the midst of the Seventieth Week. The second
is, That so, without designing it, they rob Jesus Christ of the Glory, of
having determined the Time of the Destruction of Jerusalem, as if instead of a
Prophecy concerning that Event, he had only given us an Explication of that of
Daniel. Neither will I make any further stop here, to observe, That that which
has given most trouble to Interpreters, has proceeded from the want of making
an exact distribution of the different parts of that Prophecy, which very
distinctly delivers three things: 1. The end of the Prophecy, which happened
after Seven Weeks in the time of Malachy. 2. The Death of the Messiah, which
came to pass in the midst of the last Week of the 490 Years. 3. The Peace which
was to be made in the midst of one Week, that is Three years and an half before
the Destructiof Jerusalem, which was done not by the Messiah, as some have
imagined, but by the Romans who made Peace with the Parthians, Annal. Lib. XV.
as is recorded by Tacitus. An intelligent Reader will easily judge, That this
diversity of Opinions concerning the meaning of this Oracle, has been
occasioned by want of attention to what has been now mentioned.

Now these Observations being supposed, as indeed they are Matters of the
greatest Evidence, it necessarily follows, That the Messiah was to appear
before the Destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. The Time is set down so
precisely by Daniel, as leaves no pretense to doubt of this Truth. And indeed,
though the Jews seem presently after the time of our Savior, to have adopted the
Opinion I mentioned before, as being unwilling to receive the Messiah, and
therefore carried it to the end of the Seventy Weeks, viz. to the Destruction
of their Temple, notwithstanding Daniel expressly tells us, That the Temple was
not to be destroyed till after the Appearance of the Messiah. The Jews, I say,
being convinced by the force of this Argument, have owned that the Messiah was
born at the time of the Destruction of the second Temple, but that he has hid
himself ever since.

The second Oracle concerning the Time of the Coming of the Messiah, is, That
of Haggai, which expressly tells us, that the Messiah was to appear during the
second Temple, which was begun to be built by the Order of Cyrus, finished
under Darius Son of Hystaspes, and destroyed by Vespasian. The Words of the
Prophet are as follows, Chap. II. verse. 7, 8, 9. And I will shake all Nations,
and the desire of all Nations shall come; and I will fill this House with
Glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The Silver is mine, and the Gold is mine, says
the Lord of Hosts. The Glory of this latter House shall be greater than that of
the former says the Lord of Hosts: and in this place will I give Peace, says
the Lord of Hosts. It is worth our noting, 1. That this Oracle promises a very
great change. 2. It describes the Messiah as the Expectation of the Gentiles,
suitable to the Idea God had given of him to Abraham. 3. That it fixes the
Coming of the Messiah to the Time of the second House, that is to say, of the
Temple built by Zorobabel. 4. It makes the Glory of that House to depend upon
its being honored with the presence of the Messiah.

In short, if we would be convinced of this Truth, we need only consider three
things: The first is, That the Prophets Zachariah and Malachy do represent to
us the Coming of the Messiah as near at hand; Balaam had said, almost Ten Ages
before, I see him, but not nigh, which intimated his coming to be then at a
great distance. But Zechariah speaks thus concerning it, Chap. III. verse. 8, 9,
10. Hear now O Joshuah the High Priest, thou and thy Fellows that sit before
thee, for they are men wondered at: Behold, I will bring forth my Servant the
BRANCH; For behold, the Stone that I have laid before Joshua; upon one Stone,
shall be seven Eyes; behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, says the Lord
of Hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that Land in one day. In that day
says the Lord of Hosts, shall ye call every man his Neighbor, under the Vine
and under the Figtree.

Malachy expresses himself, concerning the approaching coming of the Messiah,
thus, ( Chap. III. verse 1.) Behold, I will send my Messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me; and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to
his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in, behold he
shall come says the Lord of Hosts.

One ought to observe two very considerable things in this Prophecy: The first,
That the Messiah was to come suddenly. The second, That Malachy expressly
points to us, that the appearing of the Messiah was to be during the second
Temple; the words of the Prophecy distinctly expressing it.

And sure it is, that all who gave any credit to these Oracles, did understand
them so.

For first, Both Jews and Gentiles looked for the Messiah during the second
Temple. We find a passage express to the purpose in Tacitus; and it was on this
ground that Josephus gave the Title of Messiah to Vespasian.

2. They expected him at the end of the Seventy Weeks, which was the Third Year
after the Death of Jesus Christ. This was the occasion of their being deluded
by so many false Messiah's about the time of our Savior, and a little after.

3. They never despaired of his coming (taking the Promise of the Messiah's
coming to be conditional, when as indeed it was absolute) until they began to
believe that the term set down by God himself was expired.

4. The reason of their cursing those that compute the times set down so
distinctly and precisely by Daniel, was, because they found themselves
disappointed in his Calculation, finding that the time which Daniel had pointed
at for the coming of the Messiah, seemed to be already expired.

5. It Is but of late that they have tried to evade it, by maintaining that the
Temple will be built a third time, and that then the Messiah shall appear; but
this evasion is unanswerably refuted: 1. Because Daniel assigns a certain term
which is expired 1600 Years since. 2. Because he expressly tells us, That the
desolation of the Temple was to be for ever, as will appear in the following
Chapters. And 3dly, Because Haggai in effect calls the Temple of which he
speaks, The second or third House, by which expression he so distinctly points
out the second Temple to us, that it would be ridiculous to suppose it meant,
of a third Temple, to be built 1700 Years after the ruin of that of which he
prophesied.

CHAP. XIV.
That the Messiah was to be born of a Virgin of the House of David.
HItherto we have seen that the Messiah was to be born of the Posterity of
Abraham by Isaac, of that of Isaac by Jacob, and of that of Jacob by Juda. This
has been sufficiently made out already.

I have also showed from the Oracle in the I Sam. Chap. VII. That he was to be
born of the Posterity of David; and we find the same very particularly and
fully set down in the LXXXIX Psalm.

The following Prophets have expressed themselves to the same purpose; Isaiah XI.
verse. 1, 2, 3. and the Prophet Jeremy has pursued the same Idea's, Chap.
XXIII. verse. 5, 6. and Chap. XXXIII. verse. 15, 16, 17.

Neither do the Prophets only distinguish the Messiah by his being born of a
Virgin, but also by determining that Virgin to the House of David. Neither need
I repeat here what I have already observed, That this is a Truth, the Grounds
whereof God had laid down in his first promise, viz. The Seed of the Woman
shall bruise the Serpents head: where he makes mention of the Seed of the Woman
only, without naming that of the Man, the word of Seed or Posterity very
evidently designing a Man to be born of the Woman, which is acknowledged by the
Jews in another Prophecy, and the same which the Apostle St. Paul takes notice
of as a Maxim generally owned by the Doctors of the Synagogue. Galat. III.
It is also evident that the word Woman plainly denotes the Sex of which this
person was immediately to be born.

It was obvious to judge, That something miraculous was to attend the Birth of
the Messiah. We see Isaac born of a barren Mother, past the Age of
Childbearing: We find also something very singular at the Birth of Sampson and
Samuel; and it is well known that the promise of the Messiah was something far
greater than the Birth of these now mentioned, how illustrious soever they
might be; and that therefore probably his Birth was to be attended by a greater
Miracle. But because this was a thing wholly new, we ought to observe in what
manner God did particularly foretell it.

The Prophecy of Isaiah expresses it thus, Chap. VII. verse. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17. Moreover the Lord spoke again unto Ahaz, saying; Ask thee a
sign of the Lord thy God, ask it either in the depth, or in the height above.
But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord. And he said, hear
ye now O house of David, is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye
weary my God also? Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; behold a
Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Butter
and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the Evil, and choose the
Good: for before the Child shall know to refuse the Evil, and choose the Good,
the Land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her Kings. The Lord
shall bring upon thee, upon thy People, and upon thy Father's House, days that
have not come from the day that Ephraim departed from Juda, even the King of
Assyria. Where we may observe,

1. That the Promise here is made to a wicked King, but of the Family of David,
to whom the Prophet particularly addresses himself.

2. That this Prophecy was given at a juncture of time very capable of
awakening their attention to it, at a time when the State of the Jews was
reduced to the greatest extremity, and the House of David in particular in a
very great consternation.

3. The Prophecy was uttered by a very illustrious Prophet, who was of the
Royal Family.

4. It was sealed and confirmed with the Prediction of the Birth of a Child,
which came to pass accordingly.

5. It is set forth as a very extraordinary sign, instead of that which the
wicked King refused to ask, when Isaiah offered it him, in the Name of God.

I am not ignorant that the Modern Jews deny that this Character of being born
of a Virgin belongs to the Messiah: but it is an easy matter to confute them.

For first, Would it not have been ridiculous for the Apostles to go about to
apply this Oracle to their Messiah, if it had not been a thing universally
owned by the Jews, that this was the meaning of Isaiah's Prophecy? Is it not
evident that this Character, so difficult to gain belief, would rather perplex
than strengthen their proofs. And yet certain it is that St. Matthew has done
so, Chap. I. verse 23. as likewise St. Luke, Chap. I. verse 31.

Justin Martyr observed, That the Notion of this Oracle, as we understand it,
has been entertained amongst the Heathens, who built their Fable of Perseus
upon it, whom they pretend to have been born of a Virgin.

3. It appears that all those Laws which I mentioned in my Reflections upon
Exodus, and the following Books, Chap. XX. and which have Relation to the
distinct knowledge of the state of Virginity, receive much light from this
Notion; and are without it altogether useless.

4. It Is evident that the Jews did not dispute this Character, till after they
saw that the Christians applied it to Jesus Christ; and thereupon have fallen
upon such childish Fancies as may justly cover them with Confusion.

But we shall be yet further satisfied hereof, if we add to all these just
Prejudices, only the following Reflections on the terms the Prophet makes use of.

The first is, That the LXX Interpreters have in translating this Prophecy,
made use of a word that signifies a Virgin, and not a young Woman, as the Jews
have understood it since our Savior's time. The first who rejected the
Interpretation of the Septuagint was Symmachus, In Dialog. cum Tryphon.
Tertull. cont. Jud. cap. 9.
who lived in the second Century, as it is observed by Justin Martyr and
Tertullian, who for this reason accuse the Jews of having falsified the Holy
Scripture.

The second is, That the Hebrew word expressly signifies such an one, as
according to the Law of Virgins, was kept under Lock and Key from the Eyes of
Men, according to the custom of the Eastern Nations, and especially of the
Jews, which continues amongst them till this day.

The third is, That this word has been taken by the Africans in the same
signification, as St. Jerome observes.

The fourth is, That the Prophet does set forth this Childbearing as a Prodigy
and Miracle altogether unheard of, and as a particular Character, by which the
House of David was to be strongly confirmed in the hope of seeing the
accomplishment of the Promise which God had made of settling an eternal Kingdom
upon it, which could not be accomplished but by means of the Messiah.

The fifth is, That though some Jews have applied this Prophecy to King Hezekiah,
Raschi in h. l.
which yet to others of them seems very ridiculous, he being Nine years of Age
when the Prophecy was uttered by Isaiah, and themselves never making use of
this Evasion, except in their Disputes against the Christians, and so on this
occasion have dropped a Confession which alone was sufficient to confound them.
Yet it has been a thing so generally received amongst them, That this Prophecy
did respect the Messiah, that after they had applied it to Hezekiah, one of
their most famous Doctors concludes, Gemar in Sanhed. Cap. Chelech.
That they ought to look for no Messiah, since the time of Hezekiah, that
Prophecy having had its accomplishment in him; an Opinion which those that
succeeded him have rejected with the greatest abhorrence.

The sixth is, That the Title of Immanuel, given to this Son, whose Birth is
here promised, is represented to us Chap. VIII. as the Name of him who was Lord
of the Land, which is a true Representation of the Heir promised to David, to
whom David said, O God, thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness
above thy Fellows. Psalm. XLV. 7, 8.

The seventh is; That the Prophet Isaiah having alleged and cited two
Witnesses, Uriah the Son of Shemaiah, a Prophet, who was put to death by
Jehoiakim, and Zechariah the Son of Jeberechiah; the former of which lived long
after Ahaz, and the latter since the Captivity, under Darius King of Persia,
according to the account the Jews themselves give of them, he sufficiently
hints by this Circumstance, That the Prophecy concerning the Birth of the
Immanuel he speaks of, was to be fulfilled many Ages after, and not in that Age
wherein he prophecies.

CHAP. XV.
That the Messiah was to be born at Bethlehem of the Family of David, which at
that time was reduced to a private state.
GOD had not only pointed out the time in which the Messiah was to appear, with
the miraculous Manner and Circumstances of his Birth; but he had also named the
Family, the Place, with the State and Condition of the Family in which he was
to be born, as a triple Character by which he might be known.

I say, first, That according to the Divine Oracles, the Messiah was to be born
of the Family of David, as will appear if we consider the following Oracles.

1. God expressly promises as much to David, II Sam. Chap. VII. a place I have
quoted before, which proves that the Messiah was to be born of the Family of
David.

2. It appears that David believed this himself, from Psalm CXXXII. verse. 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18. The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, he
will not turn from it; of the fruit of thy Body will I set upon thy Throne. And
after having said, Verse 12. That if his Children would keep his Covenant, that
their Children also should sit upon his Throne for evermore. And this because
(Verse. 13 and 14.) the Lord had chosen Zion, and desired it for his habitation,
etc. and promised Verse 15. That he would abundantly bless her Provision, and
satisfy her Poor with Bread; that he would Verse 16. Clothe her Priests with
Salvation, and make her Saints shout for joy. He subjoyns Verse. 17 and 18.
There I will make the horn of David to bud, I have ordained a Lamp for mine
Anointed. His Enemies I will clothe with shame, but upon himself shall his
Crown flourish. It is very evident, That by this Horn of David is to be meant a
King, the Messiah, whom he distinguishes by that Expression from all the rest
of David's Children. And Zachariah in his Song of Praise, Luke I. verse 69.
applying it to our Savior, puts the Matter out of all doubt.

3. Hence it was the Prophets took occasion to give to the Messiah the Name of
David. So Ezekiel. XXXIV. verse. 23, 24. And I will set up one Shepherd over them,
and he shall feed them, even my Servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall
be their Shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and my Servant David a
Prince among them, I the Lord have spoken it.

4. The Jews are, and have always been firm in this persuasion, grounded on the
foresaid and other like places of Scripture, which they constantly refer to the
Messiah.

I say in the second place, That the Divine Oracles expressly point out
Bethlehem for the Birthplace of the Messiah. Micah the V. Verse 2. But thou
Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out
of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in Israel; whose
goings forth have been from of old, from the days of Eternity.

The Jews acknowledge that this Oracle speaks of the Messiah; and indeed the
Prophet distinguishing by Bethlehem adding the word Ephratah (whence the Family
of David was) from that Bethlehem which belonged to another Tribe, makes it
apparent that nothing could be spoke more distinctly to determine the
Birthplace of the Messiah. Besides, we find that all the Jewish Rabbis and
Priests agree in this, That the Messiah was to be born at Bethlehem, when being
consulted by Herod about this Matter, they declared this to be their Sense,
grounded upon the forementioned place of Micah, Matthew II. verse. 4, 5, 6.

In the third place, it appears that the Messiah was to be born in an abject,
contemptible, and weak condition, and very different from the greatness of the
Kings of Judah. Indeed, should we only have our eye on II Sam. Chap. VII. and
Psalm CXXXII. it would be natural enough to think the contrary; but Micah's
Oracle sufficiently refutes them; for how great things soever the Prophet there
speaks of the Messiah, whether as to his Divine Nature, by declaring that his
Goings forth were from the days of Eternity; or to the Majesty and Glory of his
Empire; yet however he gives us a different Idea, inducing us to conceive of
him, as of one that was to be born in the state of a private Person; for why
else is his Birth determined, not to Zion, which was the Place and Seat of the
Empire of Judah, but to Bethlehem, a Town where the Family of David lived,
whilst they were private Persons, except for this cause, to make us conceive
that the Messiah was not to be born in that place where the Family of David
possessed the Empire: but in a Condition far distant from the Glory of Kings,
and in a place where the House of David was contemptible, and of very small
esteem.

The same is hinted to us by Isaiah, in his XI Chapter, v. 1. where he calls
the Messiah a Rod, or shoot of the stem of Jesse. Now Jesse was not King, but a
private Person. And on the same account it is that the Prophet describes him,
Chap. LIII. as having no form or comeliness.

The Prophet Zachary also, Chap. IX. verse 9. represents him, not as King,
sitting on the Throne in Zion; but as riding to Jerusalem on an Ass; and he
gives him the Title of Lowly, which signifies as well a mean Condition, as the
virtue of Humility.

But in short, this is very considerable; 1. That those who acknowledged Jesus
to be the Messiah, thought they had the greatest reason so to do, because they
acknowledged him to be the Son of David.

2. That those who denied him that Title, thought themselves sufficiently
justified in so doing, by esteeming him a Nazarene; as concluding he could not
be the Son of David, if he were born at Nazareth, as they supposed.

3. The Evangelists precisely tell us, That Christ was born at Bethlehem, of
the Lineage of David, reduced to a very obscure Condition; and so making this
one of the chief Characters which spoke him to be the Messiah.

CHAP. XVI.
That the Messiah was to work great Miracles, for the establishing of his
Mission, and of the Truth of his Doctrine.
HEre is another Character which is very particular, and whereby the Messiah
might be certainly known, viz. That he was to work great Miracles for the
confirmation of his Mission and of his Doctrine.

This appears, as I have already hinted, 1. From the conformity which the
Messiah was to have with Moses, in being the Founder of a new Religious
Society, and in proposing a new Doctrine to Men; upon which account there lay
upon him the same Obligation, as upon Moses, to support his Authority by
Miracles, that even in this he might not be inferior to him.

2. One may gather this also from the Title of Prophet, and great Prophet,
which are applicable to the Messiah; it being difficult to conceive, That God
who vouchsafed the Glory of doing Miracles to most of the Prophets, though they
were barely sent to foretell the Coming of the Messiah, and to give an account
of him, should have denied the same Glory and the same Power to the Messiah
himself, of whom all the Prophets were but the Forerunners.

Besides, it is easy to judge from the mean and contemptible state wherein the
Messiah was to appear, That this Glory of doing Miracles was of absolute
necessity to give him Authority and Respect: for since he was to be born in an
obscure Condition, and not in Royal Grandeur, it is evident that the Gift of
Miracles was needful to make him known, and counterbalance that low and
opprobrious Condition in which he was to appear in the World.

But this particularly appears from an express Oracle which God gave upon this
very Subject, in Isaiah XXXV. verse. 3, 4, 5, and 6. Strengthen ye the weak
hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Say to them of a fearful heart, be strong,
fear not; behold your God will come with vengeance, even God with a Recompense;
he will come and save you. Then the eyes of the Blind shall be opened, and the
ears of the Deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the Lame man leap as an Heart,
and the tongue of the Dumb sing: for in the Wilderness shall waters break out,
and streams in the Desert. Which Oracle very fully expresses the Power of
Miracles wherewith our Savior was to be dignified, in curing all manner of
Diseases, of which the Prophet has named some only, to give us a Specimen of
the rest; and it seems as if the Prophet had chosen these four sorts before all
others, because throughout the whole Scripture we do not find that ever any
Prophet did the like, that so the Character of the Messiah might be particular
in his Miracles too.

It is also worth our noting, in giving a Character of the Messiah, First, That
even those who rejected Jesus Christ, yet did at the same time suppose that the
Messiah when he came, was to work Miracles. Therefore it is that we hear some
of them saying to Christ, What sign do thou? and others maintaining that
Moses had wrought greater Wonders than Jesus Christ, in giving them Bread from
Heaven, and feeding them miraculously for the space of Forty Years; whilst
others affirmed, That none could work greater Wonders than he wrought: When the
Messiah shall come, will he do greater Wonders than this Man?

Secondly, One ought to observe that Jesus Christ alleges this Oracle of the
Prophet Isaiah, taking it for granted that the accomplishment thereof was most
visibly evident in the Miracles which he wrought, as appears from the Answer he
gave to the Messengers of John the Baptist.

Thirdly, It is also observable, That those who were willing to flatter the
vanity of the Emperor Vespasian (whom Josephus endeavored to raise to a
belief that he was the Messiah, because he had been proclaimed in the East,
applying to that purpose the words of Micah, misapplyed, Chap. V. Verse 2.
Whose goings forth are from the East) were not wanting to attribute to him the
Glory of doing Miracles, and such as Isaiah ascribes to the Messiah, by
attributing to him the cure of one that was Blind, and another that was Lame at
Alexandria. He that would know the Particulars, may consult Tacitus his History.

And last of all we ought to observe, That the Jews do not only agree that this
Oracle of Isaiah refers to the Messiah; but they also still propose the Power
of working Miracles, as a Character which would render the Messiah very
illustrious, and certainly known.

CHAP. XVII.
That the Messiah was to be an illustrious Prophet.
THis Truth I have already asserted in the Reflections I made on the Prophecy of
Moses, Deuteronomy. XVIII. But one ought to explain this Character of the Messiah more
particularly, God having been pleased further to illustrate this Oracle of
Moses.

First then, We say that the word Messiah implies Anointing, which was common
to Kings, Prophets, and Priests; and since David's time, we find nothing more
common than this Title in the Books of the Old Testament: where we may observe
that Moses was dignified with this Gift of Prophecy; and that Samuel
communicated the same to Saul and David, when he anointed them to be Kings.
Yea, the Jews to this day are of opinion, that Elias the Prophet shall anoint
the Messiah; that is, initiate him in his Prophetical, as well as his Royal
Function.

Secondly, God more precisely signifies this, Isai. XI. Verse. 1, 2, and 3.
where he declares he would communicate all the necessary Gifts of the
Prophetical Function to the Messiah. There shall come forth a Rod out of the
stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his Roots. And the Spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the Fear of the Lord. So
that he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the
hearing of his ears.

These words need no Commentary: For the Jews refer them constantly to the
Messiah, and they plainly import that he was to be a great Prophet, forasmuch
as all the Characters which are there given to the Spirit which was to rest on
the Messiah, are the same which in the Old Testament we find attributed to the
Prophets, and may easily be taken notice of in the History of the Prophets,
especially of David and Solomon.

And much to the same purpose is that passage Isai. XLII. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, and 7. Behold my Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul
delights: I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the
Gentiles. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the
street. A bruised Reed shall he not break, and the smoking Flax shall he not
quench; he shall bring forth Judgment unto Truth. He shall not fail nor be
discouraged till he have set Judgment in the Earth, and the Isles shall wait
for his Law. Thus says God the Lord, he that created the Heavens, and
stretched them out; he that spread forth the Earth, and that which comes out
of it: he that gives breath to the People upon it, and spirit to them that
walk therein. I the Lord have called thee in Righteousness, and will hold
thine, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a
Light of the Gentiles: to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from
the prison, and them that sit in darkness, out of the prison house. In which
Oracle one ought to take notice particularly of those things which the Jews
apply to the Messiah.

1. That God proposes the Gifts of the Spirit, which he bestowed upon him as an
Effect of his Love, and the choice he had made of him.

2. That the Messiah was to make use of the same, as Rules for reforming the
Country, and propounding Gods Covenant to the Gentiles; which clearly suppose
the necessity of the Gift of Prophecy to qualify him for such great
Undertakings.

3. That contrary to the thundering Character which distinguished the rest of
the Prophets, who were as so many public Censors; the Messiah was to speak
with all meekness and sweetness to the Nations which should receive his
Preaching.

One see's that Isaiah repeats the same Idea's, Chap. LXI. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, and 7. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed
me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind-up the broken
hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to
them that are bound. To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day
of Vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn: to appoint unto them that
mourn in Zion, to give unto them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning,
the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness; that they might be called
Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified.
And they shall build the old Wastes, they shall raise up the former Desolations,
and they shall repair the waste Cities, the Desolations of many Generations.
And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of the Alien shall
be your Plowmen, and your Vine dressers. But ye shall be named the Priests of
the Lord, men shall call you the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the riches
of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast your selves. For your shame
ye shall have double, and for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion:
therefore in their Land they shall possess the double; everlasting joy shall be
upon them.

In short, he represents in this and the former Oracle, the Gentiles as a
People being in darkness, and in the misery of a Prison; from whence we may
easily infer, First, That the Messiah was to be a Prophet, how vile and abject
soever that Character might appear in the eyes of the World, as I have showed
that it was, where I spoke of the Prophets in general. Secondly, That he was to
discharge these Functions during the whole course of his Life, and that it was
to be his chief Employment here upon Earth.

David had before signified, Psalm XXII. verse 22. that the Messiah was to
declare the Name of God unto his Brethren, viz. the Jews, by exercising his
Prophetical Function in Judea; but the Holy Spirit did something more when he
seemed to point out Galilee as the place where this Sacred Doctor was chiefly
to fix his abode.

This is in effect insinuated, when God tells us that he was to begin his
Ministerial Functions in the Tribes of Naphtali and Zebulon. Isai. IX. verse. 1,
2, and 3. Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation,
when at the first he lightly afflicted the Land of Zebulon, and the Land of
Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of the Sea,
beyond Jordan in Galilee of the Nations. The people that walked in darkness
have seen a great light, they that dwell in the land of the shadow of Death,
upon them has the light shined. Thou have multiplied the Nation, thou have
increased the joy: they joy before thee according to the joy in Harvest, and as
men rejoice when they divide the spoil.

I shall afterward take notice, That the time of the Messiah was to be
distinguished by an incredible abundance of Spiritual Gifts: and so this shall
suffice at present to prove that the Messiah was to be a very great Prophet.

CHAP. XVIII.
That the Messiah was to propound a new Covenant from God with all men.
THis is a Truth which is easily gathered, 1. Because all Nations, before they
could be made partakers of the Blessing of God by the Messiah (according to the
promise made to Abraham) were first to be received into the Covenant. 2. From
the nature of that Covenant it self, of which Moses was the Mediator, the end
of which was, to separate the Jews from other Nations, some of which were not
capable of being received amongst them, till after several Generations, whereas
they were to be made partakers of this Blessing by the Messiah. 3. Because in
effect all the Ceremonial Law, was only added to the Moral, as it were contrary
to God's principal intention, and only upon occasion of the Jews worshipping
the Golden Calf, as St. Gal. 3.19.
Paul observes in the Third Chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians.

Besides, it appears that God at diverse times had given sufficient hints
concerning this.

1. He had proposed a new Priesthood of the Messiah, which was to abolish the
Levitical Priesthood; and this is the more remarkable, forasmuch as David who
pronounced that Oracle, Psalm CX. was he who first formed the design of
building the Temple, to which all the Levitical Service was annexed.

2. We find him rejecting in some sort the Levitical Ministry, after he had
despised it in comparison of the Spiritual Worship. Psalm XL. verse. 6.
Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened;
Burnt-offering and Sin-offering have thou not required. And Psalm L. verse. 8,
9, 10. I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, or thy Burnt-offerings which
have been continually before me. I will take no Bullocks out of thine House,
nor He-goats out of thy Folds; for every Beast of the Forest is mine, and the
Cattle upon a thousand Hills. And Psalm LI. verse 17. he tells us that the
Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; in opposition to the Sacrifices which
the Law prescribed, and to signify their imperfection; the Law having
appointed none for the expiation of Murder or Adultery.

Isaiah follows David, Chap. 1. verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15. To what purpose
is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? I am full of the
Burnt-offerings of Rams, and the fat of fed Beasts: and I delight not in the
blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He-goats. When you come to appear before
me, who has required this at your hands to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain
Oblations, Incense is an abomination unto me, the new Moons and Sabbaths, the
calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with, it is iniquity even the solemn
meeting. Your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates; they are a
trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. And when you spread forth your hands,
I will hide mine eyes from you; yea when ye make many prayers, I will not hear,
your hands are full of blood. And Jeremiah speaks much to the same purpose,
Chap. VII. v. 21, 22, and 23.

But besides, God directly promises this new Covenant by Isaiah, Chap. XLII.
verse. 6, 7. I the Lord have called thee in Righteousness, and will hold thine
hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a
Light of the Gentiles. To open the blind eyes, to bring out the Prisoners from
the Prison, and them that sit in Darkness from the Prison house.

It is natural to observe, That in this place, where God speaks of the Messiah,
as the Jews themselves confess, he expressly declares two things: 1. That the
Messiah should be a Covenant of the People, that is, that he should mediate a
Covenant between God and the People. 2. That the fruit of this Covenant was to
extend to the Gentiles, which plainly implies that it was not the old Covenant,
forasmuch as from it several were excluded.

The same Covenant is also mentioned, Chap. XLIX. verse. 8, 9. Thus says the
Lord, in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I
helped thee, and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the
People, to establish the Earth, to cause to inherit the desolate Heritages.
That thou may say to the Prisoners go forth; to them that are in darkness
show your selves, they shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in
all High Places.

He pursues the same Notion, Chap. LV. verse. 3, 4. Incline your ear and come
unto me, hear and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you, the sure mercies of David. Behold, I have given him for a Witness to
the People, a Leader and Commander to the People. Than which, nothing can be
more particular.

And to the same purpose he speaks, Chap. LXI. verse. 8, 9. For I the Lord love
Judgment, I hate robbery for Burnt-offering, and I will direct their work in
truth, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with them. And their Seed shall
be known among the Gentiles, and their Offspring among the people; all that
see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the Seed which the Lord has
blessed.

It is as clear as the day, That God in these Oracles promises an irrevocable
Covenant, because he calls it an Everlasting Covenant in opposition to the
former. He takes notice also in the same Book, That the said Covenant was to be
propounded in the midst of the Nations, and that then that Blessing of God
should be known according to the ancient Oracles, which was promised
universally to all Nations.

This is that which God more particularly explains afterward, by the voice and
pen of a Prophet who was of the order of Priests, thereby to prevent all sorts
of Exceptions.

Jeremiah in effect speaks to the same purpose, Chap. XXXI. verse. 31, 32, 33,
34, 35, and 36. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not according
to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the day that I took them by
the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt (which my Covenant they brake,
although I were a husband to them, says the Lord:) But this shall be the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days says the
Lord; I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their heart, and
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more
every man his Neighbor saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from
the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: for I will forgive
their iniquity, and I will remember their Sin no more. Thus says the Lord
which gives the Sun for a light by day, and the Ordinances of the Moon and
Stars for a light by night, which divides the Sea when the waves thereof roar,
the Lord of Hosts is his name. If those Ordinances depart from before me, says
the Lord, then the Seed of Israel also shall cease from being a Nation before
me for ever.

Nothing can be desired more particular than this Oracle; 1. It tells us that
God would make a new Covenant with his People, which supposes an abolishing of
the former. 2. That this Covenant was not to be like the foregoing. 3. That the
old Covenant had been made vain, and had been broken by those with whom it was
made. 4. That this Covenant was to be made after those days, that is in the
time of the Messiah. 5. That this new Covenant was not to be engraven in Tables
of Stone, but in their Hearts. 6. That in the same Covenant full Remission of
Sin is promised.

The same thing is also expressed, Chap. XXXII. verse. 40. And I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from
me. And Chap. L. verse. 5. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward, saying, Come and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant, that shall not be forgotten.

To this purpose also Ezechiel, who himself was a Priest, speaks of a Religious
Worship extended to all Nations, and of a new Covenant which God was to make
with them, Chap. XVI. verse. 60, 61, 62. Nevertheless I will remember my
Covenant with thee, in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an
everlasting Covenant. Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed when
thou shall receive thy Sisters, thy elder and thy younger, and I will give them
unto thee for Daughters, but not by thy Covenant. And I will establish my
Covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord.

Here is first, a Covenant differing from the former. 2. A Covenant wherein
other Nations were to be included, clearly intimated by the elder and younger
Sisters of the Synagogue. 3. A Covenant whereby the Gentiles were to enjoy the
same Privileges with the Jews, and be incorporated with them.

Malachy follows the steps of these Prophets, when he calls the Messiah the
Angel of the Covenant, Chap. III. verse. 1. Behold, I will send my Messenger,
and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord whom ye seek shall
suddenly come to his Temple; even the Messenger (Angel) of the Covenant, whom
ye delight in, behold he shall come says the Lord of Hosts. I know very well
that the Jews apply these words to Elias, whose Ministry, as they pretend, was
to consist in leading the Jews to Repentance. But if we read the Text with
attention, we shall find two Messengers mentioned; the first who prepare the
way of the Messiah; and the other is the Messiah himself, who is called the
Angel of the Covenant, as being sent of God to make a new Covenant with men.

CHAP. XIX.
That the Jews, by a dreadful effect of their blindness, were to reject the
Messiah.
THis is a very peculiar Mark which will guide us surely to the knowledge of
the Messiah. We find the Jews at this day very ready to follow every one that
usurps that August Title, and to take him for the only true Messiah that was
promised them; which is no other than what was infallibly to come to pass.

Neither will this much surprise us, if we consider, 1. That this People, on
diverse occasions, have given very strange instances of a prodigious blindness:
We see them reject Moses, notwithstanding God had authorized his Call by great
and avowed Miracles. Yea, we find them rejecting David also, whom God had so
signally appointed to be their King, and the Father of the Messiah, of whom we
hear these Prophecies.

2. That God upbraids them with this blindness by his Prophets, as a sin to
which they were peculiarly inclined; as appears from Psalm LXIX. verse. 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, and 28. Let their eyes be darkened that they see not, and make their
Loins continually to shake. Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy
wrathful anger take hold of them. Let their habitation be desolate, and let
none dwell in their Tents: for they persecute him whom thou have smitten, and
they talk to the grief of those whom thou have wounded. Add iniquity to their
iniquity; and let them not come into thy Righteousness. Let them be blotted out
of the Book of the Living, and not be written with the Righteous.

One see's the same thing in Isaiah, Chap. VI. verse. 9, 10, 11, and 12. where
the Spirit of God foretells that the Jews should shut their eyes against the
most evident and convincing proofs imaginable. Go, says the Lord to the
Prophet, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye
indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their heart and convert, and be healed. Then said I,
Lord how long? And he answered, until the Cities be wasted without inhabitant,
and the houses without man, and the Land be utterly desolate: and the Lord have
removed men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the Land.

Nothing can be imagined more particular than this Oracle concerning the Jews
resisting the Prophet, which God expresses in terms very usual amongst the
Prophets, as if Isaiah, who was only the foreteller of their being hardened,
should himself be the cause of it.

The Prophet Hoseah describes the very same Complaints of God against the Jews
for their blindness and ignorance, for which he denounces their destruction.
Hos. IV. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of
Israel, for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land,
because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land. By
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they
break out, and blood touches blood. Therefore shall the Land mourn, and every
one that dwells therein shall languish, with the Beasts of the Field, and
with the Fowls of Heaven, yea the Fishes of the Sea also shall be taken away.
Yet let no man strive or reprove another; for thy people are as they that
strive with the Priest. Therefore shall thou fall in the day, and the Prophet
also shall fall with thee in the night, and I will destroy thy Mother. My
people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou have rejected
knowledge I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me; seeing
thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.

The Prophet Jeremy speaks to the same purpose, Chap. V. verse. 21, 22, and 23.
Hear now this O foolish people, and without understanding, which have eyes and
see not, which have ears and hear not. Fear ye not me says the Lord? Will ye
not tremble at my presence, who have placed the Sand for the bound of the Sea,
by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass it, and though the waves thereof toss
themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass
over it? But this people has a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are
revolted and gone. And he reiterates the same, Chap. VIII. verse. 7. The stork
in the Heavens knows her appointed times; and the Turtle and the Crane and
the Swallow, observe the time of their coming: but my people know not the
Judgment of the Lord.

Ezechiel prosecutes the same matter, Chap. II. verse. 5, and 8. calling the
Jews a Rebellious House. And Chap. XII. verse. 1, and 2. he says, The word of
the Lord came unto me saying, Son of Man thou dwell in the midst of a
rebellious House, who have eyes to see, and see not, they have ears to hear,
and hear not, for they are a rebellious House.

Neither do the Prophets only represent to us in general the blindness of the
Jews upon several occasions, but they also very particularly inform us, that he
who was the most considerable person of their State, and the great Minister of
God, should be notwithstanding rejected by them.

And here, first, It is worth our noting that Moses threatens the worst of
Calamities to those who should refuse to hear the great Prophet, like unto him
whom God was to raise to his People, Deuteronomy. XVIII. verse. 18.

Secondly, David, Psalm CXVIII. v. 22. expresses this in these words, The Stone
which the Builders refused is become the Head of the Corner. From which words
it is evident, 1. That the Messiah was to be rejected. 2. That he was to be
rejected by those who were entrusted with the care of building the House. 3.
That this was to be before he should be acknowledged the great Minister of
Heaven.

God speaks the same thing by Isaiah, Chap. XXVIII. verse. 6. Behold, I lay in
Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation, he that believes shall not make haste. Which place is to be
understood of the Messiah by the Confession of the Jews themselves.

Daniel follows the same Notion, Chap. II. verse. 34, 35. Thou saw till a
stone was cut out without hands, which smote the Image upon his feet, and brake
them to pieces: and the stone became a great Mountain, and filled the Earth.

On all which Prophecies we may make these Remarks; 1. That Jesus Christ quotes
most of them, as such which by the Jews themselves were owned to refer to the
Messiah. Thus Matt. XXI. verse 42. he says, Did ye never read in the
Scriptures, the Stone which the Builders rejected, the same is become the Head
of the Corner. And St. Peter, Acts IV. verse. 11. This is the stone which was
set at naught by you builders, which is become the head of the corner. St. Paul
makes the same allusion, Ephesians. II. verse. 20. And are built on the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone. And I Cor. III. verse 11. For other foundation can no man lay, than that
is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And when Jesus Christ himself says to Peter,
Matthew. XVI. verse 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church, etc. He alludes to that of Daniel; Then was the Iron, the Clay, the
Brass, the Silver, and the Gold broken to pieces together, and became like the
Chaff of the Summer threshing floors, and the wind carried them away, that no
place was found for them: and the Stone which smote the Image became a great
Mountain, and filled the whole Earth.

Our Savior applies also to the Jews those Prophecies which foretell their
being offended at the Ministers of Heaven, in particular that of Isaiah, Chap.
VI. verse 9. Go and tell this people, hear ye indeed, but understand not, and
see ye indeed, but perceive not.

2. We may observe that the Jews of old applied those Prophecies (as the
Apostles did) to the hardening of their own Nation, as appears from that of St.
Paul, Romans X. verse 21. But to Israel he says, all the day long I have
stretched forth my hand unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.

3. We must take notice, That the same temper which was in the ancient Jews,
who rejected the Prophets, was found in those who lived at the time of our
Savior; and for this we need only to read the description which Josephus de
Bello Judaico, Lib. VII. cap. 3. gives of them, where he compares them with the
Sodomites, which is the Comparison Isaiah makes Chap. I. verse 10.

And last of all we may take notice, That Josephus acknowledges that this
Blindness of the Jews was the cause of the final destruction of Jerusalem,
which was to succeed the Death of the Messiah, according to the express Oracle
of Daniel, Chap. IX. verse 26.

CHAP. XX.
That the Messiah was to dye; and an Account of the several Circumstances of
his Death.
TO be convinced of this Truth, we need only prove that what is set down in
Psalm XXII. Isaiah LIII. Daniel IX. and Zachariah XIII. and other prophetical
passages of Holy Scripture, is to be understood of the Messiah; and the reading
of them alone is sufficient to satisfy the meanest Capacity, that the person
they point at was to lose his life by violence, with several very infamous
Circumstances.

Now it is certain that both ancient and modern Jews interpret these places of
the Messiah; and it is as evident that the Apostles understood them so; and
therefore all along applied them to Jesus Christ, following therein the known
explications of the Rabbis of their own Nation.

It is plain also, That the Death and Suffering of our Savior would have
proved a more efficaci ous Argument to refute the Apostles, than all the
Miracles of Jesus Christ could have been to establish their Doctrine, if the
Prophetical Writings had not so precisely determined his Sufferings and Death,
with the several Circumstances of them.

It is also to be noted, That the Prophecies referring to the Death of the
Messiah, are generally interwoven with Idea's which point to other Prophetical
passages avowedly owned by the Jews to have Relation to the Messiah. Thus if we
compare Psalm XXII. verse 28. with Psalm LXXII. verse. 8, 9. we shall find the
same Idea set forth in them both.

And because this Character was to be the most proper and distinguishing note
of the Messiah, forasmuch as none with pleasure do precipitate themselves into
Death, or are Masters of the Manner and Circumstances of it, therefore God
caused the same to be expressed by the Prophets with the greatest plainness and
exactness possible.

It cannot be denied but that some of the Prophets have been very cruelly
persecuted, and that some of them have died in the midst of Torments: But
concerning the Death of Christ, we have many more particulars, viz.

1. That he was to be forsaken by his own Friends, Psalm XXII. verse 11. Be not
far from me for trouble is near; for there is none to help. And Psalm LXIX.
verse 11. I made Sackcloth also my Garment, and I became a Proverb to them. And
verse 20. Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness; and I
looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I
found none.

2. That he was to be exposed to all manner of reproachful usage. Psalm XXII.
verse. 6, 7, and 8. But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised
of the people. All they that see me laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip,
they shake the head, saying, he trusted in the Lord that he would deliver him;
let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him. And Psalm LXIX. verse. 1, 2, 3,
4. Save me, O God, for the waters are come in unto my Soul. I sink in deep
mire, where there is no standing; I am come into deep waters, where the floods
overflow me. I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried, mine eyes fail while
I wait for my God. They that hate me without cause are more than the hairs of
my head, they that would destroy me, being my Enemies wrongfully, are mighty.

The same is represented to us Isaiah LIII. verse. 4, 5. Surely he has born our
griefs and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God
and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was braised for
our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed.

They take notice that he should be beaten and abused, as appears from Isaiah
LIII. verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. He is despised and rejected of men, a man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief, and we hid, as it were our faces from him;
he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he has born our grifs, he was
wounded for our transgressions, etc. The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he
is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearer, is
dumb, so he opens not his mouth. He was cut off from the Land of the Living,
for the transgression of my people was he stricken.

4. They declare that he should be sold. Zach. II. verse. 12, and 13. And I said
unto them, if ye think good, give me my price, and if not forbear: so they
weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. And the Lord said unto me, cast
it unto the potter; a goodly price that I was prized at of them. And I took the
thirty pieces of silver and cast them to the potter, in the House of the Lord.

5. They make mention of his being condemned by the Jews and Heathens. Psalm
II. verse 2. The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel
together, against the Lord and against his Anointed. And Psalm XXII. verse 16.
For Dogs have compassed me, the Assembly of the wicked have enclosed me; they
pierced my hands and my feet. And Psalm LXIX. verse 12. They that sit in the
Gate speak against me, and I was the Song of the Drunkards. And Isaiah LIII.
verse 8. He was taken from Prison and from Judgment, and who shall declare his
Generation; for he was cut off from the Land of the Living, for the
transgression of my people was he stricken.

6. They specify his Death on the Cross. Psalm XXII. verse 16. They pierced my
hands and my feet. And Zach. XII. verse 10. And they shall look upon me whom
they have pierced.

7. They intimate his dying between Thieves. Isaiah LIII. verse 12. Therefore
will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with
the strong; because he has poured out his Soul unto Death, and was numbered with
Transgressors.

8. They take notice of his being mocked before his Death. Psalm XXII. verse. 6,
7, 8. But I am a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the
people. All they that see me laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the lip, they
shake the head, etc. And Psalm LXIX. verse. 17, 18, 19. Hide not thy face from
thy servant, for I am in trouble, hear me speedily. Draw night unto my soul,
and redeem it: deliver me because of mine Enemies. Thou have known my reproach,
my shame, and my dishonor: mine Adversaries are all before thee.

9. That they who put him to death should divide his Garments. Psalm XXII.
verse 18. They part my Garments amongst them, and cast lots upon my Vesture.

10. That the Messiah should complain that God had forsaken him in the hands of
his Enemies. Psalm XXII. verse. 1, 2. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring. O my
God, I cry in the day time, and thou hear not; and in the night season am
not silent.

11. That they would give him Vinegar and Gall to drink. Psalm LXIX. verse 21.
They gave me also Gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to
drink.

12. They set before our eyes the manner of his death on the Cross. Psalm XXII.
verse. 14, 15, 16, 17. I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of
joint: my heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels. My
strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws; and
thou have brought me into the dust of death. For Dogs have compassed me, the
Assembly of the wicked have enclosed me; they pierced my hands and my feet. I
may tell all my bones, they look and stare upon me. And Isaiah LIII. verse. 7,
8, 9.

13. That not one of his Bones should be broken. Psalm XXXIV. verse 20. He
keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken.

14. That he was to be buried in the Sepulcher of a rich man. Isaiah LIII.
verse 9. He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death,
because he had done no violence, neither was deceit found in his mouth.

We may make these following Reflections on the foregoing Oracles.

1. That here are many very different Events and Circumstances, all meeting in
the same end.

2. That many of these Passages that might be questioned whether they were
particularly applicable to the Messiah, are joined with such hints, as can no
way agree with the Prophet; that uttered them. Thus we find that in the XXII
Psalm, there are many Expressions which cannot be applied to David.

3. That most of these Prophecies are avowedly attributed to the Messiah by the
most ancient Authors of the Synagogue. And the modern Jews themselves refer
them to some that suffered a violent Death, as to Rabbi Akiba, who died in the
second Century.

4. That the Apostles unanimously applied them to Jesus Christ, the true
Messiah, following therein the general consent of their Nation.

CHAP. XXI.
That the Messiah was soon after to rise again.
FOrasmuch as Death entered into the World by Sin, and that the Messiah was to
take it away, we may easily conceive, That if the Messiah were according to the
Divine disposal, to submit to Death, that he could not long continue subject to
it. He who was to restore life to those who were dead, could never be confined
and imprisoned in a Grave: and he who was superior to Enoch and Elias, who
ascended into Heaven, because he alone was exalted to the right hand of God, to
reign there for ever, as the Prophecies concerning him assure us, ought
certainly to leave his Sepulcher by a glorious Resurrection.

And this we are positively assured of by the ancient Oracles. Psalm XVI. verse.
10, 11. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell; neither will thou suffer thine
holy One to see corruption. Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence
is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. And to
assure us that these and the like passages are applicable to none but the
Messiah, we find in the same Psalms expressions too high to be applied to the
Authors themselves: As for example, Psalm. XXX. verse. 1, 2, 3. I will extol
thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me up, and have not made my foes to rejoice
over me. O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me. O Lord thou
have brought up my soul from the Grave, thou have kept me alive that I should
not go down to the pit. And Psalm XLI. verse. 8, 9, 10. An evil disease, say
they, cleaves fast unto him, and now that he lies, he shall rise up no more.
Yea, mine own familiar Friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread,
has lift up his heel against me. But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and
raise me up, that I may requite them. And Psalm XLIX. verse 15. But God will
redeem my soul from the power of the Grave, for he shall receive me. Psalm LVI.
verse. 11, 12, 13. In God have I put my trust, I will not be afraid what man can
do unto me. Thy Vows are upon me, O God, I will render praise unto thee. For
thou have delivered my soul from death, etc. Psalm LXXII. verse 20. Thou who
have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall bring
me up again from the depths of the Earth. Psalm CXLIII. verse. 11, 12. Quicken
me, O Lord, for thy names sake, for thy righteousness sake bring my soul out of
trouble: and of thy mercy cut off mine Enemies, and destroy all them that
afflict my soul, for I am thy Servant.

Hosea speaks to the same purpose Chap. XIII. verse. 14. I will ransom them from
the power of the Grave, I will redeem them from death. O Death, I will be thy
plagues; O Grave, I will be thy destruction: Repentance shall be hid from mine
eyes.

Isaiah expresses the very same thing Chap. XXV. verse. 8. He will swallow up
death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and
the rebuke of his people shall he take from off all the Earth; for the Lord
has spoken it. And yet more expressly Chap. LIII. verse. 10, and 11. Yet it
pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief; when thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his days,
and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.

For the better understanding of which passages, we are to observe, 1. That the
Messiah in many or most of them, compriseth all Believers with himself,
according to that Maxim of the Jews, who attribute to the Messiah the greatest
of all the Prophets, whatsoever God vouchsafed to any one of the Prophets; and
according to this Principle Jesus Christ speaks Matthew. XII. verse. 39, 40. An
evil and adulterous Generation seeks after a sign, and there shall no sign be
given to it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonah. For as Jonah was three days and
three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the Son of Man be three days and
three nights in the heart of the Earth.

2. That upon this account the Messiah is represented to us, not as rising
again alone, but as making all his Brethren partakers of the same glory; which
makes the Prophets speak of him, not as a single person, but in common with
others, who by him are made possessors of the same advantages.

3. That most of these Texts were quoted by the Apostles, who in so doing
followed the sense of the whole Nation, as appears from Acts II. verse. 24, 25,
26, 27, 28, and 29. Whom God has raised, having loosed the pains of death:
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. For David speaks
concerning him; I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is at my right
hand that I should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue
was glad: moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope: because thou will not
leave my soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy One to see Corruption.
Thou have made known to me the ways of life: thou shall make me full of joy
with thy Countenance. Men and Brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the
Patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his Sepulcher is with us
unto this day. And Acts XIII. verse. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37. But God
raised him from the dead. And he was seen many days of them which came up with
him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the people. And we
declare unto you glad tidings, how that the Promise which was made unto the
Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us their Children, in that he has
raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. And as concerning that he raised him up
from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I
will give you the sure mercies of David. Wherefore he says also in another
Psalm, Thou shall not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. For David, after
he had served his own Generation, by the will of God fell asleep, and was
gathered to his Fathers, and saw corruption. But he whom God raised again saw
no corruption.

In like manner we find St. Paul alluding to that of Hosea XIII. verse. 14. in I
Cor. XV. verse. 55. O Death where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory?

CHAP. XXII.
That the Messiah was to ascend into Heaven, and send down from thence the
miraculous Gifts of Prophecy, Languages, etc.
THis was a thing which might rationally enough be expected; Deuteronomy. XVIII. 18.
for the Messiah being to resemble Moses, who had not only the Gifts of the
Holy Spirit himself, but also in a manner communicated the same to the Heads of
the Congregation of Israel: it was reasonable to infer, That the Messiah was to
receive much more eminent Gifts, and to communicate them to far greater numbers.

But besides this, God had expressly promised it by David, Psalm CX. verse. 1, 2.
where he represents the Messiah sitting at the right hand of God. The Lord said
unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy
footstool. The Lord shall send the Rod of thy strength out of Zion: Rule thou
in the midst of thine Enemies.

It is worth our noting, that Daniel represents to us the same Notion where he
speaks of the Kingdom of the Messiah, Chap. VII. verse. 13, 14. I saw in the
night visions, and behold one like the Son of Man, came with the Clouds of
Heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him near before him.
And there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People,
Nations and Languages should serve him: his Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed. Where does God dwell, unless in Heaven?

David expresses himself in term; which import something too great to be
applied to the Symbolical Ark of the Covenant, Psalm XXIV. verse. 7, 8, 9. Lift
up your heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting Doors, and the King
of Glory shall come in. Who is this King of Glory? the Lord strong and mighty,
the Lord mighty in Battle, etc.

He speaks further of the glorious Kingdom of the Messiah, Psalm XLV. verse. 5,
6, 7. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies; whereby the
people fall under thee. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever: the Scepter of
thy Kingdom is a right Scepter. Thou love righteousness and hate
wickedness, therefore God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of Gladness
above thy fellows. It Is evident that David addresses himself there to the
Messiah, because he styles him a God anointed above his Fellows. And he pursues
the same Idea, Psalm LXVIII. verse. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have
led captivity captive; thou have received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious
also; that the Lord God might dwell amongst them. Nothing can be imagined more
express than these words, which lively represent to us the Ascension of the
Messiah, and the pouring forth of Prophetical Gifts, to bring the Heathens to
the Service of God.

Isaiah speaks the same Chap. XLIV. verse. 3. For I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy
Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring. The waters here spoken of,
according to the ordinary style of the Prophets, are nothing else but the
Graces of God's Spirit.

Joel expresses himself very plainly in this matter, Chap. II. verse. 28, 29,
30, 31, 32. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out of my
Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, your
old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. And also upon the
servants, and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my Spirit. And I
will show wonders in the Heavens and in the Earth, blood and fire and pillars
of smoke. The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood,
before the great and terrible Day of the Lord come. And it shall come to pass
that whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in
Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and
in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.

Nothing can be conceived more particular than this Oracle, concerning the
effusion of the Prophetical Gifts upon the Servants of the Messiah, after his
Ascension. For 1. he clearly hints at the several ways of Prophecy, which shall
be bestowed upon the Subjects of the Messiah. 2. That this great Event was to
be before the Destruction of Jerusalem, which St. Peter foretells as a thing at
the Door, Acts II. verse. 30, 31, 32. after he had showed that the wonderful
effusion of the Spirit at Pentecost, was a litteral accomplishing of the
Prophecy of Joel, he adds, Therefore being a Prophet, and knowing that God had
sworn with an Oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the
flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne: he seeing this before,
spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that his Soul was not left in Hell,
neither his Flesh did see Corruption. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we
all are witnesses.

Ezechiel goes on with the same views with Joel, Chap. XXXVI. verse. 26, and 27.
A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart
of flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. And Chap. XXXIX. verse
29. Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured out my
Spirit upon the House of Israel, says the Lord God.

And Zachariah agrees with both the foregoing Prophets, Chap. XII. verse 10.
And I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
the Spirit of Grace and of Supplications; and they shall look upon him whom
they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only
Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
Firstborn.

It Is obvious to make these following Observations upon these Oracles.

1. That the Messiah was to be raised above the reach of any of his Enemies

2. That he was to ascend to Heaven, and to be instated there in Glory, in
order to his being dignified and glorified above all Nations.

3. That he was from thence to send down Prophetical Graces plentifully, which
made his entrance into Heaven a kind of Triumph.

4. That this great Event was to precede the destruction of Jerusalem, to which
the Prophet Joel in the forecited place seems to allude. The Messiah was to
form a new Society, which was to be regulated, not by the Laws given on Mount
Sinai, but by those which were to be published from Mount Zion.

CHAP. XXIII.
That the Gentiles in the time of the Messiah were to be called to the
Knowledge of the true God,
THis Article being one of the most important and most visible Characters of
the Times of the Messiah, and also the great effect of his Ministry, we see
that God had a particular care to divulge the same by a multitude of
Prophetical Representations of it.

For not only had he declared that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the
Serpents head; Genesis III. 15.
that is, the Works of the Devil. And we cannot deny, but that the Errors and
Idolatries of the Gentiles, and their Vices which arise from thence, were the
Fruits of Sin, which this unhappy Spirit brought into the World. It was not
only foretold that God would persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Sem, Genesis
IX. 27.
by uniting the Posterities of both those Patriarchs in one and the same
Religion. Not only had he signified that the Messiah should reign over the
Children of Seth, that is over all the Posterity of Noah, the Offspring of
Cham not excepted. Not only had he foretold that all Nations, Kindreds, Genesis
XII. and Chapter XVIII. and XXII.
and Families should be blessed in the Messiah.

But God went much further afterward, for as the Light of the Revelation
increased, so the same was declared more distinctly. For,

1. The Patriarch Jacob tells that the Messiah should be the desire and
expectation of all Nations. Genesis XLIX. verse 10. The Scepter shall not depart
from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto
him shall the gathering of the people be.

2. Moses threatens the Jews, that if they despised the Law of God, Strangers,
that is Gentiles, should be preferred before them. Deuteronomy. XXVIII. verse 43. The
Stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very high; and thou shall
come down very low. The same Prophet menaceth them from God, that he would stir
up their jealousy, by calling a foolish people to his Service and Worship.
Deuteronomy. XXXII. verse 21. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not
God, they have provoked me to anger with their vanities, and I will move them
to jealousy with those which are not a people, I will provoke them to anger
with a foolish Nation. Nothing can be said more express and particular than
these last words of that great Law giver and Founder of the State of the Jews.

3. David sets forth the Empire of the Messiah, as that which was to reach over
all the Earth. Psalm II. verse 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen
for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession.
And Psalm XXII. verse 27, 28, 29, 30. All the ends of the World shall remember
and turn unto the Lord; and all the Kingdoms of the Nations shall worship
before thee. For the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor amongst the
Nations. All they that be fat upon the Earth, shall eat and worship; all they
that go down to the dust shall bow before him. A Seed shall serve him, it shall
be accounted to the Lord for a Generation. Psalm LXXII. verse. 8, 9, 10, 11. He
shall have Dominion from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the ends of the
Earth. They that dwell in the Wilderness shall bow before him; and his Enemies
shall lick the dust. The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring
presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer Gifts. Yea all Kings shall
fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him. Which Prophecy is the more
remarkable, because the Promise made to Abraham is there repeated in so many
words, viz. That all Nations of the Earth should be blessed in the Messiah.
Psalm-CII. verse 15. So the Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, and all
the Kings of the Earth thy Glory. And Psalm CX. verse 2. The Lord shall send
the Rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine Enemies.
One ought to transcribe almost the whole Book of Psalms, to take notice of all
the passages which are to this purpose.

The Prophet Hosea declares in general terms, That it was not an impossible
thing for those who had been God's people to cease to be so; or for those that
were not his people to become his people; Chap. I. verse 10. Yet the number of
the Children of Israel shall be as the Sand of the Sea, which cannot be
measured or numbered; and it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was
said unto them, ye are not my people, there it shall be said unto them, ye are
the Sons of the living God.

Isaiah mentions this so often, and in such an emphatical manner, that it seems
to be the main thing he drives at in all his Writings, Chap. II. verse 2, 3. he
speaks thus: And it shall come to pass in the last days that the Mountain of
the Lord's House shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be
exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. And many people
shall go and say, come ye and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the
House of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk
in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. And Chap. XI. verse 10. In that day there shall be a Root of
Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles
seek. And Chap. XVIII. verse 7. he makes a manifest allusion to the expectation
of all Nations: In Chap. XLII. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. he repeats the same thing;
Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights; I will
put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles. He shall
not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets. A bruised
Reed shall he not break, and the smoking Flax shall he not quench, he shall
bring forth Judgment unto the Earth; and the Isles shall wait for his Law.
Chap. LV. verse. 4, 5. Behold I have given thee for a witness of the people, a
Leader and a Commander to the people. Behold, thou shall call a Nation that
thou know not, and Nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee, because
of the Lord thy God, and for the holy One of Israel, for he has glorified
thee. But one see's these Truths in their greatest luster in the LX Chap. of
his Prophecies, verse. 3, 4, 5. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings
to the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; all
they gather themselves together, they come to thee, thy sons shall come from
far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shall see and
shine, and thine heart shall fear and be enlarged, because the abundance of the
Sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto
thee. And Chap. LXII. verse. 2. The Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and
all Kings thy glory: and thou shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of
the Lord shall name. And verse. 11, and 12. Behold, the Lord has proclaimed
unto the ends of the World, say ye to the daughter of Zion, behold thy
salvation comes; behold his reward is with him, and his work is before him.
And they shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord; and thou
shall be called, Sought out, a City not forsaken. And Chap. LXV. verse. 1. I am
sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them that sought me not: I
said behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my Name. And
Chap. LXVI. verse 18. It shall come to pass, that I will gather all Nations and
Tongues, and they shall come and see my Glory.

Amos (who was contemporary with Isaiah) speaks the same thing, Chap. IX. verse.
11, 12. In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David which is fallen,
and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his ruins, and I will
build it, as in the days of old. That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and
of all the Heathen, which are called by my Name, says the Lord which does this.

The Prophet Micah also follows the Prophet Isaiah step by step, Mich. IV.
verse. 1, 2, 3. But in the lasts days it shall come to pass, that the Mountain
of the House of the Lord shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and
it shall be exalted above the Hills, and people shall flow unto it. And many
Nations shall come and say, Come and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord,
and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we
will walk in his paths: for the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong
Nations afar off, and they shall beat their Swords into Plow shares, and their
Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn war any more.

Zephaniah is as clear as any of the rest, Chap. II. verse. 11. They shall
worship him, every one from his place, even all the Isles of the Heathen. And
Chap. III. verse. 9, 10. Then will I turn to the people a pure Language, that
they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.
From beyond the Rivers of Ethiopia, my Suppliants, the daughter of my dispersed
shall bring mine offering.

Jeremiah in the Fourth Chapter of his Prophecies, verse. 2. confirms the same
Truth; as likewise Chap. XVI. verse. 19. and more expressly Chap. XXXI. verse 34.
And they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his
Brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least of
them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord.

After the return of the Captivity, we find that the Prophets still pursued the
same Idea's. Haggai II. verse. 7, 8. And I will shake all Nations, and the
desire of all Nations shall come: and I will fill this House with Glory says
the Lord of Hosts. The Silver is mine, and the Gold is mine, says the Lord of
Hosts.

Zechariah speaks in like manner, Chap. II. verse. 10, 11. Sing and rejoice, O
daughter of Zion; for lo I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, says
the Lord. And many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall
be my people; and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shall know that
the Lord of Hosts has sent me unto thee. And Chap. VIII. verse. 20, 21, 22.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, it shall yet come to pass, that there shall come
people, and the inhabitants of many Cities: and the inhabitants of one City
shall go to another, saying; Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to
seek the Lord of Hosts, I will go also. Yea, many People and strong Nations
shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.
And Chap. XI. verse. 10. he expresses the same thing more distinctly. And I will
cut off the Chariot from Ephraim, and the Horse from Jerusalem, and the Battle
bow shall be cut off, and he shall speak peace unto the Heathen, and his
Dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the ends of the
Earth.

Malachi speaks to the same purpose with the greatest clearness imaginable,
Chap. I. verse. 10, 11. Who is there among you that shuts the doors, or kindles
fire on mine Altar for naught? I have no pleasure in you says the Lord of
Hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand: for from the rising of
the Sun, even unto the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure
offering: for my Name shall be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts.

On all which passages one may make these Observations:

1. That all this whole Series of Idea's has as much connection to one another,
as the words of those Oracles have which we have now alleged.

2. That these Prophets have set it forth with all its possible Characters, by
the Original of these People, calling them the Children of Seth, by their
Countries, Egypt, Assyria, the East and West; by their Idolatry, by their
Aversion to the Jews, their Ignorance, etc.

3. That these Prophecies were generally understood by the Jews of old, of the
Calling of the Gentiles, as appears from the use the Apostles made of them when
they preached to the Gentiles.

4. That forasmuch as God had ordered Proselytes to be received into the Jewish
Communion, he seemed thereby to have hinted to them, that what he had enjoined
them as to particulars, ought with much more reason to be practiced in general
to all the Nations of the World, and ought also to be universally desired.

5. That the Modern Jews themselves constantly believed, that the Messiah
should lead the Gentiles to Repentance. So Kimchi, Moses Maimonides, and many
other Authors, since the Talmudists.

6. That the Opinion which the Jews have entertained, That the Messiah, as a
great Conqueror, was to subdue the Nations, proceeds only from the sense of
the Oppression they have been, and still are, under, which makes them so
earnestly desire a temporal deliverance from the power of the Gentiles, by
means of the Messiah: and the pompous expression of some of the Prophets, have
strengthened this belief in them; though they cannot deny but that the same
Prophetical passages do imply that the Messiah was to subject the Gentiles by
the way of instruction.

CHAP. XXIV.
That the Jews were to be rejected in the time of the Messiah.
THere are three things which make this particular very considerable.

The first is, That it seems altogether opposite to the Design of God, who was
entered into Covenant with the Jews, excluding all other Nations of the Earth.

The second is, That nothing ever was a greater Scandal to the Jews than the
thoughts of a possibility that God should ever cast off their Nation.

3. The third is, That the Rejection of the Jews, seemed less possible in the
time of the Messiah, than at any other time: The Messiah being, according to
their persuasion, to procure the salvation of the Jews in the first place, and
before other Nations were made partakers of those Blessings which he brought
along with him.

And it was upon this Account, that God has forgot nothing which might make
those Oracles that relate to the Rejection of the Jews, in the time of the
Messiah, very sensible.

The chief Privileges which made the Jews consider themselves, as God's
peculiar People, were these.

1. God himself was in a peculiar manner their King and Sovereign; which gave
Josephus occasion to call their State a Theocracy.

2. Their Religious Service did wholly depend upon God; who had instituted
their Order of Priesthood.

3. God had placed them in a Country by themselves, and separated them from all
other Nations.

4. God had given them the Urim and Thummim, which gave them an infallible
Resolution in all important Cases happening to their State; which was an
evident Mark of the Divine Presence and Direction.

5. God gave them particular Marks of his Blessing, the extraordinary
Fruitfulness which continually ushered in their Sabbatical Year; the Security
which they enjoyed during their three Solemn Feasts; and above all, the
Deliverers which he from time to time raised up for them, their Fourteen Judges
and Kings.

And God also threatened them with evils opposite to these Blessings; and all
this is denounced against them step by step.

1. He declares that he would no longer be their God.

2. That he would abolish and reject their order of Priesthood, which was
accordingly executed by degrees.

3. That he would turn them out of their own Country, without recovery.

4. That they should have no more Prophets or Revelations.

5. That he would take away from them all the Marks of his Protection. The
passages expressing these several particulars are here subjoined, which may be
easily ranged under the foregoing Heads, that we may understand the better that
God has plainly foretold the Rejection of the Jews at the time of the Messiah.

1. Moses then threatens them with a terrible Desolation, Deuteronomy. XXVIII. verse.
28, 29. The Lord shall smite thee with madness and blindness, and astonishment
of heart: And thou shall grope at Noon day, as the blind gropeth in darkness,
and thou shall not prosper in thy ways, and thou shall be only oppressed and
spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee.

Manasseh acknowledges that God in this passage foretells, not only their first
Desolation under Nebuchadnezzar, but also that which happened under Titus
Vespasian. The Eagle mentioned at the 49th: verse of that Chapter, being not
only applicable to Nebuchadnezzar, whom Ezechiel, Chap. XVII. represents under
that Notion, but more particularly to the Roman Emperor Titus, whose Eagles
gave a literal accomplishment to that Prophecy.

This makes it evident, That at the same time when God threatens them with
their first Desolation, he also denounces to them the last; and that
consequently we may apply those passages to the second Rejection of the Jews,
which were spoken of the first.

2. Hosea expresses the same in his first, second, and third Chapters, where
he particularly fortels their being deprived of the Royal Dignity, Priesthood
and Prophecy.

3. Isaiah speaks to the same purpose in. his first, second, and fifth
Chapters, as also Chap. XXVIII. XLII, L, and LXVI. and in his XXV Chapter he
speaks as if no Restoration was to be expected.

4. Amos represents the same thing, Chap. V. verse. 16, 17, and 21, 22.
Therefore the Lord the God of Hosts, the Lord says thus; wailing shall be in
all streets, and they shall say in all the Highways, Alas! alas! and they
shall call the Husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful of Lamentation
to wailing. And in all Vineyards shall be wailing; for I will pass through thee
says the Lord. I hate, I despise your Feast-days; and I will not smell in your
solemn Assemblies: though ye offer me Burnt-offerings and your Meat offerings,
I will not accept them, neither will I regard the Peace Offerings of your fat
Beasts. Where he hints that their Desolation shall be without recovery.

5. Jeremiah is very express in Chap. V, VI, and X. verse 11. where he declares
that their Destruction should be without remedy: as also Chap. XII. and XXXI.

6. Daniel follows their steps, Chap. IX. verse. 25, 26, 27. where he directly
points at the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the Temple. The words are these;
Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the Commandment, to
restore and build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks,
and threescore and two weeks the street shall be built again, and the wall,
even in troublous times. And after the threescore and two weeks shall MESSIAH
be cut off, but not for himself: and the people of the Prince that shall come,
shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a
flood, and unto the end of the War Desolations are determined. It Is worth our
observing, That Josephus the Historian a little after the Destruction of
Jerusalem, Antiq. Lib. X.
acknowledges that this Prophecy of Daniel did expressly foretell the ruin of the
Temple of Jerusalem, and of the Jewish Government, by the Arms of the Roman
Empire, which himself was an Eyewitness of.

7. Zechariah speaks after the same manner, Chap. XI. verse. 9. Then said I, I
will not feed you, that that dies, let it die; and that that is to be cut off,
let it be cut off; and let the rest eat, every one the flesh of another.

8. And Malachi follows these common Idea's, Chap. I. verse. 10, and 11. Who is
there among you that shuts the doors for naught? Neither do ye kindle fire on
mine Altar for naught. I have no pleasure in you says the Lord of Hosts,
neither will I accept an Offering at your hand. For from the rising of the Sun,
even unto the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure
Offering; for my Name shall be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts.

I cannot conceive how any that consider the succession of these Idea's, so
interwoven one with another, can have the least doubt whether the Jews were to
be rejected at the Coming of the Messiah, or no; especially since the Apostles
and St. Paul in particular have made it appear, that the Prophets so plainly
did foretell this Truth.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the time which succeeded the publishing of these Prophecies, till the
Coming of the Messiah.
THus we have seen an Abridgment of the most remarkable Oracles uttered, either
by God himself, or by Prophets, whom he made use of to declare his Designs. I
might easily have alleged a far greater number, but I chose rather to content
my self with these, to avoid the Confusion which the multiplicity of Citations
is apt to occasion. And I question not but these I have mentioned, will suffice
to give us an Idea of God's promise concerning the Messiah sufficiently great,
and enable us to make a Judgment, whether that which the Christians declare to
have been the accomplishment of it, be so indeed.

In the mean time, for the further clearing of this matter, I desire the Reader
to make some Reflections on the whole Matter, which seem to me to deserve a
serious attention.

The first is, That God has by degrees put an end to those Divisions that were
between some other Nations and the Jews, founded on their hopes of the Promise
of the Messiah, as the time of its accomplishment drew near.

We hear little now of the enmity of the Ishmaelites against the Jews; God
having placed them in the Desert of Paran, they have indeed continued there in
a manner invincible, but also without any great communication with their
Neighbor Nations.

As for the Moabites and Ammonites, they had their Kingdoms on the Borders of
the Holy Land, and continued there till the time of Nebuchadnezzar, since which
we find little mention made of them, as being in a manner wholly confounded
with other Nations; only we meet with some few Memorials of the Ammonites,
whose pretensions to that promise were the weaker of the two, as being the
Posterity of Lot's younger Daughter.

It is worth our observing, That most of the Prophecies of David, as well as of
the following Prophets, which thunder forth such terrible Denunciations against
the pride of those people, threatening them with the Curse of God and final
Destruction, seem to have an eye to the old quarrel and jealousy, their State
quarrel which happened afterward, succeeding to this their first Aversion, and
hatred of the Jews.

The State and Government of the Edomites, as well as their jealousy against
Israel, continued till after Cyrus, who granted them the Liberty of returning
to their own Country, as well as to the Jews, who had been carried away
Captives with them by Nebuchadnezzar; but contrary to the hope they had of
being re-established to their former Estate, we find, that according to the
Prophecy of Malachy, they continued in Bondage to their Neighbors, yea to the
Jews themselves, until Herod the Edomite possessing himself of the Throne of
Judea, was probably flattered by those of his own Nation, and by some Jews
also, into a belief of his being the promised Messiah.

We must also take notice, That the Divine Providence seems to have continued
this people so long, on purpose that the Spirit of Jealousy, which was between
them and the Jews, might preserve the Notion of the promised Messiah more fresh
and lively, and to engage men to a more attentive consideration of the
Prophecies concerning the same; and that God by confounding them afterward
with other Nations, intended wholly to take away their pretensions, the Service
which before they rendered to the Jewish Church, being no longer needful, after
so clear and distinct a Revelation.

This Reflection will be owned to be more than a Conjecture, if we consider
God's dealing with the Ten Tribes: God suffers them to be carried away Captives
by Salmanassar, leaving only the Tribes of Judah, Levi, and Benjamin to be
afterward the Depositaries of the Divine Oracles.

The second is, That as it appears that God has kept some distance of time in
his Revelation, that the authority of the Prophets might be fully and firmly
established, which, as I have observed, was done by the accomplishment of some
Prophecies, respecting some particular Matters of Fact near at hand; so it
pleased God for above Four hundred years, to leave the Jews without the light
of Prophecy; because that which he had given them till Malachy's time, was
sufficient to make them know the Messiah, when he should appear in the World.

The third is, That this Cessation of the Gifts of Prophecy among the Jews, did
serve to increase their desires for the Coming of the Messiah, in whose days
those Gifts (which were the peculiar Glory of their Nation) were to be restored
in far greater abundance, than had ever been granted to them before.

A fourth Reflection which is well worth our attentive consideration, is, That
God so ordered it in his Providence, that all the Books of the Old Testament
were translated into the Greek about One hundred years after Malachy, that they
might be communicated to all Nations, the Greek Tongue being at that time, and
indeed ever since the Reign of Alexander the Great, a Language the most known
and generally spoken in the World, he having with his power carried it into the
South and East.

It is natural to conceive, that the Divine Providence hereby designed these
Three things:

First, To establish and confirm the Authority of those Divine Oracles, by
delivering them into the hands of the Heathen, by the public Authority of the
Jewish Nation, at the desire of a King of Egypt.

Secondly, To prevent cavilling about the explication of those Oracles. Thus,
for instance, we see there is no place left to dispute the Translation of that
Prophecy, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, seeing the LXX Interpreters, who were
Jews, have rendered it so themselves, some Ages before any Contests were started
about it between the Jews and Christians.

The third was, To prepare and dispose the Heathen for receiving the Religion
of the Messiah.

And indeed we may easily comprehend, 1. That it was necessary that the
Prophetical Writings should be communicated to the Heathen, in order to their
ready submitting themselves to the Authority of the Messiah, whom they knew by
those Characters which had been given of him. 2. That it was not fitting that
the Heathen should wholly depend on the Authority of the Jews, forasmuch as the
same Divine Oracles do expressly affirm, That the Messiah was to be rejected by
the greatest part of them.

I shall conclude these Reflections with a short view of the State of the
Commonwealth and Religion of the Jews, since the last of the Prophets.

First, One finds that this Government subsisted as distinct from all other
Nations of the Earth, as ever it did before: we see the Honor wherewith
Alexander the Great treated their High Priest, and that when he was appointed
Arbitrator of the difference between them and the Samaritans, he determined the
Matter in favor of the Jews.

One see's that Alexander preserved them in the Enjoyment of their Rights and
Liberties, as they enjoyed them under the Kings of Persia; and in particular
exempted them from paying any Tribute every seventh year, because then they did
not sow their Ground, and consequently could not reap.

And if we find that Ptolemy took Jerusalem on a Sabbath day, the Jews making
Conscience of defending themselves, because the Law required their ceasing from
all work; from whence Agatharcides an Heathen Author takes occasion to blame
their Law; if we find him carrying a great number of Jews with him into Egypt,
yet withal we find him treating them with as much kindness as the Macedonians
themselves, appointing distinct places in Egypt and Lybia for their Habitation.

If we find that powerful Princes, such as Antiochus Epiphanes, and some others
of his Successors, broke the power of the Jews, profaned their Temple, and
forced great numbers of them to abjure their Religion; yet we see them also at
the same time, giving the highest instances of an immovable constancy and
courage in defense of their Law, and in enduring the most exquisite Tortures;
we see others of them, encouraged with the love of their Country, as well as
Religion, putting themselves into a posture of defense, purifying the Temple,
and celebrating a Festival which is observed even at this day, and lastly
obtaining favorable Treaties at the hands of their Enemies; as may be seen in
the Books of the Maccabees, and in the Twelfth Book of Josephus his
Antiquities: yea, we find their name and glory at that time spread as far as
Lacaedemon, with which Commonwealth they made an Alliance during the
High Priesthood of Onias.

One see's them after this so considerable, under the Successor of Antiochus
their Persecutor, that even those Kings sue for their Alliance with great
presents.

One see's that Ptolomy Philometor granted to Onias the Son, leave to build a
Temple in Egypt, for the convenience of those Jews whom Ptolomy the Son of
Lagus had carried thither; as well as for those who left their Country for the
oppression of the Seleucidae; for Judea being situate between Syria and Egypt,
was ordinarily the Theater of War between those two States. It Is here worth our
noting, That the Jews undertook the building of the Temple in Egypt, as
thinking themselves authorized by that Prophecy Isai. XIX. 24. it being a thing
otherwise forbid by the Law.

One sees in the same Prince's Reign a great contest between the Samaritans and
the Jews about the pre-eminence of their Temples, at Jerusalem and Mount
Garizim, decided by him in favor of the Jews: on which occasion the Jews
showed that Prince their Law, and acquainted him with the Series of their
History, to confute the Samaritans pretensions.

One see's after this, when the Jews had conferred the Sovereignty and
High Priesthood on Simon, that their State became so powerful, that under
Hyrcanus his Successor they were in a condition to attacque their Enemies in
Syria, and compel the Edomites to admit Circumcision: Aristobulus his Son was
crowned, his Brother succeeded him in the Royal Dignity, and left the State in
a flourishing condition, notwithstanding the Civil and Foreign Wars he was
engaged in.

We find afterward, That the intestine Divisions among the Successors of those
Jewish Princes, did by degrees open a gap for foreign power to enter and
prevail over them, Pompey siding with Hyrcanus took Jerusalem, and made the
Jews tributary to the Romans, but without changing any thing in their Religion.

Julius Caesar a while after bestowed the Kingdom of Judaea upon Herod the
Edomite. Augustus after him used the Jews with the same Equity as Pompey before
him had done, as appears from one of his Declarations published in favor of
the Jews of Egypt and Asia, recorded by Josephus. This Herod and Augustus are
the same under whom our Savior Jesus Christ was born.

It is evident therefore, That the State of the Jews has continued distinct
from other Nations, and sufficiently known from the time of the Prophet
Malachy, until Herod.

We may also truly assert, That whatever inclination the Jews of old had, for
the Idolatries of their Neighbors, yet we don't find them given that way
during this interval, between the last of their Prophets and Herod, as if the
charge and command of that Prophet Malachy had always sounded in their Ears,
Mal. IV. verse 4. Remember the Law of Moses my Servant, etc.

One see's that the Jews under the Maccabees, in great numbers suffered
Martyrdom, rather than abjure their Religion; and that they observed the
Ceremonial Law with all carefulness, of which Augustus himself was witness.

One see's that under Strangers and Heathen Kings they exempted themselves from
answering any Suit at Law on the Sabbath day, from paying Tribute the seventh
Year, and preserving the Rights and Privileges of their Temple in spite of
all opposition. Lastly, one finds them, during Herod's Government, supported by
the favor of the Roman Empire, in refusing to set up the Emperor's Trophies,
for fear least some Images might be hid under them, which they looked upon as a
Crime against their Law.

I am not ignorant, that since Malachy, some Heresies sprung up among the Jews,
their Commerce with the Greeks (who applied themselves to Philosophical
Speculations) having contributed to make them much more Disputacious than they
were before. The Authority likewise of their Kings, who were Highpriests also,
may have had a great stroke in blemishing the Purity of their Religion.

But yet the Disputes which we find amongst them, as that of the Fatality of
Events, did not at all touch the Substance of their Religion.

They no sooner found the Spirit of Epicurisme to creep in amongst them, but
they framed such additions to their public Liturgy, as they thought most
proper to eradicate, or at least condemn that Corruption.

I confess also, that the Pharisees and Doctors of their Law had greatly
altered their Morality, in making their own Explications (by the great
Authority which they had amongst the People) to pass for Authentic: but yet
this change and corruption in their Morals, as to practice, did not go so far
as to abolish the Laws themselves, which were only wrested from their true
meaning. This was indeed a great Corruption, but not such a one as could make
it to be no more the same Religion.

So that we may boldly assert (which is a thing very important to our present
purpose) That the State and Religion of the Jews have continued sufficiently
entire till the time of the appearing of the Messiah in the World, for their
preserving of whatsoever was necessary, viz. as well the Books of the Old
Testament, as the knowledge of those Oracles which foretold the coming of the
Messiah, together with the Knowledge of these Principles, according to which
the Prophets have spoken in their Predictions concerning him.

REFLECTIONS Upon the BOOKS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, To Confirm the TRUTH OF THE
CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

THE PREFACE.
I Have shown in my Reflections upon the Book of Genesis, That the Facts of the
Creation, and the Promises of the Messiah, are Truths not to be questioned, and
that the Idea's of this Messiah continued vigorously all the time that preceded
the Children of Israel's going out of Egypt.

We have seen afterward in the Remarks which I have made upon the Laws which
God gave to Moses, that it was the great design of God to keep men in the
expectation of this Messiah, and to take care that they might certainly know
him whenever he should appear in the World.

I have taken notice in the third part of these Reflections of the care which
God took to give a great number of Oracles to explain particularly all the
Characters of this Messiah, the Place and Manner of his Birth, the principal
Circumstances of his Life, Death, and Resurrection, and to foretell the Effusion
of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost upon the Gentiles, their Call to the Religion of
the Messiah, and lastly, the overthrow of the whole Model of the Jewish
Religion and Commonwealth, which was no longer of any use after the Coming of
the Messiah, and the Calling of the Gentiles.

My present business is now to show, That in the Books of the New Testament we
may find an exact accomplishment of this whole Design, wherein God had with so
much care instructed the World so long before, and there is nothing more easy,
if we will but take a little pains to read these Books attentively, and to
compare them with the Model which God himself made, as we have hitherto
described it.

To make this Truth yet more evident, I think it will be necessary to do two or
three things which seem to be very important for my present Design.

And first, I am to observe that there appears a most perfect Coherence between
the Idea's of the Old Testament and those of the New, which is absolutely
necessary to show that there is in these Books a perfect unity of Design,
notwithstanding the vast difference there is between the Jews who preserve the
Old Testament, and the Christians who preserve the New.

Secondly, I am to demonstrate that the Idea's of the Messiah were very strong
in the minds of the Jews at the very time that Jesus Christ appeared in the
World.

This was absolutely necessary, that they might not have wherewith to accuse
those who received Christ for the Messiah, of being deceived in their choice,
for not having had the exact Idea's of the Messiah which God had promised.

I shall upon this account show in the third place, That when Jesus Christ did
appear in the World, the Model which God had framed in the Law of Moses,
whereby the Messiah might be plainly known, did then subsist in the manner
wherein God had framed it.

After this I shall endeavor to show by prooss, which are indeed
unquestionable, That in examining all the Characters which the Prophets gave,
by which the Messiah might be known; we cannot conceive a more exact execution
of God's Design as to the Messiah, than that which we find in the Person of
Jesus Christ, whereof the Books of the New Testament have given us the History.

Lastly, I shall show clearly that this Model which God had framed in giving
the Law and in forming the Commonwealth and Religion of the Jews in so proper
a manner, to make the Messiah certainly known, is not in being at this day; but
that it was so destroyed by the total Dispersion of that People, that we should
not be able to know the Messiah if he should now appear again in the World. And
that indeed the principal Events, which according to the Oracles were to follow
the Coming of the Messiah, are already come to pass in part, and do still come
to pass every day.

I hope to evince these Truths beyond all contest; Indeed the bare reading of
the Books of the New Testament plainly discovers the Coherence which they have
with the Books of the Old. It shows clearly that the Idea's of the Messiah were
at that time very strong in the minds of the Jews, and it supposes without any
affectation that that Model which God had made so necessary to distinguish the
Messiah, stood at that time entire.

In particular, It is certain that the four Evangelists, by the Relation of
unquestionable matters of Fact, have proved that Jesus the Son of Mary is the
Messiah which God had promised.

Saint Luke shows in the Acts of the Apostles that after the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ, and the Effusion of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, the Gospel was
preached to the Heathens.

The Epistles are a natural Consequence of this Vocation of the Heathens, and
of the abolishing of the Law of Moses which the Apostles had undertaken. They
unanimously conspire to show that God had resolved to call the Heathens to
partake of Salvation, that the Jews for the greatest part should be justly
deprived thereof, because they obstinately rejected the Messiah. Several
Questions are examined, which arose either from the Calling of the Gentiles, or
from the abolishing of the Ceremonial Worship.

The Succession of the History of the Christian Church justifies, That after
the Destruction of Jerusalem all People embraced the Religion of Jesus Christ,
in receiving him for the Messiah whom God had promised to the Patriarchs, and
to the Jews.

I shall resume all these Articles one by one, in that Natural Order in which I
have proposed them.

REFLECTIONS Upon the BOOKS OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, To Establish the Truth OF THE
CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
CHAPTER I.
That there appears a very just Connection between the Idea's of the Old
Testament, and those of the New, the latter borrowing light from the former.
AS it is not much the Character of Romances, even then when they are most tied
up to the Rules of Probability, to borrow either the Style or Idea's of those
Authors from whom they take their-Subject, so I suppose that in this my
Undertaking to show that the New Testament is an exact accomplishment of the
Old, it is very important to make out, that at the first reading of the Gospels
and Apostolical Writings, one finds in them a perfect conformity of Idea's,
with the Writings of the Old Testament.

One may to this purpose observe in general, That the Gospel supposes the
Divine Authority of the Book of the Old Testament, as an unquestionable Truth.
The Gospels and Epistles have the same coherence with the Books of the Law and
Prophets, which the Writings of the latter Prophets have with those of the
former, and which the Books of all the Prophets together, have with the Books
of Moses, and with the Prophecies, Laws and Histories which are contained
therein.

One may take notice afterward, That all the Books of the New Testament have
an essential relation to those of the Old, in their most principal Designs. I
have showed that their design was no other, than to raise men to expectations
of the Messiah, and to paint him to the life, whom God had promised from the
beginning of the World; and the only design of the New Testament is, to prove
that the Messiah is come according to the Prophets. The first speaks concerning
the Messiah as expected, the latter as already come.

But we must proceed to a more particular view of this matter. I say then first
of all, That the Christians have the same Object of their Faith which the Jews
had; this Jesus Christ himself declares, where he says; This is life Eternal,
that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. Behold here the true Character of the Christian Religion, as well as of
the Jewish, to believe one only God, to own a Messiah, and to acknowledge that
Jesus Christ is he. The Jews agree with us in the two former Articles, though
they dispute the last.

I say in the second place, That the Laws of the Gospel, which regulate
Religion, and the Conduct of particular persons in that Society, are exactly
the same with those of the old Testament. Jesus Christ in his Sermon upon the
Mount, which contains an Abridgment of his Ethics, had no other end but to
restore the true sense and meaning of those Laws God had given upon Mount
Sinai; and though in the matter of Divorces, it seems opposite to that Law
wherein God had before permitted them, yet we may easily conceive that he began
to abrogate those Orders and Dispensations which were only given to make the
Messiah known whenever he should appear.

The prayer which Jesus Christ taught his Apostles, is full of Notions which
reigned among the Jews, as several Expositors have manifested. I shall content
my self with alleging the instance of the petition for our daily Bread, which
has an evident regard to the Manna which God gave the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness for Forty years.

We know also that the Sacraments of the Baptism and the Eucharist, are
originally Jewish Ceremonies, which Jesus Christ has applied with a very
little variation, to much more important Subjects. Baptism was a washing which
accompanied the Sacrifices and Circumcision of Proselytes. lites. And the
washing practiced under the Law of Moses, signified that the Proselyte, who was
admitted to the same, was resolved to renounce his former Courses, and for the
time to come to follow an opposite way of living, according to the Rules
prescribed him by the Ministers of Heaven, after that they in the Name of God
had assured him of the remission of his sins.

The Eucharist was an Appendix of the Feast of the Passover, which preserved
the Memory of the Sufferings of the Israelites in Egypt, and the deliverance he
afforded them, in punishing of the Egyptians. This Ceremony did perpetuate the
Memory of that Deliverance till the coming of the Messiah. Jesus Christ has
substituted to this figure an instance of the Curse of God against the
Posterity of Cham, the Idea of his Death, by which he has communicated his
Blessing to all Nations of the Earth according to his promise. And he has made
it a more full and exact Memorial of his Death, which he would have us to
consider as the death of the true Lamb, which takes away the sins of the World.
As the old Covenant was made in the Blood of a Lamb, so Jesus Christ, with
regard to the New Testament or Covenant promised by Jeremiah, Chap. XXXI.
ordains the celebrating the Memorial of the Blood he had spilt, This is the New
Testament in my Blood, etc. And lastly, whereas the Law ordained the
Commemoration of the Paschal Lamb but once a year, Jesus Christ seems to
appoint a much more frequent celebration of the Eucharist, when he says, As
often as ye shall eat this Bread, etc. the reason of which, without doubt, is
taken from the greatness of the benefit which his death confers upon us.

It is well worth our Observation, That ordinarily the same Prophetical Idea's
that are found in the Old Testament may be met with in the New. The Book of the
Revelations contains abundance of particulars set down in the Prophecies of
Zachariah and Ezechiel. Jesus Christ himself pursues the Idea's of the Prophet
Joel in the XXIV of Matthew, when he sets forth the Destruction of Jerusalem,
and afterward he describes the same according to the Notions which Daniel
gives us thereof.

Daniel foretells in the VII Chapter of his Book, the Destruction of the Roman
Monarchy by the Christians, whom he styles the People of the most High. St.
Paul follows the same Notion, 1 Cor. VI. 2. where he supposes it as a known
thing: The Saints (says he) shall judge the World. And St. John in the XX of
the Revelations, verse 4. represents Satan bound, and the Government put into
the hands of Believers.

It is also very remarkable, That the promises and threats of Jesus Christ are
expressed in terms borrowed from the Old Testament. These words of Jesus
Christ, He that hears my words, and believes in him that sent me, has eternal
life, and shall not come into Judgment, etc. have not they a plain relation to
Adam's unbelief and disobedience, to the judgment he underwent, and the
punishment imposed on him? Is it not from this Spirit which penetrates both,
that the New Testament so often makes mention of a New Canaan, a New Jerusalem, a
New Name, etc. and that Glory is represented to us sometimes under the Notion
of Paradise, sometimes of a Feast, where Abraham (who is called the Father of
the Faithful) sits at the upper end?

Eternal Damnation is represented to us under the Notion of the Valley of
Hinnom, of a Lake burning with Fire and Brimstone, with regard to the Lake of
Sodom, and to the place where the filth of Jerusalem was wont to be burnt up
and consumed. It Is upon this account that Believers are exhorted to remember
Lot's Wife, Luke IX. 62. and XVII. 32. and to depart from the midst of the
wicked, Hebr. XIII.

If we consider the Election of the Apostles, and of the Seventy Disciples, we
shall find the reference they have to the Heads of the Twelve Tribes, and to
the Seventy Elders whom Moses chose, to preserve the memory of the Seventy
Souls Jacob brought with him into Egypt. These passages, Ye shall sit on Twelve
Thrones, and your Names are written in the Book of Life: and the Number of
144000, being the product of 12 times 12, by allusion to the Twelve Tribes, do
all borrow their Light from those ancient Histories.

Throughout the New Testament we find nothing but a continual allusion to the
state of the Jews; all those Idea's of the Liberty of the Sons of God do allude
to the Ceremony of their Jubilee. The First born mentioned there, and the
Kingdom of Priests, are not to be understood but by casting our eye on the Old
Testament. If Jesus Christ be called the chief Corner Stone, if Peter be called
a Stone or Rock, Believers living. Stones, and the Apostles Foundations, it is
by way of allusion to the manner in which the Twelve Princes or Heads of the
Tribes did contribute toward the building of the Temple, and to the manner of
the building of it. If the Children of Zebedee are called Boanerges, it is with
reference to the second of Haggai, Yet once, and I will shake the Heavens and
the Earth. That the Heathens are described as a people afar off, and what is
spoken concerning the Wall of Partition, has a visible respect to the
Gentiles, being prohibited to enter into the holy place of the Temple.

If I would instance in all the mystical Relations of the one Volume to the
other, I might say that there appears a singular conformity between them, even
in those things which seem most opposite. Moses the first and great Minister of
the Law, had a stammering speech, Zachary the Father of S. John the Baptist was
struck dumb, when he was to pronounce the solemn Blessing to the people; where
as Jesus Christ on the contrary has this character given of him, that never man
spoke like him. God said at the beginning, Increase and multiply, he repeats
the same to Noah, in order to the propagation of Mankind, and replenishing the
Earth; Jesus Christ says, Go and teach all Nations; and the Word is constantly
represented to us as the Seed of the Regeneration, and Paptism as the Laver or
washing whereby we acquire a new Birth. We see Noah receiving the Dove into the
Ark with an Olive Branch, as a sign of the peace of Heaven, and Jesus Christ
receives a like Token.

Fire falls down from Heaven on the Sacrifice of Abel, Noah, Moses, David,
Solomon, and Elijah, as a Token that God accepted their Offerings; and God
sends the same Mark of his Favor on the day of Pentecost, to declare that the
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ was most acceptable to him.

God had forbid the High Priest to rend his Clothes on any occasion whatsoever,
that rending of Garments involving a Mystery, as appears from the History of
Jeroboam; and yet we see, that the High Priest rent his Clothes at the
Condemnation of our Savior, and thereby violated for ever the Authority of his
Priesthood, whereas on the contrary we find the Garments of our Lord and
Savior were left whole and entire, to signify to us the Eternity of his
Priesthood. We see that the Ear of Malchus the High Priest's Servant was cut
off by S. Peter, and that Jesus Christ restored it again, to show that the
Synagogue had lost the true Faith, and Jesus Christ alone was able to restore
it. We see the holy place in the Temple opened at the Death of Christ, by the
rending of the Vail, which signified that the Ceremonial Law was then to lose
its force and authority.

But the Observations already made are sufficient to make out what I intend,
without having recourse to these Mysteries; and I believe no man can make such
Reflections, without being persuaded that so great a conformity of Idea's, must
necessarily imply a perfect unity of design; now it is impossible to suppose,
that this unity of design should be so constantly observed by different
Authors, who lived at such a distance of times, places, and interests, without
being convinced of a perpetual Divine guidance.

I acknowledge that in the New Testament there may be found some Decisions
which seem wholly opposite to those of the Old: For instance, We find there a
total abrogation of the Ceremonial Law; but forasmuch as all those Observations
had no other use, but to distinguish the Jews from all other Nations of the
Earth, and by this means to make the Messiah known to the Jews amongst whom he
was to be born; so it is obvious to conceive that all those Ceremonies were of
course to be abolished, after that the Messiah was come into the World, and
that if we consider things in this view, we shall find no contradiction at all
between Moses, who established these Ceremonies, and the Apostles who abolished
them.

But before we come to confirm these Grounds, we must make it appear, that the
Idea's of the Messiah continued very fresh in the minds of the Jews, and this
shall be the subject of the following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
That the Idea's of the Messiah continued very fresh in the Minds of the Jews
at the time of the Coming of our Savior Jesus Christ.
IT would be an easy matter for me here to show that the Idea's of the Messiah
were lively in the Minds of the Jews before the coming of Jesus Christ. This
appears from the Fable which the Rabbis told Origin, concerning Zedechiah, and
Ahiab, whom the King of Babylon burnt, for persuading the Jewish women, that
they were the persons that were to conceive the Messiah. But I intend to make
use of proofs of a different nature.

Now to prove that the Notion of the Messiah was very fresh in the minds of the
Jews, we need only take notice, that the promise of God concerning him, was the
first, the most important, and repeated with the greatest assiduity in the
Books of the Prophets, and consequently it employed them the most: God having
for this reason obliged them to read the Books of Moses every Sabbath, to sing
the Psalms of David, and to examine the Writings of the Prophets, where the
promise of the Messiah was a thousand times repeated.

We may add a great deal of light to this Observation, if we consider that the
Circumstances of the Jews at that time, engaged them to give more diligent heed
to what the Prophets had declared; and by weighing several Matters of Fact set
down in the Gospel, to show the Universal effect of the lively impression of
this Notion of the Messiah on the minds of the Jews.

Without doubt the Estate of the Jews at that time, being equally oppressed by
the power of the Romans, and that of Herod, could not but put them upon a
careful examining of the promises, which God had so often vouchsafed them
concerning the Messiah; and the rather because God had often represented to
them the Kingdom of the Messiah as a Temporal Kingdom, which was to deliver
them from the power of their Enemies.

This appears very evident in the Gospel on several occasions. We find that the
people of Jerusalem and Herod were troubled at the News of the Birth of Jesus,
as that which would probably cause great Troubles and Desolations before the
Kingdom of the Messiah could subdue the Romans as well as Herod: One see's that
the Multitudes would have taken Christ and proclaimed him their King, and
submitted themselves to him as the true Messiah: One see's that Christ's own
Disciples, both before and after his Death, talked agreeably to these popular
Idea's. What else can we make of that passage of the Mother of James and John,
when she begs for them the chief places in his Kingdom? When the Apostles
dispute which of them should be the greatest, was it not an effect of the same
cause? Did not the Apostles, when they went to Emaus, discourse at the same
rate? did not they express themselves with much grief and trouble, before they
were instructed in the most sublime Truths of the Gospel? But we trusted that
it had been he which should have redeemed Israel.

It is also very observable, That John the Baptist appears and administers the
Sacrament of Baptism at this time: This his practice gave the Jews occasion to
take him for the Messiah; but what ground had they to think so? surely from
what they had read in Ezechiel, Chap. XXXVI. verse 25. And indeed, when the
great Council of the Jews deputed some persons to him, they charged them to
know of him whether he were the Messiah, or no; and if not, why he exercised a
Function, which that Prophecy seemed to appropriate to the Messiah himself, in
calling him the Angel of the Covenant.

The same Truth may also be collected from what is related to us concerning the
Opinions of the Jews about the Person of Christ; whom, says our Savior, do
people say I am? And the Apostles answer, That some said he was John the
Baptist, others Jeremiah, others Elias, and others again that Prophet, that is
to say the Messiah, who is so called by way of Excellence in the XVIII. of
Deuteronomy. And we find that when Jesus Christ styled himself the Son of Man,
the Multitudes easily conceived that he alluded to the Seventh of Daniel, where
the Messiah is so called.

We perceive also from many other places in the Gospel, That the Multitudes
were very well acquainted with those passages in the Old Testament, which were
commonly applied to the Messiah: The Messiah, when he appears, say they, will
he do greater signs than this Man does? Others are offended because Jesus
Christ was of Nazareth, arguing from thence that he could not be the Messiah:
Others maintain that when the Messiah should come, it would not be known whence
he was; and others again asserted, that the Messiah was to continue for ever.
All which is an evident sign that the Idea's of the Messiah were very familiar
among the Jews.

This must have been so of necessity, because the Samaritans themselves were
possessed with the same Idea's, though they had not so great an extent of Light as
the Jews had. They did not indeed altogether reject the Writings of the
Prophets, but rather studied them with care, their Animosity against the Jews,
and their Jealousy upon account of the promise, of the place of the Temple,
and other things in question, do manifestly show that the Characters of the
Messiah were known to them, and that they were exactly informed in that whole
Matter.

One ought also to take notice, That as the Apostles call that the fullness of
time, because the times set down by the Prophets were almost expired, and the
Scepter was already departed from Judah, the Weeks of Daniel were ended, and
the Kingdoms of Syria and Egypt were overturned; so there were several good
men, who were filled with an expectation of the Messiah. Anna and Simeon are
represented to us, as those who by their study of the Holy Scriptures, had
discovered that the time of the coming of the Messiah was near at hand, much in
the same manner as Daniel is represented to us to have learnt from the Prophecy
of Jeremiah, that the Captivity was almost expired.

I shall add one Argument more which seems beyond exception, That many persons
were found about the time of Jesus Christ, who were either drawn by others into
an opinion of their being the Messiah, or who of themselves desired to be
accounted so. Thus we are told that the Flatterers of Herod the Great gave him
the Title of Messiah. Of this number were Theudas and Judas Gaulonites, with
some others: Thus also soon after some applied the Prophecies concerning the
Messiah to Vespasian the Emperor, because he had been chosen in the East. This
is attested by Josephus, Tacitus, and Suetonius, who assure us, that the Notion
of the promised Messiah, as of a great King, was very common in the East, and
not unknown in the West.

We know that under the Emperor Adrian Barchochab was the cause of a terrible
Sedition, by making the Jews believe that he was the Messiah: And we cannot be
ignorant how many such like Impostors have been since, who have abused the
Credulity of the Jews, Rycaut. Turk. Hist. Vol. 2. p. 174. etc.
even until Sabatai Sevi, who deluded them about One and twenty years since.

Lastly, We cannot but think that this Idea of the Messiah was always fresh
among the Jews, because we find that from that time they have continually
disputed with the Christians about this Matter; because they tell us of two
Messiah's, one the Son of Judah, and the other the Son of Joseph; and because
in all places of the World whither they are scattered, they speak of the
Messiah in their Commentaries on the Scriptures, in their Sermons, in their
public Prayers, and their common Conversation.

Surely if any time can be supposed, wherein they might have lost their
knowledge and distinct hope of the Messiah, it must be since the time appointed
for his coming is expired, when by the Christians insulting over their vain
Expectations, they have been obliged (finding themselves disappointed by
Prophetical Calculations) to set up that rash Maxim, Cursed is he that computes
the times. And therefore it is evident, that these Notions were much more
lively in them, when their hopes were well grounded, and when they might
pretend to see them accomplished.

It is no less certain, that the Model appointed by God, by means of which the
Messiah might be certainly known, did still subsist in the same manner as God
at first had formed it: but that I may give a full light to this Capital Truth;
I shall tie my self to consider the several Arguments for it distinctly; and
shall begin with those which show that the Commonwealth of the Jews did
subsist according to the Divine Model; and then proceed to others which
demonstrate, that God had therein preserved all the Distinctions necessary to
his design.

CHAP. III.
That the Common wealth of the Jews did still subsist, and follow the Model
which God had formed, in order to the certain knowing of the Messiah.
THere are two things which seem to contradict this Proposition; the one is the
overturning of the Jewish State, the other is the corruption of their Religion;
but it is easy to remove both these Difficulties.

For, the overturning of the State of the Jews, did not draw along with it that
of the Scripture, and the Laws on which it was founded, and afterward
governed. Wherefore the case of this Republic is not the same with that of
Athens or Lacedemon, which at present subsist no where, but in Books, because
there are no people now that follow the Laws of the ancient Legislators of
Sparta or Athens.

But on the contrary, we find the Jews in all parts of the World, keeping these
Laws with great carefulness, studying them with the greatest application, and
flattering themselves that God will one day re-establish them in Judea, which
they expect by means of the Messiah, whom God at first promised to them.

It Is now above 1600 years that they have been scattered throughout the World,
and yet we find not that their condition has made them change their Measures or
Hopes; and tho they have already been deceived by a great number of false
Messiahs, yet do not they for all that look upon the condition of their
Commonwealth as irrecoverable.

Now, if during so long a Series of Ages, they have kept their Laws with so
much carefulness, if they still religiously observe all those Laws which could
be kept without the Bounds of the Holy Land; who sees not but that in all
probability they must have kept them more exactly at the time of Jesus Christ,
and before his coming, when they could keep them with much more ease than since
that time, and that for many considerable Reasons.

For first, Their Dispersion then was in one only Nation, whereas now they are
scattered amongst Heathens, Christians, and Mahometans.

2. They had then Prophets who exhorted them to the observance of these Laws,
which now they have wanted for so many Ages.

3. They had often Princes that were very favorable to them, such as Cyrus and
Darius, who ordered that Sacrifices should be offered for themselves, in the
Temple at Jerusalem; and Pompey afterward had the same inclinations for them;
whereas since the time of their Dispersion, they have scarcely met with any one
Prince that has been favorable to them, if we except Julian the Apostate, who
from an effect of his hatred against the Christians, did vainly strive to
re-establish them.

4. They had a Temple to which the whole state of their Republic was fixed.
Herod about the time of our Savior had most magnificently repaired it, whereas
now for so many Ages they have neither Temple nor Altar.

5. They had Highpriests amongst them, that were entrusted with the Sovereign
Power, and were Kings of their Nation, whereas now they have neither King nor
Prince of their Faith.

6. Their Laws being translated into Greek since the time of Ptolemy
Philadelphus, it gave occasion to an extraordinary Jealousy between the Jews
of Egypt, who had the Text of the Scripture in Greek, and between those of
Jerusalem, who had it in Hebrew, whereas now all this is altogether ceased, all
the Jews now for many Ages making use only of the Hebrew Text.

Since therefore we find that they without Prophets, without King, out of their
own Country, etc. have observed these Laws for so many Ages, notwithstanding
their dispersion throughout all places, and amongst all sorts of people; how
much rather may we conceive they did so since the time of Ezra, who placed the
Books of the Old Testament in the order in which we have them at this day?
There are only 542 years, from the time of the return of their Captivity, which
happened in the year 3468, to the Birth of Christ; and but 259 years from their
return, to the translation of the 70, and we know that above 1600 years are
past since their general Dispersion.

Moreover, it appears that the Romans had so well preserved the form of the
Jewish Government from Pompey's time, as well as that of their Religion, that a
Roman General sent to demand a kind of permission of the Jews, to let him pass
with the Roman Eagles through Syria. We know that those Eagles were never set
up at Jerusalem, but it was at a time when a Roman Commander intended to stir
up the Jews to Sedition, and by that means to make the Emperor their Enemy.
Yea, we find that though the Romans reserved to themselves the power of the
Sword, yet they permitred to the Jews the Judgment of Zeal, against those whom
they called Heretics, whom they tore to pieces, to execute the rigor of the
Law.

If we find that a Roman Proconsul would not concern himself with Questions of
their Law arising without the Bounds of their own Country, how much rather may
we judge that they enjoyed an entire liberty within Judea? And indeed we find
the Priests sending their. Acts IX. 4.
Commissioners to Damascus against the Christians, without doubt with design to
execute the Law against Impostors. S. Paul was beaten several times with forty
stripes save one, which could not be upon any other pretense, but to obey the
Law in that matter.

These proofs are sufficient to make out that the Commonwealth of the Jews
subsisted still in the same manner as God instituted it.

And as for what concerns the overthrow of their Religion, as God had
interwoven the Laws that regulated it, with those of their Government, so that
their Religion was nothing else but a Religious Policy; it is evident that
their Government continuing at the time of Jesus Christ, we cannot doubt, but
that their Religion, notwithstanding the corruption which the Pharisees and
Traditionary Jews, whom Christ continually censures, had introduced, did still
continue pure enough, to answer the Model which God had framed.

They rejected the Samaritans, as appears from the IV of S. John, and looked
upon them as Heretics, having no Commerce with them.

They lived in a perfect Alienation from the Heathen; it is with this S. Peter
begins his Discourse to the Assembly at the House of Cornelius, Acts X. 28.

They lived in an exact Observance of the Solemn Feasts which God had
prescribed them, viz. the Passover, Pentecost, the Feast of Expiation and of
Tabernacles.

They observed the Feasts which their Ancestors had joined to these upon
extraordinary Occasions, as that of the Dedication, that of Lots, and some
Fasts which they kept then, as they do to this day. This appears by the History
of the Gospel, and by the Acts of the Apostles.

They assisted at these solemn Festivals with much regularity.

They did not till their Ground in the Seventh year, according to God's
Command, which made the Heathen Princes which were over them, to release them
from paying any Tribute that year, as may be seen in Josephus and other Authors.

They taught the Law in their Synagogues, and that every Sabbath day.

They were so scrupulous in their observation of the Sabbath, that they accused
our Savior for healing the Sick on that day.

It appears that Lepers were sequestered, and that they observed the distinction
of the several kinds of Leprosy, according to the Law of Moses.

We find by the History of the Gadarenes, that Swine were looked upon as
unclean Beasts.

It is certain that they paid the Tribute which was appointed for the use of
the Temple, according to the Law of Moses, and the re-establishment of that
Custom, which we find II Chron. XXIV. 5. Josephus tells us that this practice
was continued till the destruction of the Temple. Antiq. XVIII. Chapter XII.
We meet with the same in Tacitus, and other Heathen Authors of that time.

I acknowledge that at the same time they were extremely corrupt in their
Doctrines, with which Christ upbraids the Pharisees and Saduces: but this
corruption respected rather their Morals, than the Externals of their Religion;
as appears plainly from hence, that Jesus Christ upbraids the Pharisees with
their tithing Mint and Cummin, that is, with their observance of outward
Niceties, whilst they neglected the very Essentials of Piety.

They held that Heathens could not pass for their Neighbors, from whence it
would follow, that God did not forbid them to bear false witness against a
Heathen. Hence also they concluded that it was lawful for them to kill their
Enemies, and this fomented their hatred and animosity against all other
Nations. It was on this account that the Disciples of Jesus Christ marvelled
that he talked with a Samaritan Woman.

Their Decisions concerning Adultery were no less corrupt, which they declared
to be no sin, so long as it did not proceed to the outward Act; which Opinion
of theirs was more gross than that of many Heathens, who had a truer Idea of
the Purity of Heart which God requires of us, as well as that of the Body. But
yet this did not altogether destroy their Religion, though it obscured the
Excellency and Sublimity thereof.

As for the Saduces, besides that their Errors were only speculative, amongst
the greatest part of them, it is certain that what the Gospel says of their
denying the Existence of Souls and Spirits, and the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, must be understood with some qualification, as the Learned have
solidly proved, and amongst others Dr. Lightfoot on the Gospels.

And without repeating those things which seeur'd the preservation of their
State, and which also visibly tended to the preserving of their Religion, I
shall only observe, That the Jews at this day, with very little difference, are
found in the same practices and opinions, as to their Religion, which they had
at the time of our Savior.

Seeing then, that after so long a time of Sixteen hundred years, we find no
greater change in their Belief (though their Traditions are considerably
increased, the Rules whereof they have infinitely multiplied, and thereby
increased this Corruption) how can it be imagined that the Religion of the Jews
was wholly lost, or had no being at the time of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Let this therefore be established as a certain Truth, That the Commonwealth
of the Jews subsisting entirely, it was easy to know, whether the distinctions
which were necessary to discover and make known the Messiah, were still found
in the state of the Jews and their Religion. This is that I am now going to
make out.

CHAP. IV.
That all the Distinctions necessary for discovering of the Messiah, still
continued in the State of the Jews at the time of our Lord.
I Do not know whether any man can deny that Circumcision, which is one of the
principal Marks of the Jews, was practiced at that time; if any one should dare
to dispute this Truth, we need only to represent to him, that the main Dispute
between the first Disciples of Jesus Christ and the Jews, was about the
Observation of this Ceremony.

Neither were the Jews only obstinate in this Belief, but we find also that
those who first embraced the Christian Religion, maintained that the Heathens
themselves ought to submit to the Yoke of Circumcision, before they could enter
into the Divine Covenant, and enjoy the Privileges of Gods People, whom
Circumcision distinguished from the rest of the World.

One see's that though God scattered the Ten Tribes, yet some of them still
remained in Palestine, and were distinctly known as such. This appears from the
Acts of the Apostles, where mention is made of a Widow of the Tribe of Asher,
and S. Paul boasts of his being a Benjamite.

They upbraided Herod, notwithstanding he was their King, with his being an
Edomite, and not originally a Jew.

One see's that about Tire and Sidon there remained still a distinct knowledge
of the Canaanites.

It is known that Galilee was less esteemed than Judea, because many of the
Gentiles were settled there, by which means the Jews of that Province were
obliged to some Commerce with them, from which those who lived more distinct,
thought that they had a right to undervalue those that were settled in Galilee.

One may also boldly assert, That all places were still distinctly known to
what Tribe they did belong. Thus it is observed, that Capernaum was in the
Borders of Naphthali and Zebulun, that Bethlehem was in the Tribe of Juda,
which is related as a thing publicly known.

It is known that the Priests still possess the Cities which Joshua had
assigned to them. Zacharias the Father of John the Baptist dwelt at Hebron,
Josh. XXI. 10, 11.
a City belonging to the Priests in the Tribe of Juda.

One see's that even the Samaritan Woman had a distinct knowledge of some
famous places in the Holy Land, as Jacob's Well, and the Possession which he
gave to his Son Joseph, and that those of her Religion, took a Prejudice
against the Jews, because Jacob had built an Altar at Sichem.

One see's that they kept up the Practice of Redeeming their Firstborn, which
at this day is still observed by the Jews.

As also the practice of Polygamy, which was so common amongst them, that S.
Paul thought himself obliged to forbid the same to the Pastors of the Christian
Church, that he might abolish it by little and little amongst those that
embraced the Doctrine of Jesus Christ.

One see's from the Nineteenth of S. Matthew, that Divorces were publicly
practiced amongst them, as they are to this day.

If one makes any Reflection upon the Objection the Sadduces made to our Savior
concerning the Woman that successively had seven Brothers for her Husbands, we
shall perceive that the desire of Posterity being predominant amongst them, was
the cause of the continuance of this Custom, which began in the time of the
Patriarch Judah.

We have elsewhere taken notice of the extreme carefulness of the Jews, in
preserving the marks of their Daughters Virginity, which has constantly
continued down since the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ.

The Gospel, which informs us that the Jews were deprived of the power of the
Sword, does notwithstanding sufficiently signify to us, not only the extreme
horror which the Jews had conceived against Adultery; (thus we find Jesus
Christ upbraiding the Pharisees, that Adulterers, that is the greatest of
sinners, entered into the Kingdom of Heaven before them;) but also that the Laws
against Adulterers and Adulteresses were severely executed.

In short, one see's that by a Judgment of Zeal, as they call it, they brought
a Woman to our Savior which was taken in Adultery, before they went about to
stone her; for one ought to know that the Law only subjected young Women, who
were defiled after a Contract, to that sort of Punishment, because after they
were once contracted they were reputed the Wives of those to whom they were
betrothed; and such an one was she of whom we read in the Eighth Chapter of S.
John, and not a person actually married, whose punishment, according to the
Law, was to be strangled.

One see's that S. Paul supposes, That the Law which subjected a Virgin to the
Will of her Father, and gave him power to make void her Vows at pleasure, was
still in force.

I will not mention here what the Ancients tell us of the distinction which
they say was made between Virgins and married Women, as well in the Temple, as
in their Synagogues; I shall only say, that this their Tradition is not without
ground.

It is known that the order established by David for exercising the Priestly
Functions was exactly observed by them: Zacharias was of the Course of Abia,
which was the Eighth in order, as is mentioned I Chron. XXIV. 11. and he
offered Incense according to the Law, set down Exodus XXX. verse. 7, 8.

One see's that the Jews would not suffer the dead Bodies to hang upon the
Cross after Sunset, according to what we find was practiced at the time of
Joshua, in pursuance of that Law which we find Deuteronomy. XXI. verse 23.

I only mention these Particulars now, intending hereafter, that I may avoid
tedious Repetitions, to enlarge more expressly, when I shall come to show, as to
every Article, the exact accomplishment of the ancient Oracles concerning the
Messiah, in the person of our Savior Jesus Christ; together with the use of
these distinctions which bar any other, except Jesus Christ, from attributing
that Title to himself, and from abusing the credulity of the Jews.

It would be an easy matter for me to make a numerous List of these
Characters, according to all the different Oracles which God gave to the Jews
on this subject, and to justify the exact fulfilling of them in the person of
Jesus Christ. And indeed it was not without cause that God furnished his People
with so great a number of Prophecies upon this Head, his design being thereby
to give us such solid Grounds for our Faith, by granting to it all these
supports, that nothing might be able to shake it.

But because all of them may be referred to certain Heads, and that an
explication of the chief of them is sufficient to illustrate the rest, I shall
stop there now.

I begin therefore with the Character of the time in which the Messiah was to
appear, and in which Jesus Christ did actually come into the World. And it
being utterly impossible for any man to choose the time of his Birth, any more
than to choose an illustrious Forerunner, or a certain place where, or a
certain Family of which he is to be born, and much less of a Virgin for his
Mother; these Characters may satisfy us, That all those that ever pretended to
the Title of the Messiah, could not reasonably do it.

CHAP. V.
That the time pointed out by the Prophets for the coming of the Messiah, is
the very time in which Jesus Christ appeared to the World.
I Have made it appear in the Third Part of these Reflections, That the Oracle
of Jacob, Genesis XLIX. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; contains a formal Character
of the time in which our Savior was to appear. I am therefore at present to
show that the Jews at that time had wholly lost the Authority of which they had
been possessed for so many Ages, which will most evidently appear from these
four Reflections on the History of the Gospel it self.

The first is on the Birth of Jesus Christ, which happened precisely at the
time when Augustus had ordered that all the Subjects of the Roman Empire should
be enrolled; when we find that Joseph and the Blessed Virgin went to Bethlehem,
their own City, to list their Names in the Register of the Roman Magistrate,
which is an authentic proof of the Servitude of that People to the Romans.

It will not be amiss here to take notice, First, Of Moses his numbering the
People by Divine Authority: Secondly, Of the numbering which David undertook,
and for which he was exemplarily punished by God. Now as God caused the People
to be numbered, to show that they were all his Subjects, and as David numbered
them with the same respect, so we must consider this action of Augustus, was a
public Testimony of his Sovereignty over the Jews, who were subdued by Pompey.

When Tertullian appealed to the Public Registers of the Roman Empire, in his
Apologetick addressed to the Roman Magistrate, who resided at Carthage, he gave
a sufficient evidence that we have no reason to suspect the relation of the
Evangelists. One may join to this the manner of the Relation of these Facts
which the Evangelists give us; as for instance in the Baptism of our Lord, they
determine the years in which they were done, not only by the year of the High
Priest, but also by those of Augustus and Tiberius, etc.

The second Reflection may be made upon the Character of one of the Apostles of
Jesus Christ, Levi or Matthew; who before our Savior made choice of him was a
Publican, and it seems as if our Savior had on purpose taken him from that
Employ, to be one of his Disciples, to give a real instance, and such a one as
went every where along with him, that the Jews by paying Tribute to the Roman
Empire, had wholly lost their Temporal Authority, which was to continue till
the coming of the Messiah.

Here also may be made a third Reflection, which is very natural, upon a passage
related by the Evangelists. They come and ask our Savior, Whether it were
lawful to yield Obedience to the Romans? For since God had chosen this People,
and had given them Judges and Princes of his own choosing, they had always an
extreme aversion for any Foreign Domination: Of this we have an illustrious
Example at the time of the Siege of Jerusalem, when notwithstanding the
Remonstrances by Jeremy, yet they could not consent to submit. This is that
with which they are upbraided, Ezra IV. verse 19. neither were they more
content with this their state of Bondage, at the time of our Savior; and some
of their Zealots took this occasion to tempt our Savior, that they might make
him odious, which side soever he should take. Their question is, Whether it be
lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar; to which he answers with a Divine Wisdom;
Render to Caesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God the things that are
Gods; which words being joined with the Money that he made them produce, which
was stamped with the Emperors Image, do evidently show that the Romans were
Sovereign Lords in Judea: It is known that the coining of Money is the
undoubted Mark of the Sovereignty of that Prince who makes it pass for Current.

But if we must give some further light to the foregoing Reflections, we need
only observe the manner of our Savior's suffering, as it is described to us.
Sanhedr. fol. 24.2.
The Jews do agree, as may be seen in the Jerusalem Talmud, that Criminal
Judgment was taken away from them Forty years before the destruction of
Jerusalem; and the Gospel supposes the same thing; the Jews did not put Jesus
Christ to death, but they carried him to Pilate, and demanded that he might be
crucified. When Pilate said, Shall I crucify your King; they answer, We have
no other King but Caesar, which Confession was the Confession of the whole
Jewish Nation, who were assembled at the Feast of Passover. In short, One sees
that accordingly the Roman Magistrate past Sentence upon him. He was scourged
before they led him to be crucified, which was a punishment amongst the Romans.
His Body is not taken from the Cross, but by permission from Pilate; and the
Roman Soldiers are those Dogs, that is, profane Heathens who enclosed him,
and tormented him, according to the Description which David has made, Psalm
XXII.

The Jews have here but one Answer to make, which God's former dealing with
that People seems somewhat to countenance; which is, That as their Seventy
years Captivity under the Babylonian Empire did not hinder the differring of
the accomplishment of that Prophecy of the Scepters not departing from Judah,
for some Centuries after the said Captivity; so neither is it necessary to
suppose that the Messiah was to succeed immediately upon the ending of the
Kingdom of the Maccabee's, and upon the loss of their Liberty under Pompey.

But here is a very great difference: For first, during the Babylonish
Captivity, God still preserved amongst them some form of Government, the great
Lords of the Country being chiefly carried away Captives, whilst the poorest
and most miserable were left behind.

Secondly, The Captivity lasted only 70 years, where^^ this last Dispersion
has lasted above ^^600.

Thirdly, The first Captivity did not at all abolish those necessary Marks
whereby the lawful Lords of Judea might be distinguished: those that were of
the Tribe of Juda, as well as those of other Tribes, were very well known, though
they were not in possession of the Kingdom; whereas now every thing is
confounded amongst them; and if one looks into Christian Records, he may find
that many of the Kindred of Jesus Christ were put to death, because they could
pretend to the Throne of Judea.

Moreover, during the Captivity of Babylon, they had Prophets amongst them who
expressly foretold the end of it, whereas nothing of that kind has yet been seen
since the last destruction of Jerusalem, since which time no Prophet has
appeared amongst them, that advantage being transferred to the Christians, some
of which, who next succeeded our Savior, did foretell the most remarkable
Events that were to follow to the end of the World.

But if any one should be so nice as to call in question the Reasons of the
difference here alleged; at least the Jews will find nothing to object against
the Prophecy of Daniel, concerning the Weeks at the end of which the Messiah
was to appear, and afterward to be out off. In short, if it be true that Jesus
Christ was born under the Empire of Augustus, it is no less certain that he
entered upon his Ministry in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, and was crucified
the Nineteenth year of his Reign, that is in the midst of the Four hundred
eighty seventh year from the Twentieth year of Artaxernes, that is (...) before
the end of the last Week pointed out by Daniel, as I have showed in the Eight
Chapter of the Third Part of this Book.

CHAP. VI.
That Jesus Christ had precisely such a Forerunner as the Prophets had
described to precede the Messiah.
ONE will easily judge that it was agreeable to the greatness of the Messiah,
and the contemptible state wherein he was to appear to the World, that he
should have a Forerunner. Accordingly we find Isaiah expressing himself in his
manner, the year of the World 3292, almost 700 years before the Birth of our
Savior. Malachy had expressly foretold the same in his Prophecy, about 420
years before his Appearance. If this be once granted, it is easy to conceive
that the Son of a Priest, living without any worldly spendour, and dying a
violent death, though very glorious for him, was a proper Forerunner to that
Jesus, who himself was to be Crucified.

Our business therefore is to enquire whether the Characters which the Prophets
give to the Forerunner of the Messiah, do agree with John the Baptist, in whom
the Christians maintain that this Prophecy of Malachy was fulfilled. This may
be easily made out.

First, John the Baptist was miraculously conceived at a time when his Parents
could not promise themselves any such thing: The Angel Gabriel, who had
declared to Daniel the coming of the Messiah, by pointing out to him the number
of Weeks, was the Messenger of the Conception of this Forerunner of the
Messiah. Several things passed at his Birth, and at the time when they gave him
his Name, which were very strange, and which could not but be generally known,
as well because of the Accident which happened to Zacharias in the Temple, as
of his quality, being a Priest.

Secondly, The extraordinary Life which S. John led, being a Nazarite, ought to
be carefully considered. He lived in a solitary place, as the Prophet Elijah
did before him.

Thirdly, His preaching also had the Character of that ancient Prophet, being
Thundering as his was; he neither spared great men, nor those who had the
reputation of the greatest sanctity, as the Pharisees particularly, whose Pride
and Hypocrisy he touched to the quick.

Fourthly, He set forth the coming of the Messiah as at the door; The Kingdom
of Heaven, said he, is at hand; alluding to the Seventh of Daniel, where the
Kingdom of the Messiah is represented as a Kingdom which was to come down from
Heaven, whereas the former Empires had their rise from the Earth.

In short, nothing could be more illustrious than the Ministry of this great
Man.

He Baptized publicly for the space of one year, such as came to him, solemnly
engaging them to Repentance, in hopes of the sudden appearance pearance of the
Messiah. This Ceremony, which was an imitation of their custom of initiating
Proselytes in the Jewish Religion, was plainly an Essay to establish a new
Religion, or at least to reform those Corruptions which time had introduced
into the Jewish Religion.

In a word, we find him so generally followed, that the great Council of the
Jews thought fit to send Deputies to him, to know whether he were not the
Messiah they expected: This great Man was so far from abusing the great Credit
he had gained, that he solemnly protested, That he was only the Forerunner of
the Messiah, who was already come, but was as yet concealed in the midst of
them.

His Glory became so illustrious, that it stirred up jealousy in the Mind of
Herod, who cast him into Prison, and at last caused his Head to be cut off in
the Castle of Macherom, to satisfy the lewd Herodias, whose Marriage, or
rather Incest, with Herod he had reproved.

Before S. John was beheaded, he sends his Disciples to Jesus Christ, to inform
himself whether he were the Messiah; which our Savior proves to them by the
Miracles which he wrought in their presence, and by the Testimony of the
Prophet Isaiah, which S. John had before alleged as a proof of his Call.

All these Facts were so illustrious, and so well known, that S. John
constantly passed for a great Prophet amongst the Jews, the Pharisees
themselves not daring to question it: He received public Deputations from the
Jews, who demanded the Reason of his Ministry, and he himself sent one to Jesus
Christ, that his Disciples might be acquainted with him, and that they might
give him a second public Testimony; and last of all he dies a glorious Martyr
for his Purity, after he had made a vast number of Disciples, who were so well
dispersed in all places, that S. Luke tells us in the Acts, that some of them
were found in Asia, who received the Gospel and the Gifts of the Spirit, in
which they had been as it were initiated already by the Baptism of S. John.

It appears afterward that S. John was looked upon as the Forerunner of the
Messiah; Jesus Christ says he was the greatest of all the Prophets; and when
Herod heard of the Reputation of Jesus Christ, he supposed that S. John was
raised from the dead.

The Jews not conceiving that John the Baptist was the Forerunner of the
Messiah, because they understood the Prophecy of Malachy literally, Mal. IV. 5.
which also made the LXX add to the Text the word Thisbite, in the passage of
Malachy; therefore Jesus Christ declares that it was indeed he of whom Malachy
had spoken.

I acknowledge that John the Baptist did not do any Miracle; but then he
uttered 1. So plain an Oracle concerning the miraculous effusion of the Gifts
of the Holy Ghost upon the Disciples, that we find nothing so great or so clear
in all the ancient Prophecies; He that comes after me, says he, shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire.

2. He gave a second Oracle, though not so plain as the former, concerning the
destruction of Jerusalem; Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge
his floor, and will burn up the Chaff with Fire.

These two Oracles contain the end of the old Dispensation, and the beginning
of the new; the miraculous Gifts of the Spirit were given to facilitate the
publishing of the Gospel among the Gentiles; and the destruction of Jerusalem,
and of the Temple, happened as well to punish the Crime which the Jews had
committed when they put the Messiah to death; as to take away all their
pretenses of believing that the Messiah was not come, who was to appear whilst
that Temple stood.

But before I conclude this Chapter, I must observe three or four things, which
are very necessary to confirm the Authority of the Testimony which this
Forerunner of the Messiah has given to Jesus Christ.

It is a Maxim amongst the Jews, Maimonid. de fundam. legis.
That he who is acknowledged for a Prophet, may confirm the Authority of
another, by attesting him to be a true Prophet. And this is that which S. John
did to Christ; he was generally accounted a Prophet, and he attested that Jesus
Christ was so. This was that which confounded the Elders of the Jews, when they
demanded of our Savior by what Authority John acted; Jesus Christ answered
their question with another, Whether S. John had a call from God?

The first Observation therefore is, That we cannot accuse him of acting
underhand with Jesus Christ, for we do not find any correspondence kept up
between them; one of them was the Son of a Priest, the other of a Carpenter's
Wife; the one dwelt in Judea, the other in Galilee; the one concealed himself,
whilst the others Reputation had got him a great many Disciples. The Disciples
of the one were very jealous of the Disciples of the other, and endeavored to
inspire their Master with the jealousy that possessed themselves.

The second is, That the Disciples of Jesus are the persons that wrote the
History of John the Baptist, which they do as those who were concerned for his
Glory and Reputation, though at first they did not stand in the least by him, but
rather by that means inflamed. Herod's hatred against them, who contributed to
the death of S. John, as well as of Jesus Christ.

The third is, That when S. John was beheaded, who never had any correspondence
with Jesus Christ, it is extravagant to conceive, that the Disciples of Jesus
Christ should have forged the Testimony which they say this great man gave to
Christ, because this would have been to employ the Authority of a Man, who
never having wrought any Miracles, and being long since beheaded by the order
of Herod, seemed to be quite forgotten.

The fourth is, That it is not probable that they could ever entertain a design
of imposing on the World in such a matter as this, which related to public
Facts known to all Judea, to all the Priests, yea to the whole Nation assembled
at their public Feasts, to Herod the King, and to the Disciples of John
themselves, who would not have been wanting to refute and convince them,
whereas on the contrary we see, that by the disposition which S. John had
wrought in them, they were easily won to the Faith of Christ. This is evident
from the Example of Apollos a Disciple of John the Baptist's Disciples, who
became afterward so excellent a Preacher of the Christian Religion.

CHAP. VII.
That Jesus Christ was born of the Family of David, then reduced to a mean
Condition, as had been already foretold by the Prophets.
WE have considered the time in which our Savior was to be born; let us now
speak of the Family from whence he was to proceed. It has been proved already,
that this promise was made to the Family of David by Nathan the Prophet, 2 Samuel
VII. 12. I Chron. XVII. 11. in the Year of the World 2959. David repeats this
his hope, Psalm LXXXIX. 4. and Psalm CXXXII. 11. And about the Year of the
World 3292 the Prophet Isaiah adds further, that the Messiah should be in a
despicable condition.

There are four things which fully confirm this Truth.

The first is the Kindred which was between Elizabeth and the Blessed Virgin,
whence it appeared that her Relations were of the Tribe of Juda, and that she
was known to be of the Family of David.

One ought to observe here a thing, which though at first sight seems to be of
small importance, yet we cannot but think that S. Luke wrote it without design,
and that is the Journey of the Blessed Virgin to one of the Cities of Judah,
after her Conception, to visit Elizabeth her Kinswoman, the Wife of Zachariah,
and the Mother of John the Baptist; I shall not mention at present any other
Reasons of this Journey, which may seem to be worthy of the Divine Wisdom, and
so I shall only observe at present, that this visit was made to Elizabeth in a
City of Judah, which is a demonstrative proof that Jesus Christ was of the
Family of David, and consequently of that of Judah; so that this is far from
being made use of as an Objection against it, as some have done.

It is well known that the Priests had leave to take a Wife of what Tribe they
pleased; But who see's not at first sight that it was natural for a Priest,
dwelling in one of the Cities of Judah, to marry in that Tribe amongst whom he
lived; besides that, the Priests had of a long time affected to make Alliances
with that Tribe before any other.

The second thing which ought to be joined to this, is, the manner of
Elizabeth's expressing her self to the Blessed Virgin, considering her as
bearing the Messiah in her Womb; and upon this account she called her the
Mother of my Lord, alluding to Psalm CX.

The third is, That the Blessed Virgin in her Song, where she speaks of her
self as the Person in whom the Promise made to Abraham, was accomplished, Luke
I. verse. 54, 55. which Promise concerned the Messiah; she sets forth her self,
as Heiress to the Kings of Judah, and chosen before any her Ancestors,
notwithstanding all their Glory; He has put down, says she, the Mighty from
their Seats, and has exalted them of low Degree.

The fourth is, That Zachariah the Priest, who was well acquainted with the
Blessed Virgin, at whose House she had been during the first three Months of
her being with Child, and who could not be ignorant of her lineage, always
owned her to be of the Family of David. It is evident that he looked upon the
Blessed Virgin as the Mother of the Messiah, as well as Elizabeth his Wife. He
seems to have considered the Infant that was to be born of her, as the Redeemer
promised to Abraham, and the Blessed Virgin as the Heiress of David; and
therefore says, That God had raised up an Horn of Salvation for us in the
House of his Servant David: There can be nothing more convincing than this
Observation; for first, Zachariah was a Priest, that is, one of those to whom
the care of the Genealogies of the Jews was committed. 2. He appears to have
been very well versed in the Prophecies which fixed the Messiah to the Family
of David. 3. He considered his Son as the Forerunner of the Messiah, when he
proposed that the Oracle of Malachy should be fulfilled in that Son, whom God
had so miraculously bestowed upon him. 4. He needed only have examined the
Agreements of her Marriage, and he would then certainly know whether the
Blessed Virgin was not of another Tribe; which would have cured him of any
possible illusion.

In short, S. Luke observes very exactly, that this Journey of the Virgin to
her Kinswoman, and all the Circumstances which prove the Blessed Virgin to have
been of the Family of David, were things well known throughout all the
Hill-Country of Judea, that it might not be pretended that this important Fact
was any ways obscure.

But secondly, this Genealogy of Jesus Christ is carried up to David and Judah;
and it is visible that this was a thing exactly known, especially since Jesus
Christ always passed for the Son of David, blind men themselves calling him so.

A third thing to be considered is, the Blessed Virgins going to Bethlehem to
be there enrolled, according to the Decree of Augustus Caesar. There had been
several numbrings of the people; the first was at the appointment of God
himself; the second was by an order from David; and in both an exact
distinction was made between the Tribes themselves, and the Families of each
Tribe: And one see's that the same was observed in this last Register which was
made by Augustus's Decree in the 4000 year of the World.

Joseph and Mary went up to Bethlehem, which was the Seat of David's Family:
nothing appears here of design or affectation; they made no stay at Bethlehem,
and the occasion that brought them thither, was absolutely strange and unlooked
for; and yet it was certainly an accomplishment of that Prophecy of Micah,
Chap. V. verse 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, etc.

This Remark upon the Decree of Augustus is of great moment, because thereby
the Virgins being of the Family of David appears to be the most indisputable
Truth in the World, as having been owned first by the whole Family of Judah for
three Months. Secondly, By the Genealogy which subsisted entire, as the
Talmudists themselves grant in the Treatise de Sponsal. Chap. IV. Sect. 5.
where they testify that the Genealogy of the Royal Family was without
difficulty. 3. By the public testimony of all their Kindred, who met in a body
before the Roman Magistrate.

The fourth Remark is, That when Herod knew of the Birth of the Messiah at
Bethlehem, where by the confession of the Jews he was to be born, he would have
envolved Jesus Christ in the Massacre which swept away the innocent Children,
if the same Providence which brought him to Bethlehem, to demonstrate that he
was of the House of David, had not withdrawn him from thence to preserve him
from that Tyrant, who was afraid of being cast from his Throne by one of
David's Heirs.

The fifth is, That Jesus Christ did not only often allude to the place of his
Birth, in calling himself the Bread come down from Heaven, the word Bethlehem
signifying the House of Bread; but he constantly owned himself for the Son of
David. Upon this it is that he grounds the Objection which he makes to the
Jews; How is it that David calls the Messiah his Lord? And indeed this Fact was
so constantly owned by all, that even persons who were possessed with Devils,
did not dispute it, as may be seen in the Evangelists.

The sixth is, That though two of the Evangelists set down the Genealogy of our
Savior with some difference, yet the Jews never took occasion from thence to
question Jesus Christ's descent from David; his Apostles always building on
that Foundation; which may be seen as a thing taken for granted in S. Peter's
Sermon, Acts II. and in the Epistles of S. Paul, where we find our Savior
always styled the Son of David according to the Flesh.

To these already mentioned we may add the three following Observations; the
first is, That if the Genealogy of our Savior had not been distinctly known,
the Apostles would never have troubled themselves to have set it down; much
less would they have placed it in the front of their Books, as knowing that the
beginnings of Books are always more examined than the ends, and would certainly
be so by a people who always stick very close to their Genealogies. In short,
either the Genealogies of the Jews were at that time as confused as they are at
present, and so they could not have served as Characters to discover the
Messiah by; in which case the Apostles would have contented themselves to have
hinted, that Jesus Christ always past for the Son of David, as they have done
in several places of their Writings, without giving us the whole Series of his
Pedigree; or else they were at that time distinctly known, in which case it was
the easiest thing in the world to have confuted them.

The 2d is, That the differences which are found between the Genealogy of Jesus
Christ set down by S. Matthew, and that by S. Luke, is so far from giving us an
occasion to doubt of the Apostles faithfulness in this matter, that indeed it
is a new proof of their exactness in a matter of so great importance. For it
can scarcely be imagined but that in so long a Series of Ages, there must have
been some of the Ancestors of our Savior, in whom that Law took place, which
obliged the younger Brother to marry the Widow of his elder Brother deceased
without Issue, and so to raise up Seed to him, which gave occasion to a
Genealogy not natural, but legal, the Children bearing the name of the deceased
elder Brother, and possessing his Estate. Now the Evangeliste have set down
both these Genealogies exactly, which is an invincible Argument of their care
and fidelity.

The third is, That it was so much the more necessary to make this remark in
the Genealogy of the Messiah, because as we have observed elsewhere, it was
with relation of the desire of giving Birth to the Messiah, or of having
Children which might live under his Empire, that God at first permitted this
kind of Incest, with the Widow of a deceased Brother, which otherwise was so
severely prohibited by the Law.

As to the low Estate to which the Family of David was then reduced, it is
visible that David and Solomon reigned with great glory, but Rehoboam
succeeding them, Ten Tribes fell from him to Jeroboam, in the Year of the World
3029. and the Posterity of Rehoboam was afterward dethroned by Nebuchadnezzar,
who carried Zedechiah the King into Captivity in the Year 3416.

After their return from Captivity, they were entirely thrust from the Throne:
the Priests at first governing that Nation; the Maccabees, who were of the
Family of Levi, reigning in Judea, from the return of the Captivity of Babylon,
until Herod the Edomite, who was made Master of Judea by the favor of the
Romans.

2. The Family of David was at that time removed from their ancient Seat, and
was now sixed at Nazareth, where Providence seems to have removed them from
Bethlehem, to take away that object of Herod's jealousy, which would have
offended him, as we see it did when the Wise men acquainted him with the Birth
of Jesus, which obliged him to make a diligent enquiry after the place where
the Messiah was to be born, that Messiah whom he conceived to be a Prince, who
would rob him of the Sovereignty to which he was raised.

In the third place, the Blessed Virgin was betrothed to a Carpenter. Justin
Martyr tells us that Jesus Christ made Ploughs. See what the Heirs of the Kings
of Judah were reduced to.

Fourthly, When she came to Bethlehem, she lodged in an Inn, her Kindred being
not in a condition to afford her better Accommodation.

It appears that the Divine Providence was very careful in executing this
Design. There were some Decays of the Family of David, which the Blessed Virgin
expresses in her Song. She was descended from the younger Brothers of deposed
Princes, and reduced to private state, she speaks of nothing but of lowness and
meanness, not only in a way of Humility, but to demonstrate the fulfilling of
the Prophecy concerning the Throne of Jesse.

But that this might appear more evidently, and confirmed by the Law, as it was
her Duty to present her Son in the Temple, after the Seventh day, with an
Offering; so she does not offer what is prescribed to the Rich and Wealthy, but
an Offering which is appropriated by God in the Law to poor people, as appears
Lev. XII.

One see's by the Marriage Feast at Cana in Galilee, that the Kindred of Jesus
Christ were not very Rich, their wanting of Wine on such an Occasion, was no
great Mark of Plenty.

One see's also, That Jesus Christ frequently represents himself, as not having
where to rest his Head: On the Cross he recommends his Mother to one of his
Disciples, and was himself maintained by those who followed him.

CHAP. VIII.
That Jesus Christ was conceived by the Virgin Mary, without any Operation of
Man.
AS this Article is one of the most important of our Religion, so it is well
worth our attentive consideration. We may take notice here, that according to
the Observation of Justin Martyr, Dial. cum Tryph p. 297. Isai. 5.
that the Fable of Perseus, took its rise from the Prophecy of Isaiah. However,
that Prophecy being very express according to the Translation of the LXX. we
are to consider how it was accomplished. It will not be enough here to say,
That ordinarily extreme Poverty is a sufficient bar against the suspicion of
Adultery; and therefore we desire the Reader only to call to mind the
Observations set down in the Second Chapter of the second Part of these
Reflections on the Books of the Law of Moses. For

1. Polygamy and Divorces were very frequent in the time of Jesus Christ, as
appears from several passages of the Gospel, where God was pleased to give us
Examples thereof.

2. God was willing to give us Instances of his Severity against Adulteresses,
amongst which those were reckoned who suffered themselves to be defiled after
they were betrothed. We have an Example hereof in the Eighth Chapter of the
Gospel according to S. John, which I have illustrated in the Fourth Chapter of
this Fourth Part.

3. It appears that the same Laws which engaged Parents to preserve the
Virginity of their Daughters, did continue, and were still observed by the
Jews, as well as those other Laws which constituted the Body of their Religion:
When Jesus Christ upbraids the Jews for having changed the true sense of the
Law, yet he never reproaches them upon this account.

4. The Relation set down in the Eighth Chapter of S. John, makes it appear
that the Waters of Jealousy still retained their virtue; that which Jesus
Christ writ on the Ground being probably nothing else but the Curses which the
Law denounced against the Woman that should violate her Honor.

I have made it very evident in the Twentieth Chapter of my Second Part, what
was the use of those Laws concerning the Marks of Virginity, to prevent any
Doubts that might arise concerning the same: It remains now to consider the
several passages of the Evangelists, and to see what proofs we can find there
to confirm this Point, That Mary was indeed a Virgin when she conceived Jesus
Christ, and how we may answer the Objections which the Enemies of Christianity
make against this Truth.

The Evangelists tell us that this remarkable Fact was declared by the Angel
Gabriel, who had before foretold to Daniel the coming of the Messiah, and
signified the exact time thereof. The Conception of Isaac by a barren Mother,
as well as that of Samuel and John the Baptist, had been already declared in
the same manner; and one Miracle ought to serve as a preparation for the belief
of a greater.

When the Disciples of Jesus Christ speak of the Fact, they speak of it as a
thing known throughout all Jerusalem, and which had no Relation to their
Master. Besides, we know the Jealousy that was between the Disciples of S.
John, and those of our Savior.

But we have a further account besides of the Message of an Angel to Joseph,
after he had perceived that his betrothed Wife was with Child; for when he was
ready to divorce her, either by exposing her to the rigor of the Divine Law,
Deuteronomy. XXII. 23. or else by exempting her from that extremity, he is diverted
from his intention by this warning from Heaven. In all which we meet with
nothing but what is very probable; for Joseph expresses his hatred and dislike,
as conceiving her to be debauched, and was resolved not to receive her, but by
an Order from Heaven.

Moreover it is very remarkable, That we find all things recited in such a
manner, as it was necessary they should come to pass, on supposition that the
Messiah was to be born of a Virgin of the House of David.

For first, We find this event appeared incredible to the person her self, who
was designed to effect it; because she could not easily make the Application at
first.

2. It caused exceeding joy to the person who saw her self chosen by God to
fulfill so glorious a promise, whereby the Family of David was to be restored to
its ancient Luster. This is evident from the Hymn of the Blessed Virgin: which
if we compare with the Psalms of David, we shall see that that Family still
retained all the Piety of their Ancestors, with all those signs of
acknowledgment which an event of such a nature did justly require.

3. It appears that Joseph acquiesced in this Truth, he who otherwise did not
seem very credulous, till he was instructed from Heaven concerning a matter so
rare and difficult to be conceived. He retires for some time into Egypt, and
affords Mary and her Son all the service they could reasonably expect from him.

S. Contr. Helvidium.
Jerome alleges three Reasons why it was needful for the Blessed Virgin to be
betrothed to Joseph.

1. That the Original of the Blessed Virgin might be proved by the Pedigree of
Joseph, to whom she was related.

2. That according to the Law of Moses, she might not be stoned as an
Adulteress.

3. That in her Flight into Egypt she might have the comfort of a Guardian
rather than of a Husband.

Neither can any thing be opposed to the belief of these matters, but some very
weak Conjectures: The first is, That her being contracted does something
obscure the distinct Notion of Virginity; and secondly, That the Blessed Virgin
did always pass for the Wife of Joseph, even according to the style of Jesus
Christ himself. And lastly, That the Relation which the Evangelists give of
this matter, was not known till long after the death of Jesus Christ.

But it is an easy matter to satisfy the mind of any reasonable Reader in
this thing. It was necessary that the Blessed Virgin should be betrothed:

1. To secure her Life, which would have been in danger, if she had been
delivered whilst she was reputed to be a Virgin; for she would have been
accused of Whoredom, and consequently have been put to death.

2. It was necessary she should be betrothed, and pass for the lawful Wife of
Joseph, that her Son might not be banished from the Congregation of Israel, as
a Bastard in the Rigor of the Law.

As for the other Objection, I easily grant that the Blessed Virgin always
passed for the Wife of Joseph; she her self says, I and thy Father sought
thee. But withal, at that very time Jesus Christ unvailed that Mystery in the
Presence of all the Jews, maintaining that he was the Son of God, in whose
House he was at that time; it was at a solemn Feast of the Jews, where the
whole Nation was assembled, and in the midst of an Assembly of their Doctors,
that he declared the Temple to be the House of his Father, as he afterward
constantly called it.

We find him at another time declaring the same in the presence of his Family
at Cana in Galilee, John II. 4.
Woman, what have I to do with thee? says he to the Blessed Virgin; to put her
in mind of some passages which could not but preserve in her a very particular
respect for him.

He gives yet a further degree of light into this matter, when, his Mother
seeking to come at him, he says, Who is my Mother, and who are my Brethren,
that is, Kinsmen. It Is probable that Joseph was dead, before our Savior entered
upon his Ministry; however his making no mention of his reputed Father, shows
how careful he was to avoid any thing that might obscure his miraculous Birth.

Last of all, it is very considerable, that this passage being not the only
Character which was to distinguish the Messiah from all others, but was to be
confirmed by the Miracles of Jesus Christ, by his Resurrection, and those other
proofs of his Divine Nature, it was at first not much insisted on, because
there was a necessity that it should continue veiled for some time, upon the
account of the frequent Apparitions of Angels, and of God himself in a Human
form, that so the truth of his Humanity should be established by his Life and
Death, before the publication of his miraculous Conception.

For it is certain that the Apostles preached up this Truth, and that the
Evangelists had put it in writing before the destruction of the Jewish
Commonwealth; and yet we do not find that it was ever contested. The
Evangelists describe the Methods which the Jews took to make the Resurrection
of Christ to be doubted of, and to slight his Miracles; and do we think they
would not as well have given us the Objections of the Jews against a thing, of
which till then never any Instance had been known in the World?

I know very well that some of the Ancients have told us that the Jews were
offended, that the Blessed Virgin, after she was delivered of our Savior,
should seat her self in the place appointed for Virgins, and that because
Zacharias the Priest maintained her in so doing, he was thereupon killed by
them between the Temple and the Altar, with which our Savior upbraids the
Jews. I know also that they affirm that she was forced to confirm the truth of
her Virginity, by submitting her self to a search of Matrons: yet I cannot
believe that she ever underwent any such Examination, of which the silence of
the Evangelists, and S. Luke's in particular, fully convinces me, and therefore
am inclined to think that no such Objection was ever made against her.

In the mean time it is well worth our noting, 1. That the Blessed Virgin had
Zachariah the Priest as an Examiner and Witness of her behavior from the
beginning, at whose house she abode during the first months of her being with
Child, and who publicly divulged the miraculous Birth of his own Son, and his
leaping in his Mother's Womb at the Salutation of the Blessed Virgin.

2. That the Blessed Virgin lived many years after the Passion of our Savior,
that she might undergo and answer any Accusations of that nature.

3. That she also had for Witnesses of the Miracles which attended her
Conception, all the Disciples of S. John, as well as those of Jesus Christ,
though the Disciples of S. John did not agree with the Disciples of Jesus Christ.

4. That what she declared of her self, was not a Fact which had no traces
whereby it might be examined in the Old Testament.

5. That the Jews had thirty years to examine the several particulars which had
relation to the Messiah, and the miraculous manner of his Birth, at the time
when she published this particular passage of her life.

6. That we cannot call in question the veracity of the Blessed Virgin in the
account which she gives us of what concerned her self, of which no witness
could be produced, forasmuch as the accomplishment of that part of her
Prophecy, That all Nations should call her blessed, clearly shows that she had
received the Spirit of Prophecy; no more than we can suspect any Forgeries in
the Relations of other Prophets, though we have no other Testimony concerning
them, but that of the Prophets themselves.

CHAP. IX.
That Jesus Christ lived and preached after the same manner as the Prophets had
foretold the Messiah should do.
I Have clearly shown that Jesus Christ was born of the Posterity of Adam, by
Seth, by Noah, by Abraham, by Isaac, by Jacob, by Judah, by David, as it was
foretold of the Messiah by the most ancient Oracles, the increase of which I
have already taken notice of in my third part.

I have afterward showed, That Jesus Christ was born of a Virgin, Genesis III. 15
Isai. VII. 14.
whereby those Oracles, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise thy head, and a
Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, seemed to be clearly accomplished. Let us
now see, according to those Oracles, what kind of Person the Messiah was to be,
from his Birth to his Death, according to those Idea's which the Prophets have
given us.

Moses expressly tells us, Deuteronomy. 18. that the Messiah was to resemble him; The
Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me: Deuteronomy. XVIII. 15.
which place, as I have observed before, has been so constantly applied to the
Messiah, that it appears that not only John the Baptist, when he sent his
Disciples to Jesus Christ, Philip speaking to Nathanael, and the Disciples when
they were asked by our Savior who he was, but also the Samaritan woman
understood it so without the least hesitation, and said, that when the Messiah
should come, he would tell them all things.

In short, one see's an exact proportion between Moses and Jesus Christ. Not
only because our Savior was saved in his Infancy from the hand of Herod, and
from a River of Blood, like another Moses, or because Egypt served for a
Retreat to him, as Moses had hid himself in Arabia: or because he was rejected
by his Brethren, those of Nazareth, who would have thrown him headlong from a
Rock, because he declared himself to be the promised Deliverer and Messiah, by
applying to himself the words of Isaiah, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc.

Neither shall I now take notice of his being despised and disowned by his
Brethren, and called a Galilean, whereas indeed he was of Judea; For indeed the
Messiah was to be treated as a Nazarene, that is, a contemptible person, and a
Man of no consideration; for we may find that because our Savior was brought
up at Nazareth, though he was born at Bethlehem, he was therefore looked upon as
a person incapable of any thing that was great; John I. 46
Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? said Nathanael to Philip; and the
Pharisees to the Officers whom they had sent to take Jesus, Search and look,
for out of Galilee arises no Prophet, much less the great Prophet, the
Messiah, who by way of Eminence is so called. It Is upon this account that he
was called a Galilean, not only by the Heathens, but by his own Disciples too;
For the word Galilean seems to have been a name for one of an impure
Extraction, because many of other Nations dwelt among the Jews in Galilee. But
I shall take notice of several other more important Resemblances between them,
and such as have Relation to the Ministry of Moses rather than his Person, by
referring all to his Preaching, his Miracles, his Predictions, and some other
Heads of that Nature.

First then, Jesus Christ that he might at first maintain the Character of the
Messiah, appears in the Temple. John the Baptist had heard him called the Son
of God, by a very peculiar witness, a Voice from Heaven. Wherefore we see that
at his first Entry upon his Ministry, he drives out those that profaned the
House of God, whom he called his Father, with a Scourge; John II. 13, 14, 15,
etc.
and this he did at the Feast of the Passover, before the whole Nation of the
Jews.

Here is another Character of the Messiah; He was to begin the Exercise of his
Ministerial Functions, in the Tribes of Naphthali and Zebulon, according to the
Prophecy of Isaiah; Isai. IX. 1.
and this our Savior exactly accomplished by his beginning to preach at
Nazareth, which was in the Tribe of Zebulon, and he conversed much at
Capernaum, which was in the Tribe of Naphthali, according to the observation of
the Evangelists.

But I proceed to consider some Circumstances of his Ministry. Isaiah had
foretold, that the Messiah was to preach the Gospel to the poor; which Jesus
applies to himself in the Synagogue at Nazareth, declaring that in his person
that Prophecy was fulfilled; Isai. LXI. 1.
viz. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, wherefore the Lord has anointed
me to preach good tidings unto the meek, etc.

The choice which he made of his Disciples from among the meanest of the
people, and the basest of the crowd which followed him wherever he went, ought
to pass for a sufficient accomplishment of this Prophecy.

The Messiah, according to the representation which Isaiah gives us of him, was
to publish the Tidings of the Remission of Sins; and was not this that which
Jesus Christ did during the course of his Ministry?

The Messiah was to preach the Remission of Sin, in such a manner, as that he
might dry up the Fountain of it, at the same time, in calling men to the study
of Sanctification; this was admirably performed by Jesus Christ, 1. In
correcting those Abuses which the Jewish Doctors had introduced into the Law.
Secondly, In declaring that the Effect of Sanctification was to be looked for
in the heart, rather than in the eyes or hands.

One may see afterward, 1. That he knew the heart of man; which proved that he
made it. This he testifies upon several occasions, in the answers which he made
to those that spoke to him, and indeed in all his Discourses which were suited
to the dispositions of the heart of those to whom he addressed them.

2. That he made use of Parables, which are Moral Lessons very easy indeed,
but withal fitter for the subject than Fables, and more worthy of God: Parables
also, which were so ordinary and familiar amongst the Jews, that we find most
of them at this day in the Writings of the Jews, though they apply them to
another use.

3. That he descended to Particulars, without using any thing mean, which men
are apt to do when they divide things minutely.

4. That he forgot no one Precept of Morality.

5. That he examined all the Duties of Religion, and made them infinitely
recommendable by suggesting such excellent Motives.

After all, we are to consider four things in the preaching of our Savior,
which will fully prove that he was the Messiah.

1. That his Doctrine appeared to be wholly Divine; he had never been brought
up at the feet of any Doctor; but had his breeding in a Carpenter's Shop.

2. That no Crime was ever objected to him, notwithstanding that he upbraided
the Pharisees with theirs; but he supported his Doctrine by the Holiness of his
Conversation.

3. That he insensibly disposed the People to receive him as the Messiah, by
the Characters which God had given of him in the Prophets.

4. He prepared his Disciples and his Auditors to expect that one day the
Gentiles should enter into the Church.

In short, Can any thing be so surprising, as to see a Man who had lived Thirty
years as the Son of a Carpenter, to declare himself all at once a Doctor, to
preach publicly, to censure the Doctors of his Nation; to speak of the Law and
Prophets with more depth and authority than all that ever went before him. Who
can without surprise, conceive that a man of the lowest quality, should from a
Carpenters Shop, come and determine Questions about the Law, and tread under
his feet the Authority of all the great Rabbis every where, only by an I say
unto you, so that none was able to contradict him. Certainly when one see's our
Savior upon the Mount explaining and defending the Moral part of the Law from
the Corruptions into which it was fallen, he appears not only as great as Moses
on Mount Sinai, but even as God himself, when he published his Laws to that his
ancient People.

Neither ought any one to have less admiration for that perfect Innocence which
shone through the whole course of his life: What Crime had they to charge him
with when they put him to death, he who accused his Enemies of so many? Who of
you, says he, accuses me of sin? We find him only accused of words ill
understood, which they were resolved to misinterpret: His saying, That if they
destroyed that Temple, he would rebuild it in three days, was laid to his
Charge as a Crime; And yet these words could not have been heightened into
Crimes, if they had been spoken in the same sense which they put upon them.
This was an essential Character of the Messiah, who was to be the Restorer of
Holiness, according to the Idea which the Prophets gave of him.

I should take notice afterward that our Savior in his Sermons did by little
and little dispose the Minds of his Auditors and Disciples, to conceive and
believe him to be the promised Messiah. The first act of his public Ministry
was an effect of his zeal for the Holiness of a Temple consecrated to his
Father: He drove the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, at the Feast of the
Passover, which action of his was a solemn profession that he was the Son of
God. Soon after at Nazareth he applies to himself that Prophecy of Isaiah, The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. He explains himself yet more distinctly in
Jerusalem at the second Passover which he celebrated during the time of his
Ministry, that they might understand that he was the Messiah, according to the
account which the Evangelists give us; and he explains himself yet more
particularly upon John the Baptists Message to him. By which means this Truth
became already so illustrious, that the Multitudes would proclaim him King,
that is, publicly own him for the Messiah, and obey him as their rightful
Sovereign. And lastly, He explains himself in this matter by a Question, When
he asked his Disciples, Matt. XVI.
What Censures were past upon him in Judea, and what they themselves thought of
him.

In short, It is certain that Jesus prepared the Minds of his Disciples to look
for the Calling of the Gentiles, which also was the Character of the Messiah.
Genesis XLIX. 10.
Jacob had prophesied of old, To him shall the gathering of the People be. But
I shall pass by the Oracles which foretell this matter. What signifies the
History of the Prodigal, unless it be the Calling and the Return of the
Gentiles; the eldest Son (the Jew) being extremely troubled at it. What means
that saying of our Savior, That he had other Sheep, etc. or his Prediction,
That many should come from the East and West, and sit down with Abraham, when
the Children of the Kingdom should be cast forth. I shall take notice in
another place, of the frequent Repetition of such like Oracles, and their exact
accomplishment. These are sufficient at present to justify the solidity of
this last Reflection, and the truth of this Conclusion at the same time, that if
one examines the Life and Preaching of our Savior, he may find all those
Characters by which the promised Messiah might be known. Let us now proceed to
the Consideration of his Miracles.

CHAP. X.
That the Miracles wrought by our Savior, clearly prove that he is the Messiah.
AS the Messiah was to be very clearly distinguished from all others by his
Miracles, and as the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. XXXV. sets down the power of working
Miracles, as one of those Characters by which he was to be known, so it is of
great importance to us, to examine the Miracles of our Savior with great
attention, whether they have the Character of Truth, and whether they come up
to the Idea which the Prophets give us of those wonders which the Messiah was
to do.

The Evangelists, who tell us that he wrought almost an infinite number of
them, have described more than Thirty several sorts of them. He changed Water
into Wine at the Wedding at Cana; he healed the sick Son of a Courtier; he
delivered one that was possessed in the Synagogue at Capernaum; he healed S.
Peter's Mother in Law; he caused a vast number of Fish to be caught; he cured a
Leper with a word, and with a touch he healed one sick of the Palsy; he cured
a Woman of an inveterate Issue of Blood, and raised the Daughter of a Ruler of
the Synagogue from the Dead; he cured the impotent Man at the Pool of Bethesda;
he cured him that had a withered hand; he delivered a possessed person that was
blind and dumb; he recovered the Centurion's Servant, and raised to life the
Son of the Widow of Naim.

Neither are these that follow any less considerable; he restores sight to two
blind men, he casts forth a dumb Devil, he asswages a Tempest by his word, he
delivers two possessed persons, and permits the Devil to go into the Herd of
Swine of the Gadarenes; he feeds above Five thousand persons with two Loaves
and five Fishes; he walks upon the Sea, and calmeth a second Tempest; he casts
forth a Devil from a Daughter of a Woman of a Canaan, who was possessed; he
cures one deaf and dumb; he feeds Four thousand persons with seven Loaves; he
restores sight to a blind man of Bethsaida; he casts out a Devil, after his
Disciples had in vain attempted it; he restores sight to one born blind; he
cured a crooked woman; he cures one of the Dropsy on the Sabbath day; he
raises Lazarus from the Grave, after he had been dead four days; he heals ten
Lepers afterward; he restores sight to a blind man at his entering into
Jericho; and cures the lame and blind in the Temple it self.

There are several Characters which assure us of the faithfulness of the
Evangelists in these their Relations: 1. They wrote these things to convert the
Jews before the destruction of Jerusalem. 2. They marked the Circumstances very
exactly, and none could be ignorant of them, since they all went thrice a year
up to Jerusalem. 3. The Facts which they relate were lasting, and such as might
be examined. 4. They speak of Facts which they suppose that Jesus Christ was
willing should be beyond all contest, that they might be the better examined.
5. They speak of those Facts which they maintain to be the accomplishment of
the Oracles concerning the Messiah whom the Jews expected.

But there are not fewer Characters of Truth in the Miracles of our Savior to
buoy them up: The first is, That most of the Diseases, which Jesus Christ
cured, are described as absolutely incurable; this Observation is of great
moment, as well to discover to us the infinite power exerted by Jesus Christ,
as to make known the extaordinary wisdom of the Apostles, who being men without
learning, did notwithstanding set down the symptoms of the Diseases which
their Master cured, far beyond what might be expected from their Natural
Capacities.

The second Reflection belongs to the Subjects upon whom these Miracles were
wrought; for we scarce find any of them, except his curing S. Peter's Mother in
Law, to be wrought upon persons who had least relation to Jesus Christ: He
heals the Servant of the High Priest, the Son of the Ruler of a Synagogue, the
Son of a Roman Centurion, and several others.

A third Reflection may be drawn from the places where they were done, and from
the witnesses that were present. In short, They were wrought in public places,
in the midst of Cities and Synagogues; some in Judea, some in Galilee, some at
Jerusalem, at Naim, Sidon, etc. they were submitted to the examination of the
most implacable Enemies of Jesus Christ, the People of the Jews, the
Samaritans, and the Gentiles, who dwelt in Palestina.

One may add also, That these Miracles were of very different kinds, wrought in
several places, and with very considerable Circumstances, at the most solemn
Feasts, the Passover and Pentecost.

One ought to consider also, That Palestine was full of those whom our Savior
had cured; and that all the Jews who came up three times in a year to
Jerusalem, could not but take notice of them.

One ought afterward to observe, That Jesus Christ communicated to his
Disciples the power of working Miracles in the second year of his Ministry,
which none else had ever done before.

And lastly it must be observed, That these Miracles were lasting; The three
dead men, whom our Savior raised to life again, were very young, and who in
all probability lived longer than decrepit old men, were in the sight of all
Judea; and other sick and infirm persons, that he had healed, enjoyed life and
health. 2. In short, the Relation of Christ's Miracles which Pilate sent to
Tiberius, sufficiently testifies that they were Facts generally known. And 3.
That the certainty of them could so little be contested, that the Jews rather
chose to accuse him of doing them by some Magical secret, than to dispute the
truth of them.

These Reflections sufficiently confirm the truth of the Evangelists relation,
and of the Miracles of Jesus Christ. To agree to what has been said, we need
not refute the folly of those, who have compared the Miracles falsely attributed
to Apollonius Tyanaeus, with those of Jesus Christ. One hardly knows at this
day whether ever there was such a man as Apollonius; whereas ever since the
Apostles there have been Christians, who have read the History of the Miracles
of Jesus Christ, and who have believed them after a due examination. Which of
Apollonius's his Disciples was ever so bold as to say to Heathens, as
Tertullian did in the second Century, in his Apologetick, Bring to us what
possessed persons you please, and we will heal them in the Name of Jesus Christ?

But we ought also to add one thing more, That these Miracles of Jesus Christ
were exactly such as ought to have been made to prove him to be the Messiah.

1. They were exactly such as Isaiah had foretold concerning the Messiah, Chap.
XXXV. as may be seen by comparing them with the Text.

One ought only to observe, That this Character is so peculiar that it
distinguishes the Messiah from all the other Prophets, who went before him; for
none of those to whom God had given power to work Miracles, had either given
sight to the blind, or power to the lame to walk.

2. They perfectly came up to the end of his Ministry, as he was the Messiah;
For it was his design to assure his Disciples of the immortality which he
promised to them; and these Cures, and these Resurrections which were wrought
only by his word, were sufficient to convince them, as well of the Sovereign
power he had to execute his Promises, as of his goodness which was necessary to
confirm the Faith of his Followers.

3. Some of his Miracles were such as evinced his likeness to Moses; he changes
Water into Wine at Cana, he feeds many thousands in the Desert, he walks on the
Water, and makes one of his Disciples to walk with him; as Moses changed the
Waters to Blood, and had caused Manna to rain down upon the Israelites, and had
opened the Sea for their passage.

4. One ought to observe here, That if Jesus Christ's Miracles were not like
those of Moses, two only excepted, viz. his cursing of the barren Fig Tree, and
the drowning of the Swine; this was to show that he was not come like Moses to
execute the Judgments of God, but to exercise Acts of Grace and Mercy; those
now mentioned being sufficient to evince it was not for want of power.

If the Samaritan Woman argued very rationally when she said concerning Christ,
When the Messiah shall come, will he do greater signs than these; we may with
more reason urge it now, since we know not only that Jesus Christ has wrought
such great Miracles, but also conferred upon his Disciples a power of doing
greater Miracles than himself ever did.

CHAP. XI.
That the Predictions of our Lord Jesus Christ, clearly prove him to be the
Messiah.
ONe might have observed, That John the Baptist foretold many things concerning
the person of our Lord, and the glory of his Ministry; that Simeon foretold
that he was to be a sign which should be spoken against; and it is known how
exactly these things were fulfilled. But it will be more for our purpose to
examine those Prophesies which were pronounced by Christ himself.

I pretend not to repeat them all here, nor to show by how many ways, and upon
how many occasions Jesus Christ did reiterate them: this would take up too much
time; I shall only set down the chief of them, and add some few Reflections.

When Jesus Christ calls the Fishers to follow him, he foretells that he would
make them Teachers of the World; I will make you, says he, Fishers of Men. He
promises to make them famous by Miracles, and to send them the Gifts of his
Holy Spirit, which the People of Israel had now for above 400 years been
deprived of.

He promised to give them an Authority over the consciences of men, so that
what they should forbid us on Earth, should be forbidden in Heaven.

He foretells the Calling of the Gentiles to his Religion; Many, says he, shall
come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
in the Kingdom of Heaven. Which is the more considerable, because he seemed
himself unwilling to show any favor to the Gentiles, whom he called Dogs,
according to the Language of the Jews.

He foretells the Rejection of the Jews; The Children of the Kingdom, says he,
shall be cast out into outer darkness.

He foretells the Persecutions which were to happen to his Disciples from the
Jews, as well as from the Roman Governors; They shall lay their hands on you,
and persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and into Prisons, being
brought before Kings, etc.

He foretells that notwithstanding all these Persecutions, yet his Church should
not only continue, assuring them that the Gates of Hell should never prevail
against her; but also should greatly flourish and increase, according to what
David had foretold, Psalm CX. verse 3. alluding to the sudden fruitfulness
which is caused by Dew.

He above thirty times foretells his Suffering and Death.

He foretells his Resurrection the third day.

He foretells that Judas should betray him, S. Peter deny him, that his Apostles
should be scattered, as soon as they should see him smitten. He foretells the
Martyrdom of S. Peter, which he was to suffer for his sake, and to S. John,
that he was to survive the destruction of Jerusalem. He foretells that after his
Ascension to Heaven, he should begin the Call of all the Nations of the Earth;
When I shall be lifted up from the Earth, says he, I shall draw all men unto
me.

He often foretells the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple; Behold, says
he, your House is left unto you desolate.

He foretells that many false Messiah's should come after him, whom the Jews
should receive, though they had rejected him as an Impostor.

Several Reflections may be made upon these Predictions of our Lord. In short,
one may observe at first, That there are three sorts of them in the New
Testament; some of them were fulfilled soon after they were pronounced, as
those concerning the Ass which he sent his Disciples for, those of his Death
and Resurrection, of S. Peter's denying him, and the flight of his Apostles,
etc.

The Design of these was to establish the belief of those which were further
off, which is the Method of God himself the Father of our Lord in the Old
Testament, as I have observed.

Some of them related to matters which were more remote, as the Wars for
instance, which Christ foretold, the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
dispersion of the Jews.

Lastly, There were some whose accomplishment was at a very great distance,
after many Ages, some of them reaching to the end of the World.

One see's plainly that this mixture of our Savior's Predictions, which are of
so very different sorts, is of use to confirm the belief, and ascertain the
truth of them, the exact fulfilling of the first Oracle making way for the
belief and expectation of the second, and so on, till all be fulfilled.

One may observe afterward, That Jesus Christ and his Apostles, on whom he
(according to his promise) after his Ascension, poured forth the Spirit of
Prophecy, did ordinarily follow the same Notions and Expressions which the
Prophets of the Old Testament made use of.

Thus we find Jesus Christ makes use of Daniel's Notions, where he speaks of
the destruction of Jerusalem; thus we see that he imitates the most illustrious
Actions of the Prophets, and to make his Predictions the more observed, in
accomplishing the Prophecy of Zachariah on Palm Sunday; in the midst of the
acclamations of the People he weeps over Jerusalem, as if its destruction were
already come. Thus Jesus Christ says to S. Peter, When thou shall be old, Joh.
XXI. 18.
another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not; thus
foretelling his death; Thus he instructs him in the Calling of the Gentiles
under a representation of all sorts of Beasts, commanding him also, even as to
the impure Animals, Slay and eat. All the Revelations are full of such
Prophetical Idea's taken from the Old Testament, from Genesis, Isaiah,
Ezechiel, Zachariah, etc.

But here are other Reflections of as great importance as the former.

The first is, That the greatest part of these Predictions are nothing but a
continuance and more distinct explication of the Oracles of the Old Testament,
concerning the Sufferings of the Messiah, the Calling of the Gentiles, the
destruction of the Commonwealth of the Jews; and besides, they are continued to
the last day of the World, which is the end of Prophecy.

The second is, That these Predictions had not the least probability upon which
they might rationally have been grounded. What likelihood was there, that Jesus
Christ should be crucified, he who raised the dead, who commanded the Sea and
Winds, he whom they would have taken by force to make him their King? What
likelihood was there, that the Apostles, a company of poor miserable Jews,
should bring over the Gentiles to the Religion of a man who was accursed by the
Synagogue of the Jews, and crucified like a Slave by the Authority of the Roman
Magistrate? What probability was there of the destruction of Jerusalem, whilst
the Jews, accustomed to the Roman yoke, made it their business to avoid all
manner of occasions that might stir up the indignation of their Masters against
them. It is expedient, say they, rather that one man perish (meaning Jesus)
than to hazard the welfare of the whole Nation.

The third is, That these Oracles were written by the Apostles, not only
amongst Discourses of another nature, but also linked together in such a Chain,
that their connection will not permit us to believe that they were contrived
after the matters which they relate to, were past, and also that they are
constantly related by three Evangelists, long time before the things came to
pass, S. John being the only Witness of the Destruction of Jerusalem.

The fourth is, That these Oracles gave the Apostles as much grounds to expect
Calamities and violent Deaths, as to Jesus Christ himself, so that there is no
pretense of doubting that they were not faithfully recorded by the Evangelists,
and that therefore seeing the Accomplishment has exactly answered to the
Oracle, we ought to look upon them as Divine Oracles.

I confess that these Oracles, no more than the Books of the New Testament,
were ever committed to the public custody of the Jews, as formerly the Oracles
of the Prophets of old were, but this cannot really diminish their Authority.

I will not observe at present, that because the Temple was to be burnt, it was
not proper to depose them there; and 'twas for this reason God thought fit to
cause the Oracles of the Old Testament to be translated long before.

Nor yet, that it was very proper that these Predictions, as well as the Books
of the New Testament, should be put into the hands of the Gentiles, who
thence-forward were to be the People of God, and his Temple.

But this I observe, that nothing can be imagined more solemn than these
Prophecies of our Savior and his Disciples, as well as never any thing was
more exactly fulfilled.

Jesus Christ was born at Bethlehem according to the Oracles* Now as no man is
Master of the place of his Birth, so it is plain that here is no room left for
imposture; neither is a man any more the Master of his Death; wherefore to give
a certain Character to his Prophecy, he foretells his dying at Jerusalem; which
accordingly was accomplished in all its Circumstances; can any thing be more
exact?

But one may say, That it was easy for the Disciples to forge Predictions
suitable to the Event, in like manner as Virgil has done in the sixth of his
Aeneids of Marcellus. One may indeed contrive an imposture which shall be
possible, and which may answer to some few Oracles; but I shall hereafter show
the folly of that thought, when I come to prove the faithfulness of the
Apostles and Evangelists.

But can we conceive such a suspicion concerning the Conversion of the
Gentiles, the ruin of Paganism, the Victory of Christianity after Ten
Persecutions. It Is now above 1600 years that the Christian Religion subsists,
whereas, who could have assured the Disciples of Jesus Christ that their
Doctrine would have had so much as one or two followers after their Death? The
greatest Empires, that of the Chaldeans, of the Persians, of the Grecians, and
that of the Romans; have been overturned, and none of them singly have been of
so long continuance as the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, which nevertheless was
attacked by all that was great and powerful in the World. Who see's not that
this is the Empire whereof Daniel speaks in the seventh of his Revelations,
which was never to have end.

Jesus Christ foretold, as it is set down by his Disciples, according to the
Prophecy of Daniel, that the Temple of Jerusalem should be destroyed, and never
built again: who could tell the Apostles, if they had forged this Oracle
themselves, that the endeavors of Julian to confound this Prophecy, when he
began to rebuild the Temple, would be in vain, as indeed they proved by an
effect of the Divine vengeance against the Jews, who were engaged in the
rebuilding of it, Ammian. Marcellin. Lib. 23.
under the Authority of that Emperor.

Indeed if one reflects on the Oracles of Jesus Christ, one shall find them a
thousand times more known than those of the Jews.

1. The greatest part of them were penned at one and the same time.

2. They were writ by several Authors, who lived in different places.

3. They were read over the whole Earth every Lord's day, they have been
explained and commented upon soon after, every one endeavoring to take notice
of their Accomplishment.

4. They have been alleged in Disputes against Jews and Gentiles, and have
served for a Foundation to the Faith of the Christian Church, whose Teachers
have made it their business to show their uniformity with the Oracles of the
Old Testament, which are in the hands of the Jews, though the Jews have always
considered the Christians as their most mortal Enemies.

But one may also find that these Oracles, being for the most part much more
clear and express, their Accomplishment also has been so much the more easily
discernible: from whence it evidently follows, That Jesus Christ ought to be
acknowledged as the Prophet that was like unto Moses, as is mentioned in the
Eighteenth of Deuteronomy, that is indeed the true Messiah.

CHAP. XII.
That Jesus Christ died precisely in the same manner as it was foretold that
the Messiah should dye.
I Have showed in my third part, that God had given to his Church several
Oracles to explain distinctly this great Truth concerning the Messiah.

1. He had set this up for a Rule by Moses, Cursed is he that hangs on a Tree.

2. He had proposed by David the Idea of the Messiah, as having his hands and
feet pierced; the Gentiles and Jews uniting themselves against him.

3. He had foretold by Isaiah that the Messiah was to be accounted a
Malefactor, and put to death.

4. He had repeated the same Idea's by the Prophet Zechariah, who describes the
manner of his being pierced, which has a natural reference to the notion of
Crucifixion.

I have also set down the Reasons for which God separated the several parts of
those Prophetical Descriptions of so surprising an Event; the difficulty there
was on the one hand to make these Idea's to be received, which seem full of
Contradictions; the Messiah having been at first set forth as the Fountain of
Blessing: and on the other hand, their seeming incompatibility with the Glory
which God had promised to the Messiah, and by him to the Israelites.

And at last, I have showed that these Oracles do exactly and clearly describe
the things which were to happen to the Messiah, which was to be so, because of
the nature of these Events, which were so strange, and at such a distance from
the common Idea's which men have for the most part of such things.

Our business therefore only is to consider at present, whether indeed Jesus
Christ died in the same manner as the Prophets had foretold that the Messiah
should.

This Character is a very illustrious one to confirm that Jesus Christ is the
Messiah. For it is well known that a Prisoner is no longer Master of the things
that happen to him, neither of the kind of his Death, nor of the manner of his
Burial.

In short, nothing can be imagined more foolish than to suppose that the
Disciples of Jesus Christ should apply to their Master, that he might pass for
the Messiah, such Oracles as had not usually been applied to the Messiah by the
Jews, amongst whom they lived, and whom they endeavored to dispose for the
receiving of Jesus Christ as the promised Messiah.

Now we cannot conceive any thing more exact than the Agreement which we find
between the Prophecies and the Event.

1. When Jesus Christ by his triumphant entry into Jerusalem, riding on an Ass,
had put his Disciples in mind of one passage in Zachary, he obliged them also
to cast their eyes upon another, when he foretold his death, and their flight,
as the accomplishment of this Oracle, Matthew. XXVI. 31.
I will smite the Shepherd, and the flock shall be scattered, Zach. XIII. 7.

2. He was beset with a Band of Roman Soldiers, and the Servants of the
principal men amongst the Jews, who apprehended him, under the conduct of
Judas; which exactly answers, 1. To the Description which we find Psalm. XXII.
Dogs, that is Heathens, whom the Jews treated as such, and strong Bulls, that
is Jews, represented by clean Beasts, have beset me round. And secondly, to
that other Prophecy, He that eats bread with me has lift up his heel against
me.

3. He offers himself freely to death, according to that of Isaiah, That he
gave his Soul an offering for sin. This appears not only by his going into the
Garden, where he knew that he should be taken; but also by his telling the
Soldiers that he was the man they looked for; he opposed S. Peter's attempts
toward his Rescue, and declares that he did not fly from death, but was
willing to satisfy the intent of the Prophecies.

4. He is forsaken by his Disciples, as he himself had testified of it as
foretold by the Prophets, Zach. XIII. 7.

5. He is struck on the face before Annas, as Jeremiah had foretold Lament.
III. 30. He gives his Cheek to him that smites him.

6. He appears before Caiaphas, surrounded by every thing that was great
amongst the Jews, whether Lawyers or Churchmen, according to Psalm II.

7. He is silent before his unjust Judges, and neglects to answer the
Accusations which the false Witnesses deposed against him, according to the
Prophecy of Isaiah, As a Sheep before his shearers is dumb, so he opens not
his mouth, Isaiah LIII. 7. and the description which David gives of him. Ps.
XXXI. and XXXIX.

8. They opened their mouths against him, in accusing him of Blasphemy, as
David had figuratively expressed it, Psalm. XXII. 13.

9. They spit in his face, they buffetted and abused him the whole night,
according to that Oracle of Isaiah XLIX. 6.

10. When Judas saw that Jesus Christ was delivered to Pilate by the Jews, who
demanded his Crucifixion, he returned the thirty pieces of Silver, wherewith
they purchased the Potters field, afterward called the Field of Blood, and set
apart by the Jews for the burial of Strangers, as was foretold by Zachariah XI.
12. and by Jeremiah XXXII. 25.

11. He is accused before Pilate, and brought before Herod, without justifying
himself of the Crimes laid to his charge, as it is Psalm XXXVIII. and XXVII. 12.

12. Pilate and Herod agree in conspiring the death of Jesus Christ, according
to the description of Psalm II.

13. Pilate desiring to save Jesus, the Jews demand Barabbas might be released,
and Jesus punished, as David had foretold Psalm XXII. 14.

14. Jesus Christ was scourged by Pilate's order, which was foretold Psalm
XXXVIII. and LXIX. Isaiah LIII. verse. 5. and Chap. LXIII.

15. He is brought forth by Pilate to the People with an Ecce Homo, Behold the
Man, which was foretold by Isaiah, When we shall see him, there is no Beauty
that we should desire him, he is despised and rejected of men, we did esteem
him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted.

16. He is afterward delivered to the Soldiers, who before they crucified
him, insulted over him with a thousand Indignities, and scourged him again,
according to the Prophecies so often before alleged.

17. They Crucify him with two Robbers, which answers to that Prophecy Isaiah
LIII. 12. He was numbered with Transgressors.

18. They give him Gall and Vinegar to drink, as was foretold Psalm LXIX.

19. They pierce his hands and feet in nailing him to the Cross, which answers
to Psalm XXII. 17, 18.

20. They part his Garments, which is represented in the same Psalm, verse 19.
and cast Lots on his Vesture, according to the same Psalm in the very same
place.

21. He suffers a thousand Reproaches upon the Cross, according to what we find
Psalm XXII. verse 8. and Psalm LXIX. ver. 8, 10.

22. And in particular the Jews and Scribes reproach him in the very words of
Psalm XXII. verse 8.

23. Jesus Christ cries out, applying to himself the beginning of Psalm XXII.
My God! My God! why have thou forsaken me? as he had before applied to himself
the Prophecy concerning the Messiah in the third of Daniel.

24. He commends his Soul into the hands of God, in the very words which we
read Psalm XVI.

These are the principal Circumstances of the Death of Jesus Christ, which one
see's to be exactly agreeable to the Prophecies going before concerning them:
let us now consider those which followed his death, which we shall not find to
be less particular.

1. The Bones of Jesus Christ were not broken, as those of the two Thieves,
which one may see foretold Psalm XXXIV. verse 21.

2. They opened his side with a Spear, according to the Idea of Zechariah,
Chap. X. verse 12. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced.

3. His Body is buried by Joseph of Arimathea, in a new Sepulcher, which
answers to the Prophecy of Isaiah, Chap. LIII.

These Remarks do, in my judgment, clearly prove, that in the death of Christ
all the Characters by which the Prophets have distinguished the death of the
Messiah, are actually found.

But that we may yet be more sensible how justly these Oracles are applied to
Jesus Christ; here are some Reflections upon the application which the Apostles
make of these particular Facts which happened to Christ, to those Oracles which
I have now mentioned.

The first is, That the relation of these Facts is joined with an account of
the weakness whereinto they all fell: They relate their own flight, and
forsaking their Master, with S. Peter's denying of him, whilst they set down
the courage of those women, and that entire love which they showed to the
person of Jesus.

The second is, That the account of the Accomplishment of these ancient Oracles
is interwoven with the Accomplishment of those which were uttered by Jesus
Christ, which alone are sufficient to make good his claim.

The third is, That our Savior did never on any occasion more openly stand to
his pretension of being the Messiah, than when he applied to himself those
Oracles which by their public consent were referred to the Messiah, which the
Jews at that time more obstinately contested, than ever.

The fourth is, That there never was a more exact description of all
Circumstances which might assure us of the truth of any Relation, than that
which the Evangelists have given us of the death of Jesus Christ, in which we
find the places, the time, the persons, their discourses, and other things of
that nature, set down with extreme care.

The fifth is, That as this Fact, with all its Circumstances, is the most
exactly described of any thing that ever was, so it was a matter, concerning
which it was scarce possible to impose upon any one. All was done in the face
of the whole Nation, who were met together at their most solemn Festival: All
was done in the presence of the Sovereign Heathen Magistrate, of the Council of
the Jews, of Herod, and of those who followed him to Jerusalem.

The sixth is, That we find an account of some Miracles interwoven with this
Relation of the Evangelists concerning the death of Christ, and those Miracles
as public, and as little subject to suspicion, as the death it self of Jesus
Christ, if we take the pains to examine them.

They who come to take Jesus fall down backward to the ground; Jesus Christ
restores the ear of the High Priest's Servant which was cut off: there was
darkness over all the Land from Nine a Clock in the Morning till Noon; the vail
of the Temple is rent. These are miraculous actions, and such as the Jews might
easily have refuted, wheresoever they had been proposed, if the truth of them
had not been beyond all question.

From all these Remarks it evidently follows, That it is impossible to dispute
the Application which the Apostles make of these Oracles which are so
particular to the person of Jesus Christ, as the true Messiah: We find every
part of their Relation exactly answering to the Prophesies; how then can any
one doubt of their being fulfilled in him? especially seeing it is evident by
so many other proofs that he was indeed the Messiah, and that God has been
pleased so many other ways to confirm the same truth.

CHAP. XIII.
That Jesus Christ was raised again the third day according to the Prophets,
and afterward ascended into Heaven.
HAving showed in the foregoing Chapter that Jesus Christ was crucified under
Pontius Pilate, for maintaining that he was the promised Messiah, I am now to
show, that according to the Prophecies set down in my third part, he rose again
the third day, and afterward ascended into Heaven. As these two Facts are the
most important of all that are contained in the Gospel, because if they be
denied, all the Divine Worship given to Jesus Christ, by the Apostles, and a
great number of Jews and Gentiles, who received him for their Master in matters
of Religion, is absolutely unlawful; so we ought solidly to prove that they are
indisputably true. Of which we shall be fully convinced by making some
Observations upon the Relation which the Evangelists give us concerning them,
and we shall easily find therein all the Characters of Truth.

There is no necessity of observing, that a Resurrection from the dead, is a
Fact which can hardly be believed; and that tho the Jews did not all of them
look upon it as an impossible thing, yet there were Sadduces amongst them,
whose Doctrine was publicly taught. It is certain, that tho the Disciples had
seen Jesus Christ, raising three persons from the dead, and amongst others
Lazarus, a little before his death, yet we find that they were not thereby more
disposed to believe that Christ was to rise from the dead.

In short, tho the Evangelists tells us, that Jesus Christ himself had
foretold, that he was to rise again the third day, which was a thing so
commonly known, that the Priests to elude the Prophecy, desired of Pilate,
that a Guard might be set on Jesus his Grave, yet they expressly tell us, that
the Disciples, none excepted, were in such a Consternation at the death of
Jesus Christ, that they had entirely lost the hopes of seeing the
accomplishment of that Prophecy. Some pious Women, who had accompanied him to
the Cross, and were desirous to show some Marks of their Veneration after his
death; came indeed to his Sepulcher, but with Spices to embalm his dead Body,
so far were they from expecting to find him risen from the dead. Tho these Holy
Women were convinced of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, by the Apparition of
an Angel, by the Discourse of our Savior himself, and by the repetition of his
order, that they should go to Galilee, where they should see him, yet the
Relation which they give of these things, is accounted fabulous, so that two
only of all the Apostles had the curiosity to go to the Grave and inform
themselves. Here is a great unbelief amongst the Apostles, which was to be
cured: This was a condition wholly inconsistent, if we suppose them Impostors,
and that they intended to impose upon the World.

A Second thing we may observe is, That as the Incredulity of our Savior's own
Disciples was extraordinary, so we cannot imagine any more efficacious means
than were employed to overcome this their doubtfulness. If one joins the
Relations of the Evangelists together, one may find several degrees of
evidence, in those proofs which confirm the truth of the Resurrection of our
Savior.

The First is the manner of their being informed of the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ; Angels at first declare his Resurrection to some Women; Jesus Christ
afterward appears to Mary Magdalen, all alone; afterward he appears only to
two of his Disciples, then to St. Peter, afterward he appears to seven of them
at once, then to all his Disciples except Thomas, and soon after to the eleven,
Thomas being one of them. After all this, he appears to a greater number of his
Followers, till at last, having been several times seen of them all, he appears
to them all assembled together, and is taken up into Heaven in their sight. It
is evident, that as they were informed of this truth one after another, so they
were more obliged to examine the Fact more attentively when Jesus Christ
appeared to them.

The second degree has relation to those Marks and Characters, by which they
were assured, that it was Jesus Christ himself. The Angels repeat to the Women
the command which Jesus Christ before his death had given to his Disciples to
go into Galilee; Jesus Christ appearing to Mary Magdelen repeats the same to
her, and gives her a particular Commission for S. Peter, to comfort him in his
Affliction, for having denied his Master. Appearing to his Disciples as they
went to Emmaus, he refers them to the Prophecies, which spoke of his Death and
Resurrection; and moreover, when he broke Bread with them, they hear the same
Prayers which he ordinarily used at the blessing of it. He appears to them the
same day the fifth time, and shows them his feet and his hands; he repeats the
Grant of the Authority which the Father had given him; he breathes upon them,
saying, Receive the Holy Ghost; a week after he lets Thomas touch him; he
appears afterward to seven of his Apostles upon the Lake of Tiberias, where he
confirms S. Peter in his charge, from which his denying of Christ might seem to
have excluded him, after he had wrought a Miracle in the draught of the Fishes,
which was like some Miracles which he had wrought before his death. Afterward
he appears upon the same Mountain in Galilee, where in all probability he had
been transfigured before, and is there seen of Five hundred of his Disciples at
once. And last of all he appears to them at Jerusalem, after their return from
Galilee, and from thence goes with them to Bethany, where after he had told
them of the absolute power which God had given them, he commands them to go and
Baptize in his Name, he foretells the Miracles which they should work, and the
Gifts which they should receive at Jerusalem. All these so very different
Circumstances were only designed to assure their Eyes, their Hands, their
Minds, their Consciences, that it was the same Jesus whom they had always
followed.

It is worth our taking notice of the diversity of these Circumstances for the
certainty of this Fact, which absolutely prevent all pretenses of doubtfulness.
Jesus Christ appears ten several times after his death; he appears five times
on the very day of his Resurrection; he appears at several hours, to different
persons, in several places, but always to persons to whom he was familiarly
known, to those who were not at all credulous; the first news they had of his
Resurrection seemed only to raise their Scruples, if the testimony of their
Senses, which saw him and touched him, had not removed all suspicions. Jesus
Christ appears to them in places where he had wrought many Miracles, and where
he had often before conversed with them.

But one may make another more important Reflection, upon the time and the day
wherein our Savior rose again. Of the ten several times in which he appeared
to his Disciples, he appeared five times on the day of his Resurrection; he
appeared to them eight days after, and after that, the eighth day, which he
signalized by his frequent appearing to his Disciples, was consecrated to
celebrate the memory of this Event every week: One finds certain tokens hereof
in the Writings of the Apostles, and it is known that all Christians after them
did inviolably observe this Law. Now let any one consider whether it would have
been possible to introduce this Custom in the time of the Apostles, if the
Resurrection of Christ had not been a Fact confessed of all hands. Can any one
conceive that the Apostles and their Disciples, who were witnesses of the death
of Jesus Christ, and who celebrated the memory thereof by a Sacrament, could
have been so stupid to establish a Custom which would put People upon examining
the Fact, and have convinced them in a little time, since none of those that
followed them would have submitted to this practice, if they had not been
convinced by their Eyes, and their other Senses, and by a thousand other proofs
of the truth of so capital a Fact, which was so much disputed by the Jews, of
which they were obliged to make a solemn commemoration two and fifty times
every year, as long as they lived.

Let us add to this Remark, which we have elsewhere urged, with reference to
the Creation, another Reflection upon a Fact which the Evangelists tell us: They
tell us that though the Resurrection of Christ was accompanied with very peculiar
Circumstances, sufficient to convince both Jews and Gentiles of the truth of
it, being ushered in with an Earthquake, with Apparitions of Angels to the
Soldiers that guarded the Sepulcher of Jesus, and were frighted thereby, yet
the Council of the Jews contrived, with the Soldiers, a most impudent lie to
outface it, and accordingly the Soldiers coming before Pilate, tell him that
the Disciples had stolen away the Body of Jesus whilst they slept, and his
Disciples tell us, that since this has been the common Opinion of the Jews.

I will not so much as take notice here of the palpable falsity of this
Deposition; for if the Soldiers were asleep, how could they depose concerning
a Fact which was done at that time: If they were not asleep, why did not they
hinder the Disciples from taking the Body of their Master away? How could they
affirm that Thieves had taken him away, when the Linen Clothes wherein his
Body was shrouded, being left in the Grave, and the Napkin that was about his
head, being folded up in a place by it self, do absolutely evince that he was
not taken away by persons that were in fear of a surprise? What probability is
there, in short, to suspect that his Disciples, who forsook Jesus Christ whilst
he was yet alive, who fled from him at that time, should undertake such a
hazardous Attempt to have his Body only?

Neither will I insist upon a Representation of the Apostles sincerity, which
made them give us in their Histories a plain account of the report which was
spread against the belief of the Resurrection of Jesus, before ever that the
Disciples had attested the same.

But I observe another very particular Character in their Relation, which is,
that it was impossible for them to establish this Fact of the Resurrection,
without accusing thereby the whole Council of the Jews, of the most shameful
and crying imposture that ever was; to write a thing of this nature against the
Heads of that Religion, was to sacrifice themselves to the hatred of the
Public, and to expose themselves to inevitable ruin. In short, let us imagine
whether after a charge of this nature, it was easy for the Apostles to publish
their Books, and preach publicly that Jesus Christ was risen from the dead?
And yet this was what they did with a surprising diligence when they inserted
this terrible Accusation into their Books and Sermons; which alone is
sufficient to demonstrate that they were infinitely convinced of the
Resurrection, and also in a condition to convince all Gainsayers, as we shall
show hereafter.

One may add to this proof the Conversion of S. Paul, and the care which he
afterward took to confirm this truth of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. He
was a declared Enemy of Jesus Christ, and of the Christian Religion, and yet
soon after the Death of Christ he preaches him up for the Messiah: How came
this sudden change? He asserts that he had seen in Heaven this Jesus who was
risen from the dead, and received from him the Apostleship; accordingly we find
him preaching by these Orders, without any communication had with the first
Disciples of Jesus Christ. He relates these matters in a manner so little
affected to advance his Ministry in the minds of the Galatians, who preferred
S. Peter, and the other Apostles before him, that there is no ground left to
doubt of them.

One ought to make a like Reflection upon the Conversion of Cornelius the
Centurion; he was a Proselyte, that is, a Gentile by Birth, but a Jew by
Profession, and by the Employment he was in, he had occasion of being more
particularly informed of the deposition of the Soldiers, who probably were not
unknown to him, for he was in the Garrison at Caesarea, which was not far from
Jerusalem. Yet however this Cornelius, after he had a vision which commanded
him to send to Joppa, a place made famous, because Jonah the Prophet set Sail
from thence, who was a Type of the Messiah in his Death and Resurrection; this
Cornelius, I say, embraced the Christian Religion, becomes the first Bishop of
Caesarea, and dyed a Martyr for the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

The great affection which S. Luke had for S. Paul confirms the same truth. S.
Luke had never seen our Savior, he was born at Antioch, where in all
probability he exercised his Profession of Physic, yet he was converted to
Christianity, and followed S. Paul in all places, and writ the History of his
Miracles and Preaching: who doubts but that the reason hereof was, because he
had seen the Dead whom Christ had raised to life, and had seen S. Paul, whom
Jesus Christ had dignified with the Apostleship, raise others also from the
dead.

It is certain that those who were first convinced by the Relation of the
Apostles, must needs have had very evident proofs of the truth of it. The Jews
had Sadducees amongst them, who denied the possibility of the Resurrection in
general; the Council of the Jews especially had made it their business to decry
the Conduct, the Doctrine, and the Miracles of Jesus Christ, and in particular
to make the belief of his Resurrection suspected; and so much the more because
Jesus Christ had foretold it, and his Apostles maintained that it was come to
pass accordingly. If in opposition to these strong prejudices, there had only
been the deposition of two or three persons to confirm this Fact, there would
have been reason to doubt of it; but we find that this thing, which of it self
seems hard to be believed, and was otherwise so much contested, is, 1. Proved
by ten several Apparitions; 2. It is attested by above five hundred Disciples;
3. It was publicly preached by the Disciples of Christ at Jerusalem it self,
and throughout all Judea, where it was most of all disputed: 4. It was received
by the very Enemies of Jesus Christ, as S. Paul and Cornelius, and by thousands
of those, who having demanded his Death, were converted by the preaching of the
Apostles: 5. It was confirmed by the Martyrdom of the greatest part of them;
and 6. It was not not only authorized by the presence of the three persons whom
Christ had raised to life, and who lived one of them at Bethany, fifteen
furlongs from Jerusalem, where Jesus ascended to Heaven; another at Naim, etc.
But it was further verified by several Resurrections wrought by the Apostles,
to whom Christ had vouchsafed that astonishing power.

It was also a very considerable thing that the Commonwealth of the Jews
continued near forty years after the time that the Apostles undertook openly to
preach up the Resurrection of Jesus Christ as the capital Article of their
Religion; and yet in all that time it was never opposed by any public Writing
either of the Jews or Gentiles. If the Jews in their unjust intrigues against
Jesus Christ and his Religion, endeavored to abuse the World in this matter,
with calumniating Stories, neither have the Apostles been wanting to accuse the
principal Men of their Nation of imposture, and they have despised the most
cruel of their Punishments, to maintain the Justice of their Charge; and yet
none of them would undertake to justify the Calumnies of their Council, though
they saw Christianity spreading it self not only over all Judea, but in all
parts of the World. To speak of it, as it is, this Conduct of theirs was a
manifest betraying of their Cause, or rather an open acknowledgment that what
they had published against the innocence of the Disciples, and the truth of the
Resurrection of Jesus was without all ground.

I foresee only one probable difficulty which can be opposed to the solidity of
these Reflections. A Jew may demand, why Jesus Christ after his Resurrection did
not converse as openly amongst the Jews as before, that so he might have been
known by those who had crucified him, which would have put the truth of the
Resurrection out of doubt?

But to speak truth, this Objection is not reasonable; for 1. Jesus Christ had
threatened the unbelieving Jews, they should see him no more, and he ought to
make good his threatening. 2. Who sees not that they would have looked upon his
appearing amongst them as a fantastic Apparition, after they had seen him
work so many Miracles, and had attributed them to the Devil. 3. I say that such
an Apparition was not agreeable to our Savior's Doctrine in the Parable of the
Rich man; Luke XVI. 29, 31.
They have Moses and the Prophets, if they hear not them, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead. 4. Jesus Christ having for the most part
conversed in Galilee at Nazareth and Capernaum, it was to the Galileans and his
Disciples that he was chiefly to show himself, to be acknowledged by them, as
being the persons who were particularly to bear witness of this truth. After so
strong a presumption as the Governors of that People had of Christ's
Resurrection, founded upon the Earthquake which accompanied it, and upon the
Deposition of the Soldiers to whom the Angels had appeared, had not they all
the reason in the World to believe the testimony of the Apostles concerning
this truth, which they heard several times attested by them in full Council,
and saw confirmed by miraculous Cures which they could not question in the
least.

Lastly, Is not this Objection the most ridiculous thing in the World? For let
us suppose that these Considerations are not strong enough to justify our
Savior's conduct when he gave these proofs of his Resurrection, does it follow
that because he did not make choice of means (in order to persuade the Jews)
which they preferred before others used by him, without any solid Reason, that
therefore we must reject the deposition of so many Witnesses who unanimously
attest it? Since Jesus Christ had raised three persons to life again, which
then lived in Judea; since Jerusalem had continued forty years after the death
of Christ; since sixty solemn Feasts were celebrated in that time, where all
the Jews had an occasion to examine the truth of these Facts, and the truth or
falsity of the Accusation charged upon the Apostles by the Council of the Jews,
and that multitudes of Jews and Gentiles were converted at the preaching of the
Apostles, who reduced all to this Question of the Fact of the Resurrection of
our Savior, is not this an invincible proof against all the Accusations and
Suspicions of the Synagogue.

Forasmuch as the Witnesses who maintain the Resurrection of Christ, are the
very same that attest his Ascension into Heaven, and that they assert it with
the same proofs, and the same zeal, the Reflections here set down may serve for
that also, and the rather because I am next to consider the sending of the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which is an undeniable proof, both of the Resurrection
of Christ and his Ascension; and that these very Gifts of the Holy Spirit
enabled the Jews to write, preach, and publish throughout all the World the
truths of that Christianity which we now profess.

CHAP. XIV.
That Jesus Christ sent to his Apostles, and to the Primitive Christians, the
miraculous Gifts of his Holy Spirit, as he had promised in the Ancient
Prophecies.
I Have shown that the Prophecies of the Old Testament speak very plainly of
this sending of the Spirit, as a Preliminary to the Calling of the Gentiles,
which was the great design of God. The Prophet Joel speaks of it as such, and
makes this wonder to precede the destruction of Jerusalem, as S. Peter observes
in the second of the Acts. Isaiah speaks very particularly of it as such, in
the eleventh Chapter of his Prophecy, where he sufficiently intimates that the
Spirit of Prophecy should from thence forward so rest upon Jesus Christ, that
it would not be found any longer among the Jews, whose City and Temple should
be destroyed.

At present my business is to show that this thing has been exactly fulfilled,
according to the design which God had laid down in the Prophets. To be
convinced of this, we need only make some? Reflections upon the Relation which
S. Luke gives us of it in the Acts.

He tells us therefore, that fifty days only after the death of Jesus Christ,
the Apostles having continued at Jerusalem, and being assembled there, they
received the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, that is, the power of speaking
all sorts of Languages, to make them fit to preach the Gospel to all Nations,
and to explain the most sublime Mysteries of our Savior's Religion.

Every thing is considerable in this Relation of S. Luke: 1. That he relates
this Fact as happening fifty days only after the Jewish Passover, when Christ
was crucified; the whole Nation of the Jews having been witnesses of his death.
2. That he relates it as happening in the same City where Jesus Christ was
condemned, that the same Multitude, who after fifty days were again assembled
there at this Feast, might be Witnesses of this miraculous Event. In short, it
plainly appears that this new Law from Mount Sion, was solemnly promulg'd in
the presence of all the Jews, who were assembled from all parts of the World,
as the old Law was, when all the People assisted at the foot of Mount Sinai. 3.
That these Gifts were granted to all the Disciples of our Savior; Gifts, which
till that time had been wholly unheard of, and whereof some part only had been
granted to some Prophets, and to some Priests, and of which none had been made
partakers since the time of Malachi; God having so ordered it, that the desires
of the Jews might be the more inflamed for the Messiah's coming, as also that
upon his coming he might the more easily be discerned. 4. That this was a Fact
openly known amongst the Jews, and differently interpreted by them; some
saying, They they were full of new Wine. 5. That the Apostles asserted by the
mouth of S. Peter, that this was an Accomplishment of the ancient Oracles, as
well as of the Promises of Jesus Christ. 6. That they declared that the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, his Ascension into Heaven, and this miraculous
Donative, had been foretold by David and Joel. It Is certainly therefore very
natural to make these following Reflections upon the Relation of so considerable
an Event.

The first will confirm the truth of this miraculous Fact, if we consider that
it is absurd to suppose that S. Luke, a wise man, should be so rash, as to
relate a matter of this nature, if he had not been fully convinced of it; and
if it had not been an easy thing to have convinced his Readers thereof also;
nothing more being required for their conviction, but the presence of one of
those first Christians, and to make a trial of this supernatural virtue
bestowed on them, for which there were frequent occasions.

2. We must observe that this Relation of S. Luke is as it were the foundation
which he lays down, to make his Book of the Acts to appear just and reasonable,
and to justify the Apostles conduct in preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles,
not only contrary to the opinion of the Jews, who looked upon them as wholly
excluded from the Privileges of the Covenant; but also contrary to the seeming
Maxim of Jesus Christ, who acted only as the Minister of Circumcision; and
contrary to the pretensions of many Christians, who after the Mission of the
Holy Ghost, took it very ill that S. Peter had preached to the Gentiles.

3. S. Luke supposes that this Fact came to pass in such a manner, that it was
followed by Consequences as illustrious as they were incredible. Twelve poor
Fishermen undertook to go and preach to all the World, that their Master, who
fifty days before was crucified at Jerusalem, at the prosecution of the whole
Synagogue, and by order of one of the Magistrates of the Roman Empire, was not
only living, not only ascended into Heaven, but that he also had given them the
power of speaking all sorts of Languages, of curing all Diseases, and even of
raising the Dead.

4. They go yet further, they boldly maintain that Jesus Christ had given them
a privilege of communicating the same power to all those who would believe
that he was the promised Messiah, and this without any other mystery but the
bare laying on of their hands, after they had received them by Baptism into the
Profession of Christianity.

Nothing could have been more easy than to convince them of the contrary,
unless they had confirmed the truth of their Assertion by the miraculous
Consequences of that first Miracle. The Fact was publicly acknowledged; Simon
Magus is convinced thereof, and he who had made himself so famous by his
Sorceries, becomes a Disciple. S. Luke in a History of the Actions of thirty
years, relates the continual Miracles wrought by the Apostles, and particularly
by S. Paul, whom he constantly followed.

It seems to me that if one considers the History it self, and the person who
made it, that it will appear to be a true and faithful Relation; however there
are other testimonies which invincibly establish the same Truth.

1. The Gospel was in effect established in most of the Provinces and great
Cities of the Roman Empire. S. Paul writes to the Christians of Thessalonica,
Corinth, and Ephesus, to the Galatians, Colossians, etc. which is an evident
Argument that there were Christians every where, that is, Disciples of these
twelve Fishermen, who understood nothing but their native Syriack Language; How
then were all these Nations converted, without supposing the truth of the
Miracle at the Pentecost?

2. The Apostles speak to them of these miraculous Gifts as of a common thing;
S. Paul employing some part of his first Epistle to the Corinthians to regulate
those disorders which arose in the Church, by reason of the abuse of those
Gifts. S. James speaks of the power that the Priests had to cure the sick; and
S. Paul wishes for an opportunity of going to Rome, to communicate those Gifts
to the Romans.

3. They take occasion to raise the Dignity of the Gospel above that of the
Law, in calling it the Ministry of the Spirit, in opposition to the Letter of
the Law, notwithstanding the Tables of the Law had been given to Moses in so
very illustrious a manner.

It is of great moment here to consider. Three things, which alone are
sufficient to confirm the truth of the Christian Religion.

The first is, That this Mission of the Spirit is alone sufficient to convince
Mankind of the Divinity of Jesus Christ. God gave to Adam a power of speaking
one Language, and afterward he divided the same to make a confusion amongst
the Builders of Babel; and Jesus Christ does the same thing to confirm the
Glory and Belief of his Divinity. God vouchsafes the power of Miracles to some,
Jesus Christ communicates it to a far greater number; Miracles not having been
so generally wrought, because no People ever had that power in all the
foregoing Ages. The Father wrought so few Miracles, that he might leave to the
Son this means of making himself known. The Son had the glory of pouring forth
the Holy Ghost, in a greater abundance than the Father, thereby to supply the
shame of his humiliation. This is the true Reason why the Scripture says, That
the Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus Christ was not yet glorified.

The second is, That from this Miracle one ought to infer these two
Conclusions; The first is, That God was fully pacified by the Sacrifice of
Jesus Christ, the Apostles constantly representing the Passion of our Savior
as a Sacrifice offered by him. The other is, That from that time forward
Mankind was conscerated to God as his Temple. Jesus Christ in his prayer before
his Death expresses himself much in the same manner as Solomon did at his
Dedication of the first Temple, and Fire from Heaven falls down on his
Sacrifice: Jesus Christ consecrates his Apostles to be the living Stones of his
Temple, and causes the heavenly Flames to fall down upon them, as had formerly
been granted at Solomon's Dedication of the first Temple.

The third is, That the Jews themselves cannot conceive a more glorious or
magnificent Accomplishment of the ancient Oracles concerning the effusion of
the Holy Spirit at the time of the Messiah, than what we find related by S.
Luke, whereof the whole World may see the visible Effects, in the Calling of
the Gentiles to the Christian Religion: from whence one may rationally
conclude, That Jesus Christ must be acknowledged for the Messiah whom God had
promised.

CHAP. XV.
That according to the Prophecies, the Apostles of Jesus Christ have called the
Gentiles to the profession of the Christian Religion.
WE have already seen what was the design of God, and that the distinction
which he made of the Jews from other Nations, was only that the Messiah might
by that means be the more certainly known, in whom all Mankind had a right, as
being promised to Adam.

God renewed the Idea of this truth in a very lively manner, when he assured
Abraham, before he gave him the Law of Circumcision, That in his Seed all
Nations should be blessed. Jacob enlightened by the Spirit of Prophecy on his
Deathbed, plainly takes this truth for granted, when he says that the Messiah,
whom he calls Shiloh, was to be the expectation of the Gentiles, Genesis XLIX. Why
does he not say, That he was to be the expectation of the Jews? but because he
supposes that they were to be rejected, and the Gentiles called in their stead.

One see's in the Psalms, and in the Prophets until Malachi inclusively, a
thousand Declarations of this future Calling of the Gentiles to the Faith of
the Messiah, and though the most part of the Idea's which the Prophets make use
of, seem to be very figurative, describing the Messiah as a Conqueror, who was
to subdue the whole World to his Dominion by the force of Arms; yet we find a
great many others interwoven with them which only relate to the Profession of
the Religion of the Messiah, and which, not being capable of any other Sense,
sufficiently determine the others, so as not to perplex the Reader with those
seeming Obscurities. But Jesus Christ very distinctly declares this in diverse
places, and above all in the XXIV. of S. Matthew, This Gospel, says he, shall
be preached throughout all the World.

Now nothing could ever be more exactly fulfilled than these ancient Oracles
have been; let the Jews cavil as long as they please about our application of
many of the Prophecies of the Old Testament to our Savior; let them put a
sense upon the Scriptures which treat of this Subject, contrary to what the
Jews, who were contemporary with Jesus Christ ever did, and to the most of
those with whom the first Christians, as Justin, Tertullian, and others, from
time to time disputed, yet at least they cannot deny but that the thing has
been exactly fulfilled.

It is clearer than the day, that nothing could be more exact: All Christians,
from one end of the World to another, worship the God of Israel, according to
the Prophecy of Malachi. Jesus Christ subjected them to the Moral part of the
Law of Moses: The Mahometans themselves have learnt of the Christians to
acknowledge no other God but the God of Israel. The multitude of false Gods
which the World worshipped, are vanished from all places where Christianity has
been planted; and very few are left in comparison of those which are already
destroyed, so that we must consider the thing as already gone very far. In
truth, while things continue thus, one may reasonably maintain against the
Jews, that our Jesus and his Disciples have taken away all the Glory which
could be reserved for that Messiah whom they expect. They must, if they be
jealous for the Glory of him whom they look for, endeavor to make the World
forsake the worship of the God of Israel, to make way for the accomplishment of
those Oracles which can have no place in that state wherein the World is at
present.

But though this Reflection upon the exact accomplishment of the Oracles
concerning the Call of the Gentiles to the Religion of the Messiah may suffice;
yet I think my self bound to make some further Observations upon this Subject.
In short, every thing deserves to be considered in this Calling of the Gentiles
to the knowledge of the Gospel.

I do not take notice at present that the person first employed in Calling of
the Gentiles is S. Peter, to whom Jesus Christ had promised the honor of
founding his Church amongst the Nations, and who himself at first thought that
the thing was unlawful, and who after a Vision given him for that very purpose,
observes the Jewish Customs, and obliges the Gentiles to do the same. Neither
do I observe that the first who was called was Cornelius, a Roman Officer who
resided at Caesarea, where he became a Proselyte. Behold here a man engaged to
examine that, which he had a better opportunity to do than any one else, by
reason of the nature of his charge, whether what the Soldiers had deposed
concerning the Disciples stealing away the Body of our Savior, were true or no.

I am obliged to confine my self to some general Reflections upon this matter. I
consider first the difficulty which was upon all accounts in this design of the
Calling of the Gentiles, and the prodigious Success which this Call of the
Gentiles met with according to the Prophets.

To make us understand this difficulty better, we need only consider 1. What
were the Prejudices of the Jews, even those who were become Christians. 2. What
was the state of the World at the time of Jesus Christ. The Heathens enjoyed
each their several Religions for a longer time than any History could trace it.
They attributed the happiness of their States and Families to their Gods. 3. We
must observe the nature of that preaching, by which the Gentiles were
converted: Its Subject was the strangest thing in the World; if the Cross of
Jesus Christ had proved the Scandal of the Jews, who looked upon the Messiah as
the Fountain of Blessing, and the Cross as an accursed Punishment; it was
looked upon no otherwise than as an heap of Follies by the Greeks, (who boasted
themselves to be the wisest men of the World) as well as by the other Gentiles.

Yet after all this, one see's a prodigious Success, and a surprising Extent of
this Call. Within a little time the World was filled with Christians: S. Paul
writes to those that were in Asia, Greece, and Italy; S. Peter to those of
Pontus; S. John to those who were among the Parthians. There were not wanting
some in the very Emperor's Court, even that of Nero, who put S. Peter and S.
Paul to death in the Sixty seventh Year of our Lord.

One cannot attend to a Success of this nature, without being extremely
surpised; let us conceive of a dozen, or thereabouts, of poor Beggars, a dozen
of unlearned Men coming out of Judea, who should accuse the whole World of
Folly and Impiety; every one opposing them, especially the Jews, who were
incensed to see them go about to establish the belief of the Cross in the
World, as a Doctrine which would explain the accomplishment of the Promises of
God concerning the Messiah, of those Promises wherewith the Jews had filled all
the East, and which had rendered them at this time doubly ridiculous.

When instead of persecuting the Apostles, they hearken unto them; or even when
in the midst of Chains and Prisons they are examined, they declare that true
Godliness consists in knowing Jesus Christ, even the same Jesus who was
crucified in Judea, for whose Name's sake they had been publicly scourged by
order of the Council of the Jews. Thus we find S. Paul boasting of his severe
usage.

If persons question them more particularly about the Actions of this Jesus,
they answer coldly, That the Son of God came down from Heaven; that he took
upon him our Flesh in the Womb of a Virgin; that when he was become Man, and
yet an Infant, Herod sought to kill him, to avoid which he was carried into
Egypt; that after having lived thirty years obscurely in a Carpenter's Shop, he
was taken by the Jews, scourged, mocked, crowned with Thorns, nailed to the
Cross, where they gave him Vinegar to drink; that there he cried out, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? that he died, was buried, and rose again the
third day, as he had promised before his Death.

But what is it that this JESUS teaches to those that would follow him? His
Apostles in his Name require all Men to renounce the Pleasures of this Life, to
abhor Polygamy and Fornication, and instead of revenging an Affront, to turn
the other Cheek to him that smites us, and to leave our Cloak also with him who
takes our Coat from us; to go two miles with him who constrains us to guide him
one; to love our Enemies, and to wish well, and pray for those that
despitefully use us, and persecute us.

But what Rewards will he give to his Servants? The Apostles answer, That he
promises nothing that is considerable in this Life, but an everlasting
Happiness in the World to come.

It is visible that nothing seems to be worse contrived to gain credit than
this Story. The weakness of Jesus Christ is visible, he was crucified; what
ground is here to believe that he was able to perform his Promises? The Service
he prescribes is very rough, the Reward he proposes is at a great distance, and
moreover, it is such as appears very doubtful to those who are not furnished
with strong impressions of the immortality of the Soul, and of a life to come.

But on the other hand, the Apostles solidly demonstrate that he is GOD, and
not a mere Man, that he can raise the Dead, and that he can perform his
Promises. Though they do not say, Bring hither the Blind, the Lame, and the Deaf,
and we will heal them in his Name; present your Dead to us, and we will raise
them in the Name of that Jesus who is born of Mary, of that Jesus who died, and
cried out on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. (For I
acknowledge that this miraculous power which they had received, was only
exerted upon certain occasions, which the Spirit of God made choice of.) Yet
they did that which was equivalent, for when blind men were brought to them,
they said, Ye blind, in the Name of Jesus, recover your sight; and in like
manner to the Lepers, to possessed Persons, to the sick of the Palsy, to the
Dead. Upon this all were converted, and the Cross of Jesus Christ triumphs.

There are three sorts of People in the World, Wise men, Men of a middle sort,
and such as are of a lower capacity; and several of these three Orders of Men
made profession of the Christian Religion, as well amongst the Jews as Heathens.

CHAP. XVII.
That the Christian Religion is founded on Proofs of Fact, and that
consequently nothing in the World so certain as the truth of it.
THis Reflection ought to be made more than once, because there is nothing so
proper to establish the truth of the Christian Religion beyond all contest, or
that will confound Atheists, profane Persons, and Jews, who endeavor to
oppose it more effectually.

I say then, that the chief Articles on which the whole Christian Religion is
grounded, are confirmed by proofs of Fact, that is, by Witnesses whose Evidence
cannot be questioned, without shaking all the certainty which we can have of
any thing in this World, and without rejecting all the means whereby we can
assure our selves of the knowledge which we enjoy.

Many particular Events which were perfectly Divine, happened at the Birth of
John the Baptist, the Forerunner of the Messiah; they were known throughout all
the Hill Country of Judea; they happened to a Priest, that is, a public
Person; and it was when he was employed in his public Function in the Temple;
they are seconded by Miracles which were known to the whole Nation of the Jews;
they are followed by the public Ministry of John the Baptist, a man who
censures all Judea, who openly declares himself the Forerunner of the Messiah,
and who has a great number of Disciples, who are distinguished from those of
our Savior, who were spread throughout all Judea, and who continued after the
death of our Savior; these were Disciples of a Man, who besides all this, does
not keep up any correspondence with our Savior, and who at last falls by the
hand of Herod for censuring his Incest and Lusts.

JESUS CHRIST is born in Bethlehem under Augustus, a Fact of which the Roman
Commissioners were Witnesses, and which the Records of that Empire preserved as
long as they were in being.

That the Angels testified their Joy at his Birth, is a Fact which was
confirmed by the Shepherds of Bethlehem, long before Jesus Christ had any
Disciples.

That a new Star conducted the Wise men of the East to Bethlehem, was an
illustrious Fact, and of which Herod, and the Priests, and great men amongst
the Jews, were exactly informed; and the Apostles would have found it a very
difficult matter to impose this upon them, if the thing had not been distinctly
known.

That the Birth of Jesus Christ, and the arrival of the Wise men affrighted
Herod, was a public thing, confirmed by the murder of the Infants of
Bethlehem, and reported to Augustus, together with the death of Antipater;
whereof Macrobius a Heathen, who was qualified for the knowledge of such a
Story, has preserved the memory. Neither can this Fact be called in question,
because Josephus makes no mention of it, since so famous a Heathen attests it.
Augustus, says he, having heard that amongst the Infants which Herod the King
of the Jews had caused to be killed in Syria, under two years of age, he had
killed his own Son, said that it was better to be Herod 's Hog than his Son.

That Jesus Christ was in Egypt, and that he returned from thence, is a Fact
with which the Jews to this day reproach our Savior, as if he had learnt there
the secret of working Miracles.

That he confounded the Doctors at twelve years of Age, is a Fact of which the
whole Nation of the Jews were informed, because it happened at one of those
three solemn Feasts which brought up the whole Nation to Jerusalem.

That Jesus Christ was baptized by S. John, and that he received a most
glorious testimony from him, is a Fact of which all those Jews whom the
Ministry of S. John had drawn to the River Jordan were Witnesses.

That Jesus Christ chose for his Apostles men without Learning, and of the
meanest of the People, that he lived with them three years and an half,
preaching his Doctrine, correcting the Traditions of the Jews, working
Miracles, and foretelling things to come, are Facts of which the whole People
of the Jews were Witnesses, and all the Romans that were in Judea were fully
informed of them; yea, they were known to all the World. The Jews could not be
ignorant of them, who came up to Jerusalem from all parts of the World to
celebrate ten solemn Feasts according to the Law, during the time in which
these things were acting, and from thence carried the report of them into
several parts of the World where they were dispersed.

It is evident also that Jesus Christ labored to persuade men that he was the
promised Messiah; this was the most considerable Fact in the World to the Jews,
and which had relation to the most important point of their Religion, and
touched them the nearest: a Fact which happened at a time when all were in
expectation of the Messiah, as appears by the consultation of Herod, when the
Jews, who were oppressed by the Romans, did most earnestly sigh for his
appearance; a Fact confirmed by public Oracles, and known to the whole Nation,
yea to the Heathen themselves, for near Three hundred years.

That Jesus Christ, notwithstanding all his Miracles, was crucified at the
pursuit of the Jews, and by the order of Pontius Pilate, is a Fact of which the
whole People of the Jews were Witnesses, because it happened at the Feast of
the Passover, that is, at a Solemnity where the whole Nation of the Jews was
assembled; it is a Fact which no Heathens ever went about to deny, they
reproached the Christians with it, who are so little ashamed of it, that
according to the orders of the same Jesus, they celebrate the memorial of it in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

That there was thick darkness over all the Land at the Crucifixion of Jesus
Christ from the third hour till the sixth, that is, from nine of the clock till
twelve, according to our way of computing the time, was a Fact of that nature,
that the whole Nation of the Jews might easily have convinced the Apostles of
this imposture, if it had not been as confessed a truth as the darkness in
Egypt, before the departure of the Israelites.

That Jesus Christ was raised the third day, is a Fact attested by a great
number of Witnesses, the memorial whereof they celebrated every eighth day as
long as they lived, by a constant Law, because they considered this
Resurrection as the Seal of those Truths which Jesus Christ had taught them.
It Is a Fact, the truth whereof they have maintained before Magistrates, before
the People, in all parts of the World. It Is a Fact which they have publicly
preached up, notwithstanding all Prohibitions which have been made: In short,
it is a Fact which they have asserted in the midst of the most cruel Torments,
and even until Death.

That Jesus Christ sent down upon his Apostles the miraculous Gifts of the Holy
Spirit, is a Fact of which all Jerusalem was a witness fifty days after the
Feast of the Passover, when Jesus Christ was crucified; it is as remarkable a
Fact as ever happened; twelve Fishermen of Galilee, maintain in the face of the
whole Jewish Nation, that the same Jesus whom the whole Nation had demanded to
be crucified but fifty days before, and who did actually suffer upon an
infamous Cross, is risen from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, after he had
eaten and drunk with them, and had appeared several times to them after his
Resurrection, and that he had given them the power of speaking all sorts of
Languages, and of healing all manner of Diseases.

That they spoke diverse Languages is a Fact most notorious, the truth whereof
appears from the Conversion of the World, which was found to be filled with
their Disciples, but a few years after this Fact was done.

That they had the power of healing all Diseases as well as their Master, is a
Fact the truth whereof is established upon indisputable testimonies, insomuch
as their Successors received the same Gift by the laying on of their Hands. Two
hundred years after Tertullian mentions this Gift, as being at that time well
known amongst Christians.

That the Apostles, after they were rejected by the Jews, preached the Gospel
to the Gentiles, who also received it, is a Fact of which there are so many
proofs in the World, that it cannot be called in question.

That the converted Jews strongly opposed themselves against the preaching of
the Gospel to the Gentiles, pretending, as the Jews now do, that the Messiah
with his Gifts and Graces was confined to their Nation, is a Fact so well
attested, that it cannot be called in question, if we consider the first
dispute, which gave occasion to the first Council of the Apostles, and to the
contests of S. Paul with those of his own Nation.

That since that time the Apostles and their Disciples have maintained by their
Writings and Disputes, and finally by their Martyrdom, that Jesus was the
Messiah; that they have constantly stood to this claim, alleging the Facts
which the Gospel proposes, and maintaining that the matters there related were
exact Accomplishments of the Promises of God, and of the ancient Prophecies:
That all this is unquestionable, one needs only read their Sermons and Speeches
set down by S. Luke, and their Epistles; one needs only peruse the Heathen
History, and the Works of those that succeeded the Apostles, who followed their
footsteps in establishing the truth of the Christian Religion.

That the Apostles discharged their followers from the Ceremonies which Moses
prescribed, obliging them only to the Essentials of Morality: That they annul'd
the Law which permitted Divorces without sufficient cause, and Polygamy; these
are things which none, who have read their Writings, or those of their first
Disciples, can in the least question.

Lastly, That they foretold many things, as well as their Master; that they
published their Predictions, which they have extended to the end of the World,
and the return of Jesus from Heaven to judge the World; and that they have
recorded the particulars of many considerable Events, observed by the
Christians, which have happened from time to time; these are Facts as well
known, and as incontestable, as any thing can be in the World of such a nature.
Whole Nations are Witnesses of it, differing Sects, Interpreters who have
several Opinions concerning these Prophecies, the Contests of the Jews, the
Opposition of Atheists, the Cavils of Heretics, the Cruelty of Tyrants, all
these concur to prove clearly that the Christians received these Prophecies
from the Apostles, as well as the truth of them, since even these Oppositions
were foretold as well as the Persecutions.

Thus I have given you a view of the greatest part of the most important
Articles which are contained in the Christian Religion; and I think that they
are so solidly grounded upon proofs of Fact, that I can assert with reason,
That no Facts in the World can be produced, so well established as these are,
which are the Fundamentals of our Religion.

What Facts are there which are attested by whole Nations, as the Miracles of
Jesus Christ were? What Facts are there about which men were so careful to
inform themselves, as when a Man pretends to the Title of the Messiah? What
thing can we suppose that requires a stronger conviction, because of the
difficulties it involves, than that of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ? for
those who were Eyewitnesses of his Crucifixion, that is, who had seen him
punished by the Magistrate, the horror of all his own People, and in all
appearance forsaken of Heaven.

To speak the truth, as there cannot be a greater instance of fanatical folly,
than to attribute to twelve poor Fishermen, whose Master was crucified at
Jerusalem, by public order, and by an effect of the hatred of the whole
Nation, I say, to attribute to them the design of persuading that People, and
the Gentiles also, that this man was raised again from the dead, that he rules
in Heaven; that he has bestowed upon them the miraculous Gifts of speaking all
sorts of Languages, and healing all manner of Diseases; if this Jesus had been
never raised from the dead, nor had bestowed such Gifts upon them, the mind of
Man not being capable of so great folly: So we have all the reason in the World
to conclude, That since they have attested this Fact, and confirmed it by all
the proofs which might convince those, who though they were not prejudiced, yet
were astonished at the difficulty of the things themselves, so that nothing can
be more certain than Facts so confirmed, as we pretend that these actually were.

CHAP. XVII.
That it cannot be questioned, whether the Books of the New Testament were
written by the Apostles.
BEfore we allege those Arguments which will invincibly confirm the truth of
the Books of the New Testament, I desire the Reader to make these three or four
Reflections, which seem to be very important to our present design.

The first is, That we can scarcely conceive a more simple and strong way of
proving a Fact, than what we find in the Books here mentioned. The design of
the four Evangelists, for instance, is to prove that Jesus, the Son of Mary, is
the promised Messiah, and that in his Birth, his Life, his Doctrine, his Death,
and Resurrection, we meet with all the Characters which the Prophets attributed
to the Messiah. How do the Evangelists execute this their design? In the most
proper way imaginable to convince others, and most proportionable to their
design. They simply relate the Facts; and Facts so clear, that if we do not
question the truth of them, we cannot doubt that Jesus is the Messiah. They
relate the most important of these Facts, as things that happened in the face
of the whole Nation of the Jews, as I have showed in the precedent Chapter:
They relate them as Facts for the most part owned by the Jews, from which the
Malice of the Jews extorted other Consequences: They give us an account of the
Judgment which the Jews made concerning the Miracles that he wrought on the
Sabbath day, upon the Disciples gathering the Ears of Corn, of the answer which
the Jews made to Pilate, We have no other King but Caesar.

The second is, That the Apostles supposing a general expectation of the
Messiah, when Jesus Christ appeared, show that there was a very great knowledge
of the Prophecies that respected the Messiah, and a great impossibility of
applying those Oracles to particular Facts, if the truth of those Facts had not
been beyond contest. Now we find very few Oracles of which they did not make an
application to the Life and Actions of our Savior. We Will suppose the Apostles
to have been Men of great Abilities, and who had long studied the Books of the
Prophets, that they might tear out such small passages as they fancied might be
applicable to Jesus Christ: However it cannot be denied, that it does not
appear by their Writings that they had such an exact knowledge of the
Prophecies, whence it might follow that they judged them to be applicable to
Christ, by comparing them with the Facts which they relate. 2. That they had
this knowledge in common with the rest of the Jews, who at this day apply the
same Texts to the Messiah, if they are not constrained by their clearness to
wrest them some other way.

The third Reflection is, That in the Relation of these Facts, they give us all
the Marks of an extraordinary sincerity; they represent indeed whatsoever was
for their Master's Glory; but they do as well relate those things which seem to
be shameful to his memory. They tell us of the Angels that assisted at his
Birth, and at his Death; but tell us withal, That he was tempted of the Devil,
and in all appearance forsaken by God at his death. They tell us, That the
multitudes were resolved to take him by force, and make him their King, as
acknowledging him for the Messiah; and they tell us, That the same multitude
some time after demanded him to be crucified.

The fourth is, That they represent very naturally all the Judgments of the
Synagogue against Jesus: They represent him as excommunicated and crucified by
them; they describe the reports that were current among the Jews, That the
Disciples had taken away his Body out of the Sepulcher; that the Soldiers had
deposed the same in the forms of Law before Pilate. From all which it appears
that they were faithful Historians, and not at all prepossessed, and that they
used no Invectives against the Authors of these false Reports, contenting
themselves to establish the truth of the matter, by specifying the places, the
time, the witnesses, and other circumstances which are proper to establish the
truth of the Facts they relate.

These four Reflections being once supposed, I say, it is impossible to dispute
the truth of these Books, or to call their Authority in question: To be
convinced of which, one needs only consider these two things; the first is,
That the Apostles are the Authors of the Books which pass under their Names;
the other is, That their faithfulness is not to be suspected by us.

The former of these is so universally received, that nothing will be certain
in matters of this nature, if this be questioned.

The four Evangelists have published their Writings in populous Cities, where
they have been constantly read every Lord's day in Christian Assemblies, as S.
Justin Martyr assures us in his Apology, which was writ about the middle of the
second Century.

The Apostles writ their Epistles to numerous Churches, to whom their hand, as
well as the persons by whom they sent them, were well known. Can we instance in
any Writing in the World that has been preserved with the like carefulness?
Let the Jews tell us what they please, concerning the care and faithfulness of
their Ancestors to preserve the Books of the Old Testament, they can allege
nothing, but we can allege the same in favor of the Books of the New
Testament. They tells us that Moses, under the penalty of a Curse, had forbid
the adding any thing thereto; and do not we read the same threatening in the
last Book of the New Testament? The Philosophers of each Sect, have nothing of
this weight to allege as an Argument that the Books which they ascribe to
their Masters are really theirs; we find only a few men in every Age, who made
it their business to study the Books of the Philosophers, Physicians, and
Lawyers; but ever since the Apostles there have been Christians who made it
their business to peruse and preserve their Writings, as considering that they
are the Fountains of Eternal Life.

One may upon this occasion take notice of two things which deserve some
attention: The one is, That the design of some Heretics, as of Marcion for
instance, to corrupt the Copies of the Writings of the New Testament, which
were found in the hands of those of his Sect, is a good Argument to prove that
they could not be corrupted. In short, we find all the World opposed themselves
against this Corruption, and confuted them by the agreement of all the other
Copies in the World which were exempt from this corruption.

The other is, That if there are some Books whose Authority was doubtful for
some time, by those who otherwise were accounted Orthodox, yet this cannot
justly prejudice the truth of the New Testament; the reason is, because this
happened only to some few Epistles which were written, not to particular
Churches, but to whole Nations. And indeed it is plain from common sense, that
when Writings are sent to whole Bodies (as the Epistle of S. Jude) without
communicating the Copy to particular men, that they may with more justice be
suspected, than those whose hand was known by many, and particularly by those
to whom the Epistles were sent.

Moreover, The account which the ancient Fathers of the Church give us of the
uncertainties of this nature, sufficiently show that they were very careful in
examining these things; and when at any time some particular men did not use
care enough in examining these Books, as it once happened in the Church of
Ross, Eusebius. Lib. VI. cap. 12.
where a Book which was falsely attributed to S. Peter was preserved, supposing
it to have been his, the other Churches not consenting to it, that Abuse was
soon remedied, the Writings abolished, that there is scarce a weak remembrance
left of them.

One see's that these Remarks are sufficient to assure us that the Apostles are
the Authors of those. Books which bear their Names: And if this way of
confirming a matter of this nature, be accounted good and solid, when we speak
of the Books of Aristotle or Hippocrates, it must be infinitely stronger when
it is applied to the Writings of the Apostles.

In short, These Books were written to be read by persons of the meanest
Capacities, by Women, by Children as well as by Doctors: And they treat of
matters of which the whole World has reason to be informed. If some Jews
suffered Martyrdom under Antiochus, to preserve the Books of the Old Testament,
we have like examples, and as numerous, of those who have done as much for the
preservation of the Books of the New Testameat. Lastly, If the Jews have looked
upon those as Traitors and Apostates, who gave up those Books to the fury of
their Persecutors, the Christians have testified no less aversion for those who
delivered the Books of the Apostles to the fury of Heathens, even to the
subjecting of them to the utmost rigor of Ecclesiastical Discipline, in the
third Century and before.

CHAP. XVIII.
That one cannot doubt of the faithfulness of the witness of the Apostles
concerning those Facts which they relate.
NEither is it more difficult to establish this second Truth, That the
faithfulness of the Apostles cannot be reasonably questioned.

To be convinced of this, one needs only consider the Character of the
Apostles, the Character of their Writings, of their Sermons, of their
Sufferings, and of their Martyrdom, and last of all the Character of those
amongst whom they wrote these things, and preached them to their death.

As to their Sermons; The Apostles were contemporaries with Jesus Christ; they
spoke of things which they had seen, and distinguished them carefully from
those which they had learnt another way. They were honest men, simple and
without Learning, very fit to bear witness in matters of Fact. They were
Persons that preached nothing but Love, and the study of Truth; they protested
in the midst of their Sufferings, that they could not conceal the things which
they had seen and heard; they are men without covetousness or ambition; they
forsake all that they possess in the World; S. Matthew leaves his House and
Goods to follow Jesus Christ. Their Epistles speak nothing more than instances
of Christian Poverty, of the loss of their Goods, and of mighty instances of
their Charity.

These witnesses are sufficiently numerous, they preach and write in several
places, and yet they agree admirably in their relations of the same Facts; it
appears they had such lively and distinct impressions, that they frequently
make use of the very same words. The difference which is found in some part of
their Books, is a manifest argument that nothing but the force of the matter
made them agree in their Relations.

And indeed, how is it otherwise conceivable that four such Authors as the
Evangelists, should agree about so many Opinions, so many Miracles, so many
Prophecies, so many Disputes, and in a word, about so many matters of Fact:
shall we say that the second took his Copy from the first, the third from the
second, etc.? This appears to be evidently false by perusing of their works,
and by the difference of their style.

And certainly there appears so great ingenuity in their writings, that we
cannot accuse them of having had a design to deceive the world; they tell you
plainly of the meanness of their condition and original; they sincerely
discover their own weaknesses, their ambition, their vanity, their disputes,
their heats, their murmurings. S. Matthew tells us that he was a Publican, that
is a Servant of the Roman Power, whom the Jews looked upon as an excommunicated
person, and as an Enemy of their own Nation. He relates the ridiculous
pretension of the Sons of Zebedee, founded on the carnal Notion of their Mother
concerning the Temporal Kingdom of the Messiah. They set down S. Peter's
denying of his Master; they do not dissemble their common ignorance, which made
them expect a Temporal King in Jesus Christ; they frankly publish their own
incredulity, when Mary Magdalen brought them the news of our Savior's
Resurrection; and they describe the obstinate resistance of S. Thomas about
this matter, against the unanimous testimony of all his Companions.

They do not content themselves with saying in general that some illustrious
Facts have happened; but they punctually set down all the Circumstances, so
that it clearly appears their design was to have their writings examined, and
that after an exact search men might acquiesce in the conclusions which they
draw from thence. For instance, they do not tell us that Jesus Christ raised a
great many from the dead, they only tell us of three, describing the
Circumstances of their Resurrection, the time, the place, the age, the persons,
the assistants, and all these, with other particulars, which Impostors care not
to enter upon, lest they should contradict themselves, or be easily confuted.

I have already shown, That the nature of the things themselves which the
Disciples of Jesus Christ have written, is such as will not permit us to accuse
them of having had a design to impose upon the world; they are Facts, and not
Discourses, which are left upon Record; and Facts relating to the most
important matter in the world, than which none was ever more thoroughly
examined; they are Facts which are linked so closely, and which have so strict
a dependence one upon the other, and so interwoven with the most public
Transactions, either in Civil or Religious Affairs, that it was impossible for
them to form the design of such an imposture.

In short, it is very remarkable, that these Facts were publicly known to the
Kings of Judea, to the Roman Magistrate, to the principal Ministers of State,
and of their Religion, and to the whole Nation of the Jews assembled ten
several times at their solemn Feasts; to the several Sects of the Jewish
Religion, the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Essens, who are attacked, censured, and
confuted in these Books.

One ought to consider, after all, that the Apostles at first preached and
wrote in Judea, where were the witnesses of those Miracles which they related,
the Impotent, the Blind, the Deaf, which Jesus Christ had restored, the Dead
whom he raised, the Scribes and Pharisees whom he censured, the Sadduces whom
he confuted, the Auditors who had heard him preach, the Towns wherein he had
conversed most familiarly, the same People that followed him, the same Enemies
that conspired his death, the same Judges, and the same Authority which
condemned him to death.

S. Luke in the relation he gives us of the Speeches and Apologies which the
Apostles made before Kings, before the great Council of the Jews, and in the
midst of their Synagogues, brings them in speaking of the Facts contained in
the Gospel, as of matters publicly known and attested by a vast number of
witnesses. Thus S. Peter speaks of them in the Tenth of the Acts, and the other
Sacred Writers spoke of them in the same manner in their Epistles.

Here is a new Character which we ought carefully to observe: we find no
Temporal Interest which obliged the Disciples to adhere to Jesus Christ; and we
find yet less reason to suppose, if Jesus Christ had not been raised from the
dead, and they had not seen him after his death, that they should have had any
concern for his Glory; they would certainly have condemned and anathematized
him as an Impostor, who by means of some false Miracles, and an affected
Holiness, had abused them. Whereas indeed we find that they defended the Glory
of Jesus Christ with so much heat, and that with so constant a Testimony to his
Resurrection, that they exposed themselves to all manner of Reproaches, to all
sorts of Punishment, and most cruel Deaths, to confirm the belief of that Fact.
They despise the Anathema's of the Jewish Synagogue, they contemn their public
Obloquies, they value not the hatred of their whole Nation. They preach this
crucified Person in Judea, they preach him also in other Countries, that he
might be equally adored by Jews and Heathens. They leave their Employments to
follow this Jesus, and after they had accompanied him three years, they depart
from Judea to go and confound the Idolatry of the world, and within Rome it
self to decry the Gods they worshipped, obliging them to acknowledge, him whom
the men of Jerusalem had crucified, for their God; him, who had been the
detestation of the Jews: him, whom the Roman Magistrate had given up to their
Fury, in making him undergo the punishment appointed for Slaves.

Lastly, One ought to observe it as a thing of great weight in this whole
Question, That this Testimony of the Apostles which is so uniform, so solemn,
so well confirmed by all manner of means, and sealed with their deaths, is not
contested or contradicted by any Historian of that time: There was nothing more
easy, either for Jews or Gentiles, than to convince the World of the falsehood
of the Facts related in the Gospel; they had the Books of the Apostles in their
hands, they were Masters of the public Records; it was a matter of general
Concernment to the Jews, to oppose themselves to an imposture of so terrible a
consequence as the History of the Evangelists was, if it had been entirely
false; neither was it less the interest of the Romans to expose a Sect, of whom
Pliny the younger tells us, that all sorts of People joined with them, though
they were persecuted with incredible violence. In the mean time we find no body
that has contradicted the Relation of the Apostles, nor any Author that has
writ against Jesus Christ or his Apostles. A long time after indeed there was a
Book seen, called The Acts of Pilate, published by the Order of the Emperor
Maximian, which endeavored to overthrow the truth of the Facts that are
related in the Gospels; but those Acts are contradicted by all the Heathen
Historians yet remaining that were contemporay with the Apostles. Finally, a
vast number of Jews and Gentiles were immediately convinced by the Authority of
the Apostles, and a Belief in the Gospel has passed from Judea to the Ends of
the World, according to the Predictions which God gave by the Ministry of the
Prophets, and by the mouth of our Savior.

CHAP. XIX.
More Reasons to manifest the faithfulness of the Apostles.
WHat I have already alleged might be sufficient to establish the faithfulness
of the Apostles, but for a fuller conviction of the Reader concerning so
weighty a truth of our Religion, I shall superadd some few more Reflections.

First of all, It cannot be denied that the form of the Writings of the New
Testament, is vastly different from those which may be suspected as Forgeries.
When the four Evangelists had related the miraculous Birth of John the Baptist,
they next set down that of our Savior Christ, with the Actions of his Life,
until his Death, which does not comprehend above four or five years.

S. Luke writes the History of the Apostles, and in particular that of S. Paul,
and takes in only the space of about Thirty years: Now let any one judge
whether they who confine themselves to so narrow limits in respect of time,
place, and persons, have any design to impose.

The remainder of these Books is composed of two sorts of Writings, one
Epistolary, and the other Prophetical: For the Prophetical parts, time must
prove the truth of the Predictions which are contained in the Apocalypse, as
well as of those which are found in some of the Epistles of the Apostles.

As for the Epistles, besides some Moral Instructions, they are almost all
employed in deciding some questions, which the Calling of the Gentiles to the
Gospel, and the abolishing of the Ceremonial Law had raised in the minds of the
Jews, who were converted to Christianity. We know that of all Writings,
Epistles are the most certain Monuments, and those which men endeavor to forge
least.

After all, It is certain that the Sacred Writers have with great care set down
the time in which every Event happened, as well according to the style of the
Jews, in pointing out to us their solemn Feasts, as that of the Gentiles, by
setting down the year of the Roman Emperor, and the Character of the Roman
Magistrates.

A second Character which hinders us from accusing these Books as Forgeries, is
this, That we cannot deny but that these Books are of a very particular nature;
they contain several considerable Oracles which were to be fulfilled in the
same Generation, as that of the Prophecies of Nebuchadnezzar and Croesus, a
continued Series of Miracles, of which all Judea was witness; they contain a
great number of Sermons, preached upon several illustrious Occasions in the
Synagogues, in the Temple of Jerusalem, and before thousands of People in the
Wilderness. Let any one judge whether it would be an easy thing to make these
Writings to be received, if we should suppose them to be lately forged.

This third Reflection is also considerable: It is certain that the Gospel was
preached in the greatest Cities of the Empire, by the Apostles, and the
Disciples of Jesus: The History of the Apostles, and their Epistles themselves
make it evident, that there were numerous Churches at Rome, Corinth,
Thessalonica, Philippi, Ephesus, Antioch, and in several other famous places:
It is also known that there were Jewish Synagogues in the same places; now if
this be the Case, what possibility is there of suspecting the least imposture
in the Books of the Apostles, if we consider how they were drawn up? The
Disciples of Christ did not only preach in the Synagogues the same things which
they have put in writing, but they also engaged the Jews to examine them,
because they affirmed them with a constancy which the Jews could not but look
upon as incredible obstinacy: First of all, That these were things beyond
dispute, and could not be doubted of. Secondly, That they had been long since
foretold by the Prophets. Thirdly, That they were an exact accomplishment of
other Prophecies which had relation to the promised Messiah. Fourthly, That
seeing they could not question the Facts contained in the Gospel, they ought to
renounce Judaism, to receive Baptism and become Christians.

It Is also of great importance to observe further, as I have already done, that
the Books of the New Testament were penned, before the overthrow of the
Commonwealth of the Jews. There are only some of the works of S. John, which
were writ after the Destruction of Jerusalem. I have before observed that the
Divine Providence ordered it so, that all the Jews for five and thirty years
together, repairing thrice a year to Jerusalem at their three solemn Festivals,
might have greater opportunities to inform themselves of the truth of the Facts
contained in the Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles.

To this Remark I shall now add two weighty Considerations; The one is, That
the Christians for some years submitted themselves to the Ceremonial Law, and
repaired with the Jews to Jerusalem, and by this means were engaged to examine
the Facts contained in the Gospel. The other is, That after the Council of
Jerusalem, they were dispensed with as to that Custom, as well as the observing
of all the other parts of the Ceremonial Law, which set the Christians in a
greater opposition to the Jews, and so increased the necessity of examining
very scrupulously on both sides, whatsoever was for or against them in those
matters of Religion.

This Observation leads us naturally to another, That it is absolutely
impossible that an imposture of this nature should not be discovered, when
there arises a Difference between those, who may be looked upon as the Authors
of the Forgery, and those who after them endeavored to gain credit to it. Now
if we find that one Disciple of Jesus Christ betrays him, without accusing him
of the least Crime or Imposture; if we have seen the Christians at first united
in the same Assemblies with the Jews; and that there were several Contests and
Disputes between the Apostles and those first Christians, yet without calling
those Facts which are continued in the Gospel, in question by either side: S.
Paul takes notice of the Contests which happened betwixt him and S. Peter; S.
Luke relates the heats between S. Paul and Barnabas, upon very slight
occasions, he sets down also the Dispute which arose about the distribution of
Alms to the Greek and Jewish Widows: One see's that there arose a Dispute
amongst the Apostles themselves, about the Calling of the Gentiles to the
Gospel; one see's afterward the obstinacy of some of the Jews of the Sect of
the Pharisees, who maintained the absolute necessity of submitting to
Circumcision, and S. Paul's opposition set down in his Epistle to the
Galatians. We need no more to make it evident, that there could be no concert
nor collusion between them, to deceive or impose upon those to whom they
preached the Gospel.

Let us go a little further; a Dispute happens about a Capital Point of
Christian Religion, about the Resurrection; insomuch that S. Paul thinks
himself obliged to write concerning it to the Corinthians, so that there was a
necessity of examining the truth of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ again. Now
we find that S. Paul to confirm this Doctrine in general, chiefly makes use of
the instance of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, which he proves by Arguments
taken from the Fact it self, that is, by witnesses whom he produces. Whereupon
I make this considerable Reflection, That in comparing this Dispute of S. Paul
with the Writings of the Evangelists, it clearly appears that they did not
allege all the proofs they might have done. None of them relates in particular
the number of those who saw Jesus Christ in Galilee upon the holy Mountain; but
S. Paul, who had examined the faithfulness of their Relations, and knew the
witnesses, specifies the number, and observes that many of them were yet alive,
if perhaps any of them were already dead.

I shall add only two Considerations more, which prove that it was even
impossible for the Apostles to impose upon the World on this occasion. The
first is taken from their State and Condition. They are no great Lords, whose
Power might terrify any one from examining their Writings; or whose Reputation
could not have been called in question without danger: On the contrary, they
were men of mean condition, employed in base Professions, often cast into
Prisons, and from time to time obliged to appear before Magistrates for the
same Doctrine and the same Facts which they published to the World. Let us
consider then whether it were an easy matter for S. Paul for instance, I say
for this S. Paul, a maker of Tents, this S. Paul without Reputation, without
Riches; this S. Paul who was seized at Jerusalem after diverse Persecutions,
this S. Paul who was sent a Prisoner to Rome, and imprisoned there under the
power of the Roman Magistrate, and who at last lost his life by Nero's order to
make those blindly believe all he said, who were at liberty to examine, whether
all that Luke related as happening to him at Jerusalem, at Maltha, at Philippi,
at Athens, were indeed true, or only a framed Story.

The second thing we ought to observe is, That not only the Books of the
Apostles were publicly read every Lord's day, by a constant Law, of which we
have most authentic witnesses, in the Writings of the Apostles themselves, and
in other ancient Books, which are still extant; but also that they were all of
them written, not in Hebrew, which at that time was a dead Tongue; nor in
Syriack, a Language spoken in a very few places; but in Greek, which at that
time was the Language commonly received throughout all the Roman Empire; and
besides, was the Language into which the Divine Providence had caused the Old
Testament to be translated about three Ages before, that men might compare the
ancient Oracles and their accomplishment together.

CHAP. XX.
That the whole Model of the Religion and Commonwealth of the Jews is at this
day so entirely destroyed, that the Messiah could no more be known.
WHat I have before set down to establish the truth of those Facts which serve
for a Foundation to the Christian Religion, is certainly sufficient to answer
the design which I formed in writing these Reflections upon the Books of the
Holy Scripture; and I believe I may with justice conclude, That as nothing is
more uncontestable than the truth of those Books and of the Facts in them
related; so there is nothing more certain than the Truth and Divinity of the
Christian Religion. So that now I have only two things to do, with which I
conceive it will be necessary to conclude these Reflections: The one is, to show
the absolute impossibility of conceiving any other accomplishment of the
ancient Oracles than what is set down in the Gospel: The other is, that
concerning the Divisions amongst Christians, which are a scandal to the Jews,
and especially concerning the difficulty of the Mysteries which the Gospel
proposes, which are as so many stumbling Blocks to them which hinder them from
discerning those Characters of Truth in the Gospel, which by the fulfilling of
the ancient Oracles, appear therein with so much luster. The former of these
shall be the Subject of this, and the latter of the next Chapter.

As the pulling down of the Scaffolds which were only set up to build a Palace,
is an infallible sign that the Building is finished, so one may say, that the
total defacing of the Model, which God had formed in the Law, that the Messiah
at his coming might be certainly known, is an unanswerable proof that he is
already come. It is worth our pains to make some Reflections on this overthrow,
that we may conclude against the Jews, that if the Messiah was yet to appear in
the World, it would be impossible to know him, according to the Characters
which God had given of him before his appearing.

In the first place therefore, whereas God had confined the Jews to the Land of
Canaan, that they might be visible to all the Posterity of Noah, of whom one
part, that is, the Offspring of Cham, possessed Egypt and Africa; the
Posterity of Japhet, Europe and the lesser Asia; and those of Shem the rest of
Asia; the Jews at present are driven from that Country, and far from being
restored to it after Seventy years, as they were by Cyrus; they have been for
ever banished thence, by a Decree of the Emperor Adrian, who forbad them so
much as to turn their eyes toward Judea, which was in the Year of Christ 135.
The Heathen Celsus insults over them in these remarkable words, They have no
more, says he, either Land or House remaining to them.

Secondly, So far were they from having any Remainders of a Temporal Power,
Dispers^. palabun^ (...) coeli, (...) sui ext^ (...) vagant^^ per orbe^, fine
homine, fine Deo Rege, quibus nec advenarum jure terram patriam saltem
vestigio, s^lutare comeditur. Apolog. cap. 21.
that they were then wholly deprived of it. See what Tertullian says of them
in the Year of our Savior 204. They wander up and down the World like
despersed Vagabonds, banished from their Climate and Country, without Man,
without God for their King, and are not permitted, as Strangers, to set foot on
their Native Soil. We read a Decree of Honorus the Emperor, which deprives
them of the Right of nominating their Patriarchs, or of paying them any
Tribute; which shows that their Authority whas wholly extinct.

Thirdly, Their Temple at Jerusalem being destroyed in the Seventieth Year of
our Lord, as that in Egypt called Onion was the year following, it could never
be built again, notwithstanding that Julian the Apostate, out of his hatred to
the Christians, favored that Enterprise in the year of our Savior 363. There
is a Letter still extant which Julian writ to the Jews, to assure them of his
Protection, and to encourage them to that work, but it was not so much his
death which dashed that undertaking, as a very memorable opposition from Heaven.

Marcelinus a Heathen gives us this account of it. Lib. 23. Imperiique sui
memoriam magnitudine operum gestiens propagare, ambitiosum quondam apud
Hierosolymam Templum quod post multa and interneciva certamina, obsidente
Vespasiano posteaque Tito, aegre est expugnatum, instaurare sumptibus cogitabat
immodicis: Negotiumque maturandum Alypio dederat Antiochensi, qui olim
Britannias cur averat pro-Praefectis. Cum itaque rei idem fortiter instaret
Alypius, juvaretque provinciae Rector, metuendi globi flammarum prope
fundamenta crebris assultibus erumpentes, fecere locum exustis aliquoties
operatibus inaccessum: hocque modo elemento destinatius repellente, cessavit
inceptum.
And being desirous to propagate the Memory of his Government by the Greatness
of his Works, he with vast expense designed to rebuild the splendid Temple
which was formerly at Jerusalem, which after many and bloody Battles, being
besieged by Vespasian, and afterward by Titus, was at last taken with
difficulty: he committed the care of hastening the Business to Alypius of
Antioch, who had formerly been Pro-praefect of Britain. As therefore this
Alypius was vigorously prosecuting the Work, being assisted by the Lieutenant
of the Province, terrible Balls of Fire frequently breaking forth near the
foundations, sometimes burnt the Workmen, and made the place inaccessible: Thus
the design was laid aside, The Element it self beating them back on purpose.
Julian easily apprehended that their Religion would perish; and that it could
never be restored without the Temple.

In the fourth place, The observation of some of their Laws was absolutely
forbidden, as being contrary to those of the Roman Empire. Thus they were not
suffered to have many Wives.

Upon this overthrow many inconveniences followed, which it will be convenient
to represent at one view.

1. They no longer know those persons who at the first Division of the Land by
Joshua, were Owners of the different parts of the Land of Canaan.

2. Their Families and Tribes are confounded; their Jubilee, which could not be
kept but in the Land of Canaan, and which obliged them to study their
Genealogies, having ceased long since.

3. The Family of David is at this day utterly unknown.

4. They have no more lawful Priests to observe the Primogeniture, to examine
the Tokens of Virginity, though it appears, that according to God's design, these
Laws were given on purpose to ascertain the knowledge of the Messiah, and to be
like Enclosures about this important Truth, in the compass of which it might be
the better examined.

Certainly if the Jews were still in possession of Judea, if they had their
Kings of the Tribe of Judah, if they had their Priests, if they were assured of
their Genealogies, if they still enjoyed all the other necessary means for
establishing the certainty of their Descents, if their Temple had still
subsisted in its former luster, and that the Sacrifices appointed by the Laws
were still offered there: The Jews might boldly answer that the Shiloh was not
yet come, that is, they ought not to despair of seeing the Messiah born at
Bethlehem, of the Seed of David, and entering the Temple of Jerusalem. Then the
Prophecy of Daniel, which determins 490 years for the term in which the Messiah
was to appear, and be cut off by a violent Death and Punishment, would seem to
be eluded.

But the term of the Messiah's coming is past, the Commonwealth of the Jews is
overturned, the Temple of Jerusalem is destroyed 1600 years since; there are no
more Genealogies among the Jews, they do not know their Tribes, much less their
Families: How then can it be supposed that God should be true in his Oracles
(as we must acknowledge him to be) if they were never answered by the Event.

To speak the truth, it is impossible to consider the Arguments we have
alleged to prove that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, and especially those
Demonstrations which the Apostles have given us, without acknowledging these
two things:

The first is, That it was very easy at the time of Jesus Christ's appearing,
to examine whether he who declared himself to be the Messiah, were so indeed;
so it is absolutely impossible to examine it, or know it, since the destruction
of that Model, if we suppose that God at first framed it, for the determining
of this question, as we have no reason to doubt it.

The second is, That the Christians exactly followed this Divine Model, and
being convinced of the truth of the Facts which exactly corresponded with it,
and which answered it in all its parts, they had all the Reason imaginable to
believe that Jesus Christ was the Messiah.

In short, if we consider it well, we shall find that the whole Christian
Religion is nothing but a question of Fact between the Jews and Christians: But
such a question as the Jews at present are not in a condition to maintain
against the Christians.

Both Jews and Christians agree in the Characters of the Messiah, or at least
about the most of them. According to these Characters the Messiah ought to be
come: The Christians maintain that they may be found in Jesus Christ, and they
prove it by matter of Fact; wherefore we must conclude, That either these
Characters attributed to the Messiah, are not proper Characters to know him by,
and so the Wisdom of God will be eluded, and both Jews and Christians equally
deceived, in taking that for a Character of the Messiah which is not; or else
that both the Messiah is certainly come, and and that He is no other than that
Jesus whom we worship.

CHAP. XXI.
That the greatness of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion; and the
Division which is amongst Christians, cannot be any prejudice to the proofs of
the truth of the Christian Religion.
I Come now to examine the double stumbling Block which the Jews pretend
against the Christian Religion. This Religion, say they, propounds Doctrines
that are inconceivable, and contrary to Reason: For instance, that of the
Trinity, that of the Incarnation and the Divinity of the Messiah. These are the
Doctrines which the Jews reject, as absolutely incompatible with the Books of
the Old Testament, which we have received from their hands.

But it is an easy matter to answer this Objection; 1. It is founded upon a
total forgetfulness of the solidity of those proofs of Fact, which I have
alleged. Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, this is a Fact confirmed by
several Witnesses. It appears from Tacitus, that Jesus Christ suffered death
under Tiberius, Pontius Pilate being Governor of Judea. It is known that
Claudius banished the Christians from Rome, in the Year of our Lord 54. It is
evident from Tacitus, in his Life of Nero, that he accused the Christians of
burning the City of Rome, which himself was the Author of; the Christians
therefore made a considerable Body in the Capital City of the Empire, and this
happened in the year of our Lord 64. Suetonius says the same thing. 2. It
appears that Pliny, in Trajan's time, takes notice of the manner of their
Meetings. 3. Dion Cassius sets down the Accusation brought in against Flavius
and Domitilla, as against Atheists; which is the Title Julian the Apostate
gives to Constantine, because the Christians rejected the worship of the
Heathen Gods. 4. It appears by the latter end of the Acts of the Apostles that
this Book was writ in the Year of our Lord 63, and yet this Book supposes the
Gospel of S. Luke to have been written before it, and S. Luke's Gospel takes it
for granted, that some of the other Gospels were already published. 5. It
appears from the Writings of Clemens Romanus, that the Epistle to the Hebrews
was then written, and the same may be gathered from the Books of S. Ignatius,
Polycarp; and S. Justin. These Facts which are certain, are sufficient to prove
that immediately after the death of Jesus Christ, his Apostles, and their
Disciples, as Eye witnesses, maintained the truth of his Resurrection. After
this it may indeed be disputed, by what Power he was raised, whether by a
Divine Power, or by his own; but it is ridiculous to dispute the Fact by
reasonings drawn from pretened Absurdities which one may think to find in the
Doctrines of the Gospel.

Secondly, These Mysteries, as for instance, that of the Trinity, relates to
the Divine Nature, which is incomprehensible, so that it is no strange thing if
an Idea of it be proposed to us, which not being distinctly known by us, may
raise Difficulties and Perplexities in our Minds. If I would discourse with one
born blind, of the Sun, of its Light and Heat, and should attribute to the Sun
the Production of Light, and afterward of Heat, he would find an infinite
trouble not to imagine three Suns. It is known how the Philosophers, who agreed
about the Unity of the Soul, have notwithstanding been obliged to attribute
several Faculties to it, which the common People look upon as very different
things, and which seem to oppose the Idea's of its Unity and Simplicity.

In the third place, The Christians prove very solidly, that these Mysteries
have been clearly proposed by the Apostles, who received their light from
Heaven as to these Truths, and so might necessarily be believed upon their
word, for the same reason that the Prophets of the Old Testament were formerly
believed.

Moreover, they assert that these Doctrines were first expressed, though not so
clearly, in the Old Testament, which is in the hands of the Jews, the mortal
Enemies of Christians.

I add to these Remarks, that most of those Facts whose truth is so invincibly
established, suppose these Doctrines; and that the whole frame of the Religion
does so necessarily require them, that we rob it of a considerable part of its
Glory in questioning or contesting any of them.

These Reflections may suffice in general to resolve this difficulty of the
Jews; and for a more particular Satisfaction, we refer the Reader to those
Books which purposely treat of these Mysteries, desiring him to observe
carefully, that commonly the most difficult Objections of Heretics against
these matters, do rather oppose the terms which are made use of, or the notions
which men follow in speaking of these truths, than the Propositions contained
in the Writings of the New Testament.

At least one may be assured, that the Jews are constrained to resolve several
parallel Objections, to which one can scarcely give a satisfactory Answer,
without borrowing some Distinctions and Notions from the Christians.

Neither can the second Objection of the Jews give us any more disturbance. It
is true that there have been Divisions amongst Christians, and are still to
this day; What can we conclude thence? Can we reasonably conclude that
therefore the first Founders of Christianity were doubtful concerning the truth
of those Facts which are the support and foundation of it.

On the contrary, upon an attentive Observation one may find,

1. That Heresies have only served to render the truth of these Facts more
incontestable, by obliging those that had considered of them, to examine their
certainty with more care and application. This is the Judgment one ought to
make upon all those Heresies in the second Age, about the truth of the Flesh of
Jesus Christ, or about the truth of his Death: From thence men took occasion to
take notice of, and collect with great care all the Circumstances that prove
the truth of both these Facts.

2. We find that the greatest part of these Contests do not concern the truth
of the Facts, but the several Consequences drawn from them, the truth of those
Matters continuing still beyond dispute. This we find in the Dispute raised
about the Millennium, the truth of the Promises of Jesus Christ being equally
believed by both the disputing Parties; but differently understood, according
to the temper of those that considered of them; some forming gross and sensual
Conceptions concerning them; others having a more spiritual relish, which they
had acquired by studying the Prophecies, and their true sense.

3. We find that this Division which has sprung up amongst Christians, is one
of the most solid proofs of the truth of the Books of the New Testament. If
some Fools have endeavored to decry some of them, or to falsify some
particular places, we see that both Parties unite to repel that violence, by
producing their Copies, and beating back the Impostors with their united
strength. One see's that Tertullian, though a Montanist, writ Prescriptions
against Heretics; and Epiphanius takes notice (without any respect to some
that were Orthodox) of their Crime in blotting out of their Copies, that Christ
had wept.

It is known that the Division of the Jews into Karaites and Thalmudists, the
Jealousy between the Jews and Samaritans, and the Division between the Jews
and Christians, is a means of preserving the Scripture, and hindering its
Corruption, each Party being very vigilant to hinder their Adversaries from
attempting any thing to its prejudice, in corrupting a Book which they consider
as common to them all.

I might observe many other advantages which accrue to the Truth from these
Human Failings; but I will only instance in one, which has always seemed to me
very considerable; and that is, That these Heretics distinctly prove the truth
of the Predictions of our Savior. An impious person would have reason to
accuse our Oracles as false, if there had never been any Heresies. But Truth
triumphs in seeing so great a multitude of them, who the more they increase,
the more she see's her self confirmed and established. This is the Reason
induced God to permit so great an increase in the first Ages, when the Truth,
meeting with the greatest Opposition by Persecutions, stood in the greatest
need of sensible Characters, by which it might be known.

I conclude this Work with desiring my Reader to consider these Reflections upon
the Holy Scripture here propounded, with a serious attention, and to examine
the Coherence and Indissoluble Connection of them; and with prayer to God that
it may please him to make them serviceable to advance the Glory of his Name,
which is the only end I have proposed to my self in the writing of them.

FINIS.

