A DEFENSE OF THE Brief HISTORY OF THE UNITARIANS, Against Dr. SHERLOCK'S
ANSWER IN HIS VINDICATION OF THE Holy Trinity.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, M. DC. XCI.

OBSERVATIONS On Dr. SHERLOCK'S ANSWER TO THE Brief HISTORY OF THE UNITARIANS.
CHAP. I. Containing some General Observations.
WHen I see Men arguing against the Trinity; methinks I hear a Papist
inveighing against Luther or Calvin, for questioning the Truth of
Transubstantiation. Indeed it appears to me very strange, that Protestants
should stand to the Principles of the Reformation, only when they serve their
turn; and that they should be ready to part with them, when they are not
otherways able to defend a particular Opinion. It cannot be denied, that the
Christian Church in succeeding Ages fell short of her first Purity, in respect
of Doctrine as well as Manners. Now what other Remedy could be applied to such
a Depravation, than a sincere and careful Examination of the Points suspected
of Falsehood, according to Reason and Scripture? This proved so effectual a
Course; that Transubstantiation, and some other Canonized Opinions were found
to be mere Human Inventions, and accordingly were rejected as contrary to the
two abovementioned Rules. And who can assure us, that the Reformation left no
Error behind; and that the Trinity is such an Opinion, as ought neither to be
doubted of, nor to be reformed? Shall we trust Men, barely on their Word? Or
was it impossible that the Trinity should creep into the Church, as well as
several other false Opinions? Our Principles therefore allow us to examine it;
and to inquire, whether it be founded on undeniable Arguments: especially being
of such a nature that it contradicts Reason; and by confession of all
Trinitarians, is no where set down in Holy Scripture in express Words. Why
should Men call us Heretics and Libertines, because we inquire after Truth;
and will have our Faith built upon a solid Foundation? Was the Reformation so
proper to Luther and Calvin, etc. that it ought no more to be thought of? Or
were those Reformers so infallible, that they purged the Church from all
Errors? This I think would be an hard matter to prove. Let therefore no
Protestant be scandalized; if having some Scruples about the Trinity, we
endeavor to free our selves from them, by a sincere inquiry into the Grounds
of it.

I begin with Reason; and find that the belief of a Trinity does contradict it,
as much as Transubstantiation* According to Transubstantiation, the same
Numerical Body may be in a Million of different places at the same time.
According to the Trinity, three Divine Persons, that is to say, three
Intelligent Infinite Beings, each of which is God, make but one God. I cannot
believe the First; because Reason teaches me, that one Numerical Body can
occupy or be in but one place at one time. I cannot believe the other; because
Reason tells me, that Three are Three, and not One: and that it implies no less
a Contradiction, that Three Divine Persons should be but One God; than that one
Body be a Million. Now who should not scruple an Opinion, perfectly parallel
with Transubstantiation; and equally fruitful in Incongruities and
Contradictions?

I come in the second place to examine; Whether the Trinity be well grounded in
Scripture? Indeed Three are there mentioned; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
but how came Men to fancy, that they Three are but One God? Who taught 'em so?
Does the Holy Scripture plainly say; that there is but one God, yet there are
Three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in the Godhead? One would think
indeed, that such a Mystery, and so necessary in order to Salvation, were set
down in Scripture in plain or express Words. But the Scripture is perfectly
silent about it: there is not a Word to be found in the Bible, of Three
Hypostases or Persons in the Godhead. The Father is in a thousand places called
God, distinctly from the Son; nay the only true God. The Holy Ghost is no where
styled God. And the Son is so called in a few places, as it were by the way,
and in such manner as plainly shows, that the Title [God] is bestowed on him,
upon the same account as upon Moses, even because of the Dignity and Power, to
which he was exalted by the Father's Liberality. Indeed it can have no other
meaning. The Holy Scripture teaches us, that there is but one God, the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ. But if so; How can the Son be that one God, the
Father? Of this we are sure, by the whole tenor of the Gospel, that Christ was
a Man. The Gospel is nothing else but the History of Christ's Birth, Life,
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven. Who would have thought, that a
Man should be accounted the Supreme God, without any such intimation from
Scripture, nay against the whole current of it? We find in the Gospel, that
there is one God, the Father of our Lord Christ; one Son of God, sent into the
World to be the Revealer of his Father's Will, and a Mediator between God and
Man, even Christ; and one Holy Ghost, who distributes and works all sorts of
Miraculous Gifts, for the confirmation of the Gospel. The Father of Christ is
the One true God; Christ is only his Minister and Interpreter; the Holy Ghost
(whether it be God's Power, or his ministering Angel, or Angels) the Instrument
which he makes use of to work Miracles. None certainly but Men blinded or
prejudiced could think, that God's Minister and Ambassador were God himself;
and that two so opposite Beings as God and Christ, should be one and the same
Thing. It is just as if one should say, there is one King William; and one
Viceroy in Ireland, the Lord Sidney; and the Viceroy is that one King
William. Indeed this is a Doctrine so unreasonable and contradictions, and so
opposite to Holy Scripture; that I think, had there been no such thing as
Platonic Philosophy, the Trinity should never have been heard of. I desire
therefore the Trinitarians, to abate a little of their Confidence: Let them
examine with an unprejudiced Mind, upon what Foundations they build the belief
of a Trinity; and they will soon perceive how weak and frail it is. Let them at
last confess, that the Scripture does not threaten eternal Damnation to those
who disbelieve a Trinity: And then, if themselves will not part with their darling
Opinion; let them abstain from persecuting others.

Thirdly, Trinitarians lay so much stress upon the Tradition of the Church
concerning the Trinity, that I think it worth while to undeceive them; by
showing, that there never was so great a Variation in the Church, as about this
Point. I shall divide into three Periods all the Ages of the Church. The First
reaches to the Council of Nice: The Second from the Council of Nice, to the
Schoolmen: And the Third from the Schoolmen, to our time.

And one that is never so little acquainted with the Writings of the Fathers of
the three first Centuries, cannot deny, if he be but sincere; that those
Fathers follow the Ideas of Plato concerning the three Principles, and
therefore speak rather like Arians than Orthodox. They tell us, that the Son
and Holy Ghost have each of them his own Nature and Essence, whereby they are
distinguished from each other; and that the Son is subordinate and inferior to
the Father, both in Nature and Power; as likewise the Holy Ghost is subordinate
to the Son. If any one desires to see some undeniable Proofs of what I assert,
I refer him to the Quaternio of Curcellaeus, whereby he will be fully satisfied.

The succeeding Fathers finding fault with this Notion, brought into the World
a new Interpretation of the three Principles. They will not have them to be
subordinate, but equal both in Nature and Power. However they acknowledge them
to be three Essences, or Collateral Beings. If you ask them, how they can avoid
admitting a Plurality of Gods? They will answer, That those three Beings are
but one God, as Peter, James and John, are but one Man. If you deny that Peter,
James and John, are but one Man; they will tell you, that you are mistaken;
because in Propriety of Speech, this term Man ought not to signify an
Individual, as Peter, or James, or John; but a specifical Nature common to them
all; so that tho they be three Individuals, or three Persons; yet they are but
one Man, being Partakers of the same specifical common Nature. This they apply
to their three Principles: They are indeed (say they) three Hypostases or
Persons, yet they are but one God: This term God denoting not an Individual
Hypostasis, but a Nature common to the three Persons of the Trinity, whereby
tho they are three, yet they are said to be but one God. Thus they made shift,
as well as they could. It was indeed a very unsufficient way of explaining the
Unity of God, and did by no means resolve the difficulty. They made an abstract
specifical God, (as the Heathens might equally have done) but there were still
three Individual or Numerical Gods; as Peter, James and John, may be said to be
by Abstraction one specifical Man, because they have the same specifical
Nature; but however they are still three Individual Numerical Men.

Therefore the Schoolmen disliking this Notion, as favoring Polytheism, found
out a new one more agreeable (as they thought) to the Unity of God. They will not
have the three Persons of the Trinity to have each of them his own Essence and
Nature. No, this too plainly destroys the Unity of God. There is, say they, but
one Divine Essence. Right! but then they must not part with three Persons of
the Trinity: Therefore, what are those three Persons? They are Three
Subsistences; Three Modes; Three Relations; Three I know not what is. This is
mere Nonsense: for a Person is an Intelligent Being, and Three Persons must
needs be Three Intelligent Beings. So true it is, that whosoever acknowledges
Three Persons in the Godhead (if he takes the Word in its proper sense) must
admit Three Gods: Which the Learned Doctor cannot avoid, who says they are
Three distinct Minds, Three substantial Beings, Three intelligent Beings;
therefore unavoidably Three Gods.

Now is it fair to boast so much of the Tradition concerning the Trinity, as if
it had been constant and unalterable in all the Ages of the Church, when the
contrary appears to any sincere Reader? The Fathers who lived before the
Council of Nice, speak, like Platonic Philosophers and Arians; the Nicene
Fathers like Tritheists; and the Schoolmen like Madmen. Where now is that
unchangeable Tradition, so much cried up? Considering the ridiculousness of
those Men, who in their respective Ages set up new Notions of the Trinity; I am
apt to say, contrary to Averroes his Wish, Let not my Soul be with the
Philosophers. To conclude this Chapter, those great Boasters of the (pretended)
Tradition, should do well to apply themselves to the confuting the Quaternio of
Curcellaeus before mentioned; which when they have fully and truly performed,
we may perhaps begin to think of parting with Tradition, which indeed is not
the Foundation whereon we build our Faith, Knowing only the Scriptures which
are able to make wise unto Salvation.

CHAP. II. Containing an Examination of the Doctor's Answers, to the Arguments
against the Trinity in the History of the Unitarians.
HAving premised this general Observation; I come to examine, what Answer the
Doctor returns to the Arguments alleged against the Trinity, by the Author of
the Brief History of the Unitarians.

But I must first consider his Reflections, concerning the use of Reason in
expounding Scripture. This is (says he) an Impudent Argument, which brings
Revelation down in such sublime Mysteries to the level of our Understandings,
to say, such a Doctrine cannot be contained in Scripture, because it implies a
Contradiction; whereas a modest Man would first inquire, whether it be in
Scripture or not; and if it he plainly contained there, he would conclude, how
Unintelligible soever it appeared to him, that yet there is no Contradiction in
it, because it is taught in Scripture. p. 141.

But is this Impudence, to say, Transubstantiation cannot be contained in
Scripture, because it implies a Contradiction? I hope not. Well then, if the
Trinity implies no less Contradiction than Transubstantiation; why cannot we
say, that it cannot be contained in Scripture? We say, Transubstantiation
cannot be found in Scripture, because it is a plain Contradiction to our
Reason; but if the Trinity be also a plain Contradiction to our Reason; why
shall not we be allowed to say, that it cannot be contained in Scripture? I think
both Consequences are right. But says the Author, A modest Man would first
inquire whether it be in Scripture or not? But we have already made such an
Inquiry, and cannot find the Trinity in Scripture. We never could read there,
that there are Three Persons in one Numerical God. Indeed, how could we? We
might as well find there, that the Bread of the Sacrament is Transubstantiated
into Christ's Body. But he goes on; And if it be plainly contained there, he
should conclude, how Unintelligible soever it appeared to him, that yet there
is no Contradiction in it, because it is taught in Scripture. I beg the
Author's pardon; there is a vast difference, between Unintelligible and
Contradictions. He should not have said, How Unintelligible soever, but how
Contradictions soever: And thus his Words ought to run; He should conclude, how
Contradictions soever it appeared to him, that yet there is no Contradiction in
it, because it is taught by Scripture.

I perceive, the Author found it too harsh to say that, how Contradictions
soever a thing appears to be, that yet there is no Contradiction in it, because
it is taught by Scripture; and therefore he puts the word Unintelligible,
instead of the word Contradictions. In effect, we do not say, that every
Unintelligible Thing contained in Scripture, is a Contradiction. We acknowledge,
the Resurrection plainly set down in Scripture, does imply no Contradiction,
how Unintelligible soever it be; because we do very clearly conceive, that God
is able to raise our dead Bodies. We don't apprehend the manner of this
Resurrection; how it shall be performed, is a thing Unintelligible to us; but
however it is altogether free from a Contradiction. Were the Trinity as clearly
set down in Scripture, and as free from Contradiction; we would not disbelieve
it, how Unintelligible soever it appeared to us, no more than we disbelieve the
Resurrection. But the Trinity being not only Unintelligible, but
Contradictions; we deny it is taught in Scripture, which is altogether free
from Contradiction.

Let us hear the Author a little farther; We must not indeed (says he) expound
Scripture contrary to common Sense, and to the common Reason of Mankind, in
such Matters as every Man knows, and every Man can judge of; but in Matters of
pure Revelation, which we have no natural Idea of, and know nothing of them but
what is revealed; we must not pretend some imaginary Contradictions, to reject
the plain and express Authority of Revelation. For it is impossible to know,
what is a Contradiction to the Nature of Things, whose Natures we do not
understand. We must not indeed expound Scripture, contrary to common Sense, and
the common Reason of Mankind, in such Matters as every Man knows and every Man
can judge of. I grant it; but what if the Trinity does contradict the common
Reason of Mankind; and is of such a Nature as every Man knows, and every Man
can judge of? Then certainly it cannot be contained in Scripture, according to
this Author himself. Indeed we cannot fathom the Essence of an infinite Being,
no more than (as this Author says) the Essence of any created Being; yet as we
have a distinct knowledge of some Properties of a Finite Being, so we have a
clear Apprehension of the Attributes of God. We cannot be mistaken in the
Notion of One and Three; we are most certain, that One is not Three, and that
Three are not One. The most simple Men have a clear Apprehension of those two
Numbers, and therefore are able to judge of them. Now the Scripture plainly
tells us, that there is but One God; and every one knows that One God is One
Intelligent Infinite Person, and therefore cannot be Three such Persons. He
that has an Idea of One, and an Idea of Three, must needs perceive that it
implies a Contradiction, that One be Three, and Three One; that one God be
Three Intelligent Infinite Persons or Beings, and Three Intelligent Infinite
Beings One God; This every one can judge of. Therefore we must not expound
Scripture (says the Author) contrary to common Sense, and the common Reason of
Mankind; in such Matters as every Man knows, and every Man can judge of:
Therefore (say I) all being capable of judging, whether One may be Three, and
Three One; and finding it a plain Contradiction to the common Reason of
Mankind; all may be assured, that it cannot be contained in Scripture.

But (says the Author) in Matters of pure Revelation, which we have no natural
Idea of, and know nothing of 'em but what is revealed; we must not pretend some
imaginary Contradictions, to reject the plain and express Authority of
Scripture and Revelation; for it is impossible to know, what is a Contradiction
to the Natures of Things, whose Natures we do not understand. Now what does the
Author mean by the plain and express Authority of Revelation? Does he mean,
that he has found somewhere in Scripture in plain and express Words, that there
are Three Persons in one Divine Nature or Godhead? If it be so, let him show us
it. I doubt he calls plain and express Authority, some false Consequences,
which he is pleased to draw from Scripture, and which none but prejudiced Men
would ever think of.

I wish we could show a Chinese, the Gospel well translated into his own
Language; and ask him, after a serious reading of it, what he thought Christ to
be? It is very likely, I think, that he would not take him to be the supreme
God; and if any Man should tell him, he had overseen so great a Mystery; he
would undoubtedly answer, that he is sure there is no such thing in the Gospel
which he read, unless there he another Gospel wherein such a Notion is
contained. I confess there are some Matters of Revelation, which we have no
natural Idea of; and know nothing of them but what is revealed; such is the
Resurrection of the Dead: But then those Matters imply no Contradiction, and
therefore ought not to be rejected. This first (the Resurrection) may be
discovered to us by the Light of Revelation; and discovering no Contradiction
in it, we ought to believe it. The second (the Trinity) clashing altogether
with our natural Ideas, can be no Matter of Revelation, and therefore ought not
to be believed. The Resurrection is such a Thing, as we could never have
discovered by the Light of Nature; yet as soon as we come to know it, we assent
to it, because we clearly perceive the Possibility thereof, and are sure it
implies no Contradiction at all: but it is not so with the Trinity; such a
Mystery can never be revealed to us, because Revelation cannot be contrary to
Reason; and therefore the Trinity being contrary to this, cannot be the Matter
of that. God indeed may reveal to us such Objects, as are unknown to Humane
Reason; but let them be never so much above our Reason, they will never
contradict it. It is impossible to know, what is a Contradiction to the Nature
of Things, whose Natures we do not understand. Right! But we know so much of
the Nature of God, that He is One, and not Three; and this is sufficient to
show that the Trinity is a Contradiction to the Nature of God.

What I say, is so clear and so notorious a Truth, that the Author himself is
forced to acknowledge it; He says, p. 147. We must not expound Scripture to
such a Sense, as contradicts the plain and express Maxims of natural Reason:
For though God reveals such Things to us, as natural Reason could not discover,
and cannot comprehend; yet Revelation cannot contradict plain Reason; for Truth
cannot contradict it self; what is true in Revelation, can never be false in
Reason; and what is true by natural Reason, can never be false in Revelation.
All this he grants, only he says, that we must be sure there is such a
Contradiction; it must be evident and express, and not made out by uncertain
Consequences, which many times are not owing to the Nature of Things, but to
the Imperfection of our own Knowledge. This I grant too; But the Author will not
allow the Trinity to be such a Contradiction; and endeavors to prove it: Let
us hear him.

He soon perceives the difficulty, and therefore brings it in by way of an
Objection. Yes, you will say, that there should be Three Persons, each of which is
God, and yet but One God, is a Contradiction. But what Principle of natural
Reason does it contradict? Reason tells us, that Three Gods cannot be One God;
but does Reason tell us, that Three Divine Persons cannot be One God? If my
Reason be like other Men's, I am sure my Reason says nothing at all about it,
does neither affirm nor deny it.

Is not this an admirable Argument, which consists only in an Interrogation,
and in a mere denial of the difficulty proposed in the Objection? What
Principle of natural Reason does it contradict? Does Reason tell us, that Three
Divine Persons cannot be one God? Here is the Interrogation or Query. To which
I answer; Yes, it does contradict a plain Principle of natural Reason, even
this, that Three cannot be One. If my Reason be like other Men's, I am sure my
Reason says nothing at all about it, does neither affirm nor deny it. Here is a
mere denial of the difficulty: I judge the Author's Reason must needs be very
weak and corrupted, seeing it likes well this falsehood, that Three are One; and
finds no fault with it. Those unquestionably have a better sight, and a more
sound Reason, who discern, it implies a Contradiction, that Three be but One;
because they perceive and acknowledge that Three is three times One, and
therefore cannot be only once One.

Well (says the Doctor, pleading for his Adversaries) if we believe Three
distinct Divine Persons, each of which is God, we must believe Three distinct
Gods. I hope not, when we profess to believe but One God: Yes, whatever we
profess to believe, Three such distinct Persons must be Three Gods. Now this we
deny, and challenge them to produce any plain Principle of Reason to prove that
it must be so. Natural Reason teaches Nothing about the Personality of the
Godhead: it teaches One God, but whether this One God be One or Three Persons,
it says not, and therefore He may be either, without contradicting the natural
Notions we have of One God; and then there is free scope for Revelation; and if
Revelation teaches there is but One God, and that there are Three Divine
Persons, each of which has (in Scripture) not only the Title, but the Nature
and Attributes of God ascribed to him, then we must of necessity believe a
Trinity in Unity, Three Persons and one God. For what the Scripture affirms,
and Reason does not deny, is a proper Object of our Faith; and then this
Objection against this Faith, that Three distinct Divine Persons must be Three
distinct Gods, if each of them be God, is senseless and ridiculous.

I have transcribed this whole Paragraph, because it deserves some particular
Reflection. 1. I observe, that it contains no positive Proofs, but a mere
denial. The Author is extremely confident and bold; and yet all his reasonings
may be resolved into I hope not, and this we deny. Indeed this is a very short
way of answering Objections; and as easy as to burn Books that are
unanswerable. There lies an Objection cross in his way, that if we believe
Three distinct Divine Persons, we must believe Three distinct Gods. To this he
answers, I hope not, when we profess to believe but one God. Is this a direct
Confutation? must we be satisfied with such an Answer: because Trinitarians
profess that Three Divine Persons are but one God; does it follow, that it is
true, and cannot be doubted of? He hopes not, and he denies it, therein lies
the strength of his Argument and Answer. 2. I should have added, he challenges;
for this is his third way of confuting Objections. He challenges us to produce
any plain Principle of Reason, to prove that Three distinct Divine Persons must
be Three Gods. But we have a plain Principle of Reason at hand, to answer his
Challenge, to wit, that it implies a Contradiction that Three be but One. 3.
Here is a most absurd and ridiculous Paradox, as I ever heard of; Natural
Reason teaches nothing about the Personality of God or the Godhead; it teaches
One God; but whether this One God be One or Three Persons, it says not. What?
If Reason tells us that there is One God; He must be One Intelligent Being. Now
according to Reason we have no other Idea of Unity, but such as we have of a
Man, a Beast, and a Tree. Therefore as Reason teaches that a Man is one Person,
because he is one Intelligent Being; so it follows that according to Human
Reason, God is but one Person, being but one Intelligent Being. Reason does not
tell us that the Unity of God is different from the Unity of a Man: it produces
in our Minds the same Idea of both; which being applied to God as well as to
Man, must needs denote One Person or Intelligent Being in opposition to Two or
Three. Nay, if Reason teaches nothing about the Personality of the Godhead
(which the Author does not think fit to prove) what Idea can we have of the
Unity of God by Reason? As long as we are ignorant, whether God be one or three
Persons; our Idea of him must needs be more imperfect than of any other Being,
in that very Notion which is so familiar to us, and which God himself has so
much urged, viz. his Unity. This is so false a Principle, and so contrary to
the Dictates of Reason, that there never was any Man, taught by Reason that
there is but one God, but did believe at the same time, that He is but one
Person. The Author should not have ventured abroad such a Philosophy, contrary
to the Reason of all Mankind; but ought to have kept it for himself. Now I find
that the Scripture does perfectly agree with Reason. This tells me that there
is but one God, who is but one Person; That teaches me the same, and also that
the Father of our Lord Christ is that one God: both of them contrary to the
Doctrine of the Trinity. 4. He says; that there are Three Divine Persons, each
of which have (in Scripture) not only the Title, but the Nature and Attributes
of God ascribed to them. But where is the Holy Ghost called God in Scripture?
He is indeed called the Spirit of God, but never God himself; and being the
Power of God, it is no wonder that such things are ascribed to him, as are
ascribed to God himself. Thus it is ordinary to ascribe to a Man's Courage,
what he has done himself; and yet his Courage is no Person, nor distinct from
him. This I say only by the way, to show the strangeness of his Consequences.
But I shall say nothing here of the Son: and indeed seeing he brings no
particular Instances of what he advances, there is no need to insist any longer
upon it.

CHAP. III. I come now to examine his Answers, to the Objections against the
Trinity in the brief History of the Unitarians.
THE First Objection, p. 154. If our Lord Christ were himself God; there could
be no Person greater than He, none that might be called his Head or God, none
that could in any respect command him. Let us hear, How the Doctor answers this
Objection. Now (says he) this Argument is fallacious; for tho Christ be God
himself, yet if there be Three Persons in the Godhead, the Equality and
Sameness of Nature does not destroy the Subordination of the Persons: A Son is
Equal to his Father by Nature, but Inferior to him as his Son. Now where is the
Fallacy, but in the Author's Answer? His Comparison of a Father with his Son,
is short of his purpose: for tho a Son be equal to his Father by Nature, yet he
is not equal to him in Authority and Power; and therefore a Father is truly
greater than his Son, is his Head, and can command him. This is not merely a
Subordination of Order, but of Power and Authority also. But it is not so with
the Father and Son in the Trinity: they are not only equal by Nature, in the
Author's Hypothesis, but in Power and Authority; as they have the same Nature,
so they have the same Attributes, whereby they are equal to one another in all
Things. Now if it be so; how can the Father be said to be greater than the Son,
who is as great as himself? How can he be called his Head, which imports some
Authority over Christ. As appears from 1 Cor. 11. 3. But I would have you know,
that the Head of every Man is Christ; and the Head of the Woman is the Man; and
the Head of Christ is God. It appears by this place, that God is the Head of
Christ, as Christ is the Head of every Man, and the Man the Head of the Woman.
Now Christ's being the Head of every Man, imports some Power and Authority over
every Man, as the Man's being Head of the Woman imports a Power and Authority
over the Woman; and consequently God's being the Head of Christ, must import an
Authority and Power over Christ; else the Comparison would be unreasonable,
fallacious and impertinent. But, I say, how can God be called the Head of
Christ, in such a Sense? if Christ be as Great, and have as great Power and
Authority as God has, how can God be called his God? To be ones God, is as much
as to be his Benefactor and his Protector, according to the style of Scripture;
but Christ being All-mighty and selfsufficient, how can the Father be styled
his God, that is, his Benefactor and Protector? I ascend to my Father and your
Father, to my God and your God, John 20. 17. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46. How could Christ say these things, on the Doctor's
Hypothesis; for being God as well as the Father, He must no less forsake
himself, than the Father forsook him; and he might as well call himself his own
God, and complain of himself that he had forsaken himself: Nay, being himself
Almighty God as well as the Father, and being able to comfort himself in his
Sufferings; how comes he to invoke the Father, or to call him his God? for
those Words plainly show, that He expected and desired from the Father the
Assistance which He could not perform to Himself. Furthermore, how can we
forbear conceiving Two Gods, according to this Hypothesis? Christ, who invokes
the Father, is God; the Father, whom He invokes, is God also; consequently
there are Two distinct Gods. Can he that invokes, and he that is invoked, be
one and the same Being? I always thought that this supposed two several Beings.
Lastly, If our Lord Christ were himself God, how could any command him? He has
all the Power and all the Authority, that the Father has; He is no more subject
to the Father, than the Father to him; nay the Father and He are but One God.

The Author goes on; If the Father, as I have explained it, be original Mind
and Wisdom; the Son a Personal subsisting, but reflex Image of the Father's
Wisdom; tho their Eternal Wisdom be equal and the same, yet the Original is
Superior to the Image, the Father to the Son: And therefore tho I know such
Texts as he alleges, My Father is greater than I; The Head of Christ is God; I
ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God; are both by
Ancient and Modern Expositors applied to Christ's humane Nature; yet I see no
Inconvenience, in owning this to be true, with respect to his Divine Person,
and his Relation to the Father: For the Father is the Head and Fountain of the
Deity; and therefore the Father may be called his God. Let us consider this
Paragraph.

The Son is a Personal Subsisting, but Reflex Image of his Father's Wisdom.
What Gibberish is this! Has the Doctor found any where in Scripture, that the
Son is a Personal Subsisting, but Reflex Image of his Father's Wisdom? Why does
he not speak the Language of Scripture? If his Words have any Sense, he means,
that the Father reflects upon his own Knowledge and Wisdom: but how comes he to
fancy, that a reflected Wisdom, or to reflect on ones own Wisdom, is a Divine
Person and an Intelligent Being? One would think it only an Act of God, to
reflect upon his own Knowledge, or other Perfections, without dreaming of a
Divine Person; but Metaphysicians, it seems, have a clearer Sight than other
People: what is to others only an Act of God, the Metaphysician discerns to be
a Divine Person. 2. The Original, says the Author, is Superior to the Image,
the Father to the Son. But the Superiority in the Trinity is only a Superiority
of Order, which can admit of no such Expressions as Greater than Christ, the
Head of Christ, the God of Christ; as I showed before. He sees, he says, no
Inconvenience in owning this to be true with respect to Christ's Divine Person,
and his Relation to his Father; because the Father is the Head and Fountain of
the Deity. I will show more particularly, the ridiculousness of this Assertion,
by insisting upon the first of the Passages before cited, as I have done upon
the two others. Our Savior seeing his Disciples sorrowful, because He had told
them, that He was going to his Father; and being willing to comfort them, and
to lessen their Sadness; tells them (John 14. 18.) If ye loved me, ye would
rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father; For my Father is greater than I.
One would think that Christ's meaning is, That the Disciples should be glad to
hear that he leaves the World to go to his Father; because his Father being
greater than He, would undoubtedly crown his Obedience with an immortal Glory,
and a Name which is above every Name. But this Author has found out another
Sense, which is worth the observing; If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because
I said I go to the Father; for the Father is greater than I; that is to say,
the Father is the Head and Fountain of the Deity. This would have been a very
unsignificant Comfort; Be not sorrowful for my leaving this World and going to
the Father; For the Father is the first Person of the Trinity. Yet this ought
to be the Interpretation of this Passage, if the Author's Assertion be true.
Now I think the true meaning of this Phrase, the Father is the Head and
Fountain of the Deity, should be this, the Father is the first God; as the Son
is the second God, and the Holy Ghost the third God. This Author may say so, if
he pleases; I shall not contradict him, for that is the Consequence that flows
naturally from his Principles. But I shall deny, that the Father may be called
the God of Christ: if Christ be the supreme God as well as his Father, how can
the supreme God have a God over him? The term God relates only to Creatures;
God cannot be said to be the God of any but Creatures; this, common Sense and
the whole Current of Scripture teaches. Yes, you will say, the Father is the Head
and Fountain of the Deity. I answer, therefore you may in your Hypothesis call
him the first God; but by no means the God of the Son or Spirit, to whom He is
not Superior in Power, Authority, or other Divine Attribute.

The Author speaks an unintelligible Jargon in his following Paragraph, which
(I think) there is no need to insist on: Therefore I shall here leave it to
every rational Man to judge, whether we ought to rest satisfied with such a
trifling Answer to the propounded Objection.

The second Objection, p. 155. If our Lord Christ were indeed God, it could not
without Blasphemy be (absolutely and without Restriction) affirmed of him, that
He is the Creature, the Possession, the Servant, and the Subject of God. To
this the Author answers thus; That Christ is called a Creature, he proves,
because He is the Firstborn of every Creature, Col. 1. 15. But here he should
have remembered his Absolutely, and without Restriction; for Christ is so the
Firstborn of every Creature, that He is the Image of the Invisible God, and
therefore no Creature. Surely, an absurd Consequence: I say on the contrary;
Christ is the Image of the Invisible God, and therefore a Creature. Let us see
which of us is in the right. Every one may plainly see that, when St. Paul
calls Christ the Image of the Invisible God, he means, that He is a Visible
Image of an Invisible God; and therefore he added the Epithet Invisible; which
otherways had been useless, not to say ridiculous. For then the Sense of the
Apostle's Expression must be this; Christ is the Invisible Image of the
Invisible God. Now the Nature of an Image is to be visible to every ones Eye;
or else it is no Image: But if Christ is called the Image of the Invisible God,
because He is the second Person of the Trinity; this second Person being as
Invisible as the first, it follows that Christ is an Image of God as Invisible
as the Original; which is ridiculous. No, no; the Man Christ is the Image of
the Invisible God, by reason of his unspotted Holiness, and of the supreme
Power and Authority conferred on him. He is the Brightness of God's Glory, and
the express Image of his Person; but such an Image as was Visible while He
lived upon Earth; and may now be seen of all the Inhabitants of Heaven.
Besides, it does plainly appear by the Context, that St. Paul calls Jesus
Christ Man, the Image of the Invisible God. Who (the Father) says he at Ver.
13. has delivered us from the Power of Darkness, and has translated us into the
Kingdom of his dear Son. Ver. 14. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood,
even the forgiveness of Sins. Ver. 15. Who is the Image of the Invisible God,
the Firstborn of every Creature. There you see, that He who is the Image of
the Invisible God, is that dear Son in whom we have Redemption through his Blood;
but He who shed his Blood for the Redemption of Men, must be Jesus Christ Man;
therefore Jesus Christ Man is the Image of the Invisible God. Now let any
unprejudiced Man judge, which of these two Consequences is right, either this
of the Author, Christ is the Image of the Invisible God, therefore no Creature;
or mine, Christ is the Image of the Invisible God, therefore a Creature.

He goes on. He is so born before all Creatures, as (...) also signifies, that
by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, --
and He is before all things (which is the Explication of (...), Begotten before
the whole Creation, and therefore no part of the Creation) and by him all
things consist. (...), all things were not only made by him, but have their
Subsistence in him.

Now let us suppose, that (...) ought to signify born before all Creatures: I
deny that, therefore Himself is no part of the Creation. The plain meaning of
born before all Creatures, is, that Christ was born before any other Creature:
As these Words, Adam was born before all Men, do not signify that he is no
Creature, or no Man, but only that he was the first Man created. Therefore, I
say, supposing that these Words (...), are well translated by born before all
Creatures, I may with great reason draw a Consequence contrary to the Author's,
thus; Christ is born before all Creatures, therefore He is part of the Creation
Himself.

The Author is very unhappy at drawing Consequences. Here is another as false
as the former; That this does not relate to the New Creation, as the Socinians
would have it, is very plain. For, 1. In this Sense Christ (if He were a mere
Man) was not the Firstborn of every New Creature. For I hope, there were a
great many New Creatures, that is, truly Good and Pious Men, before Christ was
born of his Virgin Mother. What? supposing the New Creation by the Gospel, is
here meant; cannot Christ as a mere Man be the Firstborn of every New Creature;
being the Messiah, the Author and first Preacher of the Gospel, the Head of the
Church, the Fountain from which the Holiness of every New Evangelical Creature
does spring? In a Word, being the Author of this New Evangelical Creation,
cannot He also be the Firstborn of every New Evangelical Creature? Those
Socinians that he speaks of, by the New Creation mean nothing else, but the
New Creation wrought by Christ and his Gospel: and therefore, either this
Author imposes on them; or is not fully acquainted with their Opinions; or has
no great Skill in Reasoning.

I see, the Author does not understand the above cited place. Therefore I think
it worth while to explain it; the rather, because it is one of the strongest
Holds of the Trinitarians; and to show, that instead of favoring their
Opinion, it overthrows it. In order thereunto; 1. I will prove, that the Old
Creation, that is the Creation of the World, is not intended in that Text. 2. I
will set down, what I take to be the true Sense of that whole Context.

1. That the Creation of the World is not there meant. This I shall prove by
Four Arguments. 1. He who is the Firstborn of every Creature, is the same who
shed his Blood (ver. 14.) for the Redemption of Men; as I noted before. Now he
who shed his Blood for the Redemption of Men, can be no other but Jesus Christ,
Man: but this very Jesus Christ Man is there styled the Firstborn of every
Creature, by whom all things were created, etc. as we translate the Words;
Therefore this cannot be meant of the Creation of the World, which is the Work
of God, not of a Man. Yes, you will say; for He is God as well as Man; and
therefore may be said to have created the World. I answer; Where have you found
in Scripture, that Christ is God as well as Man? I know He is called Man in the
Writings of the New Testament; but I could never find him there styled God-Man,
as He should have often been, if He was both. Does the Apostle make a
distinction between his two Natures? does he say, we have Redemption through his
Blood, as He is a Man? and that He is the Firstborn of every Creature, and has
created all Things, as He is God? Not at all; but only tells us, That the same
Jesus Christ, in whom we have redemption through his Blood, is the Firstborn of
every Creature, and by whom all Things were created, etc. Why should we
contrive a distinction of our own, when the Apostle makes none? But 2. I cannot
but wonder, that Men should attribute the old or first Creation to Christ,
since we have no Warrant from Scripture for it: I mean, that the Scripture does
never say in express Words, that Christ has created Heaven and Earth, (which is
the proper Description of the Old Creation, or of the Creation strictly and
properly so called; and the Description usual in Scripture when it speaks of
that Creation) as it is said that God the Father of Christ has. I do observe so
great a difference between the Expressions of the Sacred Writers concerning the
Creation of the World by God, and those Expressions which are supposed to
import the same Creation by Christ; that I cannot forbear alleging some places
concerning both. I omit those of the Old Testament, which are so many; and will
insist only upon some taken out of the New. God (says St. Paul, Acts 17. 24.)
that made the World and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven
and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with Hands. And Acts 4. 11. Lord, thou
art God, which have made Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them
is. Acts 14. 15. We -- preach unto you, that ye should turn from these
Vanities, unto the Living God, which made Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and
all things that are therein. And Rev. 14. 7. Fear God, -- and worship him, that
made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of Water. This is the
true and proper Description of the Creation of the World. Were it ascribed to
Christ in such express Terms, we could not doubt that Christ had created the
World: which if the Apostles had believed, they would undoubtedly have taught
us so great a Truth, and that both in express and plain Terms, and often. No,
Christ is never said to have created Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that is
therein. In this very place the Apostle does not say, that the Firstborn
created Heaven and Earth; but All things that are in Heaven, and that are in
Earth: and the All Things of which he speaks, he limiteth to all Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities and Powers, visible and invisible; which shall be
explained hereafter. This second Reflection, that this Text contains not the
proper Description of the Creation of the World used in Scripture, being added
to the foregoing, that this Context speaks of Christ as Man; ought to persuade
any unprejudiced Man, that the Creation of the World is not here attributed to
Christ. The Primitive Christians were so far from believing, that Christ
created the World; that, as the Father only is called God in the Apostles
Creed, so He only is styled Maker of Heaven and Earth. 3. As the Epistle to the
Galatians is an excellent Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans; so the
Epistle to the Ephesians must be made use of, for the right understanding of
the Epistle to the Colossians. The Design and Scope of those two Epistles is
the same; so that we must look into the Epistle to the Ephesians, to find out
the true Sense of this controverted Text in the Colossians. Now he that
seriously compares these two Epistles with one another, will find that Coloss.
1. 15, 16, 17, 18. must be interpreted by Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. and Ephesians. 1.
10. is a true Commentary on Coloss. 1. 20. Coloss. 1. 18. runs thus, And He is
the Head of the Body, the Church: who is the Beginning, the Firstborn from the
dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence. To which answers part
of the 22d verse in the Ephesians, in these Words; And gave him to be Head over
all things to the Church. Col. 1. 15, 16, 17. runs thus; Who is the Image of
the invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature: for by him were all things
created (as we translate the Word) that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers: all things were created by him and for him: and he
is before all things, and by him all things consist. To these Verses do answer
the 20, 21, and part of the 22d verse of Chap. 1. to the Ephesians, in these
Words; He (God) raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right Hand in
the Heavenly Places, far above all Principality and Power, and Might and
Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in this World, but in that
which is to come: and has put all things under his Feet. Now in the Epistle to
the Ephesians, we see, there is not the least intimation of the Creation
ascribed to Christ; but only of his exaltation above all the Orders of Angels,
and all earthly Powers: which plainly shows, that the Apostle meant not the
Creation of the World in the forecited Verses of the Epistle to the Colossians.
Nay, were it so, he would speak Nonsense. In the Epistle to the Colossians, he
would tell us that Christ has created all the Orders of Angels, the visible and
invisible Thrones, etc. which plainly shows that He is thereby as far above
them, as the Creator is above his Creatures: but in the Epistle to the
Ephesians he would tell us, that Christ has been exalted far above all the
Orders of Angels, and all Earthly Thrones and Powers; which undeniably proves,
that He was not so before. Now what is a Contradiction, if this be not, to say
that Christ created them, and that the Father set him far above them? We must
therefore of necessity explain the Context of the Colossians, by that of the
Ephesians; and put such a Sense upon it, as imports no true and proper
Creation. 4. Coloss. 1. 19, 20. being interpreted by Ephesians. 1. 10. is a
Confirmation of what I have said hitherto. The former (Coloss. 1. 19, 20.) runs
thus; For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell; and
(having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all
things to himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in Earth, or things in
Heaven. To which answers the other Text (Ephesians. 2. 10.) in these Words; That in
the Dispensation of the fullness of time, he might gather together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are in Earth, even in
him. No Man, I hope, will deny that (...) in the Epistle to the Colossians,
which we render to Reconcile, ought to be interpreted by (...) in the Text of
the Ephesians, which signifies to gather together in one, or to sum up. So that
the meaning of both places is this, that it pleased God in the fullness of time,
to unite both Angels and Men under one Head, even Christ, whom he set up Lord
and King over them. Now this does perfectly agree with what St. Paul says to
the Ephesians, concerning Christ's exaltation above all the Orders of Angels,
and his being Head of the Church: for his Argument runs thus; God has exalted
Christ above all the Orders of Angels, and made him Head of the Church, for he
had decreed, in the fullness of time to unite both Angels and Men under one
Head, Christ. But if the Text of the Epistle to the Colossians, is meant of the
Creation of the World; this will be perfect Nonsense; for thus it ought to
run: Christ has created all Orders of Angels, and all Powers on Earth, and was
made Head of the Church; for God had decreed, in the fullness of time to unite
both Angels and Men under one Head, Christ. No Man in the World can speak
greater Nonsense than this would be, were the Creation of the World ascribed
to Christ in the controverted Text. I desire the Author to reconcile his
explication of these Words, that in all things he might have the preeminence,
with what follows. That is (says he, at p. 157.) that he might be the (...),
the First upon all accounts, before the Worlds, and the Firstborn from the
dead. So the whole Argument (according to the Author) must run thus; Christ was
the First upon all accounts, before the Worlds, and the Firstborn from the
Dead; for God was pleased, in the fullness of time to unite both Angels and Men
under Christ, as their Head. Could any thing be said more absurd and
ridiculous? The Author's Skill in Scripture and Reason is, I think, alike.

2. Having thus proved that the Old Creation, or the Creation properly so
called, is not ascribed to Christ in this Context of the Colossians; I come now
to explain its true Sense, as clearly as possibly I can. Ver. 15. Who is the
Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature. The meaning of
these last Words is not, that Christ was begotten before all Creatures, as this
Author would have it, but that He is the Lord and King of every (Intelligent)
Creature; in Allusion to the Firstborn of a Family, who is Heir of all Things.
This I prove by the 17 and 18th Verses; Ver. 17. (...), And He is before all
things, is the Explication of the Firstborn of every Creature; and signifies,
not that He is before all Creatures in order of time, but of Dignity and Power,
being by God set over all the Orders of Angels, and over the Church, as their
Head and King. But if you don't rest satisfied with this parallel Place, the
18th Verse will afford an undeniable proof of what I say: There you find,
(...), which is rightly rendered in our Bibles, That in all things He might have
the Preeminence, both in Heaven and in Earth, among Angels and in the Church. I
say now, these last Words ought to be the Explication of the two
beforementioned Expressions; to be the Firstborn of every Creature, and to be
before all Things, ought to be interpreted by his having the Praeeminence in
all Things: so that He is the Firstborn of every Creature, is this, He has
the Preeminence over every Creature. Thus by the Context it self, we find out
the true sense of (...), which in the English we translate Firstborn of every
Creature: And thus too are these Words interpreted by the principal Critics
among the Orthodox, (as they are called) Gomarus, Camero, Piscator, Drusius,
Vorstius, Davenant, Dally, Grotius, (for they will have him also to be
Orthodox) Hammond.

I come now to the next Verse, For by him were all Things created. I have fully
proved, they cannot be understood of the Old Creation, the Creation of Heaven
and Earth, and the Sea, and of the Things in them, which is the Creation
properly so called; therefore to reconcile this Verse with the foregoing, and
with the Words before cited out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, (He [God] set
Him at his own Right Hand, far above all Principality and Power, -- and every
Name that is named;) The word (...), which we render Created, ought to be
rendered Modelled, Disposed, or Reformed into a new Order. So that the Sense
will run thus; Christ is the Lord of every Creature, for by him are all both
Visible and Invisible Creatures, even all Men and Angels, Modelled or Disposed
into a new Order, being subjected to Him and His Commands: As for Angels, all
the Orders of them, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, none of them are
exempted from his Power and Authority; he rules over them, (which is the
meaning of Ver. 17.) and they are all as it were compacted in one Body under
his Conduct; as for Men, as He is the Beginning and the Firstborn from the
Dead, so He was also made Head of the Church his Body; so that in all things He
has the Preeminence, He rules in Heaven and on Earth, over Angels and over the
Church, which is the Sense of Ver. 18. This I hope makes a clear Sense,
agreeable to the whole Context, and to the Text in the Ephesians. I observe
that as (...), or He is before all Things, is the Explication of (...), etc. Or
He is the Firstborn of every Creature: So (...), or and by him all Things
consist, or are compacted into one Body, ought to be the Explication of (...),
or by him were all Things (not created, as it is rendered in the English, but)
Modelled or Reformed. I know not, why Dr. Sherlock has called this a Socinian
Explication; as if it were devised by them, to serve their Hypothesis; the
truth is, the chief of the Orthodox Interpreters, have thus explained this
Context of the Colossians. Among the Ancients, St. Cyril, Fulgentius,
Procopius, Gazeus, and even Athanasius himself: Of the Moderns, Salmero,
Montanus, Grotius, and many more. Before I put an end to this, I must observe;
that our Author is greatly mistaken in his Explication of Col. 1. 18. The
Apostle (says he) proceeds from Christ's Creation of the natural World, to his
Mediatory Kingdom: Which proves, that He did not speak of that before. I see
the Author does not observe his own rule (p. 146.) To consider, in expounding
Scripture, what goes before, and what follows. It was no hard matter to see,
that the Apostle at Ver. 16. speaks, First in the general of Things that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, Visible and Invisible: but then afterward he
explains, what he meant by the Things that are in Heaven, viz. all the Orders
of Angels; this he does in the latter part of the same Verse; and what he means
by Things that are on Earth, He tells us fully at Ver. 18. viz. the Church. The
18th Verse, being an Explication of some part of Ver. 16. it appears not to
have been Paul's Design, to proceed from Christ's Creation of the World to his
Mediatory Kingdom.

Thus I have done with the famous Context of Col. 1. 15, 16, etc. The Author of
the Brief History had proved, that Christ was God's Minister and Servant,
because He was appointed or made by God, the Apostle and High Priest of our
Profession. To this the Author, I am now considering, Answers; But here is a
Restriction to his being High Priest, and therefore no danger of Blasphemy, tho
He be God. For we may observe, that tho the Jewish High Priest was but a Man,
yet he was a type of an High Priest who is more than Man, even the eternal Son,
or Word of God; as some of the Learned Jews acknowledge. This is indeed an
admirable Answer; Christ has been appointed by God an High Priest, which seems
to prove, that Himself is not God. No, says the Doctor, you are mistaken; for
tho the Jewish High Priest was but a Man, yet He was a Type of an High Priest
more than Man, of an High Priest who is the eternal Son of God. How does he
prove it? As some, says he, of the Learned Jews acknowledge. And what then; if
some Learned Jews have spoken nonsense, must we speak nonsense too? One would
expect, the Author should prove by Scripture, and not by Jewish Writers, that
the Jewish High Priest was a type of an High Priest, who is the eternal Son and
Word of God. The Jewish High Priest being a Type of Christ, was a Type of an
High Priest more eminent and greater than Himself in all respects, tho he were
not God.

He goes on. For the Son of God is the only proper Mediator and Advocate with
the Father. If you ask him, why? he will answer; Philo Judaeus, who often calls
the (...) or Word the (...) or High Priest, says so; and shows that the
Garments of the High Priest were Figures of Heaven and Earth. Which seems to
signify that the eternal Word which made the World, is the true High Priest.
Here comes upon the stage, one of his Learned Jews, Philo; by whose Testimony
he proves, that the second Person of the Trinity is the only proper Mediator
and Advocate with the Father. But Philo being Plato's Follower, did not believe
such a Trinity as the Doctor teaches. Sure there is a great difference between
Plato's three Principles, and the Doctor's Trinity. But if there were not; must
we believe Philo Judaeus, rather than St. Paul, who plainly tells us (in direct
opposition to Philo) that as there is One God, so there is One Mediator between
God and Men, the MAN Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. As for the Garments of the
High Priest, which Philo will have to be a Figure of Heaven and Earth; and our
Author's Story about Jaddus; both which our Author alleges as Arguments, at
least as Congruities, whereby to prove the Divinity of Christ; I shall so far
trust the Judgment of the meanest Reader, as to take no notice of them. That
which follows, is no less ridiculous; I am sure (says the Author) the Apostle
distinguishes Christ from Highpriests taken from among Men, and makes his
Sonship the Foundation of his Priesthood, Heb. 5. 1, 6. The contrary to both
these is true, and evident also in the Text he cites. The Priesthood is the
Foundation of the Sonship; and Aaron and Christ are there made Instances of
Highpriests taken from among Men. The Objection therefore remains still; that
Christ being an High Priest appointed and made by God, cannot Himself be God.

He goes on: As for his next Objection (from 1 Cor. 3. 23.) Christ is God's. I
know not what he means by it; for there is no doubt but Christ is God's Son,
God's Christ, God's High Priest, serves the Ends and Designs of God's Glory;
and what then? Therefore he is not God: by no means! he may conclude that He is
not God the Father; because He acta subordinately; not that therefore He is not
God the Son. The Author of the Brief History meant (I suppose) this; that as
[you are Christ's] in that Text, signifies Men are subject to Christ; so
[Christ is God's] must signify, Christ is subjected to God, and therefore not
Himself God. This I think is good Sonse, and a good Argument. But can it be
said, that the second Person of the Trinity, who is the supreme God; nay, One
God with the First, is God's Son, God's Christ, God's High Priest, serves the
Ends and Designs of God's Glory? All these Titles denote a dependence upon the
Father, and a real subjection to Him; which cannot agree to any Person who is
indeed Himself a Supreme God.

Here is another senseless Answer, to a good and strong Objection. P. 158. His
next proof is; That God calls Christ his Servant in the Prophet Isaiah. But it
is his Servant in whom his Soul was pleased; which is the peculiar Character of
his Son; and is that very Testimony which God gave to Christ at his Baptism,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. I desire here the Reader to
observe the Doctor's accurate way of reasoning. This is the Objection; Christ
is called God's Servant, therefore He is not God. No, this is a mistake, says
He; for Christ is God's beloved Servant.

P. 159. He says in answer to the Objection from Phil. 2. 8, 9. Because He
voluntarily condescends below the Dignity of his Nature; does He forfeit the
Dignity of his Nature? But I ask; can it be said of the Supreme God, with whom
is no Variableness, neither Shadow of turning, that He has condescended below
the Dignity of his Nature?

P. 159, 160. He goes on in a florid way of Speech to show, how inconsistent it
is that Christ, were He a mere Creature, should be advanced to that Power and
Authority, whereunto He has been promoted.

Hereupon I observe; 1. The Dignity conferred upon Christ ought not to be
called, the Supreme Government of the World; as this Author has styled it: For
He acts and governs in Subordination to his Father. 2. When the Scripture
speaks of this Advancement of Christ, it extends it especially over Angels and
Men. 3. It is no Indignity to Angels, as our Author pretends, to be ruled and
governed by a Man, whom God has exalted above them. Angels indeed have some
natural Prerogatives above Men, whereby they are more excellent Creatures than
Men: but if it pleases God of his free Gift, to invest a Man with greater
Dignity, Power, and all other Excellence, than any Angel has; why cannot He be
set over them, as their Lord and Ruler, in Subordination to God? There is no
Incongruity in it. 4. That, contrary to the Author's Assertion, a mere Creature
may be a fit Lieutenant or Representative of God in Personal and Prerogative.
Acts of Government or Power. Thus Saul and David were set over the Israelites,
to govern and rule over them by God's Appointment, in Subordination to him. Nay
we do commonly say, That the King is the Lieutenant and Representative of God.
5. God communicated to Christ such Wisdom and Power, as is necessary to enable
him to exercise the Dignity conferred on him. In all this, there is not the
least Inconsistency.

But notwithstanding his foregoing Objections, he confesses, the Difficulty
remains. P. 161. If He be by Nature the Son of God, and Natural Lord of the
World; how is He said to be exalted by God, and to receive a Kingdom from him,
as the reward of his Righteousness and Sufferings? He was before possessed of
it, ever since the Foundation of the World; being natural Lord of all his
Creatures: He had no need to receive that which was his own, or purchase what
was his natural Right, by such mean and vile Condescension as suffering Death
on the Cross. Now to reconcile this, he makes a long Discourse concerning the
Mediatory Kingdom of Christ; which (says he) has been bestowed on the second
Person of the Trinity, and is peculiar to Him, and distinguished from the
Natural Government of the World, which He has in Conjunction with the Father.
This Chimerical System I may overthrow, I think, by that single Text of St.
Paul already cited; There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the
MAN Christ Jesus. If Christ is a Mediator, and has the Mediatory Kingdom, as He
is the second Person of the Trinity, that is, as He is God; why does the
Apostle tell us, that He is a Mediator bearly as He is Man? At least he should
have told us, that the Mediator is the God-Man Jesus Christ. It is
unaccountable that the Apostle, who in all his Epistles sets forth the
Excellency and Glory of Christ, in the most expressive Terms; should tell us
that the MAN Christ Jesus is the Mediator between God and Men, if the Mediatory
Kingdom is exercised by the Divine Person or Nature, and if (not Christ Man,
but) Christ God is the Mediator. But let us examine the Grounds our Author goes
on.

He tells us, ibid. A Mediatory Kingdom was necessary, to reconcile God and
Men; to restore Man to the Integrity of his Nature: and this Power and Dignity
God bestowed on his own Son; who had the most Right to it, and was the best
qualified for it, being the begotten Word and Wisdom of the Father. Now one
would expect, he should cite some Texts of Scripture, to prove this Assertion;
but he could find no place to rely on. But Christ must, says he, first become
Man, and perform the whole Will of God, and then He shall be exalted. Whereupon
he makes this Observation; (page 162.) All the Power Christ is invested with,
is as Head of the Church: God has put all Things under his Feet; and given him
to be Head over all Things to the Church; which is his Body, the Fullness of him
that fills all Things; Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. That is, says he, God has made him
Governor of the World, as Head of the Church. I observe two Things upon this
place. 1. That this Text is not well interpreted. The first part of it relates
to the foregoing Verse, and ought to be explained by it: God, says the
Apostle, at Ver. 21. Set Christ at his own Right Hand in the Heavenly Places,
far above all Principality and Power, and every Name that is named, not only in
this World, but in that which is to come. Ver. 23. And has put all Things
under his Feet. What Things? Those that are before mentioned, all the Orders of
Angels and all Earthly Powers. And then follows; And gave him to be Head, etc.
This is the sense; not, that Christ was made Governor of the whole World, as
Head of the Church. 2. But, what if all the Power Christ is invested with, is
as Head of the Church? Will it not follow, that all the Power He is invested
with, is as a Man, not as God? And this also I prove by Col. 1. 18. And He is
the Head of the Body the Church, who is the Beginning, the Firstborn from the
Dead. He who is the Firstborn from the Dead, can be no other but the MAN Jesus
Christ; but He who is the Firstborn from the Dead, is the Head of the Church,
as that Text expressly says: therefore the MAN Christ Jesus is the Head of the
Church. Thus the Apostle very plainly telling us; that the Mediator and Head of
the Church is the Man Christ Jesus, destroys our Author's Notion of Christ's
Mediatory Kingdom, or that it is grounded on and exercised by his Divine Nature
or Person. Further, if Christ God is the Mediator, if the Mediatory Kingdom
belongs to and is managed by the second Person of the (supposed) Trinity, I
don't see, how the Government of Israel can be a Type of this Kingdom, as this
Author says at p. 162, 163. For the King of the Israelites was between God and
his People, and was really diverse from both; but Christ in our Author's
Hypothesis, is God himself, One with the Father and the Holy Ghost; so that he
must be a Mediator between himself and Men, which besides that it is contrary
to the Notion of a Mediator, does wholly destroy the Parallel.

He says at page 164, 165. that, We certainly know from the Expositions of
Christ and his Apostles, that the Prophets spoke of Christ under the Names of
Lord, God, and Jehovah. But I desire him, to reconcile these Texts with his
Opinion; Heb. 1. 1, 2. God, who at sundry Times and in diverse Manners, spoke in
times past to the Fathers by the Prophets; has in these Last Days spoken unto
us by his Son. Heb. 2. 2, 3. For if the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast; --
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began
to be spoken by the Lord? Gal. 3. 19. The Law was ordained by Angels, in the
Hand of a Mediator, i. e. by the Intervention of Moses. Acts 7. 53. Who have
received the Law by the Disposition of Angels. Ver. 38. This [Moses] is He who
was with the Church in the Wilderness, with the Angel who spoke to him in Mount
Sinai. These Texts do more than sufficiently prove, that the Son of God is not
meant by the Prophets and other Writers of the Old Testament, where they
mention the Lord, God, and Jehovah. But to return to Christ's Mediatory Kingdom.

He says page 167. The Son has a Kingdom of his own, which is peculiarly his;
and administered in his Name, and by his Sovereign Authority. But, how is this
consistent with what we read page 168. The Power indeed whereby he administers
his Kingdom, is the Power of the whole Trinity, of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
for they being essentially one God, have but one Energy and Power, and
therefore can never act separately. How can the Son, or the second Person of
that Trinity, have a Kingdom of his own: if whatever he does, is also done by
the Father and Holy Ghost; have not they hereby as great a share in this
Kingdom, as the Son? This therefore is a plain Contradiction, and perfect
Nonsense. Let us hear him further, page 169, 170. The Power is not taken out
of God's Hands, that is impossible: Father, Son and Holy Ghost govern the World
still, by one individual Act and Power; but as in the Natural Government of the
World, the exercise of this Power begins with the Father; so in the exercise of
this Mediatory Kingdom, it begins with the Son, and is directed by his
Mediation. That is, God governs the World now, not merely as a Natural Lord, by
the Rules of Natural Justice; but with respect to the Mediatory Power and
Authority of his Son, and to serve the ends of his Mediatory Kingdom. This
Chimerical reasoning will not free the Author's System from Contradiction. For
as in the Natural Government of the World, tho (as he dreams) the exercise of
the Power begins with the Father, yet the Son and Holy Spirit acting in
conjunction with the Father, by an individual Act; it cannot be said that the
Power or Kingdom is peculiar to the Father: so in the supposed Mediatory
Kingdom, tho the exercise of the Power begins with the Son; yet as long as the
Father and Holy Spirit act together with him, and can never act separately; it
cannot be said, that the Son has a Kingdom of his own, or that he is the
Mediatory King, more than the Father or Spirit. Yet by the help of this
contrived Mediatory Kingdom, our Author undertakes (at page 173.) to overthrow
the Fourth Argument in the History of the Unitarians; even this, because God
does all things in his own Name, and by his own Authority, but Christ comes in
the Father's Name, does his Will, and seeks his Glory. This only proves (says
he) that he is not the Father but the Son, and the King of God. For this
Mediatory Kingdom (as he says at page 172.) is erected by the Father; and by
him given to the Son. But I ask, is not the Son equal to the Father, both in
Energy and Authority? How then can he be said to be sent by his Father, to
receive his Commands, and to seek his Glory? Can all this be ascribed to the
Supreme God? Nay, if the Father together with the Son and Spirit, be but one
God; is it not absurd to say that the Father sends the Son, and the Son does
the Will of the Father? Why not rather, in his own Mediatory Kingdom, does his
own Will, seeks his own Glory? I think, I could as soon believe White is Black,
as swallow the Absurdities of our Author's Mediatory Kingdom. But it is plain to
every discerning Reader, that he has often not understood what he said.

Having thus shown the Absurdity of his Hypothesis, concerning Christ's
Mediatory Kingdom: I will set down in a few Words, what I take to be the true
Notion of Christ's Kingdom. God had promised to David, that he would establish
his Throne for ever; and there should never be wanting one of his Seed to sit
thereon; Psalm. 89. 3, 4. I have made a Covenant with my Chosen, I have sworn
unto David my Servant; thy Seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy
Throne to all Generations. And again, verse. 29. His Seed will I make to endure
for ever, and his Throne as the Days of Heaven. Again ver. 35, 36, 37. Once I
have sworn by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David: his Seed shall
endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before me; it shall be established
for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful Witness in the Heavens. Now that this
Promise does not relate, only or chiefly, to David's Successors in the
Political Government of Israel, without any respect to the Messiah, who was
also the Son of David; does plainly appear by the Event: for the Political
Kingdom of David has been destroyed for several Ages, and the Series of
Successors in the Davidical Line is utterly broken off. This Promise therefore
had its full Accomplishment in our Messiah Jesus Christ, who is the Son of
David, and the King of Israel. But this Kingdom of Christ is both more ample
and more durable than David's was. For all Power is given to him, both in
Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28. 18. And (1 Cor. 15. 25, 26.) He must reign, till he
has put all Enemies under his Feet; the last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is
Death. Thus his Throne shall endure as long as the Sun and Moon. He may be
called, with greater reason than David was (Psalm. 89. 27.) God's Firstborn,
Higher than the Kings of the Earth: for he is (Rev. 19. 16.) King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; (Rev. 1. 5.) Prince of the Kings of the Earth. But his Power
reaches not only over Men, but over Angels too; (1 Pet. 3. 22.) He is on the
right hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and Powers being made subject to
him. This is God's Anointed, whom he has invested with the Power of enacting
Laws for the good of his Subjects. When God did not so immediately govern
Israel, as during the Theocracy, but by Kings; David, as God's Deputy and
Vicegerent, appointed Music, Singers, Porters; and made such other
Regulations, as were fit in the Worship of God: So Christ, who is a King
immediately appointed by God, by virtue of the Power and Instructions given to
him, took away the Ceremonial Law, set up a Spiritual Worship; and being a King
over the Gentiles as well as over the Jews, made such Laws as were able to
unite them into one Body, in the Worship of one God; that there might be but
one Flock, and one Shepherd. Christ's Kingdom is not only Spiritual, but
Temporal; I mean, he has so much Power over all Creatures, as is necessary to
enable him, to perform the ends of his Spiritual Kingdom. Nor is this
contradicted by our Savior's Words, at John 18. 36. The Original has it not,
My Kingdom is not of this World, but from this World. (...), i. e. My Kingdom
is not owing to Men, but to God's own appointment: I am a King indeed, but this
Kingdom I received from God's own Hands: My Kingdom is not from hence, as he
explains it, but from above. Acts 2. 36. God has made that same Jesus, whom ye
crucified, both Lord and Christ, i. e. King. And chap. 17. 31. He has appointed
a Day, in which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by the MAN whom he
has ordained. 1 Cor. 15. 24, 28, Then comes the end, when he shall deliver up
the Kingdom to God, even the Father. -- Then shall the Son be also subject to
him, that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.

This, I take to be the true account of Christ's Kingdom, according to
Scripture. Thus God performed the Oath, which he swear to David; even by
raising up an Horn of Salvation in his House, Luke 1. 69. Thus the Kingdom of
Christ, who is the Seed of David, shall last as long as the Sun and Moon. But
we no where find in Scripture, that this Kingdom is bestowed upon him, as he is
the Eternal Son of God, and Second Person of the Trinity. St. Paul was so far
from believing that; that discoursing of the principal Act of Christ's Kingly
Power and Authority, viz. his judging the World; he says, that God has
appointed a Day to perform this, by the MAN whom he has ordained, Acts 17. 31.
In a Word, as Christ has been exalted by God, and has received a Kingdom from
him: So when the appointed End comes, he shall deliver it up to God, and
remain SUBJECT to him, as St. Paul expressly teaches, 1 Cor. 15. 28. These two
things demonstratively prove, that Christ is a King, barely as a Man; and that
his Mediatory Kingdom, so much spoken of by our Author, is a Chimera.

I proceed now to his other Answers, to this Objection, That Christ knows not
the day of Judgment. He replies (page 177.) Christ in that Text speaks of
himself as Man: St. Matthew does not mention the Son, which shows that the Son
is included in St. Matthew's (...), None, or no Man; and therefore these Texts
must speak of Christ only as a Man. I answer, so they do, for he is no more
than a Man. St. Mark tells us, that Christ as the Son (of God) knows not that
Day and Hour. Now our Author will have Christ's Sonship founded in his Eternal
Generation from the Father; and that he is the Son not as he is Man, but as he
is God, so he says at page 166. and elsewhere. This is indeed a very easy
distinction, were it but true: but Trinitarians are the Authors of it, not
Scripture. In St. Mark's Gradation Christ is named after Men and Angels, to
show his present Excellence and Exaltation above them: but in St. Matthew, that
very Son of God, who is above Men and Angels, is included in the None, or no
Man. Thus this glorious Title of the Son of God, denotes here Christ Man. As
the Father in St. Mark is God; so the Son of God, who knows not that Day and
Hour, is Christ Man, who is so styled in all the New Testament without any
respect to a second Nature.

CHAP. IV.
THE sixth Argument in the Brief History runs thus: God gives what, and to
whom He pleases; He needs not the aid of any other; He entreats not for
Himself or his People; He cannot die; and deriveth his Power from none but
Himself: But it is certain, that the Lord Christ could not himself, without the
previous Ordination of the Father, confer the prime Dignities of Heaven, or of
the Church. He placed his Safety in his Father's Presence and Help; he prayed
often and fervently to the Father, both for himself and for his Disciples; he
died, and was raised from the Dead by the Father; after his Resurrection he
received from another, all that great Power which he now injoys. To this he
answers; Christ interceeds with no Creature, receives Authority from no
Creature, etc. nor from any God neither, who is separated from himself: For he
is One God with the Father and the Holy Ghost. That he interceeds with the
Father, proves indeed that he is a distinct Person from the Father; not, that
he is not one God with him. But why, I pray, does it not prove that, he is not
one God with the Father? For if he intercedes with God, can he be that very God
with whom he intercedes? if he is, what need is there for him to intercede?
Besides; this Author says before (page 167, 169, 170.) The Three Divine Persons
can never act separately, they have but One Energy, and whatever is done they
do it by one Individual Act. Now I hope he will grant, that Prayer and
Intercession are real Acts or Actions: I infer, therefore when the Son
intercedes, the Father and Holy Spirit must intercede too. Thus Intercession
and Prayer are not peculiar to the Son; but there are in the Godhead three
Intercessors, three Beseeching Persons. Whom, what Person or God, does this
Trinity beseech? Good God! how long shall it be, that Men will love Darkness
rather than Light; and prefer a Novel and Unintelligible Gospel, before the
old, plain and easy One?

Page 183. He says; For God to make a Creature, Advocate and Mediator, is to
give a Creature Authority over himself; which cannot be: for it is a Debasement
to the Divine Nature, and a reproach to the Divine Wisdom; it is as if God did
not better know, how to dispose of his Grace and Mercy, than any Creature does.
But why so? has our Author forgot, or is he to learn, that Moses, tho a mere
Creature, was a Mediator between God and his People? I am sure, St. Paul calls
him so in these Words, at Gal. 3. 19. The Law was ordained by Angels, in the
Hand of a Mediator. And at Deuteronomy. 5. 5. He stood between the Lord and them, to
show them the Word of the Lord. And the same Apostle tells us, that the MAN
Jesus Christ is a Mediator between God and Men. Does not the Scripture mention
Moses his Intercession with God; and that God was moved by his Entreaty? Why
then does this Author affirm; that to intercede with the Authority of a
Mediator, is above the Nature and Order of Creatures?

To the next Argument; viz. That Jesus Christ is in Holy Scripture always
spoken of, as a distinct and different Person from God; and described to be the
Son of God, and the Image of God. He answers, This we own, and he had no need
to prove it: This is a wonderful Argument to convince those, who acknowledge
Three distinct Persons in the Godhead; that Christ is not God because he is a
distinct Person from the Father; for so according to the Language of Scripture,
God signifies God the Father, when he is distinguished from the Son and Holy
Spirit; as all Men grant. Let the Author abate a little of his Confidence. Is
an Ironical Answer sufficient, to confute a good and a strong Argument? This is
a wonderful Argument, says he, to prove that Christ is not God. When St. Paul
says in his Salutations, Grace be to you, and Peace from God the Father, and
from the Lord Jesus Christ; who would guess, that Jesus Christ is God as well
as the Father? he, nor any other sacred Writer ever says, that there are Three
Persons in the Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; he calls only the Father,
God, and distinguishes the Lord Christ from him. If the Lord Christ is God as
well as the Father, the Apostle should have framed his Salutation thus; Grace
be to you, and Peace from God the Father; and from the God Man Jesus Christ.
But according to the Language of Scripture, says he, God signifies God the
Father, when he is distinguished from the Son and Holy Spirit. I answer; that
is a Demonstration, that the Father only is God; else the Title God could not
be appropriated to him, when he is distinguished from the Son and Spirit. And
to discern so much, a Man can lack nothing but common Sense. But I observe
farther to this Answer; that supposing Christ were but a Man, the Apostle could
have expressed himself no otherways; from whence it follows, that either the
Apostle did indeed so think, and so teach; or this Author must charge him, as
not knowing how to speak correctly and properly.

It Is impossible, says the Brief History, that the Son or Image of the One
true God, should himself be that One true God; as impossible as that the Son
should be the Father, or the Image that very Thing whose Image it is. This is
mere Sophistry, says our Author; for if the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost be the One true God; they are the same One true God, and yet the Father
is not the Son, nor the Son the Father. I appeal to the Reader, whether this be
not a mear denial of the Difficulty, not an Explication or a Solution of it?
The Son, says the Historian, cannot be the One true God, because he is the Son
and Image of the One true God; for the Son cannot be the Father, nor the Image
the very Thing whose Image it is. Yes, says our Answerer, God and the Image of
God are the same One true God.

The next Argument of the History is, that Many Texts expressly declare, That
only the Father is God. In answer to this, says our Author: This would be a
Demonstration, could he produce any one Text which asserts, that only the
Father, in opposition to the Son and Holy Ghost, is God: for then the Father
must signify the Person of the Father, in opposition to the Person of the Son,
and the Person of the Holy Ghost. But has not the Historian produced such a
Text? John 17. 3. Father, -- this is Life Eternal, to know Thee [the ONLY true
God] and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: Or, Jesus Christ thy Messenger.
Here, the Father, to whom the Son directs his Prayer (as appears by Ver. 1.) is
called the only true God; and the Son, Jesus Christ whom he has sent, or his
Messenger. Here the Father as the Sender, is opposed to the Son as the
Messenger; and the First called the ONLY true God, the Other an Apostle or
Messenger. Our Author adds; But when the Father is called the only true God,
only in opposition to all the false Gods, which the World then worshipped;
there Father does not signify Personally, but that one Godhead or Divinity, of
which the Father is the Source, the Fountain and the Original. So soon has this
Author forgot his own Observation and Rule of Interpretation, that, according
to Scripture, God signifies God the Father, whenever he is distinguished from
the Son or Spirit. Is not he, to whom Christ here directs his Prayer, called
God? and is he not distinguished from the Son, who is called the Messenger? why
then should he not signify here Personally, God the Father, as well as in other
places? why must Father here signify, not the Father; but one Godhead, of which
the Father is the Source? Thus either his Observation is false; and then he is
overthrown by the Texts to which he opposes it: or it is true; and then in this
Text, the only true God is affirmed by our Savior himself to be the Father
only, in opposition to all other Persons whomsoever. I cannot but admire this
Author's way of expounding Scripture. One while, he founds Christ's Sonship on
his eternal Generation; so that the title Son denotes begotten Wisdom the
second Person of the Trinity: as soon as this notion will not serve the turn;
as when the Son is (in St. Matthew and St. Mark) denied to know the Day and
Hour of Judgment; then the Son shall signify Christ Man. Again, when God is
distinguished from the Son and Holy Spirit, he signifies Personally God the
Father; this Notion shall serve us against many Socinian sayings of Scripture,
against all the Texts in the seventh Argument of the History: But when John 17.
1, 3. and the like Texts are urged; then on the contrary, God the Father must
not signify the Father Personally, but one Godhead, or Divinity, of which the
Father is the Source. Certainly, were his Hypothesis true, there would be no
need he should thus turn himself into all Shapes to defend it.

When the Father is called, the one God, and the only true God; in opposition
to all false Gods: is he not so called in opposition to the Son also? Most
certainly he is. In these two Texts, John 17. 3. 1 Cor. 8. 6. we have no
warrant from Reason or Scripture, to understand by the Father Three Persons,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Is it not absurd and senseless to say, That the
Father signifies also the Son and Holy Ghost, in those very Texts where he is
distinguished from them? I always thought the Father signified, the Father
only; and the Son, the Son only, and Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost only. I always
thought that the Language of Scripture, was agreeable to the Language of Men;
because otherways it cannot be understood by Men: and therefore that Father
must not be understood to be Father and Son, and a third Person distinct from
both. But Trinitarians, better sighted than other People, have found, it may.
When we read in Scripture, (1 Cor. 8. 6.) To us there is but one God, the
Father: It sounds as if the Apostle had said; There is but one numerical
infinite Being, the Father of Jesus Christ, and of all the World; because this
is the natural Idea we have of one God, the Father. But this Author tells us,
we are grossly mistaken; for one God signifies three infinite Minds, three
substantial intellectual Beings or Persons. Again, we should think that the
Father here signifies the Father only: but this is (it seems) another foul
Mistake; for it signifies besides the Father, a Son and an Holy Spirit
different from both. Nay, we must not think that the very express Words (at
Mat. 24. 36.) the Father only, do indeed signify the Father only; but the
Father, the Son, and another Person; even tho the Son is there expressly said
not to know the Day and Hour of Judgment, and that the Father only knows it.
These are some of the Illuminations with which our Author and his Party has
blessed the World.

He goes on, and says; the Dispute must end here, whether the Scripture does
teach the Divinity of the Son and Holy Ghost; for if so, when the Father is
said to be the only true God, and the one God; the Son and Holy Spirit are not
hereby excluded from the Unity of the same Godhead. I answer, the Dispute may
be soon ended; for when the Father is called the one God, and the only true
God, even in those places where the Son is mentioned: This alone is a clear
Demonstration, that the Scripture does not teach the Divinity of the Son and
Holy Ghost. Were the Son and Holy Ghost God with the Father, the Prayer of our
Lord (at John 17. 1, 2, 3, etc.) must have been thus framed; This is Life
Eternal, to know Thee (Father) and Me and the Holy Ghost to be the only true
God. And Paul to the Corinthians should have said; But to us there is but one
God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. But this is the Language of
Scripture, no where.

Page 186. His other Texts, says our Author, prove no more but that the Father
of Christ is God; not, that Christ is not one God with the Father. Let us hear
the Texts themselves, 1 Cor. 15. 24. Then comes the end, when he shall deliver
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father. James 3. 9. Therewith bless we God,
even the Father. Romans 15. 6. That ye may with one Mind, and one Mouth glorify
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is an affected blindness and
perverseness, not to discern and own, that in these Texts, God even the Father,
is as much as to say, God, that is to say the Father. No plainer or more
express Words could be used by a Socinian or other Unitarian, to declare his
Notion of the Unity of God. What hope is there of convincing those, with whom
the Father only shall not signify the Father only? And again, God, that is to
say the Father, shall be two others besides the Father.

CHAP. V.
THE next Argument. If Christ were indeed God as well as Man; or (as
Trinitarians speak) God the Son Incarnate; it had been altogether superfluous,
to give the Holy Spirit to his said Human Nature, as a Director and Guide: for
what other help could that Nature need, which was one Person with (as they
speak) God the Son; and in which God the Son did Personally dwell? To this he
answers: The account of this is plain and short; for the whole Trinity is but
one Energy and Power, and the Divine Persons cannot act separately ad extra:
what the Father does, that the Son does, and that the Holy Ghost does by one
Individual Act. But the Sanctification of all Creatures (and such is the Human
Nature of Christ) is peculiarly attributed to the Holy Spirit. But if the whole
Trinity is but one Energy and Power, the Sanctification of Christ's Human
Nature (or of any other Creature) can by no means be peculiarly attributed to
the Holy Ghost; why to the Holy Ghost rather than to the Father, or than to the
Divine Word, or Son dwelling (as they say) after a peculiar manner in Christ?
But the matter is plain, the Holy Ghost is the Power of God, of which Christ
stood in need, for performing the Will and Works of the Father, and which God
bestowed on him for that very end; but if Christ had been indeed God, there had
been no need he should receive any such Gift; for as God he would have had it,
in his own Person. Our Author adds, He might as well have asked, why the
Sanctification of the Church is ascribed to the Spirit? But the Historian had
no reason to ask such a Question: for no one pretends that the Church is God;
or is Personally united either to the Father or Son, as Trinitarians say the
Human Nature of Christ is.

It is after the same slight and insignificant manner, that he answers the next
Argument, even this; The Miracles of Christ are attributed always, either to
the Father, or the Holy Spirit dwelling in him. He answers (page 188.) Father,
Son and Holy Spirit act together. I say now, supposing this which he says; yet
if Christ were God, why should we never ascribe his Miracles to himself; why
always to the Father, or to the Holy Spirit which is the Power of the Father?
why has he concealed a matter of so great importance to be known? Or why do we
seek to make him greater than he ever said he was? Besides, in the very Texts,
in which he ascribes the Miracles he did, to the Father, or the Spirit and
Power of the Father dwelling in him; I say in those very Texts he denies, that
he does them himself: which is directly contrary to what our Author affirms,
that the (pretended) three Divine Persons have but one Energy, and act by one
Individual Act. If that were so, our Savior could not have said, John 5. 30. I
can do nothing of my self. John 14. 10. The Father that dwells in me, he
does the works. Let us hear the account which St. Peter gives, Acts 10. 38.
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with Power, who went
about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed with the Devil: for God
was with him. Here St. Peter teaches, that Christ wrought all sorts of
Miracles, not because (as Trinitarians say) he was God, but because God was
with him, i. e. God helped and assisted him, by anointing him with the Holy
Ghost, and with Power.

The next Argument is, Had our Lord Christ been more than a Man, the Prophecies
of the Old Testament in which he is promised, would not describe him barely as
the Seed of the Woman, the Seed of Abraham, a Prophet like unto Moses; the
Servant and Missionary of God, on whom God's Spirit should rest. The Historian
by a particular Induction of Texts, shows this to be the Character of Christ in
the Prophecies of the Old Testament. Our Author thinks fit to answer this
Objection, in another place.

I come now to his Answers, which he makes to the Arguments against the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost.

The First Argument in the History, is this; The Holy Ghost or Spirit, and the
Power of God, are in Scripture spoken of as one and the same thing. Our Author
answers, at page 189. It is as easy to prove, that the Father and Son are no
Persons, as that the Holy Spirit is none. But if he can make good this
Assertion, erit mihi magnus Apollo. The Father has in the New Testament the
Title of God, therefore because God is most certainly a Person, no Body can
doubt that the Father is a Person. As for the Son, the same Gospel often says
he is a Man; every Man being a Person; the Son being a Man, must be also a
Person. But it is quite otherways with the Holy Ghost, for the Scriptures call
it the Power of God; and Power is a Faculty, not a Person. Acts 10. 38. God has
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with Power. Luke 1. 35. The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow
thee. What is more plain than that, the Power of the Highest in these Texts is
the explication of the Holy Ghost? Again, Acts 6. 5. They chose Stephen, a Man
full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost. Ver. 8. And Stephen full of Faith and of
POWER, did great Wonders. Here again the Holy Ghost at ver. 5. is explained by
Power at ver. 8.

He says further; He is the Spirit of God, which searches the deep things of
God; and he who knows all things in God, must be a knowing Mind. In answer to
this, I must explain the Text to which he alludes, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. and which
he cites too, page 192. Ver. 10. But God has revealed them unto us by his
Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. The
Apostle speaks here of the Doctrines of the Gospel, its Precepts and Promises,
which before were hidden, but now are revealed to Men; as appears by ver. 7, 8,
9. He means this; God has revealed to us Apostles these Doctrines, this
(formerly) hidden Wisdom, by his Inspiration; for this Spirit or Inspiration in
us searches out (i. e. finds or discovers) these deep or hidden things of God.
Deep, I say, and hidden; not to us, but to the World, and the Princes of the
World. The Apostle illustrates his Discourse with a Comparison, ver. 11. What
Man knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man which is in him? Even
so the Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. As if he had said,
As no Man knows the things that belong to Human Life, but by his own Spirit or
Mind: So no Man knows these things of God, but by God's Spirit or Inspiration,
whereby he is enabled to know them. This Interpretation perfectly agrees with
what follows, at ver. 12. Now we have not received the Spirit of the World, but
the Spirit of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us of
God.

This is the true Sense of this place. For (...) which we translate no Man,
must either be understood exclusively of God; or so as to include God also. If
it includes God too, it will follow, that the Holy Spirit or Third Person of
the Trinity, knows the Things of God, and that the Father and Son are
altogether ignorant of them; which Consequence, I am sure, they will not allow.
But if (...) signifies no Man here (as most certainly it does) then the Spirit
of God is to be understood of, the Man who has received that Spirit or
Inspiration; by assistance whereof he may attain to the knowledge of the most
secret Counsels of God; as the Apostle explains it, in the very next Verse. The
Author grants, that Charity may be said to suffer long, and to be kind, because
a charitable Man does so: then the Spirit of God may be said to know the Things
of God, because (...), He that is Spiritual (as St. Paul styles him, Ver. 15.)
he that has the Spirit of God, does so. This Vorstius rightly understood in his
Notes upon this place. By the Spirit of God (says he) we must understand that
Spirit which is given us of God; that is, our Selves as Spiritual: thus (John
3. 6.) That which is born of the Spirit, says our Savior, is Spirit. This I
hope may be enough to clear the sense of this Text.

But the Author cannot allow of Power and Inspiration, distinct from God, and
yet not God; for what are Faculties in us, are Persons in God. If this be true,
then there are more than Three Persons in the Godhead; for Power is a Faculty
in us, and being in God too, it must be another Person in him. Thus not only
Wisdom and Love, but Power also are Persons in God. Nay, there being Three
knowing Minds in the Godhead, each of which is `God, as the Author tells us; it
cannot be said, that the Father only has Wisdom, Love, and Power. The Son and
the Holy Ghost must have them too; else they should not be God. But if Wisdom,
Love and Power, being Faculties in us, ought to be Persons in God: then there
are Nine Persons at the least, in God, viz. Wisdom, Love and Power in the
Father, who is an Infinite Mind distinct from the Son and Holy Ghost; Wisdom,
Love and Power in the Son, who is an Infinite Mind distinguished from the
Father and Holy Ghost; Wisdom, Love and Power in the Holy Ghost, who is an
Infinite Mind distinct from the Father and Son. Moreover, he tells us, that the
Son is a Person, because He is the Father's Reflex knowledge. But the Son being
an Infinite and most Perfect Mind, is undoubtedly able to reflect upon his own
Wisdom and Knowledge, and thus (as well as the Father) to beget a Son. And this
second Son in the Trinity may by the same Means and Reason beget another, and
so onwards to Infinity. Thus according to this Maxim, that what are Faculties
in us, are Persons in God; there may be, nay there must be, an infinite number
of Persons in God. Apage!

This is certain (says he) all Personal Acts belong to a Person; and therefore
whatever has any Personal Acts, we must conclude is a Person: unless we know by
some other means, that it is no Person; and then, that proves the Expression to
be Figurative. But we know, that the Holy Ghost is no Person; and therefore we
may affirm, that whenever Personal Acts are ascribed to it, it is to be
figuratively taken. That the Holy Ghost is not God, we most certainly know;
because the Scripture plainly tells us, there is but one God, the Father. That
the Holy Ghost is not a created Person, is made probable by several places of
Scripture, which teach us, that it is God's Power and Inspiration; by
explaining the Holy Ghost by the Power of God, and putting one for the other.
According to these two Principles, which the Scripture affords us; viz. That
the Father only is God, and that the Holy Ghost is God's Power; we dare affirm,
that when Personal Acts are ascribed to it, it is a Figurative Expression. Thus
we can easily conceive, that the Holy Ghost may be said to work Miracles (page
190.) to raise the Dead, to comfort, to convince, to sanctify the Church, to
dwell in the Church: because God by his Power works Miracles, raises the Dead,
comforts, convinces, sanctifies, and dwells in the Church. Thus we do not prove
that the Holy Ghost is no Person, only because Personal Acts are sometimes
Figuratively attributed to that which is no Person; as this Author mistakes:
But having proved by Scripture, that the Holy Ghost is no Person, we say that
Personal Acts are figuratively ascribed to it, as they are to Charity, Wisdom,
and other Things, both in Scripture and in Profane Authors, and in common
familiar Speech.

2. The second Argument, against the Spirit's being God, is this; A manifest
Distinction is made, as between God and Christ; so also between God and the
Holy Spirit, or Power and Inspiration of God: so that it is impossible, the
Spirit should be God himself. To this our Author answers, page 191. This Holy
Spirit is either a Divine subsisting Person, or nothing but a Name. If this
Spirit were a Divine Virtue or Power (as he would have it) then it is not
distinct from God, but is God himself: As the Powers and Faculties of the Mind,
tho they may be distinguished from each other, yet they cannot be any thing
distinct from the Mind, but are the Mind it self; and therefore if the Spirit,
as he says, be represented in Scripture, as so distinct from God, that it is
impossible he should be God himself; then he must be a distinct Divine Person,
and not the mere Power of God, which is not distinct from God himself. To this
I answer; the Holy Spirit is neither a Divine subsisting Person, nor a mere
Name. In order to the clearing of this, I must observe, that the Holy Ghost
signifies in Scripture, sometimes the Power of God, sometimes the Effects of
that Power, or all miraculous extraordinary Gifts. In the first sense, we read
(Luke 1. 35.) The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest
shall over-shadow thee. Here it is evident that the Holy Ghost signifies the
Power of God; whereby he effected the miraculous Conception of our Blessed
Savior. In the latter sense, we read (Gal. 3. 5.) He therefore that ministers
to you the Spirit, and works Miracles among you; does he it by the Works of
the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? Here the Spirit is plainly meant of the
miraculous Gifts, bestowed upon the first Christians; and the meaning of the
Apostle's Question is this; whether the Galatians had been endued with that
Spirit, and those extraordinary Gifts, by submitting to the Ceremonial Law of
Moses, or only upon their embracing the Gospel? In the first sense, the Holy
Ghost is only an Attribute of God, and so is not a mere Name; nor is it a
Divine subsisting Person; which to say, were ridiculous, and contrary to the
Notion of an Attribute. This Attribute may be distinguished from God, in such
manner as Attributes are wont to be distinguished; that is, God may be said to
act by his Power, as he is said to act by his Wisdom. But he says, If this
Spirit were a Divine Virtue or Power, then it is not distinct from God, but is
God himself. I answer, if this be all our Author contends for, that the Holy
Spirit (or Power) of God is God, in such sense as other Virtues and Faculties
of God may be called God himself; the Socinians never denied it: and this is
all that his Argument proves. Secondly, He ought to know, the Holy Spirit is
not distinct from God, as one Person from another, but is distinguished from
God as his Attribute. This is easy and plain, and agreeable to Reason and
Scripture: and is a full answer to what he adds, in these words; A Power which
is distinct from God, and is not God himself, as (he says) the Holy Spirit is,
if it has any Personal Acts, must be a distinct Person: and if these Personal
Acts are such, as are proper only to God, it must be a distinct Divine Person.

He goes on. He says this Spirit is the Inspiration of God; be it so. This
Inspiration then, is either within God himself; or without him, in his
Creatures who have this Inspiration. If it be within God himself, it must be a
Person, or else it cannot be distinct from God; and a Divine Person, unless any
thing be in God, which is not God. If this Inspiration be without God, in the
Creatures who are inspired by him; how is it the Spirit of God? For the Spirit
of God must be in God, as the Spirit of a Man is in a Man? I answer.

If every thing that is in God be a Person, then there must be as many Persons
in the Godhead, as there are Attributes or Immanent Acts in God; which to say,
is too senseless and ridiculous, to need Confutation. God's Inspiration as it is
an Act, is in God; as it is an Effect, it is in Creatures; and is called the
Spirit of God, because it is an Effect of that Spirit, Energy or Power, which
God uses to make his Will known to Men, by inward Suggestion or Inspiration.

He desires to know (page 192.) how the Spirit of God differs from his Gifts
and Graces? I answer; As the cause from its effects: so that there are
Diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 4. The same Cause
produces several effects, out of the same Power spring several Gifts.

3. The next Argument is; The Spirit is obtained of God by our Prayers,
therefore it self is not God. This he pretends to answer by his Old Sophism,
that One Divine Person may send and give another; which has been already
confuted. He adds; The Spirit gives himself, and is asked of himself; for the
Divine Persons in the Trinity do not act separately: but as the Father and the
Son give the Spirit; so the Holy Spirit gives himself in the same Individual
Act. But how can this be the same Individual Act? The Father and the Son, says
he, send the Holy Ghost, and the Holy Ghost gives himself. Can sending another,
and giving one's self, be one and the same Act? Farther; If the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost cannot act separately, when the Holy Ghost gives himself, Father
and Son must give themselves too; or else it will not be the same Individual
Act. But were it so; this would not be made peculiar to the Holy Ghost, who
only is said (in Scripture) to be given and obtained of God. But the thing is
plain and easy, if by the Spirit we understand God's Power and Inspiration;
which (with their Effects) are communicated to those that pray for them.

CHAP. VI.
4. THE next Argument is against a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead; Which
(says the Historian) is contrary to the whole Scripture. For that speaks of
God, but as one Person; and speaks of him, and to him by Singular Pronouns;
such as I, Thou, Me, Him, etc. He cites also Heb. 1. 2. where Christ is called,
the express Image of God's Person. Our Author returns this Answer; It is plain
that the Person, of whom the Son is called the express Image, is the Person of
God the Father; and the Father indeed is but one Person. But here he takes for
granted, that the Son is the second Person, of the Trinity; contrary to the
Apostle, who speaks only of the Person of God, not of the Person of God the
Father distinct from the Person of God the Son. If the Person, of whom the Son
is here said to be the express Image, is only the Person of the Father; then
the Person of the Father only, at sundry Times and in diverse Manners, spoke in
times past to the Fathers by the Prophets, Ver. 1. for (Ver. 2.) the Son is
called the Image of the same Person who spoke to the Fathers at Ver. 1. But the
Person of the Father only, is not the true God, in the Author's Hypothesis;
therefore he must conclude, that the true God spoke not to the Fathers: which
is a plain Contradiction to the Apostle; who says, that God (undoubtedly the
true God) spoke to the Fathers. Farther, by God who spoke to the Fathers, we
must understand either Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or the Father only. If
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost spoke to the Fathers; it could not be here said,
that Christ is the Image of that God's Person, for he is Three Persons. If the
Father only spoke to the Fathers, then the Father only is the true God; for the
true God spoke to the Fathers; also then God is but one Person: Which are the
things we contend for.

He goes on; As for his Singular Pronouns, I, Thou, etc. They prove indeed that
there is but one God; as we all own: not, that there are not Three Persons in
the Godhead. But do not Singular Pronouns denote Singular Persons, in all
Languages? When therefore they are applied to God, they show that he is a
Singular (that is, but one) Person; unless they will say, that the Scripture is
a particular Language different from all others: but this is false; for being
written to Men, the Forms of speaking and the Senses of them, are the same as
in all other Languages; and otherways the Scripture would not be given us, to
instruct us, but to pervert and deceive us.

5. The fifth Argument. Had the Son or Holy Ghost been God; this would not have
been omitted in the Apostles Creed. He answers; Had not the Son been God, and
also the Holy Ghost, they would never have been put into the Apostles Creed; no
more than the Form of Baptism, which is the Original of the Apostles Creed. But
why not? Suppose the Son and Holy Ghost were not God; since the Gospel was
preached by the One, and confirmed by the Other; why may not they be put into
the Creed, as well as the Catholic Church, by whom the Gospel is to be
believed? If our Creed only mentioned God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven
and Earth; it would fit a Jew as well as a Christian: therefore a Christian
Creed, as such, must make mention of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, tho they
are not Gods or God. A Christian, as such, must profess in his Creed, that he
believes not only in God the Father Almighty; but also in his Son Jesus Christ,
who was sent by him to preach the Gospel; and in the Holy Ghost, by which it
pleased God to confirm the truth of it: By such a Belief he is distinguished
from a Jew or any other Man.

He adds. That the Primitive Christians did believe the Divinity of the Son and
Holy Ghost, we are sufficiently assured from all the Ancient Records of their
Faith; but there was no Reason to express this in so short a Creed, before the
Arian and Socinian Heresies had disturbed the Church. It Is plain, our Author
has not read the Records of which he speaks. And whereas he says, there was no
reason to express the Doctrine of the Trinity in the Creed; it is very
mavelous to me, that there should be no reason to express an Article, which
he and his Party say is necessary to Salvation; and that a Man is no Christian
that believes it not. But he says it was not necessary in so short a Creed;
but I say, had the Article been necessary, (or so much as true) the Apostles
and Primitive Church would have enlarged their Creed, to make room for a
necessary Article; an Article much more necessary than the Holy Catholic
Church, and other Articles there expressed. Besides, what Enlargement would it
have been, what Encumbrance to the Learner's Memory, to have added twice this
single and short Word, God: And in (God)* the Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, etc.
I believe in (God) the Holy Ghost, etc. as Trinitarians express themselves now
a days? It is plain therefore, that the Apostles and Ancient Church could have
no other Reason, why in their Creed they made no mention of the Trinity, and
the Divinity of the Son and Holy Ghost; no other, but that they believed it
not. But why has our Author taken no notice of what the Socinian Historian had
objected at page 22, 23, 24. was it too hot, or to heavy for him? Lastly; he
says, It needed not to be added; because the Son of God must be by Nature God;
and the Spirit of God is as essentially God, as the Spirit of a Man is
essential to a Man. But must he that is the Son of God, be also by Nature God?
St. Luke says of Adam, who was the Son of God, Luke 1. 38. Was Adam by nature
God? Are not Angels in Scripture called Sons of God? and all good Christians
are they not also Sons of God, in the Language of Scripture? Job 1. 6. and 38.
7. John 1. 12. 1 John 3. 2. For his other saying, that the Spirit of God is as
essentially God, as the Spirit of a Man is essential to a Man: If one had
leisure, there might be Answers enough made to it; all that I say, is, I pray
prove it.

6. The Historian concludes, That, The Socinian Faith is an accountable and
reasonable Faith; but that of the Trinitarians is absurd, and contrary both to
Reason, and to it self, and therefore not only false, but impossible. On the
contrary, our Author draws up against the Socinian System this Charge. 1. It
ridicules the Scriptures. 2. It ridicules the whole Jewish Occonomy. 3. It
ridicules the Christian Religion. 4. It justifies, at least excuses, both Pagan
and Popish Idolatries. If it be so, my Masters, the Socinians are ill Men
indeed: but let us do them this Common Right, to examine what Proof there is of
this Indictment.

CHAP. VII.
1. THE First pretense is, That The Socinian Doctrine ridicules the Scripture,
by putting either a very absurd or a very trifling Sense on it, unworthy of the
Wisdom of God by whom it was inspired. He instances in some Expositions of
Scripture, which he finds in the brief History of the Unitarians. For Example,

The Historian, in answer to Psalm. 45. 6, 7. which the Apostle (at Heb. 1. 8.)
applies to Christ, says, In the Hebrew and in the Greek it is, God is thy Throne
(i. e. thy Seat, Resting Place, Establishment) for ever. Neither the
Translation nor the Interpretation is the Historian's, but by him taken out of
Grotius, whom no Man thinks to have ridiculed the Scripture. But let us
suppose, contrary to Grotius, that the Hebrew Elohim ought to be taken in the
Vocative Case, thus; Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever: Yet the
Interpretation of Grotius, and of the Historian, affords neither an absurd nor
a trifling Sense. The Words in the Psalms are (by confession of the ablest
Trinitarian Interpreters) spoken of Solomon, and are applied or accommodated to
Christ, by the Apostle: and I think it is very good Sense to say, that God was
the Resting Place, Seat, or Establishment, both of Christ and Solomon. But (as
I said) let us grant, that the Words should be thus rendered and interpreted,
Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever: I draw from thence this Inference, If
Solomon, tho but a Man, is here styled God; then Christ, who is a greater Man,
may be called so too. But when he is here called God, it is not meant that he
is the Supreme God, unless the Supreme God can be said to be anointed with the
Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, which is plainly inconsistent with the
Notion of a Supreme God. Besides, he who is called God in this place, is said
to have a God, by whom he is anointed; which can by no means agree to the
Supreme God: for he can have no God above him, by whom he may be exalted, being
himself the most High.

The Apostle in the following Verses, cites another Passage out of Psalm. 102.
25, 26, 27. which (says our Author at page 201.) is a plain Testimony of the
Divinity of our Savior. The Words are these, And thou Lord in the beginning
have laid the Foundations of the Earth; and the Heavens are the works of thy
Hands: they shall perish, but thou remainest, and they shall all wax old as
does a Garment, and as a Vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be
changed: but thou art the same, and thy Years fail not. Now, I say, that the
Creation of the World cannot be ascribed to Christ in this place. This, I
prove, by the Scope of the Apostle in this whole Chapter, which is not to show
the Excellence which Christ has of himself, but that which he obtained by
Donation, whereby he was made better than Angels, as appears by ver. 4. the
Words are these, Being MADE so much better than Angels, as he has by
Inheritance obtained ((...)) a more excellent Name than they. The Greek Word
which we translate obtained by Inheritance, signifies no more than barely
obtained; the Words by Inheritance are useless and dangerous, and false too,
for the Name Christ has obtained, came to him by free Donation, not by
Inheritance. And therefore it is that the most Famous Critics render (...), by
obtinuit, sortitus est, he gained or obtained. I say therefore, the Apostle's
Scope is to show the Excellency that Christ obtained, not by Nature, or of
Himself, but that which he had by Donation; and whereby he was made by God
better than the Angels. Whereupon in this whole Chapter he opposes the Glory
which Christ had been endued with, to the Glory of Angels; and shows that His
is more excellent and greater than Theirs. So that suppose Ghrist had indeed
created the World, yet the Creation cannot be ascribed to him in this Place;
for if he had created the World, he should have done it by a Power proper and
essential to himself, not by a Power received from another. But the Apostle
designs in this Chapter, not to speak of what is natural or essential to
Christ, but of what he has received from God, whereby he was made greater and
more excellent than Angels.

Having thus shown, that Christ is not said here to have created the World, I
must now declare, in what Sense this Text of the Psalm is applied to him. The
preceding Words, spoken of Solomon, are accommodated to him, to express the
Glory and the Duration of his Kingdom: its Glory, because God has anointed him
with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows; its Duration, because his Throne is
for ever and ever. By which glorious and lasting Kingdom, Christ has been made
much better than Angels, and obtained a more excellent Name than they: which
(as I said before) is the thing, the Apostle in this Chapter intended to teach
us. Now to the same purpose he applies to Christ another place, taken out of
Psalm. 102. and separated from the other only by the Word And: by this other
place (or rather, in the Words and Terms of this other place) he confirms what
he said before concerning the Duration of Christ's Kingdom; and shows that tho
all things be subject to change and alteration, yet Christ's Kingdom shall be
immutable and last for ever. They (the Heavens and the Earth) shall perish, but
thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as does a Garment, and as a Vesture
shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and
thy Years fail not. These Words are used as a Confirmation of what went before,
Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. As for ver. 10. Thou Lord in the
beginning has laid the Foundation of the Earth, etc. The Apostle does not cite
it as spoken of Christ, or with intention to accommodate it to him; but because
it was necessary for explaining the word, They (They shall perish) in the
following words, which he had occasion to use for expressing the Duration of
Christ's Kingdom. And now I appeal to any Reader, whether this be an absurd
Sense? Is not this Explication clear, and agreeable to the Scope of the Sacred
Writer? But is not the Sense which the Author would put upon this place, both
absurd and inconsistent? Can it be said that Christ is made better than Angels,
and obtained a greater Name than they, because he created Heaven and Earth;
that is, being so before by Nature, and from all Eternity, he is afterward
made better, and has a more excellent Name than theirs bestowed on him?

The next place he examines, is Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou
have led Captivity Captive, thou have received Gifts for Men: Which St. Paul
applies to Christ. Whereupon our Author says, The single Question is, Whether
Christ be that God of whom the Psalmist says, that He ascended on High? etc. If
he be not, St. Paul has abused us, for he applies that to Christ, which was not
said of him. Here indeed is a very rash Conclusion. Were this true, it would
follow, that the Sacred Writers of the New Testament have abused us, as often
as they have cited any place of the Old Testament by way of accommodation. Thus
St. Paul has again abused us, when he applies (at Romans 10. 18.) to the Apostles
these Words, Their sound went out into all the Earth, and their Words into the
ends of the World; which every one knows and confesses are meant (at Psalm. 19.
4.) of the Heavens and other Works of God, which (as it were) preach his Wisdom
and Power and Goodness to all Nations. And thus St. Matthew (at Mat. 13. 35.)
puts a Trick upon us, when he applies to Christ the Words of Psalm. 78. 2. I
will open my Mouth in Parables: Which the Psalmist speaks of himself, not of
Christ. Is our Author so little acquainted with the Writers of the New
Testament, as to be ignorant, that they very often cite the Texts of the Old,
not as Testimonies and Proofs of what they say, but by way of Allusion and
Accommodation? Such is the place in question, the Apostle thought fit to
accommodate the words of the Psalm, to the matter he was treating of; which was
an elegant way of writing, and very much practiced by the Ancient Jews, as may
be seen both in the Talmud and Rabbis. Let us hear J. Calvin on this place;
Lastly, says he, we must not be too scrupulous about the Literal Sense of this
Psalm; seeing the Apostle only alludes to the Psalmist's words: even as he
applies a place of Moses, to the matter in hand at Romans 10. 6.

God himself can be no Type, says our Author, page 203. for the Type is always
less perfect than the Antitype; and therefore whatsoever is said of God, must
belong to his Person, and cannot belong to any other. But what then? We do not
say that God is a Type of any other in this Text; nor did the Apostle cite the
Words as such: we only say, that what is spoken of God in the Psalm, is by the
Apostle applied to Christ by way of Accommodation; as several other Passages of
the Old Testament are, both by him and other sacred Writers; as is confessed by
all Interpreters.

The next Place is Heb. 1. 6. When he brings the First-begotten into the
World, he says; and let all the Angels of God worship him: Which last Words are
commonly thought to be quoted out of Psalm. 97. 7. To this Allegation the
Socinian Historian answers; The Apostle does not quote the Words of the
Psalmist, as if they were spoken of Christ; but only declares the Decree of
God (known to him by the Spirit) for subjecting the Angels to Christ, in the
same Words that the Psalmist had used on another Occasion. This is a very sound
and judicious Answer; yet our Author cannot rest satisfied with it, for he
answers; But he proves this Decree of God by no other Revelation, but the Words
of the Psalmist, nor pretends any other; and if that don't prove it, we have no
other. Yes, we have; for we know from Christ himself, that all Power is given
to him, both in Heaven and Earth, and consequently that he is exalted above all
the Orders of Angels: this the Scriptures often teach, and it was believed by
all Christians in the time of the Apostles. So that when this sacred Writer
sets before the Hebrews the eminent Glory of Christ; he does it, only to keep
them in mind of it, and to persuade them never to depart from the Doctrine of
so great and glorious a Master. As if he should have said; You are not ignorant
of the Glory Christ now injoys in Heaven; how Thrones, Powers, Dominions, etc.
are subjected to him: for when God brought his Firstborn and beloved Son into
the Heavenly World, he said concerning him, what had been said upon another
Occasion, Let all the Angels of God worship him; let them honor, serve, and be
subject to him. This is the true and natural Sense of this Place; to which I
must add, (what has been already observed by others) that it is probable this
Place is quoted out of Deuteronomy. 32. 43. according to the Lxx; and not out of Psalm.
97. For there we find the very Words of the Apostle, (...), And let all the
Angels of God worship him. But in Psalm. 97. we find only, Worship him all ye
Gods. If this be true, as I think it is, our Author's Objection will fall of it
self. For those Words in Deuteronomy. are not spoken of God, but of God's People, the
Israelites. And if this can be said of God's People; I hope it may be said of
Christ too, without concluding from thence, that he is the Supreme God.

The next Place is Isa. 45. 23. I have sworn by my self; Unto me every Knee
shall bow. Which Words of God are applied to Christ at Romans 14. 10, 11. We
shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; for it is written, Every
Knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue shall confess to God. To this the
Historian answers; In bowing and confessing to Christ at the last Judgment, we
are said to bow and confess to God; not because Christ is God, but because
Christ then and there holds the place of God, represents him, and acts by
his Commission. So Men are said to appear before our Soraign Lord the King,
when they appear at the Bar of his Judges; because the Judges act in the King's
stead, and by his Commission. To this our Author replies; But why does he
confine this bowing the Knee to the last Judgment? St. Paul, indeed gives this
as one Instance, but does not confine it to this; but in the Epistle to the
Philippians makes it as large, as the Exaltation of our Savior; Wherefore God
has highly exalted him, etc. And one may plainly see, that the Historian does
not confine the bowing of the Knee to the last Judgment; He only explains the
Words of the Apostle which relate to it. But what then? The Apostle makes the
bowing of the Knee as large as Christ's Exaltation, Phil. 2. What follows from
thence? That Christ is God! By no means. It follows only, that we ought to pay
Christ an Honor proportionable to the Dignity bestowed on him; in a word, that
every Tongue confess that he is Lord, to the Glory of God, the Father. In which
Words the Apostle plainly teaches us, that the Honor we pay to Christ, is
subordinate to God, and designed to promote God's Glory.

If then, says he, we must bow to the Person of Christ, and confess him to be
the Lord, and this can be an Accomplishment of God's Oath, Unto me every Knee
shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear; then Christ is that God, who in the
Prophet Isaiah swore, That every Knee should bow to him. This is just as if one
should say; If then the Irish must how to the Person of the Viceroy in
Ireland, and confess him to be the Lord; and this be the Accomplishment of the
King's Will, Unto me all the Irish shall bow, and swear Allegiance; then the
Viceroy is that King, who will have all the Irish to swear Allegiance to him.
This is a ridiculous Argument; for as the Irish may bow to the Person of the
Viceroy, and look upon him as a Lord established by the King to govern
Ireland; so this they do in compliance with the King's Will, and to show
thereby that they are his loyal and faithful Subjects: and he who bows to the
Viceroy, may be said to bow to the King; because the Viceroy represents the
King, and acts in his Name. So that it would be nonsense to say, the Viceroy
is King, because they pay him that Honor. Let us apply this to Christ; we must
bow to him, and confess him to be the Lord; and by so doing, God's Oath is
accomplished, Unto me every Knee shall bow, etc. Does it follow from thence,
that Christ is that God, who swore in the Prophet Isaiah? Not at all; because
when we pay this Honor to Christ, it is, to obey God's Commands, and to
acknowledge his Power and Authority over us. He who honors the Ambassador,
honors him that sent him; he who honors Christ God's Anointed, honors God
who anointed him. In a word, He who bows to Christ tho a Man, bows to God also.

The next place, is Romans 9. 33. As it is written, Behold I lay in Sion a
stumbling-Stone, and Rock of ossence; and whosoever believes on him, shall not
be ashamed. Part of these Words are taken from Isa. 28. 16. and because they
are spoken of God in the Prophet, and applied to Christ by St. Paul and St.
Peter, as several other Texts of the Old Testament are: They conclude, Christ
must be that God, spoken of in the Prophet. But the Historian answers; that
Neither Peter, nor Paul, cite the Words of the Prophet, as spoken of Christ;
but only as in some sense applicable to him, namely, because Christ also was to
many a Stone of stumbling. To this our Author replies, like a Man very little
acquainted with Scripture: that This is nothing else, but to charge the
Apostles with abusing Scripture; and producing Proofs, which are no Proofs.
This I have answered before. But he tells us, that Paul alleges this Prophecy
to prove, that the Infidelity of the Jews, and the Offense they should take at
Christ, was foretold in Scripture. Here I must tell him, he is mistaken. For
the Words are no such Prophecy; but are spoken of the Times of Sennacherib, who
was to make War against the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, whom God promises to
protect and defend, if they will but keep within the Walls of the City, and
stick close to his Law. The Author adds a considerable Reflection; And thus
these Men, rather than they will allow the Scripture proofs, that Christ is
God, destroy all the Old Testament proofs of the Truth of Christianity; and yet
if such Texts as these, must pass only for Accommodations and Allusions, I know
not where they will find any proofs. Alas! I perceive the Author would be a
very unfit Man to convert Jews. When I read first this Passage of his Book; I
could not but wonder, how it came from a Christian. He knows not where we may
find any proofs of Christianity, besides those of the Old Testament. Are then
the Miracles of Christ, and of his Apostles, nothing? Is Christ's Resurrection
no Proof, or but a weak one, of his being sent by God, and the truth of his
Message? Must we account as nothing, the Purity of the Gospel, and its swift
Propagation through the whole World? I always thought, with other Christians, that
these were invincible Arguments for the Truth of our Religion. So they are
indeed, and by them we ought to convince the Jews: and then we are able to give
them a reasonable Account of all the Texts of the Old Testament, that are
quoted in the New.

The first place in the New Testament, quoted by our Author, is Mat. 28. 19. Go
ye therefore and teach all Nations; Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. This the Author of the Brief History
explains, after this manner: To be Baptized in the Name of a Person or Persons,
is a Rite by which one delivers himself to the Institution, Instruction, and
Obedience of such Person or Persons. So that to be Baptized in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; is to prosess to be led and guided by them: or (as
Grotius expresses this matter) it is to declare, we will admit of no other thing
as a part of our Religion, but what proceeds from these; that is, Nothing but
what is commanded by God, or the Father, and has been delivered by his Son the
Lord Christ, and consirmed (externally, by the Miracles; and internally, by the
Witness and Testimony) of the Spirit, that is, of the Power and Inspiration of
God. Now all this our Author grants; only he says, that Baptism being a
Religious Rite, it is a Religious Profession of this; a Religious Devoting our
selves to them: and therefore we give up our selves to their Institution and
Guidance, not as Creatures, but as to God; who is both the Author and Object of
our Faith and Worship. But what is the meaning of all this? We do not deny,
that Baptism is a Religious Rite, and a Religious Profession of our Faith: we
only deny that, because we are Baptized in the Name of the Son and Holy Ghost,
as well as in the Name of the Father, that therefore the Son and Holy Ghost,
are Two Divine Persons, and God as well as the Father. We religiously profess
in Baptism, to believe no other Doctrine but what is derived from the Father,
taught by his Son, and confirmed by the Holy Ghost; and the being Baptized in
the Name of the Son and Holy Ghost, is so far from proving, that they are God;
that supposing they are not, yet we must of necessity be Baptized in their
Name. When the Apostles made Proselytes, had they Baptized them only in the
Name of the Father; such a Eaptism had been no distinction of Christians from
Jews; for the Jews believed in the true God, as well as the Christians. So that
supposing Christ and the Holy Ghost are not God, yet since the Gospel was first
preached by the One, and confirmed by the Other; it was necessary that he who
embraced the Gospel, should be Baptized in the Name of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: to profess thereby, that he was neither a Jew nor a Pagan, but a
Christian; and that he admitted no other Doctrine, but that delivered by the
Son, and confirmed by the Holy Ghost. This was so essential to the Baptism of a
Christian, that we never read in the Acts of the Apostles, that Proselytes were
baptized in the Name of the Father, but only in the Name of the Son: of which
we can give a reasonable Account; for all that believed in God, did not believe
in Christ; but whoever believed in Christ, believed in God too. One might
believe and trust in God, without being a Christian; but whoever believed in
Christ and was Baptized in his Name, was both a Worshipper of the true God, and
a Christian. He who was Baptized in the Name of the Son, did publicly profess
this Belief, that he was sent from God, and had his Doctrine from him; and by
such an Acknowledgment he professed at the same time, that God bare testimony to
this Doctrine by the plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost: So that to be
Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and to be Baptized
only in the Name of the Son; are one and the same thing. I shall conclude this,
with the Words of the Learned Mr. Limborck, Theol. Christ. page 645. Dominus
Jesus ritui, etc. In English thus; To this Rite before practiced by John
Baptist, the Lord Jesus added another Signification; viz. the Profession of his
Name, and the Public Reception of the Doctrine he had preached. Therefore he
ordered that Baptism should be administered in the Name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. That those who should receive the Rite of
Baptism, might thereby give up themselves to the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; and profess themselves Disciples of that Doctrine, which is originally
derived from the Father, revealed and preached by the Son, and confirmed by the
Holy Ghost, with diverse Miracles, Signs, Prodigies, and Distributions of Gifts.
So that the Reception of Baptism, was a public Profession of the Doctrine of
Christ: Therefore it is, that the Faithful are said every where, to be Baptized
in the Name of Christ; that is, to profess by their being Baptized, that they
receive his Doctrine as Divine, and will be called by his Name, as being their
heavenly Master and only Savior.

The Historian adds, that, It Is in vain, not to say ridiculously pretended;
that a Person or thing is God, because we are Baptized unto it, or in the Name
of it. For then Moses, and St. John Baptist also, would be Gods. 1 Cor. 10. 1,
2. Our Fathers were all Baptized unto Moses. Acts 19. 3. Unto what then were ye
baptized? And they said, unto John 's Baptism; that is (say the Generality of
Interpreters) unto John, and the Doctrine by him delivered. He replies page
212. I confess he had answered this Argument; could he have shown us, that the
Jews were baptized in the Name of God, and in the Name of Moses, for that had
joined Moses with God, as our Savior joins the Son and Holy Ghost with the
Father in the form of Baptism. But if the Jews were baptized in the Name of
Moses; who can doubt, that they were baptized in the Name of God too; as those
who are baptized in the Name of Jesus, are thereby baptized also in the Name of
God, as has been before showed? It is plain, the Apostle compares Moses with
Christ; and tells the Corinthians, that, as they were baptized in the Name of
Jesus the Son and Messenger of God, so the Fathers had been baptized in the
Name of Moses the Servant of God. But we can afford the Author some places of
Scripture, wherein Creatures are joined with God. Thus, Exodus 14. 31. it is
said; And the People feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his Servant
Moses. In the Hebrew it is, in the Lord and in Moses his Servant. Here Moses the
Man is joined with God; and the Jews are said, to believe in him, as they
believed in God. So 1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things, etc. Here elect
Angels, tho Creatures, are ranked with God in so great and important a Matter,
and act of Religion, as an Obtestation. Again, Rev. 1. 4. Grace be to you and
Peace from him, which is, and which was, and which is to come; and from the
seven Spirits which are before his Throne. If Moses and Angels may be joined
with God, in Acts of Faith, of Obtestation, and of Benediction; why not the Son
and Spirit in Baptism, tho neither of them is God himself? We plainly see by
St. Paul's Words to the Corinthians, that to be baptized in the Name of One,
does not import that he is God. 1 Cor. 1. 14, 15. I thank God, says he, I
baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius; lest any should say, that I had
baptized in my own Name. He plainly intimates, that a mere Man may baptize in
his own Name; and if any of the Corinthians had thought so of the Apostle, I
hope they would not have concluded from thence, that he was God, or made
himself God.

He adds; It is plain, that to baptize unto Moses, is a Figurative and Allusive
Expression; and does not and cannot signify, that they were baptized in the
Name of Moses; because it is not true. Indeed the Jews were not baptized as
Christians are; but still they were baptized. Let the Author call it a
Figurative and Mystical Baptism, or what else he pleases; it was still a
Baptism, as St. Paul assures us. And to be baptized into Moses, is the same
with being baptized in the Name of Moses; as in the New Testament to be
baptized into or unto Christ, is the same with being baptized in the Name of
Christ. This was rightly understood by Vorstius, who paraphrases this place
thus; Scitis etiam, etc. i. e. You know also, that they were all baptized in
the Doctrine of Moses, as the Messenger of God; as the Cloud, and the Passage
through the Red Sea were designed for a Confirmation of the Ministry of Moses.

But he denies, that, to be baptized into Christ, and baptized in the Name of
Christ, signify the same thing. But he mistakes as grossly, as he uses to do;
for any one may observe it, that compares the Texts, where these Phrases are
used. Thus, John 3. 18. He that believes on him (in the Greek, (...) in, or
into, or unto him) is not condemned; but he that believes not, is condemned
already; because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of
God. So at Romans 6. 3. and Gal. 3. 27. to be baptized into Christ; and at Acts
2. 38. and 8. 16. to be baptized in the Name of Christ, are used as equivalent
terms. Indeed, the plain meaning of Romans 6. 3. is this; Know ye not, that so
many of us as were baptized in the Name of Christ, and professed to obey his
Doctrine, lay thereby under an Obligation of a Spiritual Conformity to his
Death; in dying to Sin, as he is dead; and living to God, as he is raised from
the dead and lives with God. So that the first words, contrary to our Author's
Assertion, relate to the form of administering Baptism in the Name of Jesus; and
the latter to the effect of it. This we may apply also to Gal. 3. 27.

He further denies, That to be baptized unto, or into John 's Baptism,
signifies to be baptized in the Name of John: for (says he) John did not
baptize in his own Name; but made Proselytes to the Messiah. But I hope he will
not deny, that to be baptized into Christ's Baptism is all one with being
baptized in the Name of Christ. And if this be so, to be baptized into John 's
Baptism, must also signify to be baptized in the Name of John. John indeed made
Proselytes to the Messiah; but he preached the Doctrine of Repentance, and he
who was baptized by him, was baptized into the Profession of the Doctrine
taught by him; and therefore, whoever professed in his Baptism, to follow the
Doctrine of John, might be said to be baptized to the Doctrine of John, or in
the Name of John.

Lastly, He asks, Whether it be not very absurd, that the Power or Inspiration
of God, which is not a Person, should be joined in the same Form with the
Father and Son, who are Persons? I answer; I see no absurdity, in being
baptized into the Profession of a Doctrine, which not only comes originally
from God the Father, and is revealed by his Son, but is confirmed by the Power
or Spirit of God.

The next and last Place of the New Testament, which our Auther considers, is
the first Chapter of St. John's Gospel: Which, says he, page 215. gives a
glorious Testimony to the Divinity of Christ; and a plain Demonstration of the
incurable Perverseness of Heretics. I will examine this High Pretense; and
show these three Things. 1. The Absurdity of the Author's Explication of this
Chapter. 2. The Inconsistency of the Trinitarian Hypothesis with the Context.
3. The true sense and meaning of this so much controverted Place.

1. The Historian said, that the Trinitarian Exposition of this Chapter is
absurd and contradictious, and that it is this; In the Beginning, i. e. from
all Eternity. But, How (says the Historian) can in the Beginning, be from all
Eternity? From all Eternity is before the Beginning, or without Beginning, not
in the Beginning. To this our Author replies, That No Man expounds in the
beginning of Eternity. But he should not be so bold in his Assertions; for Mr.
Calvin expounds it so. He adds; When St. John tells us, In the Beginning was
the Word; we say this proves the Eternity of the Word: for that which was, when
all things began which had a beginning, was it self before the beginning and
without beginning. I answer, had the Evangelist designed to teach us the
Eternity of the Word; he would undoubtedly have done it by the same Characters,
that are used in Scripture to express the Eternity of God. Now this Expression,
in the Beginning, is so far from denoting Eternity, that it is never applied to
God in that Sense. We read in Scripture, That In the Beginning God created
Heaven and Earth, Genesis 1. 1. Heb. 1. 10. a plain Demonstration that In the
beginning cannot be applied to him that is God, but only to Creatures; and as
plain a Demonstration that God himself is from all Eternity; for he who created
all things, must needs be (not only before all things, but) from Eternity. But
we never read God was in the Beginning, in all the Descriptions which the
Scriptures afford us of his Eternity: nay, they rather declare it or describe
it by, Before the beginning, Psalm. 90. 2. Before the Mountains were brought
forth; -- even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Here Eternity is
described by before the beginning. This is the Scripture-Notion of Eternity:
therefore if St. John had intended to show the Eternity of the Word, he should
not have said In the beginning was the Word; but as it is said of God, In the
beginning the Word created the Heaven and the Earth. Nor will it avail any
thing to say; The Word was so in the beginning; that all things were made by
him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. For as the foregoing
Words, In the beginning was the Word, are no true Description of Eternity in
Scripture; so neither are these, All things were made by him, etc. the
Scripture-Description of the Creation. There is no mention here made either of
the Heaven, or the Earth, or the Sea, which are never omitted in the
Descriptions we have in Scripture of the first and true Creation, a I showed
before; and therefore there is no need to insist longer on this Phrase in this
place.

The Historian goes on. Was the Word, i. e. was God the Son? But where in
Scripture, says he, is the Word called God the the Son? Our Author replies:
This Word indeed is God the Son; but we do not paraphrase it so in this place,
In the beginning was God the Son: but, In the beginning was that Divine Person
who is called the Word. But I pray, what is the meaning of this? For if the
Word is indeed God the Son, one may paraphrase it here, In the beginning was
God the Son; as well as, In the beginning was that Divine Person called the
Word: the one is as fit, and as good Sense as the other. But it seems, our
Author is ashamed to paraphrase the Word, by God the Son: this is a Modesty in
him, which is but seldom found in his Book.

Histor. The Word was God, i. e. The Son was with the Father. Answ. It seems
then that God in this Clause, is the Father. But was not the Son also with the
Holy Ghost, and is not he too (according to Trinitarians) God, or a God? If he
is, why does St. John only say, the Son was with the Father; and how comes the
Father to ingross here the Title of God, to the exclusion of the Holy Ghost? To
avoid the strength of this Argument, our Author replies; By God, the Apostle
here means that Original Mind and Wisdom, that Supreme and Sovereign Being,
whom all Men called God, without making a Distinction of Persons in the
Godhead. But if God in this place does not signify the Father only, but the
Three Persons of the Trinity; he should not tell us, that the Apostle here
means that Original Mind and Wisdom, but those Three Minds whom all Men called
God; for we are taught all over his Book, that God is Three infinite Minds; and
consequently Three Wisdoms, for an infinite Mind cannot be without Wisdom:
Neither should he say, That Supreme and Sovereign Being, whom all Men call God,
but those Three Supreme and Sovereign Beings: for he often tells us, that God
is Three infinite and substantial Beings; therefore he is Three Supreme and
Sovereign Beings. It is a plain Contradiction, to say in one place, God is
Three Minds and Three Beings; and in another, that he is but one Mind and one
Being. Furthermore, when the Evangelist says, The Word was with God, if by God
he means not the Father only, but the Three Persons who are that God; this will
make a very trifling sense. For then, the Word was with God, must signify, the^
second Person of the Trinity was with the Three Persons of the Trinity, and
consequently with himself; which is not only trifling, but ridiculous.

The Apostle adds; And the Word was God. Our Author to serve his Hypothesis,
puts here another or a new sense on the word God: for he saw it was
inconsistent with his Opinion; that in this Clause God should be interpreted,
as it was in the foregoing. Indeed it would be strange Nonsense; for then the
Word was God should signify, the second Person of the Trinity was with the
Three Persons of the Trinity. Therefore in his Hypothesis, the Word was God,
signifies, the Word was a Divine Person in the Godhead, page 216. But this
Interpretation is no less absurd than the other; for by the Word, he
understands a Divine Person who is called the Word, and by God too he means a
Divine Person in the Godhead. Therefore his Interpretation of these Words, the
Word was God, amounts only to this, the Divine Person, who is called the Word,
was a Divine Person.

But to give us a right and full understanding of this place, he thought sit to
paraphrase it thus; In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God; that is, In the Beginning of all Things was the Divine
Person, whose Name and Character is the Word; this Word was inseparably united
to that Supreme Being, whom we call God, and was himself God, a Divine Person
subsisting in the Unity of the Godhead; not a Power and Faculty as Reason is in
Man. I hope the Author will not take it ill, if I paraphrase his Paraphrase, to
make it clearer to vulgar Understandings. In the Beginning of all Things, was
the second Divine Person of the Trinity, whose Name and Character is the Word;
this second Divine Person of the Trinity was inseparably united with the Three
Persons of the Trinity, whom we call God, and consequently with himself; and
this second Person was a Divine Person, not a Power and Faculty, as Reason is
in Man. Our Author was so taken with this sense of the Words of St. John, that
he could not for bear breaking out into these Words, Can any thing be more easy
and obvious, and more agreeable to the Doctrine of the Trinity? I confess, it is
very agreeable to the Doctrine of the Trinity.

2. Tho I have shown already the inconsistency of the Trinitarian Hypothesis,
with the First Chapter of St. John's Gospel, by confuting the Author's
Explication; yet I intend to make it appear farther, by these few
Considerations: (1.) That to be in the Beginning, cannot here signify, to be
from all Eternity, has been proved already; because the Scripture does never
describe Eternity by such an Expression, nor does the Expression in its own
Nature denote Eternity: St. John would not have expressed so great a Mystery,
and so necessary to be believed by All, in improper and unsuitable Words. (2.)
For the Word to be with God, and to be God, can never bear the sense which the
Trinitarians put upon it. When John says, the Word was with God; if by God we
must understand the Three Persons of the Trinity, and by the Word a Divine
Person in that Trinity; this Interpretation makes, as I have showed, this
absurd sense; The second Divine Person of the Trinity was with the Three
Persons of the Trinity, and consequently with himself. But if by God we must
understand the Father only; why does St. John omit the Holy Ghost, who is God
as well as the Father, and with whom the Son was no less than with the Father?
In a word (as the Historian speaks) How comes the Father to ingross here the
Title of God, to the exclusion of the Holy Ghost? (3.) The Word was God, must
signify in this Hypothesis; That Divine Person who is called the Word, was a
Divine Person. (4.) All Trinitarians confess, that St. John in the Beginning of
his Gospel, speaks of the New Creation wrought by the Gospel, as well as of the
Old; and tho they do not agree among themselves about the place, where he
begins to treat of this New Creation or Regeneration; yet they do all grant,
that he discourses of it before, Ver. 14. And the Word was made Flesh. They all
take those words, He came unto his own, Ver. 11. to be meant of Christ's
conversing among Men, and teaching them the way of Salvation. But if the Word
was made Flesh, at Ver. 14. signifies Christ's Incarnation, as Trinitarians
pretend, it is unaccountable that St. John, writing the History of Christ's
Life, should first tell us what Christ Incarnate has done, and then that He was
Incarnate. This is just as if one, writing the Life of Alexander, should say,
he overcame Darius; and then, that he was begotten by Philip King of Macedon.
Or, that Christ was tempted of the Devil; and then, that he was conceived by
the Holy Ghost. Indeed it cannot be denied, that the Evangelists do not very
much observe the order of time, in relating several Discourses and Miracles of
Christ; but this is of no great moment, and does not destroy the proper and
essential order of History. The former has been done by the Evangelists, as
well as by other Historians; but never the latter. They never tell us, that
Christ went about to preach the Gospel; and then, that he was born: or that, he
was raised from the dead; and then, that he died. This would be to invert the
true order of History, and make Nonsense of it: And therefore it sufficiently
proves that these words, The Word was made Flesh, coming after He came unto his
own, cannot be meant of Christ's Incarnation. Thus Ver. 6, 7. John is said to
bear witness of Christ, and then that he was Incarnate. The like we may observe
on Ver. 10. He was in the World, and the World was made by him; if those Words,
The World was made by him, are to be understood in a proper sense of Creation,
the Apostle should have said first, that the World was made by him, and then
that He was in the World. (5.) This Evangelist plainly tells us (Chap. 20. Ver.
21.) the design he aimed at when he wrote his Gospel; These Things are written,
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that
believing, ye might have Life through his Name. It was not therefore to teach the
Divinity and Consubstantiality of Christ, as Trinitarians pretend. He wrote,
that we might be sure that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, not that he was
God. How comes he then to forget the most essential Thing, which induced him to
write and publish his Gospel, viz. the asserting of Christ's Divinity? No, no,
it is plain, he only designed to teach and prove, that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God. And the Son of God can no more be God, than a Son can be his
Father. Thus I think it appears clearly, that this Beginning of St. John's
Gospel does not favor the Trinitarian Opinion; but from Ver. 1, to Ver. 15. is
only an Abridgment of his whole Book. Were the Trinitarian Hypothesis clearly
set down in other places of Scripture, I would not wonder to see Men lay so
much stress upon this place: but since the Scriptures throughout teach us, that
Christ was but a Man; it stands to reason, that we should explain one obscure
place by a thousand that are plain and easy.

3. I come now to assign the true Sense of this famous Context.

Verse. 1, 2. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God: The same was in the beginning with God. PARAPHRASE.
When Jesus, who is called the Word, because he was the Messenger and Preacher
of God's Will and Word, and (as it were) the Mouth by which God pronounced his
Oracles, began to preach the Gospel; he was intimate to the most secret
Counsels of God, like one who is in the very Bosom of his Father; and he was in
the form of God, and like God, by reason of the Glory and Majesty that did
shine in him.

1. That the Man Jesus may be called the Word, or the Word of God, no Body will
deny who reads Rev. 19. 13. where Jesus is thus described; He was clothed with
a Vesture dipped in Blood, and his Name is called The Word of God. He who is here
called the Word of God, who is clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood, must be
the Man Jesus. Our Lord calls himself the Way, because he teaches us the way to
Salvation; and the Light, in this very Chapter, because he is the bringer of
it: therefore why not also the Word of God, because he was the Revealer,
Bringer, and first Preacher of it?

2. It appears by the second Verse, that the Evangelist did not design to make
a real Distinction, between to be in the beginning, and to be with God; for
what was distinctly spoken in the first Verse, is put together in the second,
thus, The same was in the beginning with God. In effect, the meaning of the
Apostle is not, that Christ was, when he began to enter upon his Prophetic
Office; this would be no great wonder: but that, when he began to preach the
Doctrine of the Gospel, he was admitted into the most intimate Counsels of God,
or made partaker of his most secret Will. This I think to be the reason of the
Repetition contained in the second Verse; besides that we may observe, that
Repetitions are very frequent throughout the whole Gospel of St. John, and more
used in that Book than in any other of the New Testament. Thus when the same
Apostle says, 1 John 1. 1. That which was from the beginning, which we have
heard, etc. he does not pretend really to distinguish those two things, and to
say that the Gospel was in the beginning of the Gospel; but that what he had
seen and heard of the Gospel from the beginning of it, that he declared unto
Men.

3. I have proved before, that In the beginning cannot signify the beginning of
the World: but that it is here used for the beginning of the Gospel, the place
last quoted (and several others) do sufficiently prove.

4. To be with God, and to be in the Bosom of the Father (at ver. 18.) are
equivalent Terms. If therefore we know the true Sense of the latter Expression,
we shall have a right understanding of the former. The Words at ver. 18. run
thus; No Man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the
Bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Now to see God in St. John's Style,
is to know the Decrees and Will of God concerning the Dispensation of the
Gospel. Those words therefore ought to be thus paraphrased; No Man knew at any
time the Will and Decrees of God, concerning the Dispensation of the Gospel:
the beloved Son of God, who was admitted into his most secret Counsels, has
fully discovered them to us. The Word Only-begotten, is put here for Beloved,
by way of Excellence; and so it is used very often, both in Profane and Sacred
Authors. And to be in the Bosom of the Father, is not here an Interpretation of
Only-begotten (that is, Best-Beloved) but it is brought in as the reason of the
full knowledge that Christ had of God's Will, and of the discovery he made of
it. Christ, says our Evangelist here, has fully declared the Will and Counsels
of God to us. How so? Because he was intimate and admitted to the most secret
and hidden Counsels of God; which he expresses by the Son's being in the Bosom
of the Father. This is then the true Sense of this Phrase, The Word was with
God, viz. God discovered to him the whole extent of his Will, he kept nothing
secret from him, he filled him up with the Treasures of, Wisdom and Knowledge.

5. We may easily understand the true meaning of the Word was God, if we
compare them with Phil. 2. 6. where Christ is said to be in the form of God,
and equal with God, or rather like God, as (...) ought to be rendered. Christ
was in the form of God, and like God; by reason of the Power and Authority
bestowed upon him, whereby he wrought all sorts of Miracles; raising the Dead,
curing the Lame, restoring sight to the Blind, stilling the Winds and the Sea,
etc. This we may apply to the words of St. John. Jesus was not only in the
Bosom of God, Partaker of his most secret Counsels; but he was besides invested
with such Authority and Power, as made him like God. So that Christ is by St.
John called God (or rather, a God) by reason of that Power and Authortiy,
whereby he became in some manner like unto the true and most High God. But this
Appellation does no more prove him to be the true and most High God, than
Solomon, or the Judges, in the Psalms, will be the True God, because this Name
God is given to them, Psalm. 82. 6. and 45. 6.

Ver. 3. All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made,
that was made. PARAPHRASE.
All things, necessary to the Propagation of the Gospel, were performed by him,
the Author and first Preacher of it. And without his Direction, there was not
any thing performed that was performed. That this relates not to the Creation
of the World, but to the Dispensation of the Gospel, is very plain from the
following words, In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, etc. In
these words the Evangelist teaches us, how all things were made by Christ,
because in him was the Life and Light of Men; which all Men may discern, to be
spoken of the Gospel by him taught; which is the Light of Men and their Life,
as it leads them to Eternal Life.

Ver. 10, 11. He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World
knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. PARAPHRASE.
He was conversing among Men, to teach them the way to Salvation; some of them
were reclaimed by him, but the greater part rejected him. He was sent to his
own Brethren, but most of them would not receive him. It does sufficiently
appear by these words, and the World knew him not, that the Apostle speaks only
of Men, who only are capable of knowing; not of this visible World: As indeed
the 11th Verse is a plain Explication of Verse 10. St. John expresses in this
Chapter the same thing several ways: He was in the World; He came unto his own;
The Light shined in Darkness; these are equivalent Expressions. So also, The
World knew him not; His own received him not; the Darkness comprehended it not;
signify one and the same thing. Thus, the World was made by him, is explained
at Ver. 12. thus, But as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become
the Sons of God; and by Verse 4, and 9. So that in all this, there was no
Intention to saythat the Old Creation was the work of Je, sus Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
HIS second Charge is, That Socinianism makes the Jewish Economy very
unreasonable and unaccountable, page 231. because if Christ were no more than a
mere Man, the Antitype should fall very short of the Types contained in the
Old Testament. The Tabernacle and Temple, says he, was God's House where he
chose to dwell by the visible Symbols of his Presence; and was so contrived, as
to be the Figure both of Heaven and Earth; for so the Apostle to the Hebrews
expressly tells us, the Holy of Holies was a Figure of Heaven. -- But we must
all confess, that this was a very unaccountable and insignificant Ceremony, for
God, who fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence, to dwell in an House made
with Hands, -- had it not prefigured something more Divine and Mysterious. --
The Temple then was a Figure, and we must inquire, what it was the Figure of?
Now a Typical Presence can be a Figure of nothing but a real Presence, and
God's Personal dwelling among Men: for Presence and Habitation can signify
nothing but Presence, and a Figure must be a Figure of some thing that is real;
and nothing can answer to a figurative visible Presence of God, but a personal
visible Presence. He goes on, and applies this to Christ, who (at John 2. 19.)
calls his Body a Temple; which (says our Author) was that in Truth and Reality,
which the Temple was but a Figure of, that is, God's Presence on Earth, which
he explains of his being personally united to Christ's Humane Nature. But if
Christ be not Incarnate, adds he, if the Divine Word be not personally united
to the Humane Nature; the Body of Christ is but a figurative Temple, as the
Temple at Jerusalem was: and then one Figure is made a Type of another; which
is as great an Absurdity in Types, as a Metaphor of a Metaphor in speech. I do
not remember I ever saw so much trifling, so seriously urged in a weighty
Question: but I have undertaken the drudgery of making Reflections on it; and
therefore will consider what he has offered. --

1. That the Temple was a Figure both of Heaven and Earth, I am content to
admit; the Apostle to the Hebrews may be interpreted to that purpose. But that
it was also a Type of Christ's Body, we have no color from Scripture to affirm
it; and the Author has offered no other ground for it, but his own wandering
Fancy.

The Author to the Hebrews, who inlarges upon the Temple, does not give the
least Intimation of this: why then should we contrive Types and Figures of our
own, without any reason for it? If this be allowed, we may make Types of any
thing; and increase Figures to an infinite Number. If the Author is in love
with cold and groundless Allegories, every Body is not of his Mind, and
therefore he should keep them to himself. But why should the Temple be a Figure
of Christ's Body, rather than the Ark? God is said, all over the Old Testament,
to dwell between the Cherubims; it was the proper Seat of God, where he gave
forth his Oracles, and made his Glory to appear by affording sensible Signs of
his Presence. If therefore such Allegories had any Signification of future
Times and Things, it would be more probable that the Ark was a Type of Christ's
Body, than the Temple: the rather, because we know already by a Divine
Testimony, that the Temple was a Figure of something else. But he will say,
that Christ calls his Body a Temple. What then? so St. Paul calls the
Corinthians; Ye are, says he, the Temple of God. Was the Temple at Jerusalem a
Figure or Type of the Bodies of the Corinthians? Or does our Savior say, that
he calls his Body a Temple, because it was the Antitype of the Temple of the
Jews?

2. Tho the Temple were not a Figure of Christ's Body, yet it would be no
unaccountable and insignificant Ceremony, for God to dwell in an House made
with Hands; to appoint this the place of his Worship, etc. which our Author
thinks to be inexplicable without admitting his Doctrine of the Trinity. Who
knows not, that the Israelites were given to Idolatry; and that the pompous way
of Worship used among the neighboring Nations, agreed so much to their
Fancies, that it was necessary to comply with them in this thing, that they
might be kept from worshipping other Gods, and the current of Idolatry be
restrained. Thus God in his infinite Wisdom thought fit to set up among his
People a carnal and sensible Worship; and to appoint an House where he would
dwell after a particular Manner, and afford visible Symbols of his Presence.
All this he did to accommodate himself to the gross genius of the Israelites,
and to persuade them to forsake Idols, and to acknowledge no other God but
himself. This was the true reason of the Temple, of God's dwelling there, and
the Glory with which it was sometimes filled: and to affirm that all was done,
to prefigure Christ's Body, is a Fancy which the Author might better have kept
to himself.

3. But suppose the Temple was a Type of Christ's Body; yet there is no need
God should be incarnate in Christ's Body, to answer that Type. The Scriptures
tell us, God was with Christ, and in Christ; which I hope might be done without
an Incarnation or Personal Union, as he was in the Temple. As God spoke in the
Temple, so he spoke in and by Christ. But besides all this, Christ was greater
than the Temple; because God was always present with him, which cannot be said
of the Temple, where the Signs of God's Presence were not always visible. God's
Dwelling in Christ was always conspicuous by the Oracles which he delivered,
and the Miracles he wrought.

But he objects a place of Scripture. To this, says he, St. John plainly
alludes; The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his
Glory, the Glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, full of Grace and
Truth. (...), tabernacled amongst us; fulfilled that Type of God's dwelling in
the Tabernacle and Temple at Jerusalem, by his dwelling Personally in Humane
Nature.

This Argument, or rather Congruity, is grounded on two false Suppositions. The
first is, that The Word was made Flesh, is meant of Christ's Incarnation. The
second, that in these Words, (...), which we render he dwelt amongst us; St.
John alludes to God's dwelling in the Tabernacle. I begin with the first. It
cannot be denied that (...) may be rendered was, as well as was made. Thus it is
taken, Luke 1. 5. and 24. 19. and even at Verse 6. of this Chapter. Nor can it
be doubted that the word Flesh signifies not only Humane Nature; but very often
Humane Nature as subject to Infirmities and Afflictions. Now is it not more
agreeable to Reason and Scripture, to interpret these words thus; And the Word
(Jesus) was a Man like unto us in all things, Sin excepted; having the same
Mortal Nature, being exposed to the same Miseries and Afflictions: than to say,
The Word was Incarnate, which is a Language unknown to Scripture; wherein we
never find, that God made himself Man; and altogether repugnant to Reason? And
this I confirm by Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch then as the Children are Partakers of
Flesh and Blood; He likewise himself took part of the same, that through Death he
might destroy him that had the Power of Death, even the Devil. Here Christ is
said to be Partaker of Flesh and Blood, as pious Men are; which cannot be meant
in a sense of Incarnation, for pious Men are not said to be Incarnate: but the
one and the other are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, that is, of Infirmities and
Sufferings. This he explains farther at Verse 17. Wherefore in all things it
behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren: but his Brethren were not
Incarnate. But at Ver. 10, and 18. he expressly expounds this of Christ's
Sufferings: Ver. 10. It became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, to make the Captain of their Salvation, perfect through Sufferings.
Ver. 18. For in that he himself has suffered, -- he is able to succor them
that are tempted. Mr. Limborck saw and confessed this that I have been saying;
his Words are these, Theol. Christ. page 226. The true sense of this place, is,
that the Word was Flesh: That is, a true fleshly Substance, subject to all the
Infirmities that attend our Flesh; that is to say, He was Mortal, Vile and
Contemptible. Which appeared more especially in the days of his Passion and of
his Death, which are called at Heb. 5. 7. The days of his Flesh.

2. Our Author, charmed with Allegories and mysterious Interpretations, has
found out, that St. John alludes here to God's dwelling in the Tabernacle; and
this he thinks God did, to make the Antitype answer the Type, Christ's Body to
the Tabernacle or Temple. Since he is so much in love with Allegories, it may
be I may do him a kindness to help him to one, which I have ready at hand; it
is this: As the Tabernacle in the Wilderness had no fixed place to stand in, as
the Temple afterward had, but was carried from one place to another; according
to the several Incampments of the Israelites: So Christ, to fulfill that Type,
was always wandering with his Disciples, having no where to lay his Head; Mat.
8. 20. This Allegory is as probable, and more natural than his; without
supposing an impossible Incarnation. I cannot tell, whether the Author will
like it better than his own; I am sure, I like neither of them. No, no, there
is no Mystery in the Greek Word: Our Version renders it well, He dwelt among
us: So does Seb. Castalio, Et apud nos, Gratiae Veritatisque plenus, habitavit;
And he full of Grace and Truth dwelt among us. And the same word is thus used
without any Mystery, Rev. 12. 12. and 13. 6. where it is applied to the
Inhabitants of Heaven. By way of conclusion, I will set down the sense of the
whole Verse, which is an Abridgment of the Life of Christ: The Word was Flesh,
a mortal Man, obnoxious to Sufferings and Death: here is his Priestly Office.
He dwelt among us full of Grace and Truth; here is his Prophetic Office. We
have seen his Glory; here is his Kingly Office. Thus therefore we ought to
paraphrase the whole; Jesus Christ was a Mortal Man, Partaker of Flesh and
Blood, subject to the same Infirmities that we are; in a word, like unto us in
all things, but Sin. And he dwelt among us, preaching the happy News of
Reconciliation with God, and the Doctrine and Truth revealed to him by the
Father. But tho he were a Mortal Man, a Man of Sufferings and Griefs; yet we
have seen his Glory, shining in his Miracles, his Transfiguration, his
Resurrection, his Ascension into Heaven, etc. Such a Glory as was well becoming
the beloved Son of God.

Having spoken of the Temple, he comes to discourse of Sacrifices, and tells
us; The true meaning of the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, is not
merely that he was slain in God's Decree; for what God has decreed to be done,
is not therefore said to be done, before it is done. But this Lamb was slain in
Types and Figures, from the Foundation of the World; ever since the fall of
Adam, in those early Sacrifices which were offered after the Fall, which were
Typical of the Sacrifice of Christ. But, 1. Where has he found, that those
early Sacrifices were Typical of the Sacrifice of Christ? The Scripture is
silent about it; and the Apostle to the Hebrews, who inlarges on the Sacrifices
of the Mosaical Law, does not so much as mention those that were offered
before; which is unaccountable, if they were Figures of the Sacrifice of
Christ. 2. But he says; He knows no Principle of natural Reason, that teaches
us to offer the Blood of Beasts to God; and therefore he must think, the
Sacrifices of Beasts to be an Institution. But suppose those early Sacrifices
were an Institution, does it follow from thence, that they were instituted to
be Types of the Sacrifice of Christ? By no means: God might have other Reasons
for such an Appointment. But since the Scripture does not mention the
appointing of those Sacrifices; we have good reason to believe, that they were
of Humane Institution: for had God appointed them, it would not (it should
seem) have been omitted in Scripture. It Is reasonable to think, that Abel and
Cain thought fit to offer Sacrifices and Oblations to God; to show by such
visible Marks, the Sense they had of God's Majesty; and to express the
Reverence they ought to pay to him. 3. To deny, that the Lamb was slain from
the Foundation of the World merely in God's Decree, because what God has
decreed to be done, is not therefore said to be done before it is done, is no
very accurate reasoning in a Divine; because it is contrary to the style of
Scripture. Is there any thing more usual with the sacred Writers, especially
with the Prophets, than to speak of things to come, as if they were come to
pass already, by reason of their certainty and the immutable Decree of God? And
why then cannot the Lamb be said to be slain from the beginning of the World,
merely because God had certainly decreed it should be so? 4. But if he is not
satisfied with this Explication, here is another for him. There is a
Transposition in the words of this Verse, which also may be observed in many
other Texts of Scripture; so that the Verse may be read thus, Whose Names are
not written from the Foundation of the World, in the Book of Life, of the Lamb
slain. This reading is confirmed by Chap. 17. Ver. 8. Whose Names are not
written in the Book of Life, from the Foundation of the World. So the sense of
the controverted Text, is; The Names of those who worship the Dragon were never
written in the Book of Life of the slain Lamb; that is, in the Book of the
Martyrs and Confessors of Christ, who were destined to eternal Life from the
Foundations of the World.

Page 237. He desires some of the learned Reasoning Socinians, honestly to tell
him; what account they can give of the Jewish Priesthood and Sacrifices, which
is becoming God. Why should God he propitiated by a Man, subject to the same
Sins and Infirmities, and very often guilty of them, that other Men are? Why
innocent Beasts must die, to expiate the Sins of Men? The thing he aims at, is
to prove that the Socinian Doctrine ridicules the Jewish Economy. How so? The
Jews Sacrifices, says he, were Typical of Christ's Sacrifice. We grant it; for
so the Apostle to the Hebrews intimates: we say only, that this was not the
chief and primary end for which they were instituted. But what then? The Death
of Christ was therefore a Sacrifice. So it was. Then he was not a Metaphorical
Priest. No more he was. Then he was the Divine Word Incarnate. How so? This he
should prove, but he takes it for granted. I want the Author's Spectacles, how
to draw this Consequence, therefore the Socinian Doctrine ridicules the Jewish
Economy, from that Argument. Now to this Question, concerning the Jewish
Priesthood and Sacrifices, I answer with St. Paul, Gal. 3. 19. The Law (the
Ceremonial Law, the Law of Sacrifices and other external Rites) was added
because of Transgressions: i. e. by reason of the Idolatry of the Israelites,
which could not be restrained but by such a Method. Had not the Jews been
inclined so much to Idolatry, by seeing the Worship of their Neighbors round
them; God would not have put on their Necks this Yoke, which (as St. Peter
says) they were not able to bear. God himself says this, Jer. 7. 22. I spoke
not unto your Fathers nor commanded them, in the day that I brought them out of
the Land of Egypt, concerning Burnt-Offerings or Sacrifices: But this thing
commanded I them, saying, Obey my Voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall
be my People. Here we may plainly see, that God at first required nothing from
his People, but to own him, and obey his reasonable Laws, the Moral and
Political Laws he designed for them: but he was, as it were, constrained to
institute Sacrifices, and other external and pompous Rites, by their Idolatrous
Inclination. I refer our Author, about this matter, to Learned Dr. Spencer, the
best Writer on the Ceremonial Law. This then is the true and primary Reason of
God's appointing Sacrifices; and very well becoming both his Wisdom and
Goodness. And it hinders not, but those Sacrifices might be also Typical of the
Sacrifice of Christ: they were so, secondarily. God who appointed Sacrifices to
stop the progress of Idolatry, did also by them prefigure the Sacrifice of
Christ. But a mere Man, says he, can be no more than a Metaphorical and Typical
Priest and Sacrifice. This, I think, deserved to be proved. A Metaphorical or
Typical Priest and Sacrifice are here opposed to a true Priest and Sacrifice;
yet he tells us, that tho the Priests and Sacrifices of the Law were Typical,
they were true and proper Priests and Sacrifices; and made a true and proper
expiation for Sin, as far as they reached. But if the Priests of the Law were
true and proper Priests, and the Sacrifices true and proper Sacrifices; much
more will the Sacrifice of Christ be a true and proper Sacrifice, tho he also
was a Man. This Consequence the Author himself has afforded us. Now because the
Antitype, as he says, ought to be greater than the Type; what remains, is only
to inquire, Whether Christ be a more excellent Priest and Sacrifice, than the
Priests and Sacrifices of the Law? The Priests of the Law were but ordinary
Men, distinguished from others only by the Dignity of their Priesthood: but
Christ was the Messiah, the Son of God, entrusted with his secret Will, endued
with an in mense Authority and Power, and made (as it were) God by the
unspeakable Gifts of God his Father. The Priests of the Law were called to
their Priesthood in an ordinary ways but Christ by God's immediate
appointment. The Highpriests of the Law entered only into a Tabernacle made
with Hands, and but once a Year into the most Holy Place; but Christ into a
Tabernacle whose Builder and Maker is God, and is to continue there for ever.
Surely therefore, tho he is a Man only, this Antitype is more excellent than
the Types, and Christ a more excellent High Priest and Sacrifice than those of
the Law. So that here is no ridiculing the Jewish Economy, by the Socinian
Hypothesis: but our Author by such ungrounded Charges, and weak Proofs, has
written a Book very fit to confirm Socinians in their Opinions.

CHAP. IX.
III. HIS Third Charge is, Socinianism ridicules the Christian Religion, makes
it a very mean and contemptible Institution.

He tells us, That The Fundamental Mystery of the Christian Religion is the
stupendous Love of God in giving his own Son, his only-beloved Son, for the
Redemption of Mankind. But how comes this Love of God to be called a Mystery
still? It was a Mystery, or Secret, before the Revelation of the Gospel; but
since it was revealed, it ceases to be a Mystery or Secret: unless a Secret
discovered be a Secret still.

This, says he, our Savior lays great stress on; That God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting Life. By this, one would have thought, that Christ
had been the Son, the only begotten Son of God, before God gave him. Now this
is a very ambiguous way of expressing himself; for he professes to believe that
Christ was the Son of God, nay the only begotten Son, before he gave him; but
he differs from Us and from Common Sense in this; that by the Son of God, he
means God himself; and by before, he means from all Eternity. This is a very
hard Language; for who can fancy, that the Son of God should be God himself;
and that before, should signify Eternity? Yet this is the Sense he puts upon
it, when he says; If Socinianism be true, God did not give any Son he had
before; but made an excellent Man, whom he was pleased to call his only
begotten Son. When our Savior says, God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, etc. I desire our Author to tell me, what is meant by the
Word God, Whether the whole Trinity, or the Father only? If the whole Trinity,
the Sense will come to this; The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost so loved
the World, that they gave their only begotten Son. Which is false; for in the
Trinitarian Hypothesis, the Son is not the Son of the Second or Third Persons
in the Trinity. If by God be meant the Father only; How comes the Father to
ingross here the Title of God, to the Exclusion of the Son and the Holy Ghost?
How is he only said, to love the World; for the Son and Holy Ghost love it as
well as the Father? Thus they are not the Socinians, but the Trinitarians that
ridicule the Christian Religion, by putting on it an absurd and unnatural Sense.

But, says he, God's Love in giving his only-begotten Son for our Redemption,
which our Savior fixes on as the great Demonstration of God's Love, is not so
wonderful; if this giving his Son signifies no more, than making a Man on
purpose to be our Savior. What then? Does it follow from thence, that the
Socinian Doctrine ridicules the Christian Religion? It only follows, that the
Socinian Doctrine makes the Love of God less wonderful than the Trinitarian.
For in it self it is a wonderful Love, that God should raise up a Savior, to
Apostate and Rebel Mankind; tho this Savior was not God himself. But why
should we call a Chimera a more wonderful Love; for the Son of God cannot be
God himself, and therefore God could not show his Love by giving such a Son. To
conclude; as the Love of God in redeeming Offenders, is wonderful, be the means
what they will: So his Love in giving for them his Beloved Son, tho but a Man,
cannot without Impiety be denied, to be wonderful to a Miracle. The ridiculing
is only on the side of our Author, not on the Unitarian; and I am apt to think,
that if I were not an Unitarian already, his Book (made up of bold Charges,
inconsequent Reasonings, and arrogant Definings of what he understands not)
would make me one.

In the next place, says he, at page 239. the Apostles mightily insist on the
great Love of Christ in dying for us, and his great Humility in submitting to
the condition of Human Nature, and suffering a shameful and accursed Death,
even the Death of the Cross. He cites 2 Cor. 8. 9. and 5. 14. and Phil. 2. 5,
6, 7, 8. And goes on thus; Supposing Christ to be but a mere Man, who had no
being before he was born of the Virgin; who knew nothing of his own coming into
the World, or for what end he came; whose Undertaking was not his own voluntary
choice, but God's appointment; Where is the great Love, where is the great
Humility of this? The meaning of all this is, that were not Christ the Supreme
God, whatever he has done on our behalf, would be no great Argument of his
Love, or his Humility. If Codrus and Decius devoting themselves to Death, for
the Good of their respective Countries, have been accounted by all Men, great
Lovers of their Countries; Shall not Christ's dying for the Eternal Salvation
of Mankind, pass for an Argument of wonderful Love? Is it nothing for Christ to
lead a wandering poor and miserable Life, to expose himself to all the Injuries
and Fury of Implacable Adversaries, to undergo a painful and infamous Death;
and all this to make Men partakers of everlasting Life: Must all this be
accounted nothing, unless the Person so doing be the Supreme God? How did he
become Poor, says he, who was never Rich? But I ask him, How the Supreme God
can become Poor; How God can make himself of no Reputation, or humble himself
and become obedient unto Death; all which things he imputes to a Person who is
God? I would know, How it comes that Christ's Love and Humility is described by
such Characters, as can only be applied to a Man; if we must not be allowed to
believe, that the Love of Christ-Man was wonderful? He insists much on 2 Cor.
8. 9. where our Translation says, Christ became Poor. But he might know, that
the Greek (...) does not signify to become Poor, but to be Poor; and so
Castalio renders it. So the Sense of that place is this; Tho Christ was Rich
and Glorious, by reason of the Authority and Power conferred on him: yet he was
willing to lead a poor Life, that by his Poverty (as by one means) we might
obtain Eternal Riches and Glory.

The Historian explains being in the Form of God at Phil. 1. 6. by being made
Like to God, by a Communication to him of Divine and Miraculous Power over
Diseases, Devils, the Grave, the Winds, the Seas, etc. To this our Author
replies; This dwindles the Form of God into just nothing; for according to
them, he had no power to do this, but God did it at his Word, as he did for
other Prophets. And therefore this is no Form of God, no likeness at all: For
Christ did not work Miracles as God does, by an inherent Power; but God wrought
Miracles for him. Christ indeed could not work Miracles by an inherent or
proper Power of his own, since he was not God; but to conclude that therefore
there was no form or likeness of God at all in him, is a very bad Consequence.
When we say, that Christ was in the form or likeness of God; we exclude thereby
an equality with God, and we mean only, that he was in a manner like God. This
may be explained by a Comparison. It may be said, that a Viceroy is like a
King; but this does not signify, that he is the King himself, or is equal to
the King; but only, that by reason of the Power and Authority conferred on him,
he is in a manner like the King: So that tho he does not act by a Power of his
own, yet he may be truly said to act like a King. To conclude from hence, that
this dwindles the likeness of the Viceroy with the King, into just nothing,
would be mere Impertinence: for then a Porter would be as like a King as the
Viceroy himself; which no Man in his Senses will affirm. When therefore
Christ, by the Power bestowed upon him, cast out Devils, cured all sorts of
Diseases, raised the Dead, commanded the Winds and the Seas; He was indeed in
the likeness of God, and it was a great Humility in him, that he was so far
from making an ostentation of his Glory and Greatness, that he became like a
Servant, humbled himself, and underwent all sorts of Sufferings, even the Death
of the Cross.

But, says the Author, page 241. How did he take this Form upon him, which
signifies his own free and voluntary Choice; when he did not take it, but was
made so! What? when the Apostle says, that Christ took upon him the Form of a
Servant; must we say, that he did not? Is it not a plain Contradiction to the
Apostle? He adds; And what Humility was this, for a mere Man to be a Minister
and Servant of God; and so great a Minister as to be in the Form of God, that
is (as he says) to be glorious for Miracles, and admired as the great Power of
God: especially, when he was to be exalted unto Heaven for it, and advanced
above all Principalities and Powers? This is such Humility, as would have been
Pride and Ambition in the most, glorious Angel. Shall we not call Humility what
St. Paul calls so? He tells us, that the same who has been advanced above all
the Orders of Angels, humbled himself. All the Glory that Christ has been
crowned with, does not hinder the Apostle from praising and extolling his
Humility. Because Christ's Sufferings have been remunerated with a transcendent
Glory; must they not be accounted Humility, but Pride? On the contrary, the
more that he who humbles himself is great and glorious, the greater is his
Humility. Seeing therefore Christ had received from God more Glory than ever
any Man had, it follows, that his Humility was the most stupendous and
unparalled that ever was. But according to our Author's way of reasoning,
there is no such thing as Christian Humility. For every Christian who humbles
himself, endeavors thereby to fit himself for the Kingdom of Heaven: but all
our best Actions are not worthy to be compared with that Glory which shall be
revealed in us; and therefore will our Author say, Humility is but a Chimera,
because he who is said to humble himself, expects to get by the means an
Eternal Glory. Indeed if the most bitter Sufferings of Christ, are not to be
accounted Humility, because they were to be rewarded with a more excellent
Glory: I cannot see, how any Christians may be said to be humble; for they
expect a glorious and transcendent Reward.

Page 242. After Christ was come into the World, there was no place (says our
Author) for his Choice and Election; he could not show either his Love or his
Humility, in choosing Poverty or Death: and therefore if it was matter of his
free Choice, and a Demonstration of his great Humility and Love, as the Apostle
says it was; he must and did choose it before he came into the World. But all
this is contrary to the place of the Apostle, wherein he speaks only of what
Christ has done since he came into the World, and does not so much as mention
what he had done before. Which has forced several Trinitarian Interpreters to
acknowledge, that this Text does not relate to the Incarnation. I desire our
Author to tell me the meaning of these words, Who being in the Form of God,
thought it not Robbery to be equal with God. For if to be in the Form of God,
signifies, to be the true God; then the sense will be this; Christ being the
true God, thought it not Robbery to be equal with the true God. Which is just
as if one should say, Leopold who is Emperor does not think it Robbery to be
equal with the Emperor. Is it possible, Men should put such a trifling sense
on the words of an Apostle? Besides, how can it be said here, that the Supreme
God made himself of no Reputation? In a word, of all the things spoken of
Christ in this place, not one of them can be applied to the Supreme God: which
plainly shows, that the Man Christ Jesus only did humble himself; and that this
Humility is so far from proving that Christ is God, that it demonstrates, he
was only a Man.

He goes on; The Faith and Worship of Christ, is the distinguishing Character
of the Christian Religion. That the Faith of Christ is the distinguishing
Character of the Christian Religion, I grant; but I deny, that the Worship of
Christ is so too. I suppose, by the Worship of Christ, he means only the
Worship of Christ's Divine Nature; for he tells us in the following words, that
both the Natural and Mosaical Religion condemn the Worship of any Creature;
therefore Christ's Humane Nature being a Creature, ought not to be worshipped.
Of the Worship paid to Christ, I have said enough already; but because our
Author gives occasion for it, by repeating his Charge of Idolatry, I will
consider what he has offered, in its proper place. Only here I shall mind him;
that the Compilers of the Apostles Creed have made no mention of the Worship of
Christ, but only of Faith in him.

At page 245. He goes on to prove, that the Socinian Doctrine ridicules the
Christian Religion; Because it does not ascribe to Christ such Knowledge as is
proper to the Supreme God. His first Proof, is John 2. 25. He knew what was in
Man. To which the Historian had before answered thus; The Knowledge which the
Lord Christ had, or now in his State of Exaltation has, of the Secrets of Men's
Hearts, is the pure Gift of, and Revelation from God; and the Divine Word
abiding on him. Rev. 1. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to
him, to show unto his Servants. Our Author would elude the strength of this
Answer, thus; This (says he) is a plain abuse of the Text and the Reason of
it. He knew what was in Man, is the Reason assigned why he needed not external
Information, or Testimony of Man. He needed not that any should testify of Man,
for (...), he himself knew what was in Man, and knew all Men. Which according
to the propriety of Words, signifies an inherent Personal Knowledge; in
opposition to any external Manifestation, and therefore to Revelation it self.
For he always knew all Men, which cannot be done by Revelation; which is
particular and occasional. Here one may plainly see, what strange shifts Men
are put to, when they oppose Truth. Who denies that those Words, He knew what
was in Man, signify inherent Personal Knowledge? Can any Man know any thing but
by his inherent Personal Knowledge? He that knows, knows with his own Mind, and
therefore has an Inherent and Personal Knowledge. But does it follow from
thence, that such a Knowledge is not from Revelation? I hope it may be said of a
Man enlightened by Revelation, that he knows, as well as of any other? And yet
tho such a Man be inspired, he has an inherent Personal Knowledge; for his own
Mind knows inwardly what he did not know before. But (...), says our Author, he
himself knew; which according to the Propriety of Words, signifies an inherent
Personal Knowledge in opposition to Revelation. No surely. For then the Prophet
Elisha was God, for he knew what the King of Syria spoke in his Bedchamber, 2
Kings 6. 12. For (...), he himself knew what the King of Syria spoke: yet this
was certainly by Revelation. If our Author should reply, that it is well known
that Elisha was but a Prophet, and could know no such thing but by Inspiration
or Revelation. I answer, It is likewise well known, that Christ knew not all
things, and particularly not the Day of Judgment, Mark 13. 32. therefore he
could not be God, for God knows all things. Besides, the Scripture assures us,
that God gave to Christ his Revelation, Rev. 1. 1. which proves that all his
extraordinary Knowledge was derived from God. But he always knew all Men, says
the Author, which cannot be done by Revelation; which is particular and
occasional. Why not? God's Revelation may be perpetual, if he pleases. There is
no Contradiction or Impossibility in it. But how has he perverted the first
Verse of St. John's Revelations? The Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave
to him, to show unto his Servants things, which must shortly come to pass.
This, says he, does not signify that this was a Revelation made to Jesus
Christ, but that Revelation which Christ made; for tho God is said to give to
him, it is to show unto his Servants; that is, by appointment of God, Christ
showed this Revelation unto John. Alas, if our Author was not able to answer
this place, he should not have studied to clude it. If Christ made this
Revelation, because he is God, how is it said to be given to him, which can in
no sense agree to him who is true God? He received it, says our Author, to show
unto his Servants. But of whom can the true God receive, either Knowledge, or
Authority to dispense it? But here are two Arguments against our Author's
Doctrine: 1. That God gave to Christ a Revelation. But he that is God can need
no Revelation; because himself knows all things. 2. That He is appointed to
show this Revelation to others. Which no more can agree to one who is God, than
Revelation does.

He concludes; that He desires a Mediator, who knows more, and in a more
perfect manner. But I think, it is fit we should be contented with such a
Mediator, as God was pleased to give us.

IV. His last Charge is; that Socinianism justifies, at least excuses, both
Pagan and Popish Idolatries; at least as it is taught by those Men, who allow
of the Worship of Christ; which it is certain too, the Christian Religion
teaches.

In answer hereto; I will, 1. Show in what consists the Worship or Honor due
to Christ. 2. Compare this Worship, with the Worship which Pagans exhibited to
their false Gods, and Papists to their Saints.

1. I observe that in the Unitarian Hypothesis, the Worship or Honor due to
Christ, is not a supreme Worship; such as we ought to pay to God. Christ being
a Creature, can never be worshipped as God is. Tho he be never so great and
glorious, a supreme Worship is proper only to Almighty God, and can never be
bestowed on any Creature. 2. As it cannot be denied, that there are diverse
Orders of Creatures; so the Honor paid to them, ought to be proportionable to
their Greatness and Dignity. Thus, in a Kingdom those, who by reason of their
Dignity, are above the common sort of Men, deserve a greater Respect and Honor
than others; and the King, who is above them all, has an Honor paid to him
which is incommunicable to the rest of his Subjects. By the same reason Angels,
who are more excellent than Men, are worthy of greater Honor. But Christ, who
has been exalted above both Men and Angels, since he is King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, has a proper Worship due to him, which can never be given either to
Angels or Men. He is God's Beloved Son by way of Excellence, all Power is given
to him in Heaven and Earth, he is at the Right Hand of God, having all things
put under his Feet; he deserves therefore an Honor, so much greater than
theirs, as he is greater. Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. God also has highly exalted him,
and given him a Name above every Name; that at the Name of Jesus every Knee
should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the
Earth; and that every Tongue should confess that Jesus is Lord, to the Glory of
God the Father. The Apostle does not say, that every Knee ought to bow at the
Name of Jesus, because he is the Supreme God; but because God has exalted him
above Men and Angels; because he has obtained (of God) a Name above every Name,
the most eminent and glorious Dignity that ever was. This is the true ground of
the Honor which is due to Christ. This St. Paul teaches; and this the
Unitarians profess to believe, and perform. 3. When we worship Christ, it is to
the Glory of God the Father, as the Apostle speaks. The Honor we pay to
Christ, is terminated in God: we worship him as God's Ambassador and Image. As
he who believes in him, believes in God also; so he who honors him, honors
God also.

2. Let us compare the Worship of Christ (the Reader will remember, we mean not
thereby a Supreme Worship) with the Worship of False Gods among Pagans, and of
Saints among Papists. Pagans were guilty of Idolatry; because, First they had
no Divine Command for such Worship: but even our Author confesses, there is
such a Command for the Worship of Christ. To worship Creatures without the
Warrant of God, is Usurpation on, and Contempt of God. Secondly, They
worshipped and served Creatures more than the Creator, as St. Paul says. They
set up an infinite number of Gods, who had been mere Men; and ascribed to them
such Power as did not belong to them, and such Worship as was infinitely above
them. They offered Sacrifices to them, consecrated Temples to their Honor,
prayed to them; in a word, they paid to them such Worship, as was terminated in
them, and so made True Gods of Men. But it is not so with the Worship of
Christ. We ascribe to him no other Power, but what we know from the Scriptures
God has bestowed on him; and no other Honor but what is proportionable to that
Power, to the Dignity of his Person, and what God himself commands us to pay
him. This may be applied to the Papists. Let them show us any Text of
Scripture, which obliges us to worship St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Francis. Were
they content to keep within the bounds of Respect and Honor, due to glorified
Saints, they should be guilty of no Fault. But to pray to them, as many do, as
Mediators both of Intercession and Merit, to dedicate Churches to them, to
kneel down before their Images and to their Images, nay to their vilest
Relics; this approaches too near to Idolatry. Our Author therefore mistakes,
when he says; The greatest hurt (on the Unitarian Hypothesis) seems to be, that
they (Pagans and Papists) lose their Labor, but according to these Principles
they do no Injury to God. What then? Is it all one, to worship Christ by God's
Appointment, and to worship False Gods and (Apocryphal) Saints, without any
Warrant from God? Is it all one, to pay to Christ such Honor as neither
exceeds his Power, nor is greater than his Dignity, and honor False Gods and
Saints, in such manner as exceeds both their Power and Merit? That, is
Obedience to God's Will; the Other, detestable Usurpation and Rebellion. I
conclude therefore, that the Unitarians by the Worship they pay to Christ,
cannot be said to justify or excuse Pagans or Papists. Which if it had not been
an invidious Charge, is so apparently False, that it would not have deserved
any notice.

And thus I have done with that part of the Doctor's Book, which I undertook to
answer. It may be, the Historian himself might, upon some Texts, and to some of
our Author's Objections, have either explained or defended himself, otherways
than is here done: and that we may, it seems, shortly see; unless Dr. Sherlock
thinks sit to own, that he desires it not. In the mean time, it may be the
Historian is satisfied; that in these Papers, I have done wrong neither to him,
nor to the Inviolable Truth of God. God be pleased to Inspire Christians, with
the Spirit that leads into all Truth; and with that Infallible Note of true
Disciples, to love one another, John 13. 35.

Now to him that is of Power, to establish us according to his Gospel, and the
preaching of Jesus Christ; to God only wise, be Glory through Jesus Christ for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

