THE REGAL Proto-Martyr; OR, The MEMORIAL of the MARTYRDOM OF Charles the First.

In a Sermon preached upon the first Fast of Public Appointment for it.

An Appendix to the GRAND CONSPIRACY.

By John Allington Rector of Vppingham.

Cui prodest scelus, is fecit. Medea Jasoni. LONDON, Printed by J. W. for W.
Gilbert, Bookseller at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1672.

To the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS TREVOR Knight and Baronet, and one of the
Honorable Order of the Knights of the BATH.
SIR,
FOr as much as the Period of the Grand Conspiracy came forth as the
First Fruits of my public gratitude, I could not let this Appendix walk abroad
without your cognizance; which I am therefore willing my self, and any thing of
mine should wear, because one Tongue is too little to tell the world what a
Patron I have had, and have; and the good God grant I may long have.

It is I confess an easy thing for me to say thus, and seriously it were an
ill thing in me to say less; for the greatest good that in this world I enjoy,
it came from your single Heart and free Hand.

Now after a Period, to talk of the Grand Conspiracy, may seem that I had done
before I had made an end. But truly speaking: The Subject of this Sermon, it is
the survey of that Guilt which the Grand Conspirators and their Abettors acted
and contracted before the other Sermons could have a being: So that this is but
a Label to the Crown, and an Appendix to the sad Story. The Drift of this only
is, to knock at every door, to see how much of this guilt may lie in every
bosom; not to upbraid any, but to exhort all, so to examine, that our Penitence
may be proportionable to our Failings. For,

Though He fell by Open Enemies, yet he was wounded in the House of his
Friends. For whilst they stood a far off, the diligent in mischief came up
close; whilst they were wary, the other were working: so that a Non obstans
lies at many a door, and a Non manifestans at as many. And rare is that
Subject, who in no measure was wanting to this Sacred Person. Let the Discourse
be your scrutiny; and the presentation of it, a fresh but a short
acknowledgment of his great Obligations for abundant Kindnesses heapt upon (My
most honored Patron!)

From my Study in Leomington Hastang, Nov. 13. 1671. Your humble, affectionate,
and most obliged Chaplain, John Allington.

To the Reader.
THis following Discourse it has made no have unto the Press; for it was
preached first, when first that sad Day was made Rubrical, (the Author then
being in that Zoar wherein the good God preserved him for better times.) It
since has been repeated in two Corporations, a City and a Town; in the one it
was censured thus, He came hither to make us guilty of the KINGS death! In the
other, It were well to be preached often, that men might become more sensible of
their latent guilt. Now I profess before the world, my intentions when I by the
mercies of God conceived it, and when at any time by his assistance I was
delivered of it, ever were to work upon my Auditory; and as far as in me lay to
prick the Heart, and wound that soul, which either by Thought, Word or Deed had
assisted that Grand Conspiracy.

For being I well know, Frustra praetereunt leges, quem non absolvit
Conscientia, that Laws vainly pass over and clear an Offender, whilst yet the
guilt lies upon the soul; my design was ever to make those who are conscious,
know, Though a suppressing and stifling of evidence may carry off a Malefactor;
and a Pardon may preserve a Murderer; though an Act of Indemnity may clear an
estate, and as to secular disturbances and to legal inflictions secure a man.
Yet such who before God stand guilty of Intrusions, violent Detentions,
Sacrilege, Blood, Rebellion, Schism, etc. These though they stand as recti in
curia, discharged in all Courts, freed from all legal molestations or vexatious
upbraiding; yet before their own Consciences (if not seared) can absolve or
speak peace unto them: they must repent them truly, and they must be most
heartily sorrowful for all these Mis-doings! yea if that recieved piece of
Divinity be true, Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur oblatum, the sin is
not remitted till the prey is restored; then, whoever have wronged any, they
must have Zachaeus care, where they have wronged to restore; and where wrongs
have been so highly acted, that more than all will not do it; then the
acknowledgment must needs be great, and the anguishes of soul as proportionable
as may be, to the anguishes of those who perished by their default, and were
not heard in their most just complaints and saddest exigencies.

In the following Discourse you shall find that good St. Paul, when he became a
Convert, and was now sensible of that far distant consent which mainly appears
by looking to the raiment of those who stoned Stephen! (being for ought we know
nor Accuser, nor witness, nor Executioner, nor Judge) He was for this consent
so extremely humbled; that he publicly confessed, (and with an holy
indignation against the fact) said, Ipse ego, When the blood of the Martyr
Stephen was shed, I also was standing by and consenting to his death, and kept
the raiment of them who slew him, Acts 22. Before Men, Brethren and Fathers,
before a great assembly he deplored his guilt. I was standing by and consenting
to his death! I kept the raiment of them who slew him!

I am content in Charity to hope that God has touched the souls of many who
were then well pleased when the blood of our Regal Martyr was shed! and I will
hope they may have bewailed their guilt: But it were much more conducing toward
their Remission and pardon of so great a crime, if they became as St. Paul was,
more public Penitents: For that such who have openly slandered the Footsteps
of Gods Anointed, and in public Meetings reviled and spoke against that holy
one. And as for instance. If any of the Orthodox of those times, having zeal
proportioned to his Interest, should have been so prodigiously wicked as to
pray, -- Lord now thou have destroyed the Lion, take away the Whelps also!
Whether such an one ought not as publicly to bewail his rashness, and as
openly to retract such an horrid saying, (then called praying) I leave it to a
Conscience and to a Casuist.

The following Sermon I may tell you, has been importunately desired; and now
many more may have it than did so. But I should wish none to give a penny for
it, or to lay an eye upon it, unless they will resolve to make a conscientious
reflection on it.

Sure I am it is not personal; and as sure that few persons shall read it, but
may find a share in it, and take just occasion, either to ask Gods pardon for
some omission; or to give God praise that made them so right hearted, as to be
delivered from that extensive Guilt which few escaped.

This Sermon cannot possibly make any guilty who are not; but possibly it may
show some to be so, who have not thought they were. And therefore, whereas upon
that solemn Day we are taught to pray, Lay not the Guilt of this Innocent
Blood, (the shedding whereof, nothing but the Blood of thy Son can expiate) lay
it not to the Charge of thy People of this Land, nor let it ever be required of
us, or our Posterity --

This Discourse (God so working) may occasion that this Prayer may be preferred
with more sense, heart and feeling than before it has been: which to his Glory
may the good God effect, it will glad and rejoice the heart of

Thy Friend in the Lord, J. A.
From my Study, Nov. 13. 1671.
THE REGAL Proto-Martyr.
Acts 8. part of the 1. Ver. And SAUL was consenting to his death.
IN these words are two eminent persons to be looked upon, Saul and Stephen; a
Martyr and a Persecutor: and indeed for as much a Veritas Odium, naked Truth
begets Armed Malice; no wonder to see the Persecutor at the heels of the
Martyr, and to read of his Death, who durst be so bold as to give witness to a
Dangerous and Loyal Truth.

Now concerning this Martyr some things are obviously to be observed, before we
can come exactly to the Text. 1. His Ordination, he was a person separate from
the people. 2. The Danger bound up in that profession. 3. The particular Truth
for the which he was put to death.

In the sixth Chapter you shall find a Motion made by the Apostles, verse. 3.
That seven men of honest report should be looked up, and be brought to them to
be put into Holy Orders; upon which Stephen being found a Man full of faith and
the Holy Ghost was one. Where by the way we may observe, that albeit S. Stephen
was a person of excellent endowments, a person abundantly gifted, a person full
of faith and the Holy Ghost! yet he did not assume or take an Holy Office on
him; nay the Congregation who looked him up and made choice on him, they had no
power to confer Orders, or to make him what they desired, for v. 6. They set
him before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid hands on him. So
that though the people looked him up, v. 3. it was the Apostles who appointed
him to his Business; though the people found him out, it was the Apostles who
sent him out. Manus ei imposuerunt, it was they that laid hands upon him! So
that the first thing observable concerning the Death of the glorious Martyr is,
he was an Ordained person, he was one who by Imposition of Apostolical Hands
and Prayer, was set apart and designed for holy use. The First Christian Martyr
was in Apostolical Holy Orders.

Secondly, The Danger involved and bound up in this profession; for whereas
before he lived secure and private, as a Christian or a Disciple; now called to
a public employment, and set apart for a peculiar and Holy use, he was not
long in his Office; for, for ought we read, his first Sermon cost him his life.
It Is true indeed he was chosen to minister unto Widows; Acts 6. 1. yet by his
employment it appears he was not chosen to that Ministration only; for Stephen
full of Faith and Power did great Wonders and Miracles among the people: verse.
8. yea, though there was an whole Assembly, an whole Assembly of Libertines
against him, he held not his peace, ver. 9. but so he disputed, and so spoke,
that as the Text implies, They dispacht him for it. An Argument to me, That
Holy Orders are not only Honos, but Onus; not only an advance to Honor, but
an expose to Hazard, insomuch that by how much God is pleased to take a man
nigher to himself, by so much the more is he, than another, exposed to the Hate
of the World, and bound to abide Death or Danger for him. For our Blessed Lord
and Master, he whose Manhood of all others was nighest in conjunction with the
Deity, he was (as I may say) therefore put into Holy Orders, therefore made a
Priest, that through the Eternal Spirit, he might offer himself to God: Heb. 9.
14. therefore was he made a Priest, that he might be a Sacrifice.

And indeed, whereas Christians in general are by St. Peter called An Holy
Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5. I know nothing that this can more safely and
seasonably admonish than to remember, if we are Priests, we must then
sacrifice, and sacrifice no less than our very selves to Gods glory! For so did
our pattern, so did our high Priest who is set before us; So did St. Stephen,
who though a Deacon and one in the lowest step of Holy Office, when he was put
to it he declined not, but to his Masters and to his Kings glory, he so spoke
that he died for it, For Saul was consenting to his death!

Lastly, To come up to the Text, let us see and observe what that particular
Truth was, and what that very Speech for which he was thus used; for the which
the Jews cried out, Run upon him, and stoned him to death: and you shall find
it was, only for accusing them, and sharply setting before them the Murder of
their King. For, Acts 7. 52. you shall find these words, Which of the Prophets
have not your Fathers persecuted, and they have slain them who showed before of
the coming of the just one, of whom yet have been now the Betrayers and the
Murderers.

When St. Stephen though full of the Holy Ghost, was so bold as to tell the
Rebellious Jews of their killing the Prophets, and of their putting to death
the Just one, it presently follows v. 53. When they heard these things they
were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth. When St.
Stephen was so bold as to tell them how they had (...) trayed their King, and
murdered the Lords Anointed! When he was so bold, as to set their so horrid
and so bloody Rebellion before their eyes, no wonder if they resolve to cut off
him, who had thus cut them; to break his head, who had broke their hearts.

It is often said, Many a man loves the Treason, who hates the Traitor. But here
we have a Treason, which the Traitors themselves endure not to hear on! For,

Acts 5. 40. The Counsel of State for the time being; even those whose hands
were imbrued in the blood of their King, they call and command the Apostles,
that they should not speak in the Name of Jesus. Jesus the King of the Jews;
his Murderers commanded that no mention be made of him; command even his own
Servants, even the nighest to him, not to do any thing, no not to speak in the
Kings Name! Yea, so did the memory of their Rebellion crucify their souls,
that witness St. Stephen they were ready to slay and to stone the Speaker: For,
having nothing to answer in Defense of their Rebellion, having nothing to
answer for their Murder of Gods Anointed! having nothing to keep off that
deadly stab which the charge of their killing the just one gave unto their very
souls, Acts 7. 57. They stop their ears, but with wide open mouths they ran
upon him; and to stop that mouth whose truth cut their hearts, for want of
arguments so silenced him with stones, that he died at their feet! of whose
death the Holy Ghost is pleased to take notice, and to record not only the
Actors, but a bare Consenter also, in these words, And Saul was consenting to
his death.

But what talk I of the Murder of a Deacon, upon a day solemnly set a part to
be humbled for the Murder of a King! my answer is, I find so nigh a
conjunction between Sacred Majesty and Holy Order; between Prince and Priest;
between Gods anointed to be Kings, and Gods anointed to be Prophets, that we
can scarce find the man who will wrong the one, but if occasion serve, he would
do as much for the other, and therefore we find them both equally shielded in
one verse, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm 105.
They who will harm the Prophets, they will not stick to arm against the
Anointed: They who killed the Just one, they made nothing of murdering his
Messengers: and indeed, in order to this horrid Murder, in order to the
betraying of our Just one, and the Lords Anointed, what was more previous than
the stoning of his Prophets, the sequestring, silencing and depriving from all
comforts of this life, who ever durst as did Stephen, magnify the Lords
Anointed, or did dare to say, They were his Betrrayers or his Murderers?

Indeed, between Deacon and King there is a great disproportion: Deacon the
lowest degree of Ministry, and King the superexcellent for Majesty: and yet the
same Kings who are sometime called Gods, they are also styled, Romans 13. 3.
(...), Gods Deacons too, that is, Gods selected and peculiar Servants: and thus
considered, St. Stephen and our Sovereign may very well admit a Parallel:

For,

Was S. Stephen, Acts 6. 5. a man full of Faiih and the Holy Ghost: such was
our Sovereign. Full of Faith, for it was in faith of a better, that he gave up
his earthly Crown. Full of the Holy Ghost, for the most envious cannot deny his
Meditations and Solitudes to be the undoubted Breathings of that Spirit!

Was St. Stephen endowed with such high parts and gifts that v. 10. They were
not able to resist the Wisdom, and the Spirit by which he spoke? Even so was it
with our Blessed Sovereign, or else we had never heard of An Ordinance for no
Addresses; nor, as himself speaks, had he been assailed with Armies instead of
Arguments: yea, when his cursed Conspirators, when those who sought his life,
and those who in order to it had declared him A Fool, one unfit to govern, when
they had divested him of all counsel, and sequestered him from all Advice, when
many, and the choicest of the pack were sent to him (as the Herodians to our
Savior to entrap and entangle him in his words:) they found him so qualified,
as the Book of God testifies of S. Stephen, That they were not able to resist
the Wisdom, and the Spirit by which he spoke: and therefore as St. Stephen was
confuted with stones, because they were not able to do it with Arguments: Even
so therefore was our Blessed Sovereign not permitted to speak against the High
Court of Justice! Therefore brought to his Scaffold, and therefore cut off;
because they were not able to resist his Wisdom! because they found he was no
less good than great, as they served St. Stephen, Acts 7. 58. even so they ran
upon him and cast him out of the City. Yea, the very circumstance of place,
whence those came who did this deed, that relates to St. Stephen too: for the
High Court of Justice, that pack of Miscreants which were sent to do this
Villainy, they came forth of St. Stephens Chapel.

Now being in Stephens Martyrdom, the Spirit of God is so severe, as to take
notice not only of those (who as I may say, sealed and signed his death) not
only of those who ran upon him, and were the actors in this Murder: but of a
very Accessory, of a stander by, of one who gave no vote, flung no stone, did
no hurt: being the Spirit of God takes notice of one who did only look to the
clothing of those that stoned him, verse. 58. One that did only look on and
like the thing: certainly we shall find Consenters as well as Actors are
mightily to be humbled for the sin of this day; Not only they who plotted, and
preached, and prepared the Murder; but those also who liked it when it was
done: Those who by any complacency or after act, or subscription avowed the
thing. All such are guilty of the Horrid Murder of this Day, or else vainly
did the Holy Pen observe what is our present Text, And Saul was consenting to
his death.

In, and about these Words we shall consider of these three Propositions.
First, a man may be guilty of that sin in which he was no actor, by being only
as Saul here stands recorded, A Consenter.

Secondly, a guilt may be postnate unto a fact, for after the stoning of St.
Stephen it is observed, and not before, that Saul was consenting to his death.

Lastly, Consent may contract so deep a guilt, that without confession and
contrition, it may hale the vengeance of an Actor upon the Consenters head.

First, A man may be guilty of that sin etc. Consent it is the conception, and
the first quickening of every sin; consent it is that which gives the first
being to every iniquity, insomuch that he who consents, though he never act
further, is an actual sinner before his God: Nam scelus intra se tantum qui
cogitat ultum.

And therefore said our Blessed Master, Matt. 5. 28. Whosoever looks on a
woman to lust after her, has committed adultery already with her in his heart.
He who has a wanton, a lascivious and an adulterat reflection upon a beauty;
he who looks, and lusts, though he never exchange a word, never touch, handle
or come nigh the woman; even this very consent, this very complacencie it is
Adultery in the eye of the most pure: For, says our Savior, (the son of a
Virgin) he has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

And as consent in the Concupiscible, even so consent in the Irascible it
contracts a like guilt: For, as he is an adulterer who looks and lusts,
though he never violate the chastity of the woman: even so a man may be guilty
of Murder, and yet never draw blood; a man may be a Manslayer, and yet never
harm or hurt a person: For the express determination and words of St. John are,
Whosoever hates his brother is a Murderer. 1 Jo. 3. 15.

Now if it be so, that consent is the window that first lets in the thief,
consent the pass by which the Destroyer enters into our Souls; if it be so,
that Consent makes us guilty even of the sin of others; for, if Consent
abstracted from all outward Action makes the whole Man guilty; if guilt takes
its rise, not from the Act, but from Consent, it is all a matter who Acts, for
who ever consents he is also guilty.

In the Beginning of Time, when the Devil first endeavored to bring sin into
the World, He took upon Him the form of a Serpent, Genesis 3. in that he spoke
unto the woman; told Her, God meant nothing less than what He said, That they
should die; yea, rather they should become as Gods; and all this, only to gain
a Consent; so that it was consent that brought Sin into the World, it was
Consent that made Eve a sinner; Consent that made Her guilty of the Devils
Machination.

On the other side; when our blessed Lord and Master come to Destroy the works
of the Devil; The Devil He could gain no Consent; and therefore though He set
before him, All the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them, yet says our
Savior, John 14. 30. The Prince of this world comes, and has Nothing in me.
Let the Devil and His Angels do all they can, they can get no ground, they can
have nothing in us, or any of us, but with consent only; so that, of all things
that are under our power; of all the Talents committed to our charge, we ought
to be more choice of none than of this we have now in Hand, Our Consent: It Is
this that makes us miserable; This, that makes us happy, it is this that makes
us virtuous, and it is this that makes us vicious; It Is this, that makes us
God's, and it is this that makes us the Devils.

'Twas Consent, that made the Devils suggestion become Eves sin, it was consent
that made Eve's entisement become Adam's Transgression; and it is consent that
makes every Tentation become our guilt; so that you see to very great purpose
it was here observed, that though Saul was not an Actor, yet He was a Consenter
to his death.

Whereas then the Business of this great Day is, to be Humbled before the great
God, for the foulest Murder (except that of the Son of God) that was ever read
on; it concerns every of us to lay Hand upon the Heart and as the Twelve did,
(when their King and Master foretold His Treachery) to say, Master, Is it I?
Math. 26. 22. It concerns every of us to consider how far we were toward the
guilt of this great Crime; How far either by way of Default or Consent, we have
drawn up, even to this Murder.

1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay Hands suddenly on no Man; neither be partaker of other Men's
sins. This exhortation of St. Paul, not only admonishes Timothy to take Heed
of sinning, by an overhasty, either Ordination or Absolution: But also to take
heed that He become not a Party, or partaker in other Men's sins.

Now the great sins which we are this Day (or at this Time) to recollect, it is
the Murder of God's Anointed, the betraying and butchering of our King; Now
this, though it was Paucorum Crimen, the abominable acting of some few; yet it
was Multorum Delictum, the Failance and the sin of too too many, and that upon
these Accounts.

1. In Respect of Acts Antecedent and going before.

2. In Respect of Acts Consequent and following after.

Upon both which, we shall find, Consent and Guilt, it will rise like a
Land-Flood, and carry almost all before it; so that albeit, few were those who
washed their Hands in His Blood, we shall find few also are those who are not
besprinkled with it.

First, Then let us consider what previous and antecedent Acts may involve a
Guilt in this Murder: I shall instance only in Two:

1. A Provocation of our God. 2. A Desertion of God's Anointed.
For both these are, as the School speaks, Volitum in Causa, a consequential
consent, or a consequential guilt.

First, It is a Consequential Consent and guilt to do that which provokes God
to inflict such a Judgment: so that in our provocation of God to permit this
Murder, we have contracted enough to call for our Tears: For, if gracious and
good Kings be the Blessings of God upon a People, certainly the Removing of
such must needs be upon a provocation, and nothing can be so, but our sin.

Amongst us Men, we justly account Him a partaker, who is a Provoker unto sin;
He that provokes a Man to Anger, provokes a Man to Drunkenness, provokes a Man
to Steal, he is doubtless a partaker even in his sin: Had Job cursed upon the
provocation and instigation of his Wife, She, as well as He had been guilt: Not
Amnon alone, but Jonadab who promoted and provoked was guilty in his lust, 2 Samuel 13. Now look what is the provoking of a Man to sin, proportionably the
same, is the provokeing of our God to Judgment: A sin undoubtedly, for only sin
can do it, and sin can do it, even to as sad a Judgment, as to permit the
Murder of a good, and a precious KING.

2 Samuel 12. When the Child gotten by David in Adultery was delivered, the Lord
sent him word, v. 14. That, Because thou have given Occasion to the Enemies of
the Lord to blaspheme, the Child that is born unto Thee shall surely die. The
sin of the Father it had an influence even upon the death of the Child; because
Thou have given occasion, therefore shall the Child die. And even so, because
we provoked the Lord, therefore did God suffer His Anointed to be thus smitten.
And indeed, the School very well observes, there is Volitum in Causa, as well
as Direct Voluntarium: There is an indirect consent, and a consequential
willing of a Thing, as well as a downright, and voluntary consent, insomuch
that many a Man gladly and willingly consents unto the cause, who perfectly
abhors and abominates the effect; and yet where there is an inseparable
coherence, He who directly wills the one, he does consequentially will the
other; As for instance, The Men of the first World, Genesis 6. 5. They did
directly will and consent unto those abominations and wickednesses for which
God threatened, yea and resolved to drown the world; But as to the Drowning of
the World, they gave no consent, nor had no will; But, for as much as they
willed that which necessarily brought on the other, therefore, they were
Volitum in Causa, They were the consequential willers of their own Ruin: For,
their sins provoked the Deluge, Genesis 18. 20. Even so, the Men of Sodom, they
had no will to have had Them and Theirs destroyed with Fire and Brimstone: But,
being they continued to Act and do that, whose cry clamored to Heaven for
vengeance, and for this Vengeance: Therefore even they were Volitum in Causa,
they were the consequential cause and provoker of their own destruction: And
this you shall find is gathered, even from the very language of God Himself,
for the Lord by his Prophet Rebuking Israel, Thus says, Why will you die, O
House of Israel? Alas! Israel had no mind, no will in the world to die; They
would never have given suffrage or consent to their own death; And yet, for as
much as they willed that, which would infallibly bring death upon them, God
lays their death even to their own charge, and makes their destruction an act
of their own will, saying, Why will ye die, O House of Israel.

Now, as the Men of the old World, the Deluge; as the Men of Sodom their Fire
and Brimstone; and as Israel their Destruction, so were all we the cause of the
Kings death, who continued to commit those sins, and to act those wickednesses,
for which God was resolved to deprive the Nation of so great an Happiness.

2 Chronicles. 35. We read how Josiah going out to Battle was slain before Necho
King of Egypt: Now Josiah was so good a King, so right-hearted toward his God,
so Religious, and so zealous of his Honor, that it is generally concluded, He
was slain not for His own, but for the sins of His People, insomuch that some
conceive Jeremiah made his Lamentations with Order unto him.

That Sovereign, whose Murder we this Day Commemorate, He was never so much
Charles le Grand, as He was le Bon. He was never so Great as he was Good, He was
(to say no more) as Gold tried in the Fire, exact and pure; or, as Saul for
height, even so, He for Piety was far above his Brethren: and yet even He could
not stand before His Enemies! The Lord went not out with His Armies, He fell,
as did good Josiah before the Uncircumcized: And why so? Was it for want of
Valor? or Prudence? or Skill in Feats of War? No, He had all these! what
then? Truly it was, because the Sins of His Party fought stronger against
Heaven, than their Arms could do against the Rebels! The loud Volly of Oaths
discharged against God Himself! The Drink Offerings of the Mighty! The Rapine,
Plunders, and abominable Exactions done in his Name! This made our King
miscarry, this prevented God, from going out with our Hosts; These Achans so
troubled our Israel, that as God the Son, King of the Jews, was smitten,
wounded and slain for the Transgressions of His People; Even so the
Transgressions of His People, the sin of his Three full, and flourishing
Kingdoms, these were the Provocations, and these a great cause, why God took
away so great a blessing, and delivered into Bloody Hands so innocent a KING.

1 Samuel 12. 25, If ye shall do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your
King. It is not said if ye and your King do wickedly, then shall both be
destroyed; but it is only said, If ye shall do wickedly, yet both ye and your
King shall be consumed.

Whence it clearly appears to me, that the provocation of a people, and the
sins of a Nation they may, and often have a great influence upon the death of a
King, and that a King may be taken away, not so much for his own, as for their
Transgressions.

And therefore I beseech you all in the name and fear of God; if it only be
that you may live peaceably and plentifully, and every man sit quietly under
his own vine, and comfortably eat the fruit of his own labors, let us
therefore forbear any longer to provoke our God: Forasmuch as swearing, and
whoring, and drinking, profane and ungodly Ryots; Forasmuch as doing wickedly
may again provoke God to consume both us and our King: let us upon this day of
solemn Humiliation and Fasting, for the glory of our God, for the safety of our
King, for that sad share which we contributed toward this so foul a murder:
let us sow in tears that we may reap in joy: let us henceforth abhor, at least
those sins which gave the Rebellious an advantage! those sins which gave
occasion to the Enemies of the Lord for to blaspheme and to say, the Kings
Friends they were only Libertines, Papists, Atheists, horrible Swearers, and
Blasphemers, Enemies to God and the power of Godliness.

I beseech you for Gods sake, that all who profess Loyalty, may profess piety;
that Fear God and honor the King may be as close in our hearts, as we find
they stand together in the Book of God; and then I am sure we shall ever
prevent this first guilt, the provoking of God to take away, or to permit the
murder of our King.

Secondly, A second consequential Consent, or previous disposition to the
destruction of Gods Anointed, it was The deserting of him. Non obstans, the
not preventing, the not bindring of it, whilst yet it was in our power. And
this is an undoubted way of contracting guilt from the sin of others: he who
hinders not what he may, and where he is bound, doubtless he is volitum in
causa, of what effect follows upon this culpable neglect. As for instance, he
who stands or sits before a window, through which the wind blows and the snow or
rain beats, if he will neither remove thence, nor pull to the cazement, he is
undoubtedly a consenter to his own wetting, and a consequential willer of his
own cold-taking: for he both might and ought to have prevented it. That Father
or Mother, who by a timely and seasonable correction might have kept their
children from lewd and vile courses, and have not endeavored it; such parents
they have a guilt even in their transgressions, even in the misdemeanors of
such children.

For, 1 Samuel 3. you shall find God threatens a judgment upon old Eli, because
his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not: because old Eli
hindered not when he might, the Lord imputes a portion of his sons sin even
unto him: Now to apply this to our present purpose.

First, Had the people of this Nation kept close and conscientiously to their
Allegiance and their Oaths, there had been no Rising; had they kept those
cazements as they were, close shut, the Tempest of War and the Storms of Blood
had never broken in; yea, had they clapped them to, when they first opened there
had been an end. For, (to speak in the phrase of our Royal Martyr) When the
Devil of Rebellion first turned himself into an Angel of Reformation: Whilst
yet the Religious Mask of the Godly Party had but one Presbyterian Face to
cover, the Vizard might easily have been knocked off, before numerous Faces, and
many Factions appeared under at first but one godly Hood, before the Prince of
Darkness transformed himself into an whole Firmament of New Lights, the King
(in the right sense) might have been secured: For at first what Elisha said to
his Servant, was with us most true; There was more for us than was against us,
more for than against the King. But with a Non Obstante; for not using the
means and power they had, for not preferring a public and Royal Interest
before their own; by omitting the duty, which Oaths and Allegiance obliged to,
we betrayed our Sovereign, and by not restraining and Helping when we might, we
became Volitum in Causa, even upon this account consequentially guilty even of
our Sovereign's Blood.

We cannot but know, how it was the common Allarm of every factious Trumpet,
the Vulgar Theme of every Rebellious Pulpit! Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of
the Lord, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they come not to
the Help of the Lord, to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty. Judge. 5. 23.

Now if our Adversaries Judges (to speak in their own words, and out of one of
their Catechisms) Neuters are Directly under that fearful Curse, which the
Angel of the Lord denounced against Merosh, Romans page 7. I say then, if they
who came not out and defended their Rebellious Cause; if the Mighty for not
fighting against the Almighty in the Cause of His Anointed, deserved a Curse,
and were (as they affirm) Directly under that fearful execration which the
Angel of the Lord denounced.

Certainly then a fortiori; Those who were wanting in a far better Cause; Those
who deserted their Sovereign, those who came not out to the Help of Him, whom
by the Oath of God they were bound to succor, those who to save their own
Penny, cared not to see him lose his Crown! These for not using the power and
means they had, though they did not spill, they betrayed his blood; and though
they were not direct Consenters, yet they were direct strengthners of their
Hands who did it.

Now if it be so, That the Son of Man, when in the Person of a King sitting
upon his Throne of rich Glory, He shall pass an everlasting curse upon the sins
of Omission, that is, upon such who Relieved him not, no not in His poorest
Members: if for not seeding the Hungry, for not clothing the Naked, for not
visiting the imprisoned, if for omitting Acts of Charity Christ shall Denounce
the sad Sentence of everlasting Fire; certainly then, Subjects omitting Acts of
Justice, Subjects not doing their bounden duties, Subjects neglecting the King
of Glory in his Chief, and most immediate Deputy, the Lords anointed: they have
a great deal of cause to fear, and grieve, and pray, that even this Grand
Omission, and this great failing may be forgiven to Them: For, he who hinders
not when he may, and when he is Bound, cannot but be guilty of the Blood he
might have saved, and of that sin, which he both should and might have
prevented. And therefore, whether we respect our Provocations of God Almighty
by our Personal misdoings, or the Omission of our Duty by our not doing, in
both respects the most of us have been consequential Consenters, and
contradicted guilt enough to be this day humbled, and beg Gods pardon, though
not for the Murder, yet for the slaughter of our King. And so I have done with
the first Proposition, to wit, How a Man may be guilty of that sin in which he
was no actor, by being (as you have heard) a consequential Consenter to it. We
shall now therefore pass to the Second.

II. That is, to prove and show, How a guilt may be postnate unto a Fact, for
after the stoning of St. Stephen it is observed, and not before, That Saul was
consenting to His Death.

In the last Verse of the preceding Chapter it is written, when St. Stephen had
kneeled down and prayed for his Enemies, He fell asleep, so that Dead he was
before these words were added, And Saul was consenting, etc.

Now, Two Ways I shall observe how Guilt may come in at the back Door, and be
postnate unto the Fact. 1. By applauding the Deed, by commending, liking and
joying in it. 2dly. By partaking in the Advantages, and by a Tacit Desire
rather the Act should be done, than they want the Benefit and the Rest they
have got by it.

First, He who applauds, commends, likes and joys in a foul Transaction, he is
a Consenter to it.

Qui laudat obscoenum, perpetrat illud. He who praises a piece of obscenity,
he acts it, says the Arabians. And indeed Consent and Commendation they are so
nigh Related, that we never heartily commend what we like not, and so alike,
are Consent and Liking, that they are not easily distinguished; for as He who
frowns, or turns his Ear from a seeming witty piece of lewdness, in so doing
checks it; even so He who laughs, and smiles, and seems pleased with it, so far
as he is pleased, so far he is a Consenter to it. And therefore St. Paul
condemns the impure Gnostiques even upon This account, that they were not only
vile themselves, but they also took pleasure in them that did such things, Romans
1. 32. And indeed St. Paul's sin here, according to the Original, it seems only
a complacency and a liking, (...), and therefore as in lust, even so it is in
point of Blood; He who applauds the Murder, He who is glad it is done, He who
praises and honors the Doers of it, (though he had no Hand in the doing of it)
has a Consenting Heart to the Deed done, and is in the Eye of the Just God,
Guilty of it! For indeed there is no Body joys, and praises, and is glad to
hear any Thing is done, but if he durst, even he himself would have done it.
Doubtless Saul in my Text, though casually he was only a Consenter, he could
as willingly have been an Aider or Assistant to St. Stephen's death.

In the Case of King Ahab and poor Naboth, we do not read that Ahab had any
intelligence or inckling given him of Jesabel's bloody design; all was acted
and done, the High Court of Justice had sped their villainy, and dispatched the
Innocent before he knew it; and yet for all that, the Prophet is sent to arrest
and charge him guilty of plain Murder, Occidisti, Thou have killed. Now I pray
how could he be guilty of a death he knew not of, of a Murder done altogether
unknown to him? Truly if you search the Story, you shall find it only was by a
postnate Consent, by a liking, and approving, and joying what Jesabel had done.
There is a Story of one Lucius Carpentus who having killed Nicanor, by running
him through, his Page who deadly hated him, after his Master had dispatched him,
he to show his well-liking of the fact, thrust in his Masters Sword deeper into
the dead Heart. Now though the Page could not possibly kill him again, yet he
by thus doing, and thus confirming and approving what his Master had done, he
became a Murderer as well as his Master.

It is very well known the Lord of Glory, Christ Jesus our Spiritual King, He
can die no more, Death can have no more Dominion over him, Heb. 6. 6. and yet
Saint Paul expressly says, They who fall away, that is, such as fall off from
the Faith of Him, They crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh: So that at
this very day to say as the Jews did and do, That Christ was an Impostor, that
He was a Deceiver, that He was justly arraigned, condemned, and crucified; This
is by a postnate Consent to render us guilty of his Blood, and to crucify
asresh the Lord of Glory: This is to Thrust the Nails into his Hands and Feet
again, this is (as the Page did his Masters Sword) to run the Soldiers Spear
into his Heart again!

Now as Ahab by approving what Jesabel had done; The Page by confirming what
his Master Carpentus had acted, the Apostates by owning and commending what the
Jews did; Are all by postnate Consents, guilty of the several Murders acted to
their Hands; even so, of the cruel and barbarous Murder of our King (our King
of most blessed and happy Memory) they must all be as was Saul to the Death of
Stephen, Consenters; who either rejoiced at his Death, applauded the deed, or
so far countenance the Villainy, as to slander the Foot steps of Gods anointed,
to justify his arraignment! or who dared in their Hearts to say He suffered as
a Tyrant, a Traitor, and a Murderer.

Psalm. 10. 3. The vulgar Latin thus renders it. Quoniam laudatur peccator in
Desideriis Animae suae, and iniquus benedicitur, etc. Because the sinner is
praised in the desires of his Soul, and the unjust Man is blessed, therefore is
God exasperated.

To call evil good, to praise the desires of the wicked, to bless the unjust,
this is a ready way to contract a share in their Iniquity.

Acts 12. 22. When Herod making a blasphemous Oration had the Peoples applause
for it; this their praise was a sinful consenting to, and an owning of his
Blasphemy.

Verse 3. The Jews being pleased that Herod killed James, by this became
involved in the blood of James: and Saul in my Text, by Countenancing the
Executioners, and such as did, became himself a guilty Consenter to St.
Stephens Death.

Those then, who when our blessed King was Murdered, stuck not to say, now was
our Achan, the troubler of Israel taken out of the way; those who to blind the
indisputable Villainy, Perjury and Treason of those desperately wicked, who
dared to Murder the Lords Anointed: Those (I say) who to palliate and justify
their abominations, laid all the Blood and Guilt and mischief upon the
Innocent, upon their suffering and Martyred King; those who cried him down, as
Caput Malignantium, the head of Tyranny! but cried up his Persecutors as the
Saints of the Earth! Those who laid His Honor in the Dust, but advanced theirs
to the Highest Heavens, those who did thus justify the wicked, trample upon
and condemn the righteous; they did more than Saul in my Text: for he only kept
what Clothes they had; but these, they clothed the Murderers with Majesty and
Honor, and therefore if Saul for suffering the Clothes of the Executioners to
lie at his feet was a Consenter to St. Stephens death: these who did dare to
trample upon their Dead Sovereign, and to put His Robes and Righteousness upon
the King-killers* those who did dare to call the Usurper, David; and his Son,
Solomon: their lawful Sovereign, Tarquin, or Charles Stewart! But the Seed of
the Rebellious, His Highness, the Joy of the Nation, and the Healer of our
Breaches! They must needs be deeper in guilt than was Saul, and therefore
Consenters, because such Countenancers of his death! amongst us Men, we doubt
not for to say, he who really intends, but is prevented for acting, is for all
that guilty of his designed mischief.

Those 40. who bound themselves under a Curse, not to eat or drink till they
had killed the Consenter in my Text, Acts 23. 12. til they had killed Paul,
though Paul was rescued, yet they were guilty; for they had already committed
Murder in their hearts. The Husbandmen who said among themselves -- This is
the Heir, come let us kill him? Math. 21. 28. They were guilty even from that
very moment; and doubtless that ungracious Son, Patrios qui inquirit in Annos
-- who wishes his Fathers death, that he may have his Lands, he has already
killed him as far as he dares.

Now as an Intention before the act, even so, a Complacency, and well-liking of
the Thing done, are proportionable guilts, both Consenters, one to the doing,
the other to the deed done; both guilty before the just God. They who wished
the Kings death, but did nothing toward it; They who were glad it was done, but
had no hand in doing of it, In Uno Tertio Convenient, they both meet in this
guilt, they are Consenters to his death.

Acts 3. 15. Though the people of the Jews did no more But only consent unto
the Sentence and Judgment of their Magistrates, St. Peter charge the whole
Nation, saying, Authorem Vitae interfecistis, Ye have killed the Prince of Life.

After his Sentence and Condemnation, some (who perchance were not at his
Trial) were at his Passion or Execution. Now if they who gave No consent toward
his death, did, whilst yet dying, or dead, revile, mock or deride him, if they
were in their number who when he was dead, said to Pilate, Sir, This Impostor,
or this Deceiver, said thus or thus; This derision, this scornful joy, and this
reviling of him dead, made them also Consenters, and guilty of his death.

Those then, whose foul Hearts have yet an evil Eye, those who call Murderers,
Martyrs; and Unrighteous Judges, The Beloved of the Lord! Those who love to
detract, and to hear Him Lessened who was the greatest Loss that ever Our Three
Kingdoms suffered! Such, because they cannot wash their Hands in innocence,
they ought to wash their Hearts in penitence; for what Subject soever does not
perfectly abhor, he is in some measure a liker, and and so a kind of Consenter
to his death; either by applauding the Doers, or by a tacit commending, liking,
and joying in the deed.

Lastly, As by applauding the Actors, commending, liking, or joying in the Act,
there is a culpable Consent contracted, Numb. 16. 26. even so by partaking in
the Advantages, in the Rapine and ill-gotten goods issuing from that death,
there is a sinful and wicked Consent involved. Cui prodest scelus is fecit.

1 Kings 21. When Jesabel had dispatched poor Naboth, had Ahab abhorred the
Vineyard, had Ahab took no possession, had not Ahab entered upon his
Inheritance, we might then have justly thought Naboths death had been wholly
Jesabels, not at all his will. But when we find that he who was Sick while
Naboth lived, was instantly Recovered when Naboth was dead; when we find how
that Ahab as to an Inheritance new fallen, hastens to possess what Blood and
Murder gave him Title to: This is a clear demonstration his content was full,
and he must needs be a Consenter to his death.

In the crucifying and murdering of the Son of God, the first Motive to a
Consult or Consent, it was the Inheritance, Matthew. 21. 28. This is the Heir,
let us kill him that the Inheritance may be ours. Now as he who kills for an
Inheritance, continues on him the guilt of that Blood so long as he enjoys
that Inheritance, that being the design and complement of his Murder. Even so,
Qui Ratum habet factum, He who approves a Murder done in his Name, and
manifests that approbation by sharing in the prey, and the advantages of that
Murder, he by Ratification makes the deed his own; and as often as he makes a
beneficial use of that Blood, Blood touches Blood, and he is a Consenter in
that Blood.

Now the Murder which at This Time we are to be humbled for, the execrable
Beheading of Gods Anointed, it was done in Our Name, the Cursed and Illegal
Indictment it was drawn up in the Name of The People of England. Now if in Law,
Qui ratum habet factum Mandanti aequiparatur. If he who approves a mischief
done in his Name, and for his Interest, is looked upon as a Commander of it:
Certainly then whosoever has not disowned, or is so far from disowning, that
he shall make a beneficial and glad use of this Murder, he thereby so
ratifies, that he owns the Mischief, and as Ahab at Naboths death, is very well
pleased and content the deed was done.

Amongst us men we cannot measure Intentions but only by outward proofs; but
the Seer of all Secrets, He who shall judge the World even for the abstrusest
Crimes, He shall judge according to the Bosom, and the hidden Influence,
according to those likings and thoughts of heart which we have, but perchance
fear or shame to discover.

As for instance, They who would rather a King should lose his Head, than they
the Crown Land; lose all His Majesty and Honor, than they their present
Justiceship and Power; they who would rather the Son of God should be crucified
a fresh, than they part with their sins: Such in the sight of our Just and
All-seeing God, they are liable to these deaths, and shall be sadly accountable
for the guilt of them.

It is not yet so long, but we may very well remember those who did this foul
deed, they made it their work to draw in as many Consenters as possible. For,
first there was a Subscription, then there was an Engagement, then a
Recognition, all tending to the Ratification of this Murder. A Sanhedrim or
Council there was of Forty, a Readmission to the House; but none might have
this Privilege or Honor, but he must first subscribe; places of Trust,
Pensions, other men's good Livings, Promotions, and Offices of profit, none
might have without an Engagement against King and Lords: Yea the Capital Head
of this Mischief, He for whose Rise the King was Ruined, must have a
Recognition.

Now put the Case thus. Suppose the Great Sultan, the Grand Seignior, the Turk,
had made a Conquest of this Nation, and would admit no Man to any place of
Trust or Profit, no, nor to enjoy his own, unless he would subscribe that the
Jews did well in putting their King and Sovereign to Death! I beseech you lay
your hands upon your hearts, and seriously judge, if this subscription were not
(let the mental Reservation be what it may) a sensible Ratification, or a
Consenting to his Death.

Now if so, how shall they avoid, the being at least seeming Consenters to the
death and blood of our dread blessed Sovereign, who merely to feed their
ambition, and to become what they were never Bred nor Born to, Lords over their
Brethren, and Controulers of all about them, subscribed the guilt, and greedily
shared, either in the power, authority, or revenue, which was all his; for if
we justly charge the Pope for being a guilty Consenter to stews and
Brothel-houses, because he takes a Salary and Revenue from them; or, if we
justly say, they who eat of the Sacrifice, though they never come at the
Shrine, are guilty Consenters to the Idolatry! certainly in like and equitable
proportion, those who have been partakers in any of the Royal Ruins! Those who
have cemented their Fortunes with the Kings Blood, and have secretly deprecated
and prayed against the Return of any of His; these, though they may and have
avoided the Law, they have yet a God to reckon with, before whom such a
Consenter shall not dare to plead net guilty, but how deep in guilt that must
be our last considerable, in which I promised to show.

III. Consent may contract so deep a guilt, that without hearty confession, and
an unfeigned contrition, it may hale the vengeance of an actor upon the
Consenters head.

The Senses, the Members, and all the Natural actions and performances of the
Body, they are indeterminately considered indifferent; they are in themselves
nor good nor evil, it is our consent that makes them morally all they are, Romans
6. It Is our consent that makes our members, as St. Paul speaks, servants either
to uncleanness or holiness; The eye of man it may be the instrument either of
admiration or of lust; yea, the very heart it self it may be the seat, either
of Charity or Uncharitableness.

If so be then we would apprehend how our state stands in Foro Interno, in the
Court of Conscience and the eye of God, we must begin at Heart, and look within.

David a good King could tell us, he had Subjects, the Words of whose Mouth
were smoother than Butter, Psalm. 55. 21, even then, when War was at the Heart;
their words were smoother than Oil, yet were they drawn Swords.

Men may appear, (and our Martyred King sadly found it so) like Saints and
Angels, talking of nothing, but of Reformation, Religion in Purity, and the
power of godliness; when God knows within, their hearts were full of malice;
God not in all their thoughts, nor did they aim at any thing more, than
Interest and Destruction!

Now albeit it so is, that Figg-leaves, and Sheeps clothing may blind the Eyes
of Men, God will not, God cannot be so mocked! Look what we are at heart, look
what we are within, look what is consented to agreed on and concluded in the
most secret Recesses of the Soul, by that God judges, and to that we shall
stand or fall.

Actus exterior nihil Malitiae addit interiori. The School well observes,
though the outward act may be the Executioner, it cannot be the Author of any
more mischief than what in the Soul is contrived and consented to; so that
consent is a complete guilt, and therefore I have showed you, Consent may make
an Adulterer, and yet the body, not touch a Woman; Malice may make a Murderer,
and yet the hand do no Violence; Soul may be guilty of the death of Stephen,
and throw never a stone at him.

The Point then is, how deep a guilt consent may be, and we shall find it deep
enough to carry an impenitent soul to eternal sorrows. Psalm. 50. 18. When thou
saw a Thief then thou consentest with him. To consent but to a piece of
Theevery; it is guilt enough, yea guilt in such a measure, that it is numbered
among those sins, for the which God threatens to Tear in Pieces without
Deliverance: Now if a consent in theft may amount to this, certainly a consent
in blood, and that blood heightened by the greatest circumstances incident to
Blood, to wit, Majesty and Innocence! A consent (I say) in the shedding of such
blood, it must needs be aggravated, and indeed cannot be extenuated, but by the
weakness, and the little measures of consent.

1 Epist. of St. John, chapter 3. v. 15. The beloved Disciple had no sooner said,
Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer; But then he immediately adds, and
no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him.

No Murderer. A learned Neoterick well upon that place observes Murder is
committed -- Non tantum occident is Manu, sed etiam odient is Animo -- Homing
n^^ only by the Hand, but by the Mind; so that even a mental Murderer; a
consenter, but no acter: a willer, but no doe^: he may be even for it in the
state of damnation! a Person in whom (he so continuing) the hope of Eternal
Life is not. Evidence enough that Consent alone may involve in a deep guilt.

What then Remains? Truly this only, that where consent Once was, Contrition
may for ever be.

Saul in my Text, (whilst yet Saul, whilst yet a Persecuter) he made nothing of
consenting, no not of putting a Saint to Death. But when he became a Convert,
one of the first signal Testimonies he gives, is, the confession of his guilt
contracted even at St. Stephens death.

Acts 22. 20. Lord, when the Blood of thy Martyr* Stephen was shed, I also was
standing by and consenting to his Death, and kept the Raiment of them that slew
him. When of a Saul he became a Paul, when his Soul was softened, and his Heart
changed, behold him Vir Dolorum, a Man of Sorrows; a Man whose very Soul is
troubled for looking on, for standing by, for consenting, yea for that little
countenance he gave in keeping the Raiment of them that stoned him. How much
then, in the Name of God, ought every of us to be humbled and grieved for the
Provocations by which we have moved God to permit this Villainy! For our not
doing in time what might have stopped this Blood! For applauding the Doers! For
liking the Deed! Or when for our own Interest and Advantage we have secretly
rather wished it so than otherwise! Did Time or Place serve, I might now do
well to enforce this Argument from a Bare Consent, to such a Full Consent as
includes and implies Plotting, Counselling, Commanding, Contributing and
Acting. For if a weak postnate and bare Consent may (as ye have heard) contract
a guilt, certainly then as Consents have been heightened, so must needs the
guilt. Those who have made it their work to prepare the way for so foul a
Murder, those who preached and printed down their King for a Madman or a
Fool, comparing him to a Pilot whose endeavor was to sink his Ship, and to a
General who planted his Ordinance against his own Army, that so he might be (as
he was) first disarmed. Those who made it their work to run about with
slanders, and spread lying disparagements throughout the Nation, only to
weaken the Repute, and make their King despicable. Those who to save
themselves, laid all their own guilt upon his shoulders. And those, who when He
had for peace-sake owned the Debts which he never contracted, and was content
to preface a Treaty of Peace with his own Infamy: Those I say who took this
advantage for a Confession, and grounded all their closer Machinations of his
Death upon this Bottom.

These, and every of these, are Actors in so sad a guilt, that it behooves such,
not only as did David (for the murdering of a Subject only) go mourning all
the day long; but they ought to do so all their lives long, praying and praying
again, yea they ought to importune others to pray both with them and for them,
that their foul Hearts may happily be cleansed in That KINGS Blood which is
only able to wash off This Kings Blood.

In a word to close all. It is observed of St. Paul, that after he became a
Convert, and of the Right Side, after he was truly sensible of the Dishonor
done to his King then in glory; None of all his most Faithful Adherents out-did
him in Pains and Diligence for the Recovery and Advance of the Glory of his
Master: for now we find him at that pitch, that he professes to value Nothing
like to it, saying, God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 14. and, I determined not to know any thing among
you, save Jesus Christ and Him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2.

All then I shall add, is, That we also express our Penitence, as St. Paul did,
by a most loyal and double diligence, that so our King who dyed a Martyr, may
be found a Prophet also, for in those excellent Meditations (fit to be read and
perused upon this Day) He tells his Son* His penitent Rebels, Those that Repent
of any Defects in their Duties toward him, them should he find truly zealous to
repay with Interest their Loyalty and Love: and the good God grant they may;
and that not only they, but even all we, duly considering whose Authority the
King has, may so faithfully serve, and humbly obey him in God, and for God,
that God may be a God of peace to us, and to our Children, even from Generation
to Generation!

These, O God, and all other Blessings in thy Wisdom known expedient even for
our Eternal Welfare, we humbly beg, even for His sake who was a King murdered
by His Subjects, even Jesus Christ the Righteous: To whom with Thee and the
Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory now and for ever. AMEN.

Deo soli sit omnis gloria.
FINIS.

