REMARKS UPON The Ecclesiastical History OF THE Ancient Churches OF THE
ALBIGENSES.

By PETER ALLIX, D. D. Treasurer of the Church of Sarum.

IMPRIMATUR. August 3. 1691. Z. Isham, R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCII.

TO THE QUEEN.
May it please your Majesty,
THIS Defense of the Albigenses, the Ancient and Illustrious Confessors, who
some Ages ago enlightened the Southern Parts of France, is laid down at your
Majesty's Feet for Your Protection, as well as their Successors do now fly into
your Dominions for Relief. That Charity which moves your Majesty to protect
them by your Gracious Favor, and support them by your Royal Bounty, makes me
presume to offer this Historical Apology to your Sacred Majesty.

Their Faith was in most things the same with that which our Reformers taught
in opposition to the Church of Rome; and after all the Endeavors that have
been used to blacken them by the most horrid Calumnies, as well as to destroy
them by the cruellest Inquisitions and Croisades, the Innocence of their Lives,
and the Exemplariness of their Deaths, makes them to be justly gloried in as
the true Authors of the Reformation.

It was from them that this Church (now so happy in your Majesty) received the
first Beams of that heavenly Light, which it now enjoys, and which it of late
maintained with such vast Advantages, that it is deservedly esteemed the chief
Body, as well as the justest Glory, of the whole Reformation. The Persecutions
of those earliest Restorers of the Doctrine of Jesus Chirst, drove them out of
their Country, and forced many to fly into this Kingdom for shelter, who
brought with them the first Seeds of those Truths which have since yielded so
plentiful an Increase. There is nothing in this History that will either strike
or charm. Those true Disciples of their crucified Master, were considerable for
nothing but the Purity of their Doctrine, the Innocence of their Lives, and the
Patience as well as the Constancy of their Sufferings. But the Glories of this
World which surround your Majesty, do not darken or lessen in your Esteem these
distinguishing Characters of the Religion of Christ our Savior, and of those
his Suffering Members, in whose Afflictions you are pleased to take so great a
share, that you do very much diminish their own sense of them, and make them so
much the easier by those vast Supports you give them.

May that God who has raised up your Majesty to support Religion, and protect
its Confessors in their lowest Circumstances, and who has so miraculously
preserved and prospered the King and your Majesty in Opposition to the Enemies
and Persecutors of his Truth, still pour down the richest of his Blessings upon
your Majesty's; May You perfect what You have so gloriously begun; May You be
Long, Great and Happy here, and infinitely Greater and Happier for ever. These
are the daily Wishes and most earnest Prayers of,

May it please your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Dutiful, most Faithful, and
most Obedient Subject, PETER ALLIX.

THE PREFACE.
IT was no hard matter for us to justify the Waldenses from the Accusation of
Schism, which the Bishop of Meaux thought fit to charge upon them; for by
showing the Antiquity, Purity, and Succession of those Churches, I have made it
appear, that what the Bishop calls Schism, ought in Justice to be looked upon
as a vigorous Opposition to the false Worship and Usurpations of the Romish
Faction; and by consequence, that there is no more reason to call the Waldenses
Schismatics, because of their refusing Subjection to the Pope, and rejecting
the Errors of the Church of Rome, than there is to call the Church of England
Schismatical for the same Reasons.

But it is so long since the heads of the Church of Rome have founded their
Design of an Universal Monarchy, and so have fitted their Style to their
Pretensions, that it is now become a very familiar thing with them, to treat
those as Rebels and Schismatics, who will not submit to their Authority: so
that we need not wonder if they, who have espoused the Interest of the Church
of Rome, and who defend her against the Protestants, do boldly charge those
with Schism against whom they write, without giving themselves the trouble of
proving their Charge.

Nay, perhaps we are to think our selves obliged to the Bishop of Meaux, who
raising himself a little above the common Method of the Doctors of his own
Communion, has limited himself to accuse the Waldenses of Schism only, whereas
he might with as much reason, have charged them with Heresy, if he had followed
the Writers of Controversy of his own Party, or the Legends of the Saints of
his Communion. For it is certain, that the Writers of Controversy in the Church
of Rome, and those who have writ the Lives of those Inquisitors that have been
canonized, have never looked upon the Waldenses as any other than Manichees; so
thoroughly rooted is the Spirit of Calumny in the Members of that Church: the
Character of Father of Lies, being very necessary to support that of Murderer
honorably, whereof they have been in Possession so very long.

I cannot tell whether the Bishop of Meaux has forgiven himself for his
Tenderness toward the Waldenses, whom he only treats as Schismatics. For
seeing one Day informs another, and that thus Men come to refine their Notions
to the utmost, who knows but the Bishop, who when he writ his Book of
Variations, had only obscurely hinted, that to accuse the Pope of being
Antichrist, was a Character of Manicheism; who knows, I say, but that now he
sees so clearly, that the Waldenses have formally declared that the Pope is
Antichrist, he will not anew make them Manichees once more, the better to
accommodate himself with the Maxims of his New System? If he should not do it
himself, to avoid the shame of being guilty of a Variation, at least it is very
obvious to believe, that some of those who are engaged with him in the same
Cause, will not fail of taking that Course; and therefore I am glad I have
prevented him, by showing, that the Waldenses were no Manichees, though they
took the Pope to be Antichrist.

Be it as it will, I hope it will not be harder for us to justify the
Albigenses from the Accusations brought against them by the Bishop of Meaux. He
uses his utmost Endeavors to maintain a most abominable Calumny raised by his
Predecessors, and strives, by representing the Albigenses as a People who had
revived the Errors of the Manichees, to make them equally odious to those of
the Church of Rome, and the Protestants of France, whom his Violence, together
with that of his Colleagues, have forced to take upon them the external
Profession of Popery.

The Jews built the Tombs of those Prophets, whom their Fathers slew; process
of Time having cured them of their Fury, that enraged their Forefathers against
the Ambassadors of Heaven. Those of the Church of Rome only, know not what it
is to disown the Rage and Slanders of their Predecessors. She has accused the
Albigenses of Manicheism, and has done it on purpose to inspire her Votaries
with a barbarous Cruelty, against a People, who refused to bear the Yoke of her
Tyranny: And it is to please her, that her Ministers must still go on to tear
the Memory of those faithful Servants of God, for the utter Extirpation of whom
she formerly armed the Hands of all the furious Zealots of her Communion.

And as in handling the History of the Waldenses, I thought needful for the
Satisfaction of the Reader, to make some Remarks on their Original, their
Succession, their Separation from the Church of Rome, and their Ministry; so I
intend now to follow the same Method exactly in these Observations on the
History of the Albigenses; and I hope this will be equally useful to show what
care God has taken to preserve these other illustrious Witnesses of his Truth,
notwithstanding all those Corruptions that overspread the Churches of the West.

I have set down the Character of the Manichees, both Ancient and Modern, in my
Remarks upon the History of the Churches of Piedmont, so fully, that it will
not be necessary to repeat what I say there in this Treatise.

1. Because it is certain, that it was rather Humor in the Bishop of Meaux,
that he did not accuse them of Manicheism, than any due regard to Truth, the
Waldenses having been as much accused of Manicheism, as the Albigenses; neither
are there any more solid Proofs to convict the Albigenses of those Errors, than
the Waldenses.

2. Because this new Hypothesis of the Bishop of Meaux, wherein he asserts,
that to accuse the Pope of being Antichrist, is a Character of Manicheism, is
so excessively ridiculous, that it is hard to guess, how even the Bishop
himself, could ever give Entertainment to it.

It is a very surprising thing to see the Bishop maintain, in his new
Commentary upon the Revelation, that the Prophecies of St. John concerning
Antichrist, were actually accomplished above 1200 Years since. Antichrist then
must have made his escape in the Crowd, without being at all perceived; for the
greatest Lights of the Church, and those who had their Eyes most open to
discover him, never perceived any thing of all this. Vega and Ribera, who have
written on the Revelations with as much Learning as the Bishop of Meaux, were
never able to make any Discovery in ancient History that could be applicable to
the Apocalypse; and all the Romish Writers of Controversy, must have been a
Company of Asses, not to stumble upon so easy an Answer, which would eternally
have stopped the Mouths of the Protestants in so ticklish and tender a Point.

But it is no matter, since two Protestant Authors, and those of the first Rank
too, Grotius and Hammond, have handed this Notion to the Bishop: it being very
probable, that the Bishop did for this Reason, hinder the Clergy from putting
the Works of Grotius in the Catalogue of Books, which they forbad a little
before the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes: and he would have been as civil
to Dr. Hammond too, if his Commentary upon the New Testament had been known to
him, any where else than in Pool's Synopsis. And really these great Men very
well deserved, that a particular Regard should be had to them; their Mistake in
the point of Antichrist having proved as advantageous to the Church of Rome, as
their learned Works can be profitable to the Protestants.

But it is yet a more surprising thing to see the Bishop make this Charge of
the Albigenses against the Pope, a Character of their being Manichees, which
none that have ever writ against them before, have taken the least notice of.

Whatever the Success may be of so groundless a Charge, I shall make it appear,
that the Bishop of Meaux could not accuse the Albigenses, without making great
Numbers of his best Catholics suspected, and Abettors of the Manicheism of the
Albigenses in this Point.

I thought it was my Duty to clear Wicklef and his Disciples from the Slanders
cast upon them by the Bishop of Meaux: I know very well, that he has done
nothing, but repeat the old Calumnies wherewith the Papists formerly
endeavored to blacken that great Man, without taking the least notice of the
Apologies that have been made in his behalf. But either Men must resolve never
to write against these Gentlemen, or be content to undergo the Drudgery of
repeating publicly those solid Answers that have been returned to their
Accusations before; which the Writers of the Romish Party always think fit to
dissemble.

I hope however, that seeing the Matter I undertake to treat of, naturally
engaged me to take notice of great Numbers of Matters of Fact, which were
necessary to be examined toward the clearing of this Subject; and that the
Malice and Cruelty of the Enemies of these ancient Christians have robbed us of
what might be most material for their Justification: the Reader will not
expect, I should put these Remarks into any other form, than that in which I
wrote my Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Churches of Piedmont.
For I could neither write a continued History, nor dispense with the
Examination of several Matters of Fact, which could not be cleared so well as
they ought, without some critical Enquiries, that will be unpleasant to all
those who search for any thing else but Truth. I have confined my self here
entirely to the enquiry after, and illustration of that alone; and I am
persuaded, that those who will take the pains to weigh what I have said in
these following Sheets with care, will be of the same Opinion. And I heartily
wish, that it may triumph over Falsehood, and Innocence prevail against all the
Assaults of Obloquy and Slander.

CORRIGENDA.
THe Reader is desired to make Allowances for these Alterations in the first
100 Pages; because the Publisher had not the Original French Copy till those
Sheets were wrought off; and he thinks, that all Men will sooner excuse him for
annexing them to the Preface, where they may appear not so beautiful, than if
he should have suffered them to pass unregarded, since that might have led the
Reader into Mistakes, and at last reflected upon himself. He says this the more
willingly, because he is confident that no Man will charge the Author with it
in the least, since his Unacquaintedness with our Language, easily justifies
him from any manner of Imputation upon that Account.

Page 6. Line 20. read Gauls, which they remained. p. 7. l. 21. for Photinus r.
Pothinus. p. 10. l. penult, r. by Feuardentius. p. 19. l. 31. r. preserved us
one of his Books. p. 24. l. 24. r. trusting Chastity with any. p. 27. l. 20. r.
Pope Syricius to Hymerius. p. 30. l. 1. r. But the pleasantest thing of all is,
that St. Jerome. -- l. 11. f. Deum r. Diem. p. 31. l. 11. for Deo read alio. p.
33. l. 22. r. Ecclesiae Catholicae, cap. 34. p. 37. l. 24. r. being ill
advised. p. 39. l. 7. from the bottom, for That great Emperor, r. Maximus the
Emperor.

Page 47. l. 19. after mentem, add, Nam taliter ferme omnes agunt, ut eos non
tam putes antea poenitentiam criminum egisse, quam postea ipsius poenitentiae
poenitere: nec tam prius poenituisse quod male vixerint, quam postea quod se
promiserint been esse victuros: Novum prorsus conversionis genus! licita non
faciunt, and illicita committunt. Temperant a concubitu, and non temperant a
rapina. -- Quid agis stultae persuasio? Peccata interdixit Deus non Matrimonia;
non convenient studiis vestris sactae vestra: non debetis esse amici criminum,
qui dicitis vos sectatores esse virtutum. Who under a show of Religion, are
Slaves to the Vices of this World; who having taken upon themselves a Title of
Holiness, after the Reproaches and Scandals of former Crimes, do not alter
their Lives by a new Conversation, but change their Names by a new Profession;
and thinking that the Sum of the Worship of God lies more in their Clothes than
their Actions, they have only changed their Garments, not their Minds: for they
do almost all things, etc.

P. 62. l. 4. from bott. for the Prayer r. Prayers. p. 69. l. 3. r. use of
again. p. 70. l. 4. r. find solved in.

P. 78. l. 32. once mentioned should be in Italick. p. 81. l. 19. from
concerning Expositors to which sort of Writings, must be struck out; and these
Words put in; The blessed Father Augustine has told us, that we ought to have
quite another Opinion of Expositions, than that which you hold; who in his Book
against Faustas the Manichee, speaks not only of those which have been blamed
by Learned Men, but also of those which have been approved of, after this
manner. Which sort of Writings, etc. P. 88. l. 11. dele giving that account of.
p. 113. l. 18. r. continual. p. 141. l. 5. dele of. p. 156. l. 18. f. Hours r.
Times. p. 180. l. 7. r. the conduct. p. 183. l. 13. r. Heresies. p. 206. col.
1. l. 17. for Anglica, which seems to be a Mistake either in the Copy, or in
the Original MS. r. Angelica. -- l. 26. f. sine r. sive. p. 208. col. 1. l. 5.
f. enim r. eum. p. 227. l. 15. dele,. P. 248. l. 10. r. Stere of ****

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. COncerning the Original of the Churches of Gallia Narbonensis and
Aquitain, Page 1 CHAP. II. The Faith of the Church of the Gauls in the Second
Century, Page 7 CHAP. III. The Faith of Gallia Aquitanica, and Narbonensis, in
the Fourth Century, Page 14 CHAP. IV. An Examination of the Opinions of
Vigilantius, Page 21 CHAP. V. The State of the Churches of Aquitain and Narbon
in the Fifth Century, Page 35 CHAP. VI. The State of these Diocesses in the
Sixth Century, Page 53 CHAP. VII. The State of the Diocesses of Aquitain, and
Narbon, in the Seventh Century. Page 60 CHAP. VIII. The Opinion of the Churches
of Aquitain and Narbon in the Eighth Century, Page 72 CHAP. IX. The Faith of
the Churches of Aquitain and Narbon, in the Ninth Century, Page 79 CHAP. X. The
State of these Diocesses in the Tenth Century, Page 89 CHAP. XI. The Beginning
of the Manichees in Aquitain, and the State of those Churches as to Religion in
that Age, Page 95 CHAP. XII. That these Diocesses continued independent of the
Popes, until the Beginning of the Twelfth Century, Page 102 CHAP. XIII. Of the
Opposition that was made by a Part of these Churches, to the Attempts of the
Popes, and of their Separation from the Communion of Rome before Peter Waldo,
Page 112 CHAP. XIV. Of the Opinions of Peter de Bruis, and Henry, and their
Disciples, and whether they were Manichees or not, Page 121 CHAP. XV. That it
does not appear from the Conference of Alby, that the Albigenses were
Manichees, Page 131 CHAP. XVI. The Albigenses justified by a Conference,
whereof we have an Account written by Bernard of Foncaud, Page 140 CHAP. XVII.
The Calumnies raised against the Albigenses, refuted by the Conference at
Montreal, Page 153 CHAP. XVIII. Reflections on the Convictions of Manicheism,
which were said to be proved upon the Albigenses, Page 160 CHAP. XIX. Whether
the Albigenses were Manichees, because they accused the Pope of being the
Antichrist, Page 173 CHAP. XX. Of the Morals of the Albigenses, and of their
Ecclesiastical Government, Page 180 CHAP. XXI. Concerning the Persecutions
which the Albigenses have suffered from the Pope and his Party, Page 190 CHAP.
XXII. That the Doctrine of the Albigenses spread it self in England, and
continued there till the time of the Reformation, Page 201 The Petition of the
LOLLARDS, Page 205 CHAP. XXIII. Of the Doctrine of Wicklef and his Disciples,
in England, Page 222 CHAP. XXIV. Of the Calumnies that have been unjustly
charged upon Wicklef by the Papists, Page 227 CHAP. XXV. That the Doctrine of
the Albigenses was propagated in Spain, and that it continued there till the
Reformation, Page 237 CONCLUSION, Page 245 Extracts of several Trials of some
pretended Heretics in the Diocese of Sarum. Taken out of an old Register, Page
248
REMARKS UPON THE Ecclesiastical History OF THE Ancient Churches OF THE Country
of the Albigenses.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Original of the Churches of Gallia Narbonensis and
Aquitain.
BEfore the Gauls were entirely reduced by Caesar under the Power of the Roman
Empire, and after that under the said Emperor, Gallia was commonly divided into
two Parts, whereof the one was called Braccata, the other Comata. Gallia
Braccata contained not only that part of Italy, which is beyond the Alps, and
was named Cisalpina, but also Gallia Narbonensis, whereof Vienna was the
Capital City. The other, to wit, Gallia Comata, was divided into three parts;
the first whereof was called Belgica, the other Celtica, and the third
Aquitain. But Augustus being absolute Master of Gaul, made some Alteration in
this Division; for he extended the Bounds of Aquitain, by restraining those of
Celtica, and distinguished Aquitain into three Provinces, whereof the first and
second were on this side of the Garonne, and reached to the Loyre; the third
reached from the Garonne to the Pyrenean Mountains. Bourges and Bourdeaux were
the Mother-Cities of the first and second of these Provinces; and Eulse or
Eaulse was the Metropolis of the third, which City having been destroyed by the
Wars, Ausch succeeded her in that Dignity.

As for Gallia Narbonensis, which at first was only a Province, whereof Vienna
was the Capital City, Augustus was pleased to take that Honor from her, to
bestow it upon Lions, which seemed to him more commodious to be made the Seat
of Government. This Province was afterward changed, by being divided into four
Parts, viz. into Narbonensis, Viennensis, the Maritime Alps and the Greek Alps.
And after this Division, Narbonensis was again subdivided into two parts, the
first and second, as may be seen since the fourth Century.

It was needful at the entrance of this Discourse, to give the Reader this
short Draught of the Countries that went under the Name of Gallia, to give him
an Idea of that part of them, where we intend to show him the Continuation of
that Church which gave birth to the Albigenses, and furnished the West with
Witnesses of so great weight against the Corruptions of the Romish Party; and
indeed though the Visi-Gothes, who cut off these Provinces from the Roman
Empire; and afterward the French, who destroyed the Visi-Gothes in the time of
Clovis, made very great Changes in this Division of Gallia Narbonensis and
Aquitain, yet we may exactly observe, that the Church of these Provinces, has
well nigh always made a distinct Body by her Synods and Canons.

It is a matter of Difficulty precisely to fix the first Rise of these
Churches. I own that some Greek Fathers have believed, that St. Luke and
Crescens, Disciples of St. Paul, did preach the Gospel in Gallia; but that
which engaged them in this Opinion, seems of little or no solidity. And the
Galatia mentioned by St. Paul in the second of Timothy, does not signify
Gallia, but a Province of the lesser Asia, as the learned Petavius
acknowledges.

Others have believed, that St. Paul himself preached the Gospel in these
Provinces, as he passed through them in his way to Spain, where the fourth
Century took it for granted that he preached the Gospel: but neither does this
seem grounded upon sufficient Authority; and we do not find that the ancient
Authors of these Countries did ever maintain any such thing.

Should we indeed, as to this Point, give credit to the most part of the Romish
Legends, to which Baronius in his Annals pays too great a Deference, it would
be an easy matter to give to the most part of these Churches a most august
Original. We might suppose that St. Peter and St. Paul were the Founders of
them by the Ministry of their Disciples, or that Clement Bishop of Rome sent
them thither almost immediately after the Martyrdom of the Apostles St. Peter
and St. Paul. They tell us that Paul was the first Bishop of Narbon, Saturninus
of Toulouse, Martialis of Limoges, Frontinus of Perigueux, Vincentius of Daeqs,
Georgius of Puy, Eutropius of Xaintes: Much like as for some Ages since, in
most of the other Churches of France, they suppose that the first Bishops were
sent them by the same Apostles, or by their first Successors.

But we meet with nothing but Falsities in these pretended Traditions: and it
is impossible to reconcile them with what Sulpicius Severus and Gregorius
Turonensis tell us concerning the Rise of Christian Religion among the Gauls.
The former of these distinctly assures us, that Gaul never had any Martyrs
before the Empire of Aurelius Son of Antoninus, Hist. lib. 2. Sub Aurelio
Antonini filio Persecutio quinta agitata; ac tunc primum inter Gallias Martyria
visa, serius trans Alps Dei Religione suscepta. The fifth Persecution was
carried on under Aurelius, Antonine's Son; and then first were Martyrdoms seen
among the Gauls, the Divine Religion having been later entertained beyond the
Alps. This single Period of Severus gives Sentence against all those pretended
Martyrs wherewith the Churches of France have filled their Breviaries. The
latter tells us plainly, that it was not till the Empire of Decius, about the
year 250, that the City of Toulouse had for her first Bishop Saturninus, who
was sent from Rome in company of six others, into the Country of the Gauls, to
preach the Gospel, to wit, Gatian at Tours, Trophimus at Arles, Paul at Narbon,
Dionysius at Paris, Austremoine at Clermont, and Martialis at Limoges. This is
that which is clearly proved from the Acts of the Martyrdom of St. Saturninus,
cited by Gregory Bishop of Tours.

These Testimonies of two ancient Authors, the one of the 5 th Century, and the
other more ancient, viz. the same who wrote the Martyrdom of St. Saturninus,
have made such an Impression upon some of the Learnedest Men of the Roman
Communion, viz. upon Bosquet Bishop of Montpellier, Sirmond, and Launoy the
famous Doctor of the Faculty of Paris, as to make them with Scorn reject those
Legends, which ascribe more ancient Founders to these Churches, notwithstanding
that they are the greatest Ornament of the Breviaries of the Gallican Church,
and that they cannot lose their Credit, without shaking the belief of abundance
of Miracles, and the Authority of a great number of Devotions.

And indeed, what reason is there to own a Tradition for authentic, which we
scarcely find backed with any Witness for the space of above 700 years?
Besides, don't we know, that it was the Dispute about Precedence between the
Churches in the 8 th and 9 th Century, and which we find lasted till the 12 th,
that engaged the several Parties to devise this great Antiquity, and boldly
change that, which before had been the current Belief of their Churches,
because it did not answer their Pretensions, nor comport with their Vanity, to
substitute instead thereof fabulous Originals, under whose shelter they might
maintain a Dispute with more advantage against those that were on even ground
with them?

But however it be difficult to fix the certain Original of these Churches, for
the Gothic Liturgy, which was used in these Provinces, assures us that St.
Saturninus came from Smyrna, from whence it should seem that the first Founders
of the Churches of Lions and Vienna came likewise, yet thus much we may assert
that the Gospel soon took deep root there.

My Design is not to refute here what the Authors of the Legends have inserted
in their fabulous Relations, concerning the Establishment of the Christian
Religion in these Provinces, and the Character of the Piety of those first
Founders of Christianity, of their Precepts and of their Miracles. Indeed there
is reason to deplore either the boundless Impudence of the Pastors of the Roman
Communion, in obtruding such palpable Falsities, or the prodigious Stupidity of
the People of that Church, who feed themselves with Stories more fabulous than
those of Amadis of Gaul, and make them the Subject of their Devotion. We read
in the Life of St. Martialis, that after the Saint had converted Limoges, he
there consecrated Churches to the Honor of Jesus Christ, of the H. Virgin* and
St. Stephen, whose Cousin he was. We read that he raised to Life the Priests of
the Idol, whom God had struck dead with a Clap of Thunder, for their poisoning
St. Martialis; and that, after their Resurrection, he converted them. We find
that he admitted to the Vow of Virginity a Person called Valeria, who some time
after having had her Head cut off, by order of the Duke of Guienne, whose
Courtship she had slighted, immediately took up her Head, and carried it to St.
Martialis, as he was saying Mass. We find him there going to Rome to give an
account to St. Peter of his Commission: all this is very gravely related by the
Legendaries; yea, the Impudence of these Knaves proceeded to that Point, as in
the ninth Century, to conciliate Authority to these fabulous Relations. Several
Councils were assembled at Limoges, where with intolerable Impudence they
imposed two Epistles upon St. Martialis, the one as writ to those of Toulouse,
and the other to those of Bourdeaux, and which bear much a like Resemblance to
the Apostolical Writings of those times, as Asses do to Lions: and all that
these insipid Authors tell us about it, is so entirely framed according to the
Manners, Notions and Customs of the later Ages, that we can find nothing in
their Writings but what some stupid Monks have insolently invented and patched
together, with so little regard to Reason, that one of these extravagant
Fellows maintains that the Blessed Virgin was saying her Rosary at the time she
was visited by the Angel Gabriel.

It is not certainly known whether the Books which St. Irenaeus has written
against the Valentinians, ought to persuade us that those Heretics had then
already spread themselves among the Gauls; for seeing he writ them in Greek,
this Work seems to have been designed against the Heretics of the East; for
though we have a Translation of these Books, more ancient than the time of S.
Austin, yet we have no Proof that it was done with Design to refute Persons who
had endeavored to corrupt the Faith from the very Beginning of its
Establishment in Gaul.

True it is, that in the fourth Century, Arianism had considerably corrupted
and infected the Purity of these Diocesses: Saturninus Bishop of Arles, and
those of his Cabal, having condemned St. Hilary Bishop of Poitiers, for an
Heretic, because he opposed Arianism with all his Might; but soon after we
find that Truth raised her self again from under its Ruins: For though at the
beginning of the fifth Century the Visi-Gothes who were Arians, had made
themselves Masters of these Provinces of the Gauls, and which they remain
possessed of till they were taken from them by Clovis King of France; yet we do
not find that Arianism ever prevailed there, the Vigilance of the Pastors
having prevented the Peoples yielding so far to the Authority of these Arian
Kings, as to follow them in their Error, the very Nature of these Disputes
engaging the Enemies of the Church to maintain such Maxims, as put a stop to
the Peoples Superstition, with respect to the Veneration of Martyrs.

I am not ignorant that St. Gaudentius takes notice that several
Priscillianists were scattered up and down these Provinces, and Priscillianism
was nothing else but Manicheism in Perfection, as appears from the Writings of
St. Austin. But this evil Plant withered soon after; both the Arians, who were
Masters, and the Orthodox, equally joining their Endeavors to confound that
Heresy. Neither indeed do we find after the sixth Century, any mention made of
Priscillianists in these parts; so that we may affirm that Christianity was
preserved there with much Purity in those primitive times, and arrived to such
a Degree of Strength and Vigor, as to banish both those Heresies, whereof the
one attacked the Father of our Savior, and the other denied the Divinity of
the Son.

But what I have already said in general, is not sufficient to give us a
competent and just Idea of the Christianity which was planted in these
Provinces, and which the Albigenses have so happily asserted, both by their
Preachings and Sufferings. We must therefore take a Review of these Primitive
Ages, and consider a little wherein consisted that Religion which these
Diocesses received from those first Ministers of Jesus Christ, who conveyed
thither the Doctrine of the Gospel, and transmitted the same to Posterity, as a
sacred Trust committed to them.

CHAP. II. The Faith of the Church of the Gauls in the Second Century.
WE have no Gallick Author, whose Name is so famous as St. Irenaeus; Eusebius. l.
4. c. 20.
he was a Disciple of St. Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna; and being sent into Gaul
by that Apostolic Man, he was first Priest of the Church of Lions, and
afterward succeeded Photinus, first Bishop of that City; it was in his time
that the Church suffered the fifth Persecution under the Government of the
Emperors Verus and Marcus Aurelius. Eusebius has preserved the Relation of the
Martyrdom of the Believers of Lions and Vienna, which according to all
Probability is judged to have been made by St. Irenaeus in the Name of both
these Churches.

This Relation tells us first of all, that the Roman President having caused
some Slaves to be apprehended that belonged to Christians, made them confess,
at the Sight of Tortures prepared for them, that the Christians did eat
Children in their Assemblies, and that they there promiscuously polluted
themselves by abominable Incests; which was afterward confirmed by weak
Christians, who for fear of Torments abjured their Religion.

2. That the Christians having confuted this Calumny, by their Constancy in
enduring the Torments, and above all the rest Blandina, who after a whole day's
suffering Tortures, having cried with a loud Voice, I am a Christian: there is
no Wickedness committed amongst us: (which was seconded by Byblis, who before
had abjured) How, said she, should the Christians, to whom it is not lawful to
eat the Blood of Beasts, devour Infants?

3. Blandina is represented to us in these Acts, as praying to God with great
Affection, and as it were conversing with Jesus Christ in Prayer. Attalus being
set in a Chair of Iron, to be there burnt, and perceiving the smell of his
broiled Flesh, said to the Spectators in Latin; In hoc demum est homines vorare
quod agitis; nos vero neque homines voramus, neque omnino quicquam mali
facimus. This that ye do here is indeed to devour Men; but as for us, we
neither devour Men, nor do any thing at all that is evil.

Lastly; The Church was desirous to bury what remained of their Bodies, as the
Relation informs us, but the Fury of the Pagans who burnt them to Ashes,
hindered them: These are the chiefest Heads of this Relation, where we find
nothing but God and Jesus Christ called upon, where we do not see the Believers
troubling themselves to explain or qualify the corporal Manducation of the Body
of Jesus Christ, as it became them to have done, had they believed their eating
of him with their bodily Mouth; and where there is not the least Word that
might give us to understand that these Churches took care to preserve these so
precious Relics, to honor them with their Adorations, as in latter times has
been done.

We find here also the Spirit of Calumny transporting the Heathens against the
Disciples of Jesus Christ; and how far the Cruelty of Torments may prevail to
make Men confess the most enormous Calumnies to be true. The Reader must not
forget these two Characters of old Rome, because the Inquisitors have renewed
these very same Slanders against the Albigenses, and have pretended to confirm
them by Confessions which the Cruelty of their Tortures have forced from them.

Neither is it only in this Work of his, that St. Irenaeus informs us, what in
his time was the Faith of these Churches planted in Gaul, for he has left us
five Books, and Eusebius has preserved for us some Epistles of that ancient
Bishop, altogether refulgent with the Purity of the Faith delivered by the
Apostles.

1. St. Irenaeus gives us this for one Character of the Gnostics, that they
embraced Doctrines which were not to be found in the Writings of the Prophets
or the Apostles, Lib. 1. cap. 1. p. 33.

And it is with the same Spirit that he attributes to Heretics, the accusing of
the Scripture for being unintelligible, without the Help of Tradition, whereas
he maintains that that which had been preached, was committed to Writing by the
special Will of God, to the end it might be the Ground and Pillar of our Faith,
Lib. 3. c. 1, and 2. And that it is to make the Apostles Hypocrites, to suppose
that they taught some things in public, and others in private; whence it
appears clearly, that when he makes use of Tradition, he only does it with
respect to those scriptural Doctrines which the Heretics opposed, and whereof
they pretended that the Apostles had left the contrary to those that succeeded
them, Lib. 3. c. 2. It Is upon this occasion that he alleges the Testimony of
the Church of Rome, founded by the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, as of one
that was most known: Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam (says he) propter potentiorem
Principalitatem, necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est eos qui sunt
undique fideles, in quo semper ab his qui sunt undique conservata est ea, quae
est ab Apostolis Traditio; For to this Church, because of its more powerful
Superiority, it behooves the whole Church to come, that is, the Believers of all
Parts, for as much as therein the Tradition from the Apostles has always peen
preserved by the Believers of all parts. It is apparent that whatsoever Design
he may have had to raise the Authority of the Church of Rome; he makes no other
use of it, than to make out, that it was impossible those Doctrines which the
Heretics gave out for Apostolical, should be really so, seeing they were
unknown to a Church which had had the Apostles and their Successors for her
Guides, more especially seeing that Church was placed in the very Seat of the
Empire, which continually drew to Rome a vast number of Believers from all the
different places of the Empire, from whence they brought not along with them a
different Tradition from that which they found in the Bosom of the Church of
Rome.

That St. Irenaeus had no other aim but this, is owned by F. Quesnel in his
Notes upon the tenth Epistle of St. Leo, page 809. And this appears evidently,
because after all that Esteem which he had for the Church of Rome, he was not
afraid to write to her Bishop very censuring Letters, upon the account of his
having excommunicated the Churches of Asia, that celebrated Easter the
fourteenth of the Moon of March; as also because he continued in the Communion
of those Churches of Asia, without being concerned at the Excommunication of
the Pope of Rome.

2. He reduces the whole Faith of Christians throughout the World, to that
which we call the Apostles Creed, without mentioning so much as a Word of those
Doctrines which the Church of Rome has superadded to it, pretending to confirm
them by Tradition, Lib. 1. c. 2.

3. He maintains the Scriptures to be both clear and perfect, Lib. 2. c. 47.

4. He rejects the Doctrines which the Heretics grounded upon the Explication
of some Parables, maintaining that nothing ought to be established, but upon
clear and evident places of Scripture, Lib. 2. c. 46.

5. It appears by his Writings, that Penance at that time was public, without
dispensing with Women that were overtaken with the Sins of Uncleanness, by
which means being exposed to extreme Confusion, it made some of them abjure
Christianity, Lib. 1. c. 9.

6. He makes it appear that Caelibat was not yet known in Asia, whence these
first Christians of the Gauls derived their Original, which is acknowledged by
the Fevardentius, Lib. 1. c. 9.

7. He assigns to the Marcosians the custom of anointing those they received
into their Communion, with Balm, [ Opobalsamo] which shows, that at that time
extreme Unction was not known: And we may make the same Observation from his
imputing to other Heretics, the anointing of Persons at the Point of Death,
with Oil and Water, Lib. 1. c. 18.

8. He attributes to the Gnostics, the Imitation of the Heathens, because they
had the Images of Jesus Christ, Lib. 1. c. 24. which makes it evident that the
Christians had no Images, much less that they gave to them any religious
Worship. And indeed we find him reasoning, lib. 2. c. 6. after such a manner,
as shows that the Christians were yet in full Possession of a Right to reproach
the Heathens with all those Absurdities that arise from the Use of Images. The
same may also be gathered from lib. 2. c. 42. where he divides the Law into two
Tables, in a manner very different from that of the Doctors of the Roman
Church, and altogether conformable to the Judgment of Josephus and other Jewish
Doctors.

9. He makes it appear that he knew nothing of the Separability of Accidents
from their Subjects, which is the sole Support of Transubstantiation, lib. 2.
c. 14.

10. He in plain terms ^ejects the Invocation of Angels, instead thereof
recommending that of our Savior Jesus Christ, lib. 2. c. 57.

11. He asserts that the Blessed Virgin had unseasonable Motions, intempestivam
festinationem, John 2.3. so far was he from believing her wholly free from Sin,
lib. 2. c. 18. This shows that when he says, cap. 33. Quod alligavit Virgo Eva
per incredulitatem hoc Virgo Maria solvit per fidem; What the Virgin Eve bound
up by her Unbelief, that the Virgin Mary set free by her Faith; he does not own
the Virgin for the Person that saved Men, but his meaning is like that of
Hesychius, who said, speaking of the Women to whom Jesus Christ appeared after
his Resurrection; Invenere enim, says he, mulieres, quod olim amisere per
Evam, lucrum invenit ea, quae damni occasionem praebuerat. For the Women found
what formerly they lost by Eve; she found the Gain, who had been an occasion of
the Loss, T. 15. B. P. p. 823. col. 1.

And this is the sense likewise of that other Passage of St. Irenaeus, which we
find, lib. 5. c. 19. for though he calls the Virgin. Eve's Advocate, it plainly
appears that he meant nothing else but what is expressed by St. Chrysostom in
Ps. 44. T. 3. p. 221. Virgo nos Paradiso expulit, per Virginem vitam aternam
invenimus. A Virgin drove us out of Paradise, and by a Virgin we have found
eternal Life.

12. That he did not believe we ought to have recourse to the Intercession of
Saints, can be invincibly demonstrated from hence, because he did not believe
that the Faithful should see the Face of God before the Day of Judgment, lib.
5. c. 3.

13. He plainly asserts that the Apostolical Succession is of no Consideration
without the Truth of Doctrine. Lib. 4. c. 43. so far was he from making it a
bar to hinder Believers from examining the Doctrine propounded to them.

14. He maintains that the Gates of Heaven were opened to Jesus Christ, because
of the Assumption of his Flesh; so far was he from believing that his glorified
Body could penetrate Bodies. Lib. 3. c. 18. and lib. 4. c. 66.

He asserts that Jesus Christ, at his being born, opened the Blessed Virgin's
Womb, lib. 4. c. 66. which the Church of Rome condemns for diverse Reasons.

And for as much as he holds the Holy Ghost to be the Food of Life, lib. 4. c.
75. accordingly he maintains, c. 2. lib. 5. that our Bodies are nourished by
the Creatures of God received in the Eucharist, and that they receive growth by
them.

He distinctly asserts that the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as to its
Substance, consists of Bread and Wine, which are the Creatures of God, which he
receives as Oblations of a different kind from the Sacrifices of the old
Testament; and indeed in case he had otherwise conceived the matter, he would
have favored the Opinion of the Gnostics, who pretending that the Work of the
Creation was not the Work of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, could never
have lighted upon a more comfortable Doctrine than that of Transubstantiation,
by means of which the Nature of Bread and Wine would be destroyed by Jesus
Christ in the Sacrament, and nothing left but the Accidents, that is to say,
mere Fantomes, without any thing of Reality. L. 4. c. 34, and 57.

In like manner we find him asserting, lib. 5. c. 33. that what Jesus Christ
gave to his Disciples in the Cup, was the Generation or Product of the Vine.

15. We see clearly from what Eusebius has preserved of St. Irenaeus, that the
Variety in observing a Fast before Easter was very great, and that there was no
Law of the Apostles, or of Jesus Christ injoining it, every one using it
according to his own free Will and Devotion. We find also that whatsoever
Respect St. Irenaeus had for the Church of Rome, he was no more inclined to be
led by her sole Authority, than St. Polycarp was, whom he much commends; and if
he considered her as an Apostolic Church, yet he never attributed to her any
Authority over the other Flocks of the Lord.

I will not dissemble that St. Irenaeus seems somewhat at a loss, about the
state of Believers after Death; but to this it is sufficient to say; 1. That we
find in St. Irenaeus an Abridgment of the Faith almost in the same form that we
find it in the Apostles Creed, as it is called. 2. That if we do not agree to
all the Opinions of St. Irenaeus, about the State of Souls after Death; it is
certain that the Doctors of the Church of Rome do at least reject as many
Articles as we do, yea and more too.

From what I have said, we may however perceive what was the State of the
Christian Religion in Gaul, a little after the middle of the second Century,
which is the time wherein St. Irenaeus lived and flourished.

I wish I could produce for the following Century as Authentic a Witness
concerning the State of the Churches in this part of Gaul; but indeed though
there were diverse famous Writers, whose Works are cited by St. Jerome, yet
there is in a manner nothing of them left to us. I know there are some who
believe that Victorinus was Bishop of Poictiers in the third Century: but this
is not found true, for it is certain that he was Bishop of Passau
Patavionensis, and not Pictaviensis; so that we must proceed to those who can
inform us of the State of this part of Gaul, during the fourth Century.

CHAP. III. The Faith of Gallia Aquitanica, and Narbonensis, in the Fourth
Century.
ST. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers, a famous Confessor in the Persecution which
the Arians stirred up against the Orthodox, can afford us much Light concerning
the State and Faith of these Diocesses: This great Man was married, as he who
published his Works at Paris owns, after the famous Baptista Mantuanus,
observing that the Law for the Celibacy of the Clergy was not yet introduced,
and that before that time, as St. Jerome expresses it, they rather made choice
of married Persons, than unmarried, because the former were judged more proper
for the Functions of the Holy Ministry.

But this is not the only Article wherein he differed from Popery, as well as
the Church of Aquitain.

1. He counts the Canonical Books as we do, and plainly holds them for
Apocryphal, which we reject, as we find in the Preface to his Commentary upon
the Book of Psalms.

2. He lays it down for an Error and piece of Impiety to look upon the
Scripture as imperfect, in Psalm 118. Lit. Vau.

3. He asserts that Ignorance is not capable of excusing Men, seeing the
Scripture is proposed to us as the Rule of our Faith and Manners: Non habet
veniam ignoratio voluntatis; quia sub scientiae facultate nescire, repudiatae
magis, quam non repertae scientiae est reatus: Ob id enim long a Peccatoribus
salus, quia non exquisierint Justificationes Dei: Nam utique non ob aliud
consignatae literis manent, quam ut ad universorum scientiam, notionemque
defluerent. Ignorance of the Divine Will gives no Excuse; because to be
ignorant when we may learn, makes us guilty of rejecting Knowledge, rather than
missing of it: For therefore is Salvation far from Sinners, because they search
not after that which justifies before God, and which indeed is for no other
reason preserved in Writing, but that it might be derived to the Knowledge and
Understanding of all. This is a Style, and these are Maxims very different from
those of the Church of Rome.

4. He affirms that we are to be ignorant of whatsoever the Scripture does not
teach us: and after having asserted, that it is the Character of Heretics to
conceal the Holy Scripture, fol. 204. he maintains that it is another Mark of
Heresy to believe beyond what the Gospel teaches us. Tu qui ultra Evangelium
sapis, necesse est ut aliis alibi arcanorum doctrinis, cognitionem Paterni
nominis adeptus sis. Thou who art wise beyond the Gospel, it must needs be that
thou have elsewhere by other secret Doctrines, attained the Knowledge of God the
Father, fol. 132.

5. He asserts, that it was the Will of God, that the Scripture should be plain
and clear. Quantae enim potuit Dominus, verborum simplicitate evangelicam fidem
locutus est, and in tantum ad intelligentiam nostram sermones aptavit, in
quantum naturae nostrae ferret infirmitas, non tamen ut quicquam minus dignum
naturae suae majestate loqueretur. The Lord has expressed the Faith of the
Gospel in the greatest Simplicity of Words he could, and so far accommodated
his Speech to our Understanding, as the Weakness of our Nature would bear, yet
so as not to speak any thing unbecoming the Majesty of his Nature.

6. He there also confirms the Fullness of Scripture after a most Authentic
manner: Lib. 8. de Trin. Non est humano aut seculi sensu in Dei rebus
loquendum; In the things of God we are not to speak according to a humane or
worldly sense and meaning. And a little after; Quae scripta sunt legamus, and
quae legerimus intelligamus, and tunc perfectae fidei officio fungemur. Let us
read what is written, and understand what we read, so shall we discharge the
Duty of perfect Faith. So likewise, lib. 5. p. 46. Non est de Deo humanis
Judiciis sentiendum, neque in nobis ea natura est, ut se in coelestem
cognitionem suis viribus efferat; a Deo discendum est, quid ex Deo
intelligendum sit; quia non nisi se authore cognoscitur. We must not think of
God according to humane Judgment, for neither is our Nature such, to be able to
raise it self by its own Strength to Heavenly Knowledge; we must learn of God
whatsoever is to be understood of him, because he is not to be known any
further than as he is the Author of our Knowledge. And a little after; Loquendum
ergo non aliter de Deo est, quam ut ipse ad intelligentiam nostram de se
locutus est: Wherefore we are no otherwise to speak of God, than as he in
Compliance with our Understanding, has spoke to us concerning himself.

7. He owns no other Foundation of the Church, besides the Confession of the
Divinity of our Savior, made by St. Peter, instead of referring it to the
Person of St. Peter, or to the Functions of his Apostleship; lib. 2. Vnum
igitur hoc est immobile fundamentum, una haec est foelix fidei Petra, Petri ore
confessa, Tu es filius Dei vivi. This is the only immovable Foundation, this
is the only happy Rock of Faith confessed by the Mouth of Peter, Thou art the
Son of the living God. And so likewise, lib. 6. p. 77. Super hanc igitur
Confessionis Petram Ecclesiae aedificatio est: Wherefore upon the Rock of this
Confession the Church is built.

9. He overthrows all the Exceptions of the Church of Rome in favor of the
Adoration of Angels, by maintaining that the Angel who appeared to Abraham was
Jesus Christ; de Trin. lib. 4. and lib. de Synodis contra Arianos.

10. He was so little of the Belief, that the Faith of the People depends upon
that of their Pastors, that he asserts and proves in his Book against the
Arians or Auxentius, that the People may continue Orthodox under Heretical
Pastors.

11. He overthrows all Worshipping of Creatures, which is practiced by the
Church of Rome, by maintaining, that if any should worship Jesus Christ,
believing him to be a Creature, he would be accursed. Lib. 12. de Trinit.

12. He dreamed so little of the Infallibility of the Pope, which a great part
of the Church of Rome owns as the greatest Article, into which the Faith of all
Christians must be resolved, that he pronounces many Anathema's against
Liberius, because he had subscribed to an Arian Confession of Faith; as may be
seen in the Fragments of St. Hilary, published by Pithaeus.

13. He lays it down for a Maxim, that Jesus Christ alone was without Sin, in
his Discourse upon Psalm 58, and 138.

14. He owns God only to have the Power of forgiving Sins, Can. 8. in Matthew. so
far was he from attributing this Power to Ministers, as the Church of Rome does
at this day.

15. He formally asserts that the good Works of one Man are of no avail to
deliver another from Punishment, which overthrows the great Foundation of
Satisfactions and Purgatory, after the manner that the Church of Rome makes use
of them, Can. 27. in Matthew. The wise Virgins tell the foolish, that they cannot
give to them of their Oil; Quia non sit forte quod omnibus satis sit, alienis
scilicet operibus and meritis neminem adjuvandum, quia unicuique lampadi suae
emere oleum sit necesse. Lest perhaps there might not be enough for them all,
to intimate that no Body can be helped by the Works and Merits of another,
because it is necessary for every one to buy Oil for his own Lamp.

16. He was so far from believing the Merit of Works, as the Church of Rome at
present does, that he discourses thus upon Psalm. 118. lit. Coph. In operibus
quidem Bonitatis totus perfectus est, sed satis esse hoc sibi non putat ad
salutem, nisi secundum miserationem Dei and judicia, miserationem consequatur.
He is indeed wholly perfect in all the Works of Goodness, but he does not think
this sufficient for his Salvation, except according to the Mercy of God and his
Judgments, he obtain Mercy. And it is the same Notion he gives us, speaking of
the Parable of the Laborers, upon Psalm. 130. Mercedem non operis sed
misericordiae, undecimae horae operarii consequuntur.

17. We cannot deny but that St. Hilary believed a Purgatory, but yet in that
Point he differed much from the Church of Rome: He owns a Baptism of Fire after
this Life, but such a Baptism as was to be conferred at the last Day, viz. the
Day of Judgment, Matthew. Can. 2. And that which must needs greatly scandalize
the Papists, is, that St. Hilary maintains that all Believers, without
excepting so much as the Blessed Virgin, must endure the Fire, which he
expressly affirms on Psalm. 118.

18. If we have a Mind to know whether he allowed the Notion of the Church of
Rome, which believes that we can perfectly fulfill the Law of God; we may easily
be resolved by his manner of treating the young Man, who boasted himself before
Jesus Christ, as if he had done it: He accuses him of Insolence in several
places of his Works, for pretending to be justified by his Works. De Trinit.
lib. 9. Can. 19. in Matthew. and Lib. de Patris and Filii unitate.

19. He overturns the common Notion of the Church of Rome, which is, that when
Jesus Christ entered in to his Disciples, the Doors being shut, he had not lost
the Solidity of his Body, and consequently that there was a Penetration of
Dimensions: St. Hilary rejects this Notion as absurd, accounting this
Penetration of Dimensions impossible, lib. 3. de. Trinit.

20. He asserts that the Eucharist is celebrated in breaking of Bread, and that
the Disciples of Jesus Christ did drink of the Fruit of the Vine at the Lord's
Supper, and mentions not so much as one Word of Transubstantiation, in a place
where he particularly explains the Institution of the Eucharist, Can. 30. in
Matthew. To speak the Truth, how could he have any other Thoughts, who maintains
that Jesus Christ is no longer on the Earth, in respect of his Body, because it
is impossible for a Body to be in more places than one? Adest enim and cum
fideliter invocatur per naturam suam praesens est; spiritus enim est omnia
penetrans and continens; non enim secundum nos corporalis est, ut cum alicubi
adsit, absit aliunde, sed virtute praesenti, and se quacunque est, porrigenti,
cum replente omniae ejus spiritu in omnibus sit, tamen ei, qui in eum credat
adsistit. For he is present by his Nature, when he is called upon with Faith,
he being a Spirit penetrating and containing all things: for he is not like us
corporeal, so as that when he is in one place, he should be absent from
another, but he is in all places by the Presence of his Power which extends
it self wherever he is, and his Spirit that fills all things; yet he is in
a more peculiar manner with him that believes in him.

21. He was so far from approving the Romish Inquisition, that he calls the
Emperor Constantius Antichrist, for persecuting those that were not of his
Opinion, lib. in Constant. August. Yea he judged all Force to be so contrary to
the Spirit of the Christian Religion, that he maintains that there can be no
Religion where Force is made use of.

Lastly; He was so far from believing that the Antichrist, whereof St. John
speaks, was already come; that he maintains that he would be revealed in the
Churches that were then possessed by the Arians, and that the Faith being thus
attacked, the true Believers would be forced to look out for Shelter amongst
the Mountains in Woods and Caves, leaving the Antichrist Master of the public
Places consecrated to the Worship of God.

This is the Sum of what may be gathered from the Writings of St. Hilary. I
make no mention of some Errors of this great Man, because Claudianus Mamertus
having confuted them about the end of the fifth Century, has made it appear
that they were only some particular Opinions of this great Confessor, and that
we cannot look upon them as the common Faith of the Diocese where he was
settled. But the same cannot be said of the Articles I have noted; Claudianus is
so far from blaming them, that he approves them by his Silence, and shows that
his Doctrine in this Respect, was the Doctrine of the Church of Gaul.

We have nothing left us of the Works of Rhodanius Bishop of Toulouse, who was
contemporary with St. Hilary: But it appears clear to us, that this Holy
Confessor having been sent into Banishment with St. Hilary, after the Council
of Beziers, by the Cabal of Saturninus Bishop of Arles, Favourer of the Arians;
we are to consider Rhodanius as a Defender of the same Faith, and an
illustrious Witness of the Belief of his Diocese: And we ought to make the same
Judgment of Phaebadius Bishop of Again, who was so much engaged in the same
Quarrel, and who acquired so great a Name by the vigorous Opposition he made
against the Errors of Arius: But Providence has preserved us none of his Works.

In effect, this great Man, who wrote in the Year 357. as appears by his Book
against the Arians, gives us sufficiently to understand what his Faith was in
diverse Articles, and what was the Doctrine of the Diocese.

1. He maintains that the Catholic Faith is found with those who speak
according to the Holy Scripture, and not amongst those who only make use of
Prejudices. After having quoted several places of Scripture, to prove against
the Arians the Eternity of the Son, he concludes in this manner, B. Patr. T. 4.
p. 174. Volentes igitur a Patre Filium scindere, and infra Deum ponere, de
Evangelio praescribunt: Those therefore who would rend the Father from the Son,
and place him below God, give Law to the Gospel. He expresses himself yet more
strongly to this purpose, toward the end of his Book, ib. p. 180. Hoc
credimus, hoc tenemus, quia hoc accepimus a Prophetis; hoc nobis Evangelia
locuta sunt, hoc Apostoli tradiderunt, hoc Martyrs in passione confessi sunt;
in hoc mentibus fidei etiam haeremus, contra quod si Angelus de Coelo
annuntiaverit, Anathema sit. -- Ergo ut supra diximus, praejudicatae opinionis
authoritas nihil valebit, quia contra semetipsam, ipsa consistit. This we
believe, this we hold fast, because it is this we have received from the
Prophets, this the Gospels have declared to us, this the Apostles have left us,
this the Martyrs in their Sufferings have confessed, and to this we adhere with
our Minds by Faith, so that if an Angel from Heaven should preach contrary to
this, let him be accursed. -- Wherefore, as was said before, the Authority of a
prejudicate Opinion can be of no force, because it stands against it self.

2. He makes it appear that the Name of Catholic was not sufficient to be a
true Christian, when he represents that Arianism had so far seized the Minds of
all the World, that it was necessary to espouse the Arian Heresy, to procure
the Name of being Catholics, ib. p. 169. Sed quia aut Haeresis suscipienda est
ut Catholici dicamur, aut vere Catholici non futuri; si Haeresin non
repudiamus, ad hanc tractatus conditionem, necessitate descendimus. But because
we are either to become Heretics, that we may be called Catholics, or cease
to be Catholics indeed; by becoming Heretics we are necessitated to write
this Treatise.

3. He asserts that the Revelation of Holy Scripture is so perfect, with
respect to the Divinity of our Savior, that Anathemas are to be pronounced
against all those that advance any other Doctrine. This appears from the great
number of Passages which he quotes from thence, p. 173, and 178. to which he
joins the Anathema, whereof I have already spoke before.

4. He observes expressly that the same Honors rendered to Jesus Christ in the
Liturgy, as to God, do demonstrate his Equality with God, p. 174. Quod si ita
est, says he, quotidie blasphemamus in gratiarum actionibus and oblationibus
sacrificiorum, communia haec Patri and filio confitentes, etc. If it be so, we
blaspheme daily in our Thanksgivings and Offerings of Sacrifice, in confessing
these things common to Father and Son.

Thus does he implicitly overthrow the first Principles of the Church of Rome,
viz. the Imperfection of the Holy Scripture in Matters of Faith, the Authority
and Necessity of Traditions, which are the completing of it, and other such
like Doctrines. We should now proceed to examine what the State of these
Diocesses was in the following Century, but that the Bishop of Meaux stops us,
to reflect upon the History and Doctrine of Vigilantius, whose Name is too
famous, and his Memory too unworthily torn by that Bishop, not to afford him
that Defense which his Zeal against Superstition does justly deserve.

CHAP. IV. An Examination of the Opinions of Vigilantius.
VIgilantius was born in Aquitain, as is proved by de Marca, in a Dissertation
of his which is not yet published, and Priest in the Diocese of Barcelona; he
had contracted a particular Friendship with St. Paulinus, who was ordained
Priest at Barcelona; St. Paulinus recommended him in particular to St. Jerome,
as he passed through Campania, where St. Paulinus was Bishop, in his way to
Jerusalem; St. Jerome received him with all the Affection possible, in the Year
394. and calls him the Holy Priest Vigilantius, in his 13 th Epistle to St.
Paulinus. He made no long stay in the Holy Land; it is probable that the
Disputes about Origenism, which troubled that Province, obliged him to return
the sooner. St. Jerome seems to insinuate that Vigilantius had been gained by
Rufinus, Enemy to St. Jerome, and that after Vigilantius was come into Egypt,
and in some other Provinces, he accused St. Jerome for having too great a Liking
for the Writings of Origin, etc. decrying him everywhere as an Origenist. This
was the true Cause of the Hate and Rage of St. Jerome against Vigilantius,
whereof we have a very sensible Instance in his 75 th Epistle, which he wrote
against Vigilantius about the Year 397. where he treats him with the greatest
Indignity. Vigilantius being returned into Gaul, seems to have made his abode
there, and to have published a certain Treatise, about the Year 406. against
the worshipping of Relics, which about 60 Years before, was introduced into
the Church. St. Jerome being informed hereof, had an Occasion offered him of
defending the Superstition of the common People against the Censures of
Vigilantius, and of unloading against him the most injurious Language that
Hatred could inspire.

The Writers of the Church of Rome have not been wanting long since, to draw
their Advantage from these Invectives of St. Jerome against the Protestants, and
never speak of Vigilantius but as a Heretic. The Bishop of Meaux has
carefully traced their Steps: he tells us therefore after his manner very
confidently, that even in the fourth Century, the most clear-sighted of all the
rest, there was found but one only, Vigilantius, who opposed himself against
the Honors given to the Saints, and the worshipping of their Relics, yet he
is looked upon by the Protestants, as the Person who has preserved the
Depositum, that is to say, the Succession of the Apostolical Doctrine, and is
preferred by them to St. Jerome, who has the whole Church for him.

This of Necessity obliges us to take a particular view of the Opinions of
Vigilantius. I shall not make a stop to invalidate what the Bishop says that
Vigilantius wrote in the fourth Century, nor at his endeavoring to cloak the
Notion of his Church concerning the religious Worship they give to Saints and
to Relics, under the indeterminate Expression of the Honors of Saints, and
the Worship of Relics: But to come to the thing it self, I maintain, that if
Vigilantius had the Misfortune of falling under the Displeasure of St. Jerome,
by the Censure he pronounced against the popular Superstition of rendering
various Honors to the Relics of Saints, yet was he never condemned by the
Church that then was, nor treated as an Heretic. Gennadius owns that
Vigilantius had an elegant Style, and that his Zeal for Religion had engaged
him to write. I own that he charges him with a Mistake in his Explication of
the second Vision of Daniel, and in some other Articles for which he reckons
him amongst Heretics. But we are to take notice, 1 st, that Gennadius wrote an
hundred Years after Vigilantius, and so follows the Judgment St. Jerome had
given before of him. 2 dly, That he calls these Articles Heretical, after the
manner of ancient Authors, who very frankly bestowed the Name of Heresy on
every thing that displeased them, though it had never been condemned by the
Scripture, nor rejected by the Body of the Church. 3 dly, That he looked upon
these pretended Heresies as of very small Importance, because he speaks of an
absurd Explication of the second Vision of Daniel, which St. Jerome had revived,
as of an Error more considerable than those of Vigilantius, which he does not
express, and mentions them as Trifles. However be it as it will if the Bishop
of Meaux maintains these two things; 1 st. That Vigilantius was the only Man
that opposed the Honors of the Saints, and the Worship of Relics; and 2 dly.
That St. Jerome had the whole Church on his side in his Answer; I maintain
against the Bishop, that either he is deceived himself, or was willing to
deceive his Reader, in both these things.

The Falsity of the first will appear to every one that can read St. Jerome's
Book against Vigilantius; St. Jerome himself witnesses, that the holy Bishop,
in whose Diocese Vigilantius was a Priest, that is to say, the Bishop of
Barcelona, was of Vigilantius's Opinion: so that we have already discovered one
Bishop, whom St. Jerome endeavored to conceal from us; but we shall find a
greater number whom St. Jerome himself owns to have approved Vigilantius's
Opinion, lest we should imagine that Vigilantius and his Bishop were
Schismatics: O horrible! says St. Jerome, some Bishops also are said to be
Partakers of his Crimes: And we may judge of St. Jerome's Moderation by that
which follows; Si tamen Episcopi nominandi sunt, qui non ordinant Diaconos nisi
primo uxores duxerint, nulli caelibi credentes pudicitiam: If we may call them
Bishops, who ordain none to be Deacons except they be married, not trusting the
Chastity of any unmarried Person. What then shall we conclude that so many
Churches whose Bishops and Priests were all married, had no lawful Bishops or
Priests? Can any thing be conceived more extravagant than this? To this
Acknowledgment of St. Jerome we may add what he says himself on the 65 th
Chapter of Isaiah; for he owns that Vigilantius's blaming of that popular
Superstition, had induced diverse Persons in Gaul, to abstain from frequenting
the Churches of the Martyrs, and to withdraw themselves from the Prayers that
were made there. The Falsity of the second Article will be no less evident, if
we examine the manner of St. Jerome's defending himself against Vigilantius; for
though he had undertaken to run down Vigilantius, yet after all he agrees with
him in the main.

St. Jerome owns in his 53 d Epistle, which he writes to Riparius, that
Vigilantius had writ twice against the Worship of Relics, and that he called
those that adored them, Cinerarii and Idolaters, qui mortuorum hominum ossa
venerarentur, who did honor the Bones of dead Men; for which St. Jerome calls
him a Samaritan and a Jew, because he counted dead Bodies to be unclean, as if
Christians still lived under the Law.

Whereas Vigilantius blamed the Custom of honoring them in the Churches,
because it was a piece of Superstition in a Place dedicated to religious
Worship, to bestow any Veneration upon Creatures, though the most holy and most
excellent that might be. St. Jerome is forced to prevaricate upon this Charge;
his way of defending this matter is such as would never please the Palate of the
Church of Rome. Nos autem non dico Martyrum reliquias, sed ne Solemn quidem and
Lunam, non Angelos, non Archangelos, non Cherubin, non Seraphim, and omne nomen
quod nominatur, and in praesenti saeculo and in futuro, colimus and adoramus,
ne serviamus Creaturae potius quam Creatori, qui est Benedictus in saecula.
Honoramus autem reliquias Martyrum, ut cum, cujus sunt Martyrs adoremus,
honoramus servos, ut honor servorum redundet ad Dominum, qui ait, qui vos
suscipit, me suscipit. Ergo Petri and Pauli immundae sunt Reliquiae, ergo Moysi
corpusculum immundum erit, quod juxta Hebraicam veritatem, ab ipso sepultum est
Domino; and quotiescunque Apostolorum and Prophetarum and omnium Martyrum
Basilicas ingredimur, toties Idolorum templa veneramur, accensique ante tumulos
eorum cerei Idololatriae insignia sunt. But we neither worship nor adore, I do
not say the Relics of Martyrs, but not so much as the Sun and Moon, etc. nor
any Name that is named in this World, or in that which is to come, lest we
should serve the Creature rather than God, who is blessed for ever: But we
honor the Relics of the Martyrs, in worshipping him whose they are; we honor
the Servants, that their Honor may redound to the Lord, who says, He that
receives you, receives me: What are the Relics then of Peter and Paul,
unclean? Is the Body of Moses unclean? which according to the Hebrew Truth was
buried by the Lord himself; and as often as we enter the Churches of the
Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs, do we worship the Temples of Idols? and shall
we say that the Tapers which burn before their Monuments are the Marks of
Idolatry?

What a fine Application does St. Jerome make here of that Passage? He that
receives you, receives me; and how solid an Answer does he return to a solid
Objection, when he tells us, We honor the Servants in worshipping him whose
they are? What a Consequence is this? Is there any other Honor due to Relics,
besides that of being interred? Was not this the Custom used to the Christians
of old, before the time of Constantius? It is well enough seen, that the good
Father skips over the Difficulty, and under a general Protestation of
worshipping nothing but God, he endeavors to shelter a Custom which had been
introduced after the Emperor Constantius's time, that is to say, about 60 Years
before. Vigilantius blamed the Custom which but a little before had been
introduced of lighting Tapers before the Tombs of Martyrs, and passing the
Night by them in Prayer, wherein he followed the Maxims of the Council of
Elvira, held under the Empire of Constantine, about 90 Years before. After what
manner does St. Jerome refute these Complaints of Vigilantius? he tells us of
the Presence of the Angels at the Grave of Jesus Christ; he relies upon the
Example of the Apostles, who buried the Body of St. Stephen: He produces the
Custom of Daniel and the Apostles, who spent the Night in Prayer; and all this
without doubt extremely to the purpose, and the Protestants are much in the
wrong, to prefer the Opinions of Vigilantius to such solid Reasonings as these.

But it may be replied, That St. Jerome disputed only slightly, and for
Argument's sake, in his Epistle to Riparius, not having then seen the Writing
of Vigilantius, and therefore handled the matter only as a Declaimer.

This indeed is the best Excuse that can be alleged to make the Reader digest
the furious Transports and Invectives of this famous Monk, who treats
Vigilantius no otherwise than as another Julian the Apostate, and seems very
willing to have had him destroyed by the Law mentioned in the 13 th of
Deuteronomy. And after all this, St. Jerome is the same in his Book against
Vigilantius, which follows this Epistle.

After a Preface which out-does all the Monsters that either the Scripture or
Fables speak of, he begins thus; Exortus est subito Vigilantius, seu verius
Dormitantius, qui immundo spiritu pugnet contra Christi spiritum, and Martyrum
neget sepulcra veneranda, damnandas dicat esse Vigilias, nunquam nisi in Pascha
Alleluja cantandum, continentiam Haeresin, Pudicitiam Libidinis seminarium; and
quomodo Euphorbus in Pythagora renatus esse perhibetur; sic in isto Joviniani
men's prava surrexit, ut in illo, and in hoc Diaboli respondere cogamur
insidiis. Here is suddenly started up one Vigilantius, or rather Dormitantius,
who with an unclean Spirit fights against the Spirit of Christ, and denies that
any Veneration ought to be given to the Sepulchers of Martyrs, condemns the
Watchings at them, affirms that Alleluja's ought to be sung at no time except
Easter, calls Continence Heresy, and Chastity the Nursery of Lust; so that as
Euphorbus was said to be born again in Pythagoras, in like manner in him seems
to be revived Jovinianus's Wickedness, in whom as we were forced to oppose our
selves against the Wiles of the Devil, so likewise are we now equally obliged
to oppose this Man's Errors. What Ciceronian Eloquence is this? What a strange
Account of things is here?

But there is something worse behind, see what Stories he tells of Jovinian:
Ecclesiae Authoritate damnatus inter Phasides aves and carnes suillas, non tam
emisit spiritum, quam eructavit, iste Caupo Callaguritanus, and in perversum
propter nomen viculi, mutus Quintilianus: Miscet aquam vino, and de pristino
artificio, suae venena perfidiae Catholicae fidei sociare conatur, impugnare
virginitatem, odisse pudicitiam, in convivio saecularium contra sanctorum
Azemia proclamare, dum inter phialas philosophatur, and ad placentas liguriens,
Psalmorum modulatione mulcetur, ut tantum inter Epulas David and Idithum and
Asaph and filiorum Core cantica audire dignetur. Surely the good St. Jerome did
not think of what he said, so extremely was he transported with an
inconsiderate Zeal for Celibacy; but however, this Zeal of his had a reasonable
Motive: Prohnefas! said he. This is the first Heresy of Vigilantius; he would
have it allowed to Ministers to marry, whereas in the ten Provinces subject to
the Pope, in the seventeen Provinces of the Jurisdiction of Ephesus, and in the
five Provinces of Egypt they followed a contrary Custom.

This without doubt was a crying Heresy, and yet it appears from the Decretal
of Pope -- to Hymerius Bishop of Tarracona, that it had made so little
Impression upon the Minds of Men, that Innocent I. was fain to write A. D. 405.
to Exuperius Bishop of Toulouse, upon the same Subject of the Celibacy of the
Clergy, so much opposition did that Business every where meet with at that
time. We must consider further the manner how St. Jerome applies the Passage,
which only regards Adultery, to the Celibacy of the Clergy: But this is only by
way of Preface.

St. Jerome tells us at first, that he had received Vigilantius's Book, by the
Care of Riparius and Desiderius, who lived near the Countries that Vigilantius
had infected with his Opinions, and that he had been informed by them, that
there were some there who favored his Vices, and were pleased with his
Blasphemies: After having branded his Book for a stupid piece of Ignorance, and
which did not deserve to be discussed, were it not for the sake of some silly
Women, laden with Sins, of whom St. Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 3.6. he assaults
Vigilantius upon the account of the place of his Birth; he was born at
Calaguri, whereupon St. Jerome makes a learned Disquisition into the Original of
that People, from Pompey's time: Nimirum, says he, respondet generi suo, ut
qui de Latronum and Convenarum natus est semine, quos Cn. Pompeius, edomita
Hispania, and ad Triumphum redire festinans, de Pyrenaei jugis deposuit, and in
unum oppidum congregavit, unde and Convenarum urbs nomen accepit, hucusque
latrocinetur contra Ecclesiam, and de Vectonibus, Arrebacis, Celtiberisque
descendens, incurset Galliarum Ecclesias, portetque nequaquam vexillum Christi,
sed insigne Diaboli. Fecit hoc idem Pompeius etiam in Orientis partibus, ut
Cilicibus and Isauris Piratis, Latronibusque superatis, sui nominis inter
Ciliciam and Isauriam conderet civitatem. Sed haec urbs hodie servat scita
Majorum, and nullus in ea ortus est Dormitantius: Galliae vernaculum hostem
sustinent, and hominem moti capitis, atque Hippocraticis vinculis alligandum,
sedentem sinunt in Ecclesia and inter caetera verba Blasphemiae, etc. He indeed
(says he) every way answers his Extraction; for being descended from Robbers,
and a mixed Rabble drawn together from several parts, whom Pompey after he had
conquered Spain, and hasting to his Triumph, removed from the tops of the
Pyrenean Hills, and gathered them into one City, which therefore was called the
City of Strangers; what wonder is it then, if being such a one, he ravage and
spoil the Church, and if deriving his Pedigree from the Vectones, Arrebaci and
Celtiberi, he make Incursions upon the Gallick Churches, fighting not under
Christ's but the Devil's Banner? Pompey also did the same in the East, where
after he had overcome the Pirates and Robbers of Cilicia and Isauria, he built
a City bearing his own Name, between Cilicia and Isauria: but to this day that
City observes their Forefathers Customs, and never produced any Dormitantius;
whereas Gaul maintains an homebred Enemy, and suffers a Man that is half mad,
one fit to be bound in Hippocrates's Bands, to sit in the Church, etc. Here is
a violent Transport of Rage: What horrid thing then is it that this Robber has
attempted? Why he said; Quid necesse est te tanto honor, non solum honorare,
sed etiam adorare illud nescio quid, quod in modico vasculo transferendo colis?
Et rursum in eodem libro: Quid pulverem linteamine circundatum adorando
oscularis? Et in consequentibus, prope ritum Gentilium videmus sub praetextu
Religionis, introductum in Ecclesias; Sole adhuc fulgente, moles cereorum
accendi, and ubicunque pulvisculum nescio quod, in modico vasculo, pretioso
linteamine circundatum osculantes adorare. Magnum honorem praebent hujusmodi
homines beatissimis Martyribus, quos putant de vilissimis cereolis
illustrandos, quos Agnus qui est in medio Throni, cum omni fulgore Majestatis
suae illustrat. What need is there for thee, not only to venerate, but also
adore something I know not what which thou worshippest, carrying it about in a
little Box. And again in the same Book; why do thou kiss by way of Worship, a
little Dust wrapped up in Linen? And afterward; We have almost seen a
heathenish Rite introduced into the Churches; whole heaps of wax Tapers lighted
in the Face of the Sun, and Men every where kissing a little Dust, shut up in a
small Box, with religious Reverence, which is wrapped about with fine Linen.
These Men must need render a great Honor to the most Blessed Martyrs, whom
they suppose to stand in need of the Illustration of vile Candles, whereas the
Lamb that is in the midst of the Throne, does illuminate them with all the
Brightness of his Majesty. This is a dreadful Crime in Vigilantius beyond all
controversy.

Who is there, replies St. Jerome to this, that ever adored the Martyrs? And he
proves that it may not be done by the Example of Paul and Barnabas, and of St.
Peter. The Church of Rome, and the Bishop of Meaux, are concerned to enquire
whether St. Jerome was very Orthodox, in denying a thing which at present cannot
be so absolutely denied, without the Imputation of Heresy. After St. Jerome has
shown his Indignation against this Expression, Illud nescio quid, as if
Vigilantius therein had spoke Blasphemy, and derogated from the Honor due to
the Martyrs, he defends his Judgment by the Examples of Constantine, that is to
say, of Constantius, who had transported to Constantinople the Relics of St.
Andrew, St. Luke and Timothy, and of the Emperor Arcadius, who had caused the
Bones of the Prophet Samuel to be brought out of Judea to Thrace, with the
Approbation of the Bishops and People of that time. This is a very solid
Defense, if we may believe St. Jerome, for it seems there is no more to be said,
when once a Superstition comes to be 60 years old.

That which displeases, is, that St. Jerome goes about to support this popular
Worship, by this curious way of arguing. Mortuum suspicaris, and idcirco
blasphemas; lege Evangelium, Deus Abraham, Deus Isaac, Deus Jacob; non est Deus
mortuorum, sed vivorum. Si ergo vivunt, honesto juxta te carcere non
clauduntur: Ais enim vel in sinu Abraham, vel in loco refrigerii, vel subter
Aram Dei, animas Apostolorum and Martyrum consedisse, nec posse suis tumulis
and ubi voluerint adesse praesentes; senatoriae videlicet dignitatis sunt, ut
non inter Homicidas teterrimo carcere* sed in libera honestaque custodia in
Fortunatarum Insulis and in Campis Elysiis recludantur. Tu Deo Leges ponis, tu
Apostolis vincula injicis, ut usque ad Deum judicii teneantur custodia; nec
sint cum Domino suo, de quibus scriptum est, sequuntur Agnum quocunque vadit.
Si Agnus ubique, ergo and hi qui cum Agno sunt, ubique esse credendi sunt. Et
cum Diabolus and Daemones toto vagentur orb, and celeritate nimia ubique
praesentes sint, Martyrs post effusionem sanguinis, sui arca operientur
inclusi, and inde exire non poterunt?

Thou supposest him to be dead, and therefore thou blasphemest; Read the
Gospel, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; he is
not the God of the Dead, but of the Living. But if they be alive, say you, they
ought not to be shut up in such narrow Prisons; and you own that the Souls of
the Apostles and Martyrs have taken up their abode either in the Bosom of
Abraham, or in a Place of Refreshment, or under the Altar of God, and they
cannot be present at their Tombs, or wherever they please: for by your
account, they are Persons of the first Quality, and so ought not to be shut up
amongst Murderers in a filthy Dungeon, but to enjoy a free and honorable
Custody in the fortunate Islands, and the Elysian Fields. Thus you limit and
set Laws to God, and bind the Apostles in Chains, and keep them in custody till
the Day of Judgment; so that they cannot be with their Lord, of whom it is
written, that they follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Now seeing the Lamb
is every where, they who are with the Lamb must be supposed to be everywhere
also; and when the Devil and Spirits do wander throughout the whole World, and
by their over great Nimbleness, are present everywhere, shall we say that the
Martyrs after the shedding of their Blood, are shut up in their Coffins without
being able to stir from thence?

These fine Reasonings of St. Jerome against Vigilantius have two Characters.
The 1 st, is, that they are contrary to the Sentiments of most of the Ancients;
The 2 d, is, that they have been despised by St. Austin: And in fine, have
displeased all the Schoolmen; so that it is not worth while to contradict them.
St. Jerome handles the rest of his Matter much at the same rate. Dicis in
libello tuo, quod dum vivimus, mutui pro nobis orare possumus postquam autem
mortui fuerimus, nullius sit pro Deo exaudienda oration: praesertim cum Martyrs
ultionem sui obsecrantes impetrare non quiverint. You say in your Book, That
whilst we are alive we may mutually pray for one another, but that after we are
once dead, no Man's Prayer can be heard for another; and the rather, because
even the Martyrs themselves begging of God that he would avenge their Blood,
have not been able to obtain their request.

What is it St. Jerome answers to this? he says, That if the Saints, when
alive, procured Favors for others, they may obtain them much rather now when
they are with Christ, seeing they are not dead, but asleep, as the Scripture
tells us.

As to the wax Tapers, the use of which is blamed by Vigilantius, St. Jerome
tells us something that will not over-well agree with the Church of Rome.
Cereos autem non clara luce accendi^us, sicut frustra calumniaris, sed ut
noctis tenebras hoc solatio temperemus, and vigilemus ad Lumen, ne tecum
dormiamus in tenebris. Quod si aliqui propter imperitiam and simplicitatem
saecularium hominum, vel certe religiosarum feminarum, de quibus vere possumus
dicere confiteor Zelum Dei habent, sed non secundum scientiam, hoc pro honor
Martyrum faciunt, quid inde perdis? Causabantur quondam and Apostoli, quod
periret unguentum, sed Domini voce correpti sunt, neque enim Christus indigebat
unguento, nec Martyrs Lumine Cereorum, and tamen illa Mulier in honor Christi
hoc fecit, devotioque mentis ejus recipitur: and quicunque accendunt cereos,
secundum fidem suam habent mercedem, dicente Apostolo, Vnusquisque suo sensu
abundet. Neither do we light wax Tapers at Noonday, as you causlesly complain,
but only to allay the Darkness of the Night with the help of Candles, and to be
kept waking by the Light of them, lest being in Darkness we should fall asleep
as well as you: But, and if some out of Ignorance and Simplicity amongst the
Laymen or devout Women, of whom we may truly say, that they have a Zeal for
God, but not according to Knowledge, should do this in honor to the Martyrs,
what is the loss or hurt of all this? So the Apostles also murmured of old,
that the Woman made waste of her Ointment; but were reproved by our Lord
himself; neither did the Lord want the Ointment any more than the Martyrs stand
in need of Wax Tapers; and yet because the Woman did it in honor to Christ,
her Devotion is accepted of; and so they who light wax Tapers, receive a reward
according to their Faith; for the Apostle tells us, Let every one abound in his
own Sense.

One cannot avoid taking notice how St. Jerome abuses this Passage of St. Paul,
and the Pretense he gives for adjudging Rewards, to all sorts of Superstition;
however we must acknowledge that in this Article St. Jerome has many more
Approvers than Vigilantius.

Vigilantius called them Idolaters, who by lighting Wax Tapers by Daylight,
did imitate the Customs of the Heathens. How does St. Jerome answer him. First,
He tells him, that what was done of this kind to Idols, was detestable, but
that the same thing when done out of respect to the Martyrs, is very
commendable. 2 ly, That the Eastern Churches lighted Candles at the reading of
the Gospel, though there be no Relics of the Martyrs. 3 ly, That Jesus Christ
assigns to the wise Virgins Lamps lighted. 4 ly, He opposes to Vigilantius the
Example of the Bishop of Rome, who celebrated the Mass upon the Tombs of the
Apostles, as upon an Altar. I fear I should tire the Patience of my Reader,
should I go about to examine this Piece of St. Jerome's throughout, this
Specimen may suffice to judge of the whole Work.

I shall therefore only reduce to some few Articles, what I have further to
add, in order to the full clearing of this Question.

1. I affirm, that the Bishop of Meaux had no reason to say that Vigilantius
opposed himself against the Honors done to Saints. St. Jerome does not accuse
him of it in any part of his Works, he only blames him because he was not for
giving them so great Honor as other Men did. Quid necesse est tanto honor,
non tantum honorare, sed etiam adorare illud nescio quid? What necessity is
there not only to honor, but even to adore and worship I know not what, with
so very great Honor?

2. It Is for the Bishop of Meaux to tell us, whether he believes with St.
Jerome, that Vigilantius was an Heretic for denying that the Souls of Saints
are present at their Graves; and whether St. Jerome does solidly prove, that we
ought to believe them to be everywhere, where Jesus Christ is; because it is
said in the Revelations, that the Virgins follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

3. The truth is, Vigilantius stretched the Point too far, in maintaining, that
after we are dead, the Prayer of any one for another cannot be heard. Probably
also he might be too rigid, in refusing to enter into the Churches of the
Apostles and Martyrs, to signify his Aversion to the Superstition which then
began to be introduced, as St. Austin complains, De moribus Eccles. -- cap. 34.

1. But it is false, that because Vigilantius found fault with the Adoration of
Relics; therefore St. Jerome maintained the same to be lawful: he was so far
from that, that he upbraids Vigilantius with calumniating the Church by this
his Accusation. Quis, O insanum caput! aliquando Martyrs adoravit? Quis
hominem putavit Deum? Who ever, O foolish Man, adored the Martyrs? Who ever
took a Man to be God? It is evident that St. Jerome takes Adoration to be an Act
due to God alone, and which he does not divide in two sorts, as the Church of
Rome does at this day, which indeed makes three different sorts of it.

2. It is false, that St. Jerome maintains that the Church prayed to Saints,
whereof Vigilantius accuses those against whom he had writ. He agrees with
Vigilantius, that the Saints ought not to be prayed to even as Friends to
Christ, and Intercessors with God; Ne ut Amici quidem Dei and comprecatores ad
Deum. Is it not manifest that the Bishop of Meaux abuses the World, when he
quotes St. Jerome in favor of the Church of Rome, which prays to Saints on both
these accounts, which are so expressly rejected by St. Jerome; and when he
upbraids the Protestants for following of Vigilantius in an Article which St.
Jerome owns as well as he, and the whole Church at that time? But to speak the
truth, The whole of Vigilantius his Crime, consists: 1 st, In that he was
willing to bring the Discipline of the Council of Elvira in force again, which
was assembled at the beginning of the 4 th Century; the Constitutions whereof
were undervalued toward the end of the same Age, after the Christian Religion
began to bear down all its Opposers, under the Reign of Constantine and his
Children. 2 ly, Because he attributes to the Church some Customs, which were
not all of them authorized, though they were already generally received and
maintained by the Ignorant and Superstitious sort of People. 3 ly, Because he
opposed some Customs as general, which were capable of being explained in a
tolerable Sense. But indeed at the bottom, St. Jerome and Vigilantius were very
well agreed upon the Point we condemn in the Church of Rome; neither do we find
that the Church, to which Vigilantius did belong, did ever except against him.
Thus it is evident, that the Protestants may look upon Vigilantius as a zealous
Defender of the Christian Purity, and one of those who opposed themselves
against Superstition in its first rise.

CHAP. V. The State of the Churches of Aquitain and Narbon in the Fifth Century.
THis Age furnishes us with several considerable Witnesses. St. Jerome, whom
the Bishop of Meaux has endeavored to represent as our Antagonist, is the
first of them.

He says, speaking of Exuperius Bishop of Toulouse, Praefat. in Zechariam.
that this holy Bishop carried the Eucharist in a Wicker-Basket, a way by no
means agreeable to the Custom of the Church of Rome, where it is accompanied
with quite different Ceremonies. 1 st, Because it is made the Object of
Adoration, and that in the very Streets. 2 ly, Because People dare not touch
the least Crumb of it, as being persuaded that the Body of Jesus Christ which
is in the Host, multiplies according to the number of the Crumbs, into which
the Host may be broken. 3 ly, Because by this means it might come to be trod
under foot or lost, upon which a thousand Inconveniences must follow.

It is worth observing here concerning this Custom of carrying the Eucharist
about, which was in use in the 2 d Century, as appears from the Writings of
Justin Martyr; that it differed very much from what we find in the Romish
Church, since the 12 th Century. For indeed since that time, Rome has taken
great care to obtain Laws whereby all that walk in the Streets, whether Jews,
Heathens or Christians, might be compelled to adore, what she looks upon as her
God. But we find nothing like this in any Law of the Emperors or Christian
Princes in favor of the Adoration of the Eucharist.

The 2 d Witness whom we may consult about the State of these Diocesses, is
Sulpitius Severus, Monk of Primuliacum in Guienne. And since he wrote at a
time, when the Zeal for that kind of Life did transport the best Men, we need
not wonder that he has inserted so many Fables in the Books we have of his,
though setting those aside, nothing was finer in that Age than his Writings.

But after all, it is certain, that notwithstanding all this leaven of a
Monastic Spirit, we find many Characters of a very pure Divinity in his Books;
this will appear from the following Observations: whence it is obvious to
conclude, that he was not engaged in Popish Maxims.

1. He maintains, That it was Jesus Christ that wrestled with Jacob; which
Passage the Doctors of the Church of Rome corrupt, to have an occasion thence
to conclude that a mere Angel had blessed Jacob; T. 7. B. P. page 170.
Pridie, says he, quam inter se fratres convenirent, Dominus, humana specie
assumpta, colluctatus cum Jacob refertur. Et cum adversus Dominum
praevaluisset, tamen non esse mortalem non ignoravit; benedici sibi ab eo
flagitabat. The day before the Brothers met, the Lord is said to have wrestled
with Jacob in a humane Form; and though he prevailed against the Lord, yet he
knew him not to be mortal, and desired to be blessed by him.

Page 173.
2. He owns the second Commandment, and distinguishes it from the first. Non
erunt tibi Dii alieni praeter me. Non facies tibi Idolum. Thou shall have no
other Gods but me. Thou shall not make to thy self a Graven Image. Neither does
he split the last Command into two, as the Church of Rome does at present: for
he concludes the Decalogue in this Manner, Non falsum testimonium dices
adversus Proximum tuum. Non concupisces quidquam Proximi tui? Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy Neighbor. Thou shall not covet any any thing
that is thy Neighbors.

3. He was so little persuaded that the Name of Catholic was a solid Character
of the true Church, that he confesses that Arianism had infected all the World.
See how he expresses himself, Eoque his certaminibus processum, ut istiusmodi
piaculis orbis terrarum implicaretur, nam Italiam, Illyricum atque Orientem
Valens and Vrsacius, caeterique, quorum nomina edidimus, infecerant. And these
Contests proceeded so far, that the whole World became involved in this
Wickedness: for Valens and Vrsacius, with the rest, whose Names we have
mentioned, had infected Italy, Illyricum, and the East.

4. He minded the Pope's Power of suppressing Heresy so little, that he owns
St. Hilary to have preserved Gaul: Illud, Page 210.
says he, apud omnes constitit, unius Hilarii beneficio, Gallias nostras
piaculo Haeresis liberatas: Thus much was known to all, that by the sole
Endeavors of Hilary, our Gaul was delivered from the Infection of Heresy.

5. He shows so violent an Aversion to the Spirit of Persecution, that he very
sharply reproves Ithacius, for using the Priscillianists hardly, who were a
Branch of the Manichees that had settled themselves in Spain and for persuading
the Emperor Gratian to banish them: Is, says he, viz. Ithacius, Page 211.
vero sine modo and ultra quam oportuit, Idacium sociosque ejus lacessens,
facem quandam nascenti incendio subdidit, ut exasperaverit malos potius quam
compresserit. -- Tum vero Idacius atque Ithacius acrius instare -- arbitrantes
posse inter initia malum comprimi; sed parum sanis consiliis saeculares judices
adeunt, ut eorum decretis atque executionibus, Haeretici urbibus pellerentur.
Igitur post multa and foeda Idacio supplicante, elicitur a Gratiano tum
Imperatore rescriptum, etc. But he above measure, and beyond what ought to have
been done, provoking Idacius and his Fellows, helped to blow the Flame, and
exasperate these wicked Men, rather than suppress them. -- Whereupon Idacius
and Ithacius began to double their Endeavors, supposing that the Mischief
might be suppressed in its beginning; but being all advised, they address
themselves to secular Judges, that by their Decrees and Executions, the
Heretics might be banished the Cities. Thus after many and base Intrigues upon
Idacius's petitioning, an Order was drawn from Gratian the then Emperor, etc.

6. He draws such a Parallel between St. Ambrose and Pope Damasus, that he
attributes to them the supreme Authority in the Church, which does not at all
agree with the Notion of Papacy. After having said that it was impossible for
the Priscillianists to justify themselves before Damasus Bishop of Rome, and
St. Ambrose, because both these Bishops refused to hear them; he proceeds thus;
Tum vertere consilia, Page 212.
ut quia duobus Episcopis, quorum ea tempestate summa authoritas erat, non
illuserat, etc. Then they began to change their Measures, and because they
could not delude the two Bishops, whose Authority was supreme at that time, etc.

Page 219. cap. 8.
7. He informs us what the Tendency is of the Worship given to Martyrs, by the
History he gives us of an Altar, which the popular Superstition had rendered
famous, because they pretended that some Martyrs had been buried in that place.
St. Martin whose Life is described by our Author, not being able to make any
certain Discovery of the Name of this Martyr, and the Circumstances of his
Sufferings, and being loath absolutely to doubt of the Truth of it, thought fit
himself to go to this famous Sepulcher, in Company of some of his Brethren:
Being come to the place, he earnestly begged of God to reveal to him the Name
and Merit of the Martyr; and afterward turning himself toward the left, Vidit
prope assistere umbram sordidam trucem; He sees standing near him a hideous and
terrible Ghost: They command him to declare himself, the Ghost obeys: Nomen
edicit, de crimine confitetur, Latronem se fuisse, ob scelera percussum, vulgi
errore celebratum; sibi nihil cum Martyribus esse commune; cum illos gloria, se
poena retineret. Tells his Name, confesses his Crime, that he had been
executed for Robbery, that it was only the Error of the People caused him to be
canonized; that he was in nothing like the Martyrs who were in Glory, whereas
he was in Pain. The good St. Martin being troubled to hear this account, caused
the Altar to be carried to another place: and so faith our Author, delivered
the People from a superstitious Error.

Ibid. cap. 9.
8. He declares that the Custom of carrying the Images of the Saints through the
Parishes, was no better than a Custom derived from the Heathens. The same
Saint, says he, once by Accident saw a Company of Heathens at a Distance, who
accompanied the Body of an Heathen to the Grave; but finding himself too far
off to discover what they were about, and perceiving the Winds to wave the
Linen wherewith the dead Body was covered, he imagined they were employed
about the profane Ceremonies of their Sacrifices, and the reason he gives of
it is this; Quia esset haec Gallorum Rusticis consuetudo, simulacra Daemonum,
candido tecta velamine, misera per agros suos circumferre dementia. Because it
was the Custom of the Country People of Gaul, to carry madly about their
Grounds the Images of Demons, covered over with a white Vail.

9. He lays down a very remarkable Maxim for the Albigenses: Ecclesiam auro non
strui, sed potius destrui; Page 234. Dial. c. 1.
That Gold was not the means of building, but rather of destroying the Church;
which those of the Church of Rome could never forgive him, as appears by their
Censures in the Margin.

10. He severely blames the Conduct of those who employ Violence against such
as do not acquiesce in their Decisions. He went, says he, to Alexandria, but
would not make any stay in a place: Vbi recens fraternae cladis fervebat
invidia; Page 235. Dia. c. 3. ad finem.
nam etsi fortasse videantur parere Episcopis debuisse, non ob hanc tamen
causam multitudinem tantam sub Christi confessione viventem, praesertim ab
Episcopis oportuisset affligi. Where the Reproach of their intestine Slaughters
was yet fresh; for though perhaps it was their Duty to have obeyed the Bishops,
yet such a vast number of Persons living in the Confession of Christ, ought not
to have been afflicted in that manner, especially by the Bishops.

11. He acquaints us with the unjust Proceedings of the Spanish Bishops against
the Priscillianists, and the ridiculous Marks they had to discover them:
Maximus Imperator, Page 253.
alias satis bonus, depravatus consiliis sacerdotum, post Priscilliani necem,
Ithacium Episcopum Priscilliani accusatorem, caeterosque illius socios, vi
Regia tuebatur, ne quis ei crimini daret, opera illius cujuscunque modi hominem
fuisse damnatum. Et jam pridie Imperator ex illorum sententia decreverat,
tribunos summa potestate armatos ad Hispanias mittere qui Haereticos
inquirerent, deprehensis vitam and bona adimerent: Nec dubium erat quin
sanctorum etiam maximam turbam, tempestas ista depopulatura est, parvo
discrimine inter hominum genera: etenim tum solis oculis judicabatur, cum quis
pallore potius aut vest, quam fide Haereticus estimaretur. This great Emperor,
otherwise a very good Man, being spoiled by the Counsel of the Priests, after
Priscillian's Death, did by his Kingly Power defend Ithacius the Bishop,
Priscillian's Accuser, and the rest of his Associates, that no body might
reflect on him, as if by his Procurement any Man had been condemned. -- The Day
before the Emperor had already according to their liking, resolved to send
Tribunes with full Power into Spain, to examine those that were Heretics, and
being found such, to take away their Lives and Estates: Neither was it to be
doubted but that this Storm would have reached the greatest part of Believers,
because of the small Distinction made between them and the other: for then they
judged Persons only by the Eye, esteeming them Heretics from their pale Looks
or Habit, rather than by their Faith. He afterward shows the Horror that St.
Martin had conceived against these kind of Proceedings: Page 254.
There was nothing he was more concerned about; Illa praecipua cura ne Tribuni
cum jure gladiorum ad Hispanias mitterentur: Than to prevent the Tribunes being
sent into Spain, with the Power of the Sword. He renounced Communion with these
sanguinary Bishops; but not long after, to avoid a greater Mischief, he was
obliged to give up that Point, though he still refused to subscribe to the
Condemnation of the Priscillianists; Hujus diei communionem Martinus iniit,
Ibid.
satius aestimans ad horam cedere, quam his non consulere, quorum cervicibus
gladius imminebat; veruntamen summa vi Episcopis nitentibus, ut communionem
illam subscriptione firmaret, extorqueri non potuit. Martin communicated with
them at that time, thinking it better for a while to give way to them, than not
to provide for their Safety, who had the Sword hanging over them: But yet
though the Bishops used their utmost Endeavors to make him ratify his
communicating with them by his Subscription, they could never bring him to it.

If we consult Vincentius Lirinensis, and Cassian, they will afford us much
Light as to the State of these Diocesses.

Vincentius a Priest of the Monastery of Lerins, is one of those who can best
inform us what was esteemed Orthodox in these Churches: Indeed we find all the
peculiar Doctrines of the Church of Rome are condemned in the Maxims that he
solidly asserts in the 28 th Chapter of his Commonitorium, T. 4. B. P. page 72,
and 73.
where he maintains that the Church may every day make a further Progress in
the Knowledge of Truth, and all this without making any Innovation: Crescat
igitur oportet, and multum vehementerque proficiat, tam singulorum quam omnium,
tam unius hominis, quam totius Ecclesiae, aetatum ac saeculorum gradibus
intelligentia, scientia sapientia, sed in suo duntaxat genere, in eodem se
dogmate, eodem sensu, eademque sententia. The Understanding, Knowledge and
Wisdom, as well of every singular Person as of the whole Church, ought to grow
and greatly increase, according to the several Degrees of Times and Ages, but
every one in his own way, that is to say, in the same Doctrine, in the same
Sense, and the same Judgment.

2. He in the same place exclaims against all new Doctrines and new Names, and
yet owns that the Church acquires daily more Light in matters of Religion; Sed
ita tamen ut vere profectus sit ille fidei non permutatio: But yet so that this
is really an Advancement, not a Change of Faith.

3. He reduces all that we ought to believe to the Rule of Faith, and declares
what is the true use, and the true Authority of the Doctors of the Church: Quae
tamen antiqua sanctorum Patrum consensio, non in omnibus divinae legis
quaestiunculis, Page 78. cap. 39.
sed solum certe praecipue in fidei regula, magno nobis studio and investiganda
est and sequenda. -- Quibus tamen (Patribus) hac lege credendum est, ut
quicquid vel omnes vel plures, uno eodemque sensu manifest frequenter
perseveranter, velut quodam consentiente sibi magistrorum consilio, accipiendo,
tenendo, tradendo firmaverint, id pro indubitato certo, ratoque habeatur. But
yet this primitive Consent of the Holy Fathers is not to be inquired after and
followed as to the lesser Questions of Divine Law alike, but especially, if not
only, in the Rule of Faith. -- Which Fathers we may give full Credit to, on
this Condition, that whatsoever all or the most of them do in the same sense,
manifestly, frequently and constantly maintain, as in a Council of Masters
agreeing together, by their receiving, holding and delivering the same, that
ought to be esteemed unquestionable, certain and firm.

4. He lays down a Method how we may dispute with the Church of Rome, about the
Errors she has drawn from Antiquity, by reducing the whole Dispute to the
Scripture: Ibid.
Atque ideo quascunque illas antiquiores, vel Schismatum vel Haereseon
profanitates, nullo modo nos oportet, nisi aut sola, si opus est, Scripturarum
authoritate convincere, aut certe jam antiquitus universalibus Sacerdotum
Catholicorum Conciliis convictas damnatasque vitare. Wherefore we are no other
way to convict all ancient Errors of Schism or Heresy, but either, if need be,
by the sole Authority of Scripture, or else to avoid them as already condemned
by the universal Councils of Catholic Priests.

5. He excellently explains the Use of Tradition, without derogating any thing
from the Sufficiency of Scripture: Diximus in superioribus hanc fuisse semper,
Page 79. c. ante penult.
and esse hodieque Catholicorum consuetudinem, ut fidem veram duobus istis
mediis adprobent: primum Divini Canonis authoritate; deinde Ecclesiae
traditione: non quia Canon solus non sibi ad universa sufficiat, sed quia verba
Divina pro suo plerique arbitratis interpretantes, varias opiniones erroresque
concipiant; atque ideo necesse sit ut ad unam Ecclesiastici sensus regulam;
scripturae coelestis intelligentia dirigatur, in iis duntaxat praecipue
quaestionibus, quibus totius Catholici dogmatis fundamenta nituntur. We have
said before, that this has been and still is the Custom of Catholics, to
prove the true Faith two ways; 1 st, by the Authority of the Divine Canon: And
2 dly, by the Churches Tradition; not as if the Canon were not of it self
sufficient, but because most Men interpret Scripture according to their own
private Fancy, which has given occasion to various Opinions and Errors:
Wherefore it is needful that the Understanding of Holy Scripture be regulated
by one single Determination of the Church, and particularly in those Questions
on which the Foundations of all Catholic Doctrine rest.

Lastly; He desires that universal Consent may be taken only from such a
Tradition as he authorizeth. Ibid.
Item diximus in ipsa rursus Ecclesia, universitatis pariter ac antiquitatis
consensionem spectari oportere, ne aut ab unitatis integritate in partem
schismatis abrumpamur, aut a vetustatis religione, in Haereseon novitates
praecipitemur. We have said also that in the Church we are to have an Eye to
the Consent of Universality and Antiquity, that we be not rent from the entire
Union into a Schism, or be cast headlong from the Religion of the Ancients into
the Novelties of Heresy.

There needs little more than these Maxims to secure a Church where they are
taught from those Corruptions, into which the Church of Rome is fallen by her
continual Practice of the contrary, as well in respect of the Doctrines of
Faith, as of religious Worship.

Cassian a Priest, the Disciple of Chrysostom, has writ much concerning the
Institutes of Monks, and accordingly we find in his Writings several Instances
of their Folly and Pride. He says the young Monks observed the Rules
prescribed to them so exactly, Vt non solum non audeant absque Praepositi sui
scientia, Institut. Caenob. lib. 4. cap. 10.
vel permissu, non solum cella progredi, sed ne ipsi quidem communi and
naturali necessitati satisfacere sua authoritate praesumant. That without leave
obtained from their Abbot, they dare not only not stir out of their Cells, but
what is more, not so much as satisfy the common Necessities of Nature. He shows
that Covetousness began already to reign amongst the Monks of his time.
Tertius, says he, Ibid. lib. 7. cap. 1.
nobis est conflictus adversus Philargyriam, quam nos amorem pecuniarum
possumus appellare; peregrinum bellum and extra naturam, nec aliunde in Monacho
sumens principium, quam de corruptae and torpidae mentis ignavia, and plerumque
initio abrenuntiationis male arrepto, and erga Deum tepido amore. Our third
Conflict is with the Love of Money, a foreign and unnatural War, and which
arises in Monks from the Sluggishness from a corrupt and benumbed Mind, and
very often is grounded upon an inconsiderate Entrance upon a Self-denying Life,
and a luke warm Love toward God. Lib. 7. cap. 16.
He cannot bear the Impudence of those covetous Monks, who defended themselves
with those Words of Jesus Christ, It is more glorious to give than to receive.
He censures the impertinent Interpretation which some Monks put upon these
Words of Christ, Whosoever does not take up his Cross and follow me, Collat. 8.
cap. 3.
is not worthy of me: Quod quidam districtissimi Monachorum, habentes quidem
Zelum Dei, sed non secundum scientiam, simpliciter intelligentes, fecerunt sibi
Cruces ligneas, easque jugiter humeris circumferentes, non aedificationem, sed
risum cunctis videntibus intulerunt. Which some of the strictest Monks having a
Zeal for God, but not according to Knowledge, taking too literally, made
themselves wooden Crosses, and by carrying them about upon their Shoulders,
instead of edifying, provoked those that saw them to Laughter.

2. He informs us that the Monks of Egypt were no scrupulous Observers of their
Fasts, and that they made no Difficulty of breaking them, in order to discharge
some Duty which appeared of more Importance to them. Cassian tells us he was
surprised at it, Inst. Caenob. l. 5. cap. 14.
but one of the eldest Monks returned him this excellent Answer: Jejunium
semper est mecum, vos autem continuo dimissurus, mecum jugiter tenere non
potero. Et Jejunium quidem, licet utile sit, ac jugiter necessarium, tamen
voluntarii muneris est oblatio: opus autem charitatis impleri, exigit praecepti
necessitas. To fast is always in my power, but you being ready to depart, I
cannot have you always with me. Besides, to fast, though it be useful and
always necessary, yet it is but a Free-Will-Offering: whereas Acts of Charity
are required of us upon the account of their being commanded.

3. It appears that they did not believe the Scriptures to be so obscure, as at
this day they are supposed to be. We may see what Abbot Theodorus thought of
this matter, as we find it set down by Cassian. Ibid. lib. 5. cap. 34.
Monachum ad scripturarum notitiam pertingere cupientem, nequaquam debere
labores suos, erga commentatorum libros impendere, sed potius omnem mentis
industriam and intentionem cordis, erga emundationem viti^rum carnalium
detinere, quibus expulsis confestim cordis oculi, sublato velamine Passionum,
sacramenta scripturarum velut naturaliter incipient contemplari. Siquidem nobis
non ut essent incognita vel obscura, sancti spiritus gratia promulgata sunt:
sed nostro vitio, velamine Peccatorum cordis oculos obnubente, redduntur
obscura, quibus rursum naturali redditis sanitati, ipsa scripturarum sanctarum
lectio, ad contemplationem verae scientiae abunde etiam sola sufficiat, nec eos
commentatorum institutionibus indigere. That a Monk who desires to attain to
the Knowledge of Scripture, ought not to spend his time upon Commentators, but
rather bend and apply his utmost Industry and Attention to the purging himself
from fleshly Lusts, which if they are once expelled, then immediately the Eyes
of the Heart, upon removing of the Vail of Passions, will as it were naturally
begin to contemplate the Mysteries of Scripture; since we may be sure that the
Grace of the Holy Spirit never gave them forth that they should continue
unknown or obscure; but they are darkened by our own Fault, because the Vail of
Sin covers the Eyes of the Soul, which when once restored to their natural
Soundness, the very reading of the Holy Scripture is alone abundantly
sufficient for their Contemplation of true Knowledge; neither do they further
need the Instructions of Commentators.

4. It is evident that he did not believe Transubstantiation, because he says,
Nemo in terris situs, in coelis esse potest; De incar. lib. 7. cap. 4.
No body placed on the Earth can be in Heaven.

5. We find that he did not own Auricular Confession, no more than Chrysostom
his Master, because where he gives an account of the means whereby we may
obtain the Forgiveness of Sins, he does not mention one Word of it. True it is
that he speaks indeed of a Confession of Sins, but of such an one as is to be
made to God alone. Nec non, says he, Collat. 20. c. 8.
per peccatorum confessionem, eorum abolitio conceditur; dixi enim, ait,
pronuntiabo adversum me injustitiam meam Domino, and tu remisisti impietatem
peccati mei. And also by the Confession of Sin their Forgiveness is granted;
for says he, I said, I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin.

6. He acknowledges that the Fast of Lent was no Apostolical Law. Sciendum sane
hanc observationem quadragesimae, Collat. 21. cap. 30.
quamdiu Ecclesiae illius primitivae perfectio illibata permansit, penitus non
fuisse. -- Verum cum ab illa Apostolica devotione descendens quotidie
credentium multitudo suis opibus incubaret, nec eas usui cunctorum, secundum
Apostolorum instituta divideret; sed privatim impendiis suis consulens, non
servare tantum, sed etiam augere contenderet, Ananiae and Sapphirae exemplum
non contenta sectari; id tunc universis sacerdotibus placuit, ut homines curis
saecularibus illigatos, and pene, ut ita dixerim, continentiae vel
compunctionis ignaros, ad opus sanctum Canonica indictione revocarent. We are
to know that as long as the Perfection of that Primitive Church remained
untainted, there was no such Observation of Lent. -- But when the Multitude of
Believers daily declining from that Apostolical Devotion, set their Hearts upon
their Riches, not distributing them for the use of all, according to the Rule
of the Apostles, but applying themselves to private Expenses, endeavored not
only to keep what they had, but to increase it, being not content to follow the
Example of Ananias and Sapphira; then was it thought good by the Universality
of Priests, to recall Men that were entangled in secular Business, and in a
manner ignorant of what Continence or Compunction meant, to this holy Work by
the Canonical Injunction of a Fast.

I proceed to other considerable Authors who have lived in these Diocesses.
Salvian a Priest at Marseilles informs us what their Faith was, in several
important Articles.

Lib. 3. page 64. T. 5. B. P.
1. He refers all Faith to the Scriptures: Si scire vis, says he, quid tenendum
sit, habes literas sacras: perfecta ratio est hoc tenere, quod legeris. -- Cum
legimus quod regat cuncta quae fecit; hoc ipso approbamus quod regit, quia se
regere testatur. Cum legimus quod praesenti judicio omnia dispenset; hoc ipso
est evidens quod judicat, quia se judicare confirmat. Alia enim omnia, id est
humana dicta argumentis ac testibus egent; Dei antem sermo ipse sibi testis
est: quia necesse est quicquid incorrupta veritas loquitur, incorruptum sit
veritatis Testimonium. Would thou know what thou art to believe; thou have
the holy Scripture: it is the perfection of Reason, to hold whatever thou
read there. -- When we read that he rules every thing that he has made; by
this we approve of his governing of every thing, because he says it. For all
other, that is, humane Sayings, stand in need of Proofs and Witnesses; but
God's Word is its own Witness, because whatsoever incorrupt Truth speaks, must
needs be an incorrupt Witness of Truth.

2. He seems to approve of the difficulty which some of the Waldenses and
Albigenses made to swear, when he says, Jussit Salvator noster, Ibid. page 68.
ut Christiani homines non jurarent. Our Savior commanded that Christians
should not swear.

3. He absolutely forbids Pride to those who believe themselves righteous. See
how he expresses himself; Et hoc intolerabilis superbiae atque immanis piaculi
crimen est, Page 72.
si tam bonum se aliquis esse credat, ut etiam malos existimet per se posse
salvari. Loquens Deus de terra quadam, vel de populo peccatore, sic dicit: Si
fuerint tres viri in medio ejus, Noe and Daniel and Job, non liberabunt filios
and filias, ipsi soli salvi erunt. Neminem tamen reor tam impudentem fore qui
se his talibus viris audeat comparare: quia quamvis placere nunc aliquis Deo
studeat, hoc ipsum tamen genus maximum injustitiae est, si se justum praesumat.
This also is intolerable Pride, and the highest Wickedness, for any one to
think himself so good, as that wicked Men may be saved by his means, etc. and
concludes; For though a Man may do his endeavor to please God, yet is it the
highest kind of Unrighteousness, if he presume himself to be righteous. He
passes the same Judgment upon those who believe they merit by their Prayer.
Lib. 6. page 103.
Neque enim unquam nos ita vivimus ut exaudiri mereamur. Neither do we ever
live so as to deserve to have our Prayers heard.

4. He gives us a perfect Picture of the Hypocrisy of the Monks of his time.
Qui, says he, sub speciae Religionis, Lib. 5. page 94.
vitiis saecularibus mancipati: qui scilicet post veterum flagitiorum probra
and crimina, titulo sanctitatis sibi inscripto, non conversatione aliis, sed
professione nomen tantum denotaverunt, non vitam: and summam divini cultus
habitum magis quam actum existimantes, vestem tantummodo exuere non mentem. --
For they do almost all things in such a manner, that you would not so much
think that they had repented of their former Crimes, as that afterward they
had repented of their Repentance; nor that at first they repented of their
wicked Lives, so much as afterward that they had ever promised to live well.
-- A new kind of Conversion this is; What is lawful they don't do, and commit
what is unlawful. They abstain from Women, but not from Rapine. He adds to his
sharp Censure of them, that God never forbad Marriage? O foolish Persuasion,
what do thou? God forbids Sin, not Marriage; your Actions do not agree with
your Profession; you must not be Friends to Crimes, who pretend to be Followers
of Virtues. He shows also that at Carthage they were extremely despised. And if
at any time any Servant of God, Lib. 8. page 125.
from the Monasteries of Egypt, or the holy Places at Jerusalem, or from the
holy and venerable Retirements of the Wilderness, happened to come to that Town
to perform some divine Office; he was no sooner seen by the People, but they
all loaded him with opprobrious Language, Sacriledg and Curses.

5. He shows that it is in vain for any one to bear the Name of Catholic, if
he does not answer that Character; and he prefers the Goths and Vandals, that
were Arians, to the Orthodox Christians of his time. They, says he, are humble
toward God, Lib. 7. page 114.
we rebellious; they believed Victory to be in God's Hand, we in our own. --
What can the Privilege of a religious Name avail us, that we call our selves
Catholics, that we boast our selves to be Believers, that we despise the Goths
and Vandals, by reviling them as Heretics, whilst we our selves live as ill as
Heretics? -- If we be not found doing these things ( viz. the Duties of true
Christians) it is in vain that we flatter our selves with the empty Presumption
of the Name of Catholics.

6. He sufficiently shows that Prayer for the Dead, was at that time thought to
be a very uncertain thing, Page 142. ad Ec. Cath. Lib. 1.
when he says; But if either the violence of the Disease be such, or the
carelessness of the Sick has been so great as to continue in their spiritual
Infection till they are a dying, then I don't know what to say, or what to
promise. -- It is better indeed to leave nothing unattempted, than to neglect a
dying Person; especially, because I do not know, whether to endeavor any thing
at the last Gasp may be a Medicine; sure it is, that to try nothing, is certain
Perdition.

7. He expressly excludes the Doctrine of Merits. For this alone what Equivalent
can Man pay, for whom Christ gave himself, Page 148. ad Ec. Lib. 2.
by the suffering of most extreme Pains? Or what will he render to the Lord
worthy of him, who owns God himself to be God, by whom he was redeemed?

I ought in this Place to mention a Canon of the first Council of Orange held
in the year 441, at which 15 of the Bishops of Gallia Narbonensis, and the
Country about Lions assisted. It Is the XVII Canon; the first Words are these,
Cum Capsa and Calix offerendus est (other MSS. have inferendus, which seems
more agreeable to reason) and admixitione Eucharistiae consecrandus.

We find that this Canon does hint at these two things very clearly. 1 st, That
at that time they kept the Bread of the Eucharist in a Casket or Coffer, so far
were they from making it an Object of their Adoration. 2 d, That the mingling
only of the Bread that was consecrated before, with the Wine that was not
consecrated, made them look upon the Wine, though not consecrated by the Words
of Jesus Christ, as the Blood of Jesus Christ; which is the most extravagant
and senseless Notion in the World, if we suppose that these Fathers were
seasoned with the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which attributes to the Words
of Christ, only the Virtue of changing the Substance of the Wine into the
Substance of the Blood of Christ. Allatius takes a great deal of pains to avoid
this Argument, which shows, that the Greek Church, that believes the same,
cannot be of the Faith of the Church of Rome. In the mean time, the thing is
certain, Comment. de Ordine Romans page 139.
and Mabillon has ingenuously acknowledged, that this is the true sense of that
Canon. And indeed there are many Proofs that make it evident, that both the
Greek and Latin Fathers were of this Opinion.

Salonius one of the most famous Bishops of Gallia Narbonensis, owns no other
Doctrine but that of the Old and New Testament. Drink Waters out of thine own
Cistern; B. P. T. 1. page 134.
and running Waters out of thine own Well. S. By Cistern he means the Catholic
Doctrine, that is, that of the Old and New Testament; and by the Well, he
understands the Depth and Height of the same Catholic Doctrine, that is, the
various meanings of holy Scripture: For in these Words, he teaches us to
beware of the Doctrine of Heretics, and to attend to the reading of Holy
Scripture.

He will have the Author's Meaning, and not Tradition, to be the Explication of
Scripture. Page 141.
Do not remove the ancient Landmarks or Bounds which thy Fathers have set. S.
By the ancient Bounds he understands the Bounds of Truth and Faith, which
Catholic Doctors have placed from the beginning. He would have no Man
therefore receive the Truth of Holy Faith and Gospel-Doctrine, any otherwise
than it has been handed down to them by the Holy Fathers; and likewise
commands that no Man interpret the Words of Holy Scripture, otherwise than
according to the Intention of each Writer.

He does not own the Apocrypha. How many Books did Solomon publish? Page 147.
S. Three only, according to the number of their Titles, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, and Canticles. V. What does Solomon say in the Proverbs, or what
does he teach in Ecclesiastes, and his Songs?

Page 157.
He assigns but two Places whither the Soul goes immediately. For, by the Tree,
Man is understood, because every Man is as it were a Tree in the Wood of
Mankind; by the South, which is a warm Wind, is signified the Rest of Paradise;
and by the North, which is cold, is signified the Pain of Hell: and the meaning
of it is, Wheresoever Man prepares a Place for his future abode, if to the
South, when he falls (that is, dies) he shall abide to all Eternity in the Rest
of Paradise, and the glory of the Kingdom of Heaven.

He makes it the greatest Absurdity, that a Man should eat his own Flesh; which
yet follows from the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Page 153.
But that Expression, He eats his own Flesh, is spoke by an Hyperbole. V. What
is an Hyperbole? S. When any thing is expressed that is incredible. V. How is
this expressed hyperbolically, he eats his own Flesh? S. Because it is incredible
that any Man should eat his own Flesh; but to aggravate the slothfulness of
this Fool, he says, that he eats his own Flesh, to show that a Fool rather
desires his Flesh should waste by Hunger, and be consumed by the Misery of
Want, than to support it by the labor of his Hands. These are all Maxims
concerning diverse important Articles, very different from the present Maxims of
the Church of Rome.

I grant that Prosper, who was a Native of Aquitain, was no more than a
Layman, but he was in so great a Reputation, that there were but few Bishops
of his time, that have shown more Knowledge, or expressed more Zeal for the
defense of Truth, Cod. 54. T. 1. disp. 91. cap. 11.
than he did. This Testimony is given of him by Cassiodorus, Photius and
Vasquez. Wherefore his Testimony concerning the Faith of his Country, must be
of great weight with us.

Dimid. Temp. cap. 6.
Would we know the Opinion of the Church of this Diocese? He tells us of a small
part of the Body of Jesus Christ, thereby meaning the Eucharist or the
Sacrament, which was given in little Bits. And it is in the same sense that he
speaks of a small part of the Sacrifice; Expressions that are utterly
inconsistent with the Notion of the Church of Rome, concerning the carnal
Presence. And indeed it is plain in all his Writings, that he follows the steps
of St. Augustine, in his Expressions and Judgments of things which are contrary
to those of the Church of Rome.

This we may see in his Extract of the Sentences of St. Augustine, where he
repeats what that Father had said upon Psalm 33. upon occasion of these Words
of the vulgar Version, which says, that David ferebatur in manibus suis, in the
presence of Achish. Where it clearly appears, that he understood those Words as
well as St. Augustine did, of the Sacrament of his Body, which may be called his
Body in some sense; that is to say, by way of Likeness, as St. Augustine
expresses himself concerning it.

I cite nothing here from those other Works, which are attributed to him,
because indeed they are none of his.

I shall only observe two things: The first is, that in his Epistle to
Demetrius he plainly shows, that he knew nothing of the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, concerning the Necessity of the Ministers Intention for the Validity
of the Sacraments: for there he attributes all to the Work of God, and not to
that of the Minister, according to the Doctrine of St. Augustine, upon the
Question of the Validity of Baptism conferred by Heretics.

The other is, that as he follows St. Augustine in the Matter of Free Grace, as
one may see in his Poems gathered from the Opinions of St. Augustine and his
Sentences, so he rejects the Doctrine of Merit and Works, as a pure Pelagian
Doctrine, in several Places of his Writings.

Lastly, We must join with these Authors, Arnobius the Rhetorician (since it is
very probable that he lived in Gallia Narbonensis, because he has dedicated
some of his Works to Leontius Bishop of Arles, to the Bishop of Narbonne, and
Faustus Bishop of Riez, who died about the year 485.) Arnobius explains his
Belief in the Matter of the Eucharist after this manner. We have received,
says he upon the 4 th Psalm, Wheat in the Body, Wine in the Blood, and Oil in
Chrisme. So likewise on Psalm. 104. he says of Jesus Christ, that he
administers, not only the species of Bread, but also of Wine and Oil. Thus it
is he describes the Eucharist and Baptism. We may observe likewise, that as he
recommends to Believers the consideration of these Words, Upon Psalm. 120.
sursum Corda, at the Moment of their receiving these Mysteries, so he does not
own that any receive the Body of Christ besides those that fear him, and who by
Faith are made the Sanctuary of God: thus he argues in his Commentaries upon
Psalm. 21, and 132.

As for Faustus Bishop of Riez, whatever Contests he had with those who
defended the Doctrine of St. Augustine in the matter of Grace, which made Pope
Gelasius condemn his Writings; yet certain it is, that France has always had
the highest esteem for him possible; and his Name is registered in the Catalogue
of her Saints, in the Roman Martyrology, till it was expunged by Molanes in the
last Century. Neither has this hindered, but that to this Day he is honored,
and prayed unto as a Saint in the Diocese of Riez. His Doctrine is as follows.

T. 2. B. P. page 148.
1. He rejects the Merits of good Works, and Works of Supererrogation, as
particularly, as if he had had an Eye to the Papists: Wherefore (says he)
though we endeavor with all Labors of Soul and Body; though we exercise our
selves with all the might of our Obedience; yet nothing of all this is of
sufficient Worth to be rendered or offered up by us as a deserving Recompense
for Heavenly-good Things. No temporal Obedience whatsoever can be equivalent to
the Joys of Eternal Life. Though our Limbs may be wearied with Watchings, and
our Faces discolored with Fastings, Romans 8.
yet when all is done, the Sufferings of this time will never be worthy to be
compared with that Glory which shall be revealed in us. Book 2. chap. 4. Page
726.
He discourses much at the same rate concerning Grace and Free Will.

2. We see clearly that he did not own the Existence of the Body of Jesus
Christ in the Eucharist, in the manner of a Spirit, because he maintains all
Creatures to be corporeal; and that the Soul is distinctly in a certain place,
Lib. de Creat. Page 598.
because if it were otherwise, we must conclude it to be every where. That
which is very strange, is, that Mamertus, who has refuted him, does yet more
directly thwart this Doctrine of Rome, by the various Hypotheses which he
proposes when he confutes this Faustus Bishop of Riez. But this Century has
detained me too long; I proceed now therefore to consider the State of these
Diocesses in the Sixth Century.

CHAP. VI. The State of these Diocesses in the Sixth Century.
WE do not find so many Authors of these Diocesses in the Sixth Century, as we
have had in the foregoing: but however, those we have of them, are sufficient
to inform us what their State was. I begin with St. Caesarius Bishop of Arles,
who assisted at the Council of Agde in the year 502, and died in 542; so that
he reached almost the middle of this Century.

This great Man fully represents the Notion that he had of the Eucharist, when
he shows, that in Baptism there is the same Change, and the same Presence of
the Blood of Jesus Christ which he owns in the Eucharist; Page 278.
as appears in his 4 th and 5 th Homily. But in his 7 th Homily, he speaks in
such a manner as needs no Commentary: And therefore since he was now about to
withdraw his assumed Body from our Eyes, and carry it up to Heaven, it was
needful that the same day he should consecrate for us the Sacrament of his Body
and Blood, that he might continually be remembered by the Mystery which was once
offered up for our Redemption: that so seeing his Intercession for the
Salvation of Man was daily and continual, the offering up of our Redemption
might be perpetual also, that this everlasting Sacrifice might live in our
Memory, and be always present by Grace.

2. Though he speaks of the Eucharist as changed into the Body of Jesus Christ
by the Power of God, yet he maintains that it is by Faith, and by the Acts of
Understanding, that we can partake thereof. See how he speaks to a Christian
who has been regenerated by Baptism. Wherefore as without any bodily feeling,
having laid aside what before thou esteemedst advantageous, thou art suddenly
become clothed with a new Dignity: and as it is not thy Eyes, but thy
Understanding that persuades thee that God has healed what was wounded in
thee, blotted out thy Sins, and washed away thy Stains; so when thou go up
to the venerable Altar to be satisfied with Food, thou may see the sacred
Body and Blood of thy God by Faith, admire it with Reverence, reach it with thy
Mind, receive it with thy Heart, and above all, take it in with thy Soul.

3. He expressly asserts, that the Body which the Priest distributes, is as well
in a little Part as in the Whole; which agrees only with the Sacrament, and not
with the natural Body of Jesus Christ.

4. He maintains, that the Oblation of the Bread and Wine made by Melchizedeck,
did typically signify the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ; which is absolutely false,
if it be true that the Consecration destroys the Nature of the things offered,
as the Church of Rome believes. Hear what he says: He therefore, in
Melchizedeck (whose Genealogy or Original was unknown to those of that time) by
the offering of Bread and Wine did foreshew this Sacrifice of Christ: of whom
the Prophet pronounces, Thou art a Priest for ever, according to the order of
Melchizedeck. And Blessed Moses also speaking of this Mystery, signifies the
Wine and Blood with one Word; Long before, (pointing at the Lord's Passion) in
the Blessing of the Patriarch, he shall wash his Garment in Wine, and his
Clothes in the Blood of the Grape. Mark how evidently it appears, that the
Creature Wine is called the Blood of Christ. Consider what thou art further to
enquire concerning this twofold Species, seeing the Lord himself witnesses.
Except, says he, you shall eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, ye have no Life in you; which Testimony is a most evident and strong
Argument against the Blasphemies of Pelagius, who impiously presumes to
maintain that Baptism ought to be conferred upon Infants, not to obtain Life,
but to attain the Kingdom of Heaven: For by these Words of our Lord pronounced
by the Evangelist, You shall not have Life in you, is plainly understood, that
every Soul that has not been baptized, is not only deprived of Glory, but Life
also.

Lastly, In the same Sermon, he says, in Conformity with the Notion of St.
Cyprian, about the Mixture of the Water with the Wine in the Chalice, that by
the Water is represented the Figure of the Nations, and by the Wine the Blood
of the Passion of our Savior, which supposes the Subsistence of the Wine, as
well as of the Water, and utterly overthrows the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

2. He overturns the Notion of the Romish Purgatory, and follows here also the
Sentiments of those of the Ancients, who removed Purgatory to the last Day of
Judgment. Homil. 8. page 282.
But if neither in our Tribulations we bless God, nor redeem our Sins by good
Works, we shall so long abide in that Purgatory, till all our lesser Sins be
consumed, like Wood, Hay, and Stubble. But some body may say, What matter is it
how long I stay there, so I may but at last pass through into eternal Life? Let
no Man say so, most dear Brethren, for as much as this Purgatory Fire is more
painful than any thing that can be thought, seen or felt in this World. And
seeing it is writ of the Day of Judgment, that it shall be one Day, how can any
one know whether he may be Days, Months, or even Years, in passing through it?

3. In his 12 th Homily he exhorts the People, not to go out of the Church on
Sundays, before the Celebration of the Eucharist; and makes the Prayers of the
Priest to appear ridiculous, when there are no Communicants to receive: To
whom, says he, shall the Priest say, Sursum corda? But we are especially to
observe, that when he presses the Greatness of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and
the Adoration due to the Sacrament, he says never a Word of what some Popish
Orator would represent to us on the like Occasion.

4. In the 20 th Homily he exhorts the Country People to read the Scriptures,
and removes all Excuses which they might make to avoid this Duty, with as much
Earnestness as those of the Church of Rome expressed, when they would dissuade
their Auditors from the reading of it.

5. The 38 th Homily is a Collection of several places of Scripture, treating
of the means by which Remission of Sins is granted to us. He reckons up there
twelve several means, where we are to take notice, 1 st, That he does not speak
one Word of confessing to a Priest, nor of the Power God has bestowed on them
to pardon Sins, as Judges, which at present is the great and only mean to
obtain the Pardon of Sin; those other whereof St. Caesarius speaks, being of no
use without the Pardons pronounced by the Priest, in the Tribunal of
Confession. That which is here peculiar is, that tho he has said a very great
deal about the Efficacy of Contrition for the Remission of Sins, in his 29 th
Homily, he has not been able to avoid the caute lege of the Romish Censors, as
we may see in the Bibliotheca Patrum, of the Paris Edition. 2 dly, We are to
observe that whereas the Church of Rome pretends to find the Sacrament of
Extreme Unction and Auricular Confession, in the 5 th Chapter of St. James's
Epistle; Caesarius discovers nothing there, but the Christian Duty of praying
one for another, proceeding from the Charity we owe to our Neighbor.

Ruricius was Bishop of Limoges from the Year 535. in which he assisted at the
first Council of Auvergne: He assisted also at the 4 th Council of Orleans, in
541. and at the 5 th, in 549.

We have nothing left us of this Prelate, save his two Books of Epistles,
though even there we can inform our selves about several very important
Matters, which demonstrate what the Faith was that was then received and
embraced in Aquitain.

1. He takes for granted that dying Persons are immediately taken up into
Heaven, so far is he from mentioning Purgatory. See in what manner he comforts
Namacius and Ceraunia, T. 3. B. Patr. page 381. Ep. 3. ad finem.
for the Loss of their Son. Indeed you have reason to take a great deal of
Comfort from the Will of Christ, since untimely Death was his Lot, that he has
been pleased to take him away in that State, to which he pronounces the
Kingdom of Heaven to belong, that at the same time you might have a Patron
instead of a Son, and leave off deploring him as lost, whom you see the Lord
has taken to himself. Page 382.
And in another place: Wherefore let your Faith wipe off your Tears, since we
believe that those who are dear to us, do not lose their Life, but change it,
they leave this World full of Sorrows, and hasten to the Region of the Blessed,
and take their leave of this painful Pilgrimage, that they may arrive at the
Land of Rest.

2. He supposes Abraham's Bosom and Heaven to be the same thing, when he
brings in a young Woman that enjoyed the Glory of Heaven, speaking after this
manner: Page 383. Epist. 4.
Wherefore my loving Parents, rather bewail your own Sins, and seriously think
of redeeming your own Crimes, that if you love me in Christ, you may be thought
worthy to be admited into the Patriarch's Bosom, where the Lord, acording to
the Purity of my Innocence, and his great Kindness, has placed me, etc.

3. He exhorts a Lady of his Acquaintance to the reading of Holy Scripture,
when he sent her a Painter. But, says he, you ought to look for more perfect
and great Instruments in those Divine Writings from whence these are taken, if
ever you desire to perfect what you have begun, or attain what is promised you.
If you thus seek, the Lord will give you both Knowledge and Strength to
understand what you read, and keep what you understand.

St. Ferreolus Bishop of Vzez, must not be forgot by us, he was chosen in the
Year 553. and died in 581. We find in the Rule that he writ for Monks, that he
settled in his Diocese an uncommon Strain of Piety.

1. We do not find him to demand the Approbation of this his Rule at Rome, as
has been done for some Ages since. He sends to the Bishop of Die, to desire his
Advice, and afterward published it with the Approbation only of that Bishop,
without troubling himself about any other Authority.

2. He orders his Monks to work with their Hands, that they might not be
chargeable to the Public, Cap. 5. Regul.
as all the Orders of Mendicants are at this time.

3. He receives none but such as are come to Men's Estate, and will have them
tried before they be admitted, whereas St. Bennet ordained, that those whom
their Parents had presented to a Monastery, Cap. 11.
should from their Infancy be received and abide there.

4. He will have the great Employment of the Monks to be the reading of the
Psalms, which he will have them go through every Week.

5. He will have them on Anniversary Days of the Martyrdom of the Saints, to
read the Acts of their Martyrdom, for a worthy Celebration of the Memory of
their Passion; but not a Word of encouraging the Monks to offer up Prayers to
them on these solemn Days. F. 6.18.


6. Above all he requires of every Monk daily to read the Scripture, and not to
dispense with it, upon any Pretense, or because of any other Business
whatsoever.

Fortunatus was born in Italy, but coming into France in the Year 575. he
stayed there in the Service of St. Radegunda, and was ordained Priest at
Poictiers, where he lived in great Reputation till the end of that Century.
Some will have him to have been raised to the Episcopal Dignity in the same
City, but this appears to be wholly uncertain. Gregorius Turonensis, who often
mentions him as his Friend, never gives him any other Title but that of Priest.
However it be, it appears by his Writings, that he was very far from Popery; in
these following Articles.

1. He never in the Life of St. Martin attributes to that holy Man, that upon
any occasion he prayed to the Saints for the working of his Miracles. Book 3.
page 764. Bib. Patr.
This we may see in his Relation of St. Martin's raising a Child to Life.

2. He looks upon all Bishops as the Vicars of St. Peter; accordingly he says
to the Bishop of Metz; Apparet Petri vos meruisse vices: It appears you have
deserved to be St. Peter's Vicar.

3. We meet with nothing more commonly in the Epitaphs which he made, than this
Notion, that deceased Believers are in Heaven; from such Expressions as these;
Hunc tenet ulna Dei. Inter Apostolicos credimus esse choros. Non hanc flere
decet, quam Paradisus habet. Accordingly also he maintains that Abraham's Bosom
is the Heavenly Glory. Page 796.


Lastly; It appears from an Exposition he has made on the Apostles Creed, that
he owned no Doctrines, besides those contained in that ancient Formulary, as
Articles of his Faith, because he makes no mention at all of those new Articles
which the Church of Rome has added to that Creed, and which she imposes on
her People, as another part of that which makes the Object of Faith.

It cannot be denied but that the Spirit of Superstition had already made a
considerable Progress in all places; we meet with an illustrious Example
thereof in the Diocese of Marseilles, which joined to Gallia Narbonensis: The
People there began to render a religious Worship to Images, whereupon Serenus
the Bishop of Marseilles was forced to follow the Method of St. Epiphanius, in
breaking the Images to pieces, which drew upon him the Censures of Gregory I.
Lib. 9. Ep. 9.
who exhorts him to erect them again, though he commends him for having opposed
himself to their Adoration, and exhorts him carefully to instruct the People,
to prevent their falling again into Idolatry. And it is natural to conclude,
that this Excess of the People met with the same Checks in many other places.

CHAP. VII. The State of the Diocesses of Aquitain, and Narbon, in the Seventh
Century.
I am come to the Seventh Century, of which I have two pieces of great
Authority to produce: The first concerns the Purity of these Diocesses, in
regard to their Faith. There was a Council held at Toledo in the Year 633,
whereat Silva Bishop of Narbon assisted, in the Name of the Bishops of Gallia
Narbonensis, and they began the Synod with a Confession of Faith, which shows
beyond all Controversy, that nothing was looked upon by them as an Article of
Faith, that was not received for such in the Creed of the ancient Christians;
for there was not so much as one Word to be found there of all those Articles
which the Church of Rome imposes upon those of her Communion, as an Addition
to the primitive Faith.

The second regards the Practice of the public Acts of Religion, and that is
the Gothic Liturgy, which of a long time was used in these Diocesses;
wherefore to make a fuller Discovery of the Religion of these Provinces, it
will be of Importance to make some Remarks upon this Liturgy, which was in use
there.

It is not probable that all the Parts of it are of equal Antiquity, as may be
seen by the Office of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin in Soul and Body,
which was rejected in France, as a thing uncertain, toward the end of the 9 th
Century, according to the Testimony of Vsuardus. One may make the same Judgment
of diverse other Offices, which are found in this Gothic Liturgy; the Barbarism
which appears in all its parts, sufficiently shows its Age: In the mean time
such as it is, it does not want the Marks of a considerable Purity, which it
seems, obliged Gregory VII. to abolish and suppress it with all his Might.

1. We find in it the Recital of the Apostles Creed, as the only Profession of
Faith, which the Churches of these Provinces required of those who would be
Partakers of her Communion

2. We don't find in it any Prayer addressed to Saints. It supposes all along
from one end to the other, that the Saints pray in general for the Church, and
on this Ground it is, that therein they desire God to have regard to their
Prayers, and to receive their Intercession, their Suffrages, and so forth.
Patrocinia.
There is no greater stress laid upon the Power of the Blessed Virgin with God,
than on that of the Patriarchs and Apostles, yea, of the Anchorets and Virgins.
True it is, that there is a solemn Commemoration of diverse Saints, but it may
easily be perceived, that it is only done out of a Design to glorify God, by
representing to themselves their Examples, and forming or disposing themselves
to imitate them. This is done in the Office of St. Forrestus and Ferucio.

We find diverse Confessions to God before the Liturgy, Page 271.
but none at all made to Angels, to the Blessed Virgin or Saints, as at this
day is done in the Romish Mass.

3. We find there no particular Distinction for the Bishop of Rome, only that
the Bishop of the City of Rome is called the first of Bishops. Mabillon in his
Preface triumphs, Page 276.
because of this Title, but he is extremely out in his account; for has the
first Bishop any Jurisdiction over the second? Page 266.
the second over the third? We find there the Prayer for the Feast of St.
Peter, but with a Clause which Mabillon owns to be found in all the ancient
Missals, and is struck out of the Roman Liturgy, in order to extend the Papal
Monarchy over all the Earth.

We do not find therein the least Foot-step of Prayers for the Pope, which
shows that the Decree of the Council of Vaison, wherein it was ordained that
Prayers should be made to God for the Bishop of Rome, was not observed
throughout Gaul; yea what is more, the same Liturgy gives the Title of Head of
the Church to St. Paul, as well as to St. Peter.

We find therein no Adoration of the Cross on Good Friday.

4. We find therein an Office for St. Saturninus Bishop of Toulouse, who is
looked upon as come from the Eastern Parts in the place of St. Peter, which
shows that all the Bishops of France considered themselves as the Vicars of St.
Peter, as well as the Bishop of Rome: Page 220.
Si quidem ipse Pontifex tuus ab Orientis partibus in urbem Tolosatium
destinatus, Roma, Garonae invicem Petri tui, tam Cathedram, quam Martyrium
consummavit. For this your Bishop being sent from the East to Toulouse, instead
of Rome, has now upon the Garonne filled the Chair, and consummated the
Martyrdom of your Peter.

5. We find therein that the Confession of St. Peter was the Foundation of the
Church; and the Festival of his Chair is therein referred to his Bishopric.
Page 227.
Testis est dies bodierna Beati Petri Cathedra Episcopatus exposita: in qua
fidei merito revelationis mysterium, filium Dei confitendo, Praelatus Apostolus
ordinatur. In cujus confessione est fundamentum Ecclesiae; nec adversus hanc
Petram portae inferi praevalent. St. Peter's Episcopal Chair, which is shown to
this Day, can testify this: wherein by reason of his Faith, when he confessed
that Mystery that was then revealed, even the Son of God, he was ordained a
Bishop. In whose Confession is the Foundation of the Church; neither shall the
Gates of Hell prevail against this Rock.

6. We read there that the Gates of Hell do not signify Errors, as the Church
of Rome will have it, but the State of the Dead, from whence the Faith which
St. Peter has professed, delivers those who imitate him: Let us pray, says
he, that the Souls of the deceased being brought up out of Hell, the infernal
Gates may not prevail over the Dead, because of their Crimes which the Church
believes are overcome by the Faith of the Apostle.

7. We find there, as in the Romish Mass, an high Abjuration of the Doctrine of
the Merit of Works: And though we find the Word Merit often used in it, Page
230.
yet we also meet with those necessary Explications of it, as are sufficient to
hinder any wrong Impression that may be made by a Word of an ambiguous sense.

8. I do own that we find in it the Prayer for the Dead, but there are a
hundred other Passages which speak them to be in Peace, in the Peace of God,
that they are at rest; and other Expressions which very plainly import that
they had not received the Notion of Purgatory, no more than the Authors of the
Roman Liturgy had at that time.

I know there are some Passages in it, which seem to suppose the Souls departed
to be in a place of Torment; but I have two things to say to this Point; the
one is, that those Missals, whose Style comes near to the Belief of the Church
of Rome, are of a later Date: the other is, that the ordinary Article, pro
pausantibus, for those who are at rest, imports nothing like a place of
Torment. To these two Considerations we may add, That what is ordinarily
requested for them, is either that they may have a part in the first, that is
to say, a more early Resurrection, which is the same with the Opinion of the
Millennium: or that they may be written in the Book of Life, or carried into
Abraham's Bosom: which shows that the State of Souls after Death, was not more
certainly determined by those who governed these Churches at this time, than by
the Members of the Catholic Church any where else.

We read that there are diverse Flocks, Page 279.
whereof each Bishop is the Pastor, as well St. Cyprian as Cornelius. Indeed we
find that to every Bishop is given the Title of summus Pontifex, Page 290.
and summus Sacerdos. Grant unto us, Lord, who this Day are celebrating the
Anniversary of the Decease of thy high Priest and our Father, Bishop Martin.

We see there the manner of administering Baptism, with the Unction or anointing
called the Chrismation; but we do not find that they made two Sacraments of
them, as the Church of Rome has since done.

We find there also the Consecration of Wax Tapers, but yet without ascribing
to them all those Virtues which the Church of Rome attributes to her
consecrated Tapers in the Roman Order. Page 24.


But I go on to that which is most considerable in this Liturgy. Mabillon, who
has published it in France, according to the Copy printed at Rome, pretends
that it expressly shows, that the Churches which made use of this Liturgy, held
the Doctrine of the Real Presence. If instead of some Passages that he quotes,
we could find there a precise Order for adoring the Sacrament after
Consecration, as being become the Body of Jesus Christ, which we do not find in
any part of it, there would indeed be some ground for his Pretension; but there
is not so much as a Word to this purpose: which makes it evident, that in these
Diocesses, they had not received this Doctrine, nor the natural Consequences of
it any more than in any other part of the Catholic Church; for we find that as
soon as ever this Opinion was entertained, it was immediately followed with
supreme Adoration.

Neither do we find any thing therein of the Sacrifice of the Mass, any more
than of the Adoration of the Sacrament, which is another Consequence of the
Real Presence.

We do not find any Masses there without Communicants. St. Caesarius, whom I
have already cited, would have accounted them ridiculous and a mere Profanation.

Lastly; We do not find that the Communion under one kind was there thought to
be a Consequent, as it has been in the Church of Rome, of the Real Presence:
And yet one would think that the Fear of profaning the Blood of Jesus Christ,
as being very subject to be spilt, ought to have obliged them to take the same
Precautions, as the Church of Rome has since done to prevent such dreadful, and
yet such common Inconveniences.

If Mabillon had well considered these essential Defects, which a Papist cannot
but naturally meet with in this Gothic Liturgy, in all Appearance he would not
have been so lavish of his Judgment. But without making use of these just
Anticipations, upon the matter in hand, let us consider a little whether the
attentive Examination of the Liturgy, be not sufficient to clear these
Prejudices, and oblige him to put another sense upon the Words which he has
wrested to confirm his Assertion.

The Characters we meet with in this Liturgy are these:

1. It makes a great Distinction between that which is taken with the Mouth,
and that which is received by the Heart. Grant, Page 190.
O Lord, that what we have taken with our Mouths, we may receive with our
Minds, and that the temporal Gift may be to us an eternal Remedy. This
Observation is decretory, for the Transubstantiators own that both Good and Bad
receive the Body of Christ. Page 27.
Goffridus Vindocinensis expressly asserts it, notwithstanding that St. Augustine
has rejected it as a great Absurdity. Tr. 26. in Joan.


2. It supposes likewise that Jesus Christ is above the Heavens, and that he
is no otherwise near to us than by the Communion of our Nature which he has
taken to himself. Page 191.
Vt qui te consortem in carnis propinquitate laetantur, ad summorum Civium
unitatem, super quos corpus assumptum evexisti, perducantur: That they who
rejoice to see thee their Brother, in the Nearness of thy Flesh, may be brought
up to the Unity of those highest Citizens, above whom thou have carried up thy
assumed Body.

3. It supposes the Sacrament to be only a Commemoration; We remember thy
Suffering, Page 192.
and thy Body broken for the Remission of our Sins. Which is a plain Allusion
to the Words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.24. and shows that the Authors of this
Liturgy, did understand them of the Cross, and not, as the Church of Rome does,
of the Eucharist. The Ambrosian and Gallican Liturgies have followed the Sense
of the Gothic Liturgy, which deserves some Observation. Page 255.
We meet with the same thing again: Thou did command by Moses and Aaron thy
Servants, that the Passover should be celebrated by the offering of a Lamb for
ever, until the Coming of Christ; and have commanded the same Custom to be
observed for a Memorial.

4. It supposes that we receive the Body of Jesus Christ spiritually: Let us,
dearest Brethren, Page 193.
who have been fed with the Food of Heaven, and refreshed with the Cup of the
Eternal Wine, render never-ceasing Praises and Thanks to our God, begging of
him that we who have spiritually received the Sacred Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, being freed from fleshly Vices, may deserve to be made Spiritual. What
it means by the word Spiritual is very plain, Page 207.
where it calls the Dove that appeared at the Baptism of Jesus Christ,
Spiritalis Columba. And the spiritual Dove descending upon his Head by the Holy
Ghost, that came thy self. Page 231. P. 296, and 300.
Thus it calls the Eucharist spiritual Sacrifices, He has refreshed us with
the Heavenly Bread and the Spiritual Cup.

5. It takes for granted, that the Believers of old did eat the same Living
Bread, Page 229.
which Jesus Christ gives us: For he himself is the living and true Bread that
came down from Heaven, and always dwells in Heaven, who is the Substance of
Eternity, and the Food of Power. For thy Word, by which all things were made,
is not only the Bread of humane Souls, but of the very Angels themselves. By
the Nourishment of this Bread, thy Servant Moses was enabled to fast 40 Days
and Nights, when he received the Law, and abstained from carnal Food, that he
might be the more capable of tasting thy Sweetness, living on thy Word. Let
this living and true Bread which came down from Heaven, that he might give Food
to the Hungry, yea that he himself might be the Food of the Living, become to
us such Bread as that our Hearts may be strengthened thereby; that so in the
Power of this Bread, we may be enabled to fast these 40 Days without any
impediment from Flesh and Blood.

6. It calls the Sacrament, Gifts laid upon the Altar. Be pleased to sanctify,
P* 234, and 237.
O Lord, these Gifts which we offer upon thy Altar, offering immaculate
Sacrifices upon the Holy Altar. Let us beseech the Almighty through his only
begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who has vouchsafed to bless and sanctify
these Gifts by the offering up of his Body and Blood, that he would be pleased
also to bless the Gifts offered by his Servants.

7. It calls the Sacrament, Salutiferam Dominicae immolationis effigiem, in
sacrificio spiritali Christo offerente transfusam. The salutiferous
Representation of our Lord's offering up of himself transfused into the
spiritual Sacrifice, whereof Christ himself is the Sacrificer or Offerer.

8. We find there a Prayer, whose Title is, A Collect for the Breaking of the
Bread after Consecration. Which scarce proves, that they were persuaded that
the Substance of the Bread was destroyed by the Consecration.

9. The same which in some Places it calls the Body of Christ, it elsewhere
calls the Sacrament of the Body.

10. It reduces all to the virtue of the Eucharist. Page 296.
Keep within us, Lord, the Gift of thy Glory, and let us by the Virtue of the
Eucharist, which we receive, be armed against all the Pollutions of the World.

11. It supposes that the Body of Jesus Christ abides within us, and prays
that it may continue there incorruptible. Ibidem.
Hear the Prayers of thy Family, Almighty God, and grant that these holy Things
which we have received of thy Gift, we may by thy Gift keep incorrupted within
us. Page 298.
And again; let us with unanimous Prayer entreat the Divine Mercy, that these
saving Sacraments being received into our inward Parts, may purify our Soul,
and sanctify our Body, and confirm our Hearts and Minds in the hope of heavenly
Things.

12. It calls the Eucharist Holy Bread: Bearing in mind the most glorious
Passion of our Lord, and his Resurrection from the lower Parts of the Earth; We
offer up unto thee, O Lord, this unspotted Sacrifice, this holy Bread, and this
saving Cup, beseeching thee, etc.

13. It calls the Sacrament, Holy Mysteries, in several Places.

These many Instances one would have thought might have obliged Mabillon to
believe that the Authors of this Liturgy, did speak figuratively in some other
Places, where they seem to speak more strongly, and to give us another Notion;
especially considering the manner of their expressing themselves, when they
speak of the Feast of St. John Baptist. It it worthy and just, equal and
saving, Page 275.
for us always to give Thanks to thee Almighty, and merciful God, and in this
Banquet of thy Sacrament, to join the Head of thy Martyr by an Evangelical
Commemoration, and to offer it upon thy Propitiatory Table, as in a Dish of
shining Metal. And we may add several others upon each of those Passages which
seem the most likely to deceive us.

If we had the Canon of this Liturgy, which these Gentlemen did not think fit
to give us, we should there easily find the Solution of these Difficulties; for
it is very probable, it was like that of the Ambrosian Liturgy, where it was so
clearly specified, that the Bread was the Figure of the Body of Jesus Christ,
as that it put an end to all manner of Cavillings on the Point. Indeed these
Words, The Figure or Representation of the Sacrifice of our Lord, Page 237.
do plainly show, that this was their meaning. But we must make a shift to help
our selves with what they have been pleased to give us. It is easy to judge what
those Passages were, which Mabillon judged to be most favorable to his Cause;
for he has caused them to be Printed in great Characters, that no Body might
pass them by.

Thus the word Truth, seemed to him to determine the Question of the Real
Presence; Page 195.
the Words are these: We beseech thee, Almighty God, that like as we do now
perform the Truth of the Heavenly Sacrament, so we may cleave to the Truth of
the Body and Blood of our Lord. But this learned Benedictine has suffered
himself to be overtaken by his own Prejudice. The Author of the Liturgy
distinguishes two times; the one before the Death of Jesus Christ, which was
only an obscure Image of a Thing that was to come; this is that which is
expressed in these Words: Page 206.
Or that the Living Bread, by denying of himself, should not afford Life; but
for the Redemption of his Possession, and the Praise of his Glory, what before
he vouchsafed in a Parable, he may now vouchsafe in Truth. The other, wherein
the Death of Jesus Christ has authorized the Signification of the Eucharist;
upon which account, he calls it the Truth of the Heavenly Sacrament. We have a
like Expression of Baptism, alluding to the Passage of the Red Sea, in one of
St. Augustin's Homilies, upon Nicodemus's coming to Jesus Christ, related by
Paulus Diaconus, In inventione S. Crucis; and it is the same we find also in
several Passages of St. Caesarius.

We find that the word Transformation has perfectly charmed him. Page 202.
We therefore, Lord, keeping these Institutes and Precepts, do most humbly
beseech thee that thou would be pleased to receive, bless and sanctify this
Sacrifice, that it may be to us a true Eucharist, in thy own and Son's Name,
and of the Holy Ghost; that so there may be a Transformation of the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, thy only Begotten, etc. And in a Marginal Note
he observes, that the same Word is made use of in this Liturgy: Page 228.
That it may please thee to send down thy Holy Spirit upon these Solemnities,
that it may be to us a true Eucharist, in thy own and Son's Name, and of the
Holy Ghost, for a Transformation of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, thy only Begotten; that it may bestow upon us, who eat it, eternal
Life, and the everlasting Kingdom to those that shall drink it. And also, Page
285.
That thy Blessing may come down upon this Bread and Wine, for the
Transformation of thy Holy Spirit; that blessing thou may bless them, and
sanctifying thou may sanctify them, etc. And the like in other Missals as
ancient as this; which he observes also in his Preface.

But this after all, signifies nothing else but the Change which the Holy Ghost
produces in making the Elements after Consecration, to become the Sacrament of
the Body of Jesus Christ. This is that which our Authors have fully justified
by an infinite number of Examples borrowed from Baptism, and other things
consecrated by Prayer. Boethius in his Books, De consolatione Philosophiae,
says, Conversi in malitiam, humanam quoque amisere naturam. Evenit ergo, ut
quem transformatum vitiis videas, hominem existimare non possis. Being turned
into Malice, they at the same time lose humane Nature: So that if you see one
transformed by Vice, you cannot look upon him as a Man. And Ratramnus in his
Book of the Body and Blood of our Lord, says, That Jesus Christ in former
times could change the Manna, and Water out of the Rock in the Wilderness, into
his Flesh and Blood: the same Ratramnus that opposed Paschasius, who was the
first Publisher of the Doctrine of a real Change.

We find there the Notion of Vertere and convertere in carnem: Beseeching that
he who then changed the Water into Wine, Page 208.
would be pleased now to change the Wine of our Oblations into his Blood. And
again, Let us entreat him, Page 209.
that he who as at this day, by his Son, turned the Species of Water into Wine,
would be pleased in like manner, to change the Oblations and Prayers of us all,
into a Divine Sacrifice, and to accept them as he did accept the Offering of
Abel the Just, and the Sacrifice of Abraham his Patriarch. But the appearance
of this seeming Difficulty, we find in the following Leaf. Besides, that it is
ridiculous to suppose the real Change of the Prayers of Believers into the Body
and Blood of our Saviviour, which is supposed of the Oblations.

Page 240.
We meet with an Expression which seems somewhat strange: O Jesu Christ, who in
the Evening of the World, wast made an Evening-Sacrifice on the Cross,
vouchsafe to us, that we may become new Sepulchers for thy Body. Tho indeed
these Expressions plainly show that they are only intended for the prefiguring
the Death of Christ, Lib. 1. cap. 33. de institut. Cleric.
according to the Notion of Rabanus Maurus.

We find there frequently, that the Sacrament is said to be a Remedy for the
Body, and an Expiation for the Soul; but this does no more suppose the carnal
Presence, or the Expiation, which is the fruit of a Propitiatory Sacrifice,
than that which we find in the Roman Order, in blessing a Grave, that it may be
a saving Remedy to the Party resting in it, for the Redemption of his Soul.

Page 207.
In the same Liturgy, they say to God, Do thou therefore so come down into the
present Oblation, that it may afford Healing unto the Living, and Refreshment
unto those who are Dead. But this regards only the Presence of Virtue, as in
the Roman Order; they beg of God that he would afford his Presence and Majesty
in Baptism. Page 143.


There is mention likewise made of the Immolation of the Body of Jesus Christ;
but this is only said by way of Resemblance, as St. Augustine explains it in his
23 d Epistle to Bonifacius; for in other places this Liturgy speaks of Bread
offered up.

There is also mention made of a Sacrifice. But 1 st, He gives that Name to the
Eucharist, which everywhere throughout this Liturgy, is termed a Sacrifice of
Praises and Thanksgivings. 2 ly, It compares the Sacrifice with that of
Melchizedeck, wherein every one knows, there was nothing of Transubstantiation.
This is that which Rabanus explains, Lib. 1. de instit. clericor. cap. 31.

Mabillon particularly triumphs, when he takes notice of a Passage which is
found in the 78 th Office. He offered up himself first to thee a Sacrifice, and
first taught himself to be offered. These words, offered up himself, seem to
him to be applicable to the Act of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist: but he must
not take it ill, if we tell him, that it is not true, that he then offered up
any Sacrifice: the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ consisting only in his Death on
the Cross; the Eucharist, where he had only his Death before his Eyes, was only
the Memorial of his Sacrifice, his Offering consisting only in his Death. If he
did offer up himself in the Eucharist, then was he already dead, which is a
Notion attributed to Gregory Nissen, but is refuted by the Divines of the
Church of Rome, as impertinent.

Some it may be will imagine, that the Authors of the Gothic Liturgy, take
away all Equivocation, when they say; Page 300.
Let us receive that in the Wine which flowed from thee on the Cross. But
indeed, here we have reason to admire how far strong Prejudices will carry Men,
so as even to hinder common Sense from acting; for really there can be no
Notion more opposite to Transubstantiation: since this Notion represents the
State in which Christ was given to us, that is, a State of Death, which is
contrary to the Popish Notions, by which they believe him alive in the
Eucharist. Besides, it is absolutely false, that Jesus Christ did after his
Resurrection, retake the same Blood which he lost on the Cross. The Church of
Rome pretends that she has it in her keeping, and it is shown in I don't know
how many places. This Expression, is well known to be St. Augustin's, whose
Doctrine is vastly opposite to that of Transubstantiation, as De Marca has
been forced to acknowledge.

This is what I thought might be observed concerning this Gothic Liturgy,
which was used amongst the Visi-goths, and which mentions no Saint of later
standing than St. Leodegarius, who died in the year 677. Now because Pope
Adrian the First, engaged Charlemain to abolish the Galliean Liturgy, which was
very different from the Roman, endeavoring by this means to subject the
Gallican Churches to himself, under the plausible pretense of making them more
uniform with the Church of Rome; Gregory VII th, undertook to suppress the
Gothic Liturgy, which was not less but rather more different; because the
Popes after Adrian I. had made great Changes in the Roman Liturgy, and had
enriched it with many Novelties, which the Ages after Gregory the First, had
produced in Religion. However it be, thus much is evident from what I have
observed at the beginning of this Chapter, that in the VII th Century in which
this Liturgy was in use in these Diocesses, there was nothing less known than
the Romish Religion, as it concerns those Articles which the Protestants reject
as Novelties. But let us proceed to take a view of the State of these Diocesses
in the 8 th Century.

CHAP. VIII. The Opinion of the Churches of Aquitain and Narbon in the Eighth
Century.
THere was no part of Gaul so shaken and laid waste by the Wars, as Aquitain
and Gallia Narbonensis were in the 8 th Century: Though all France suffered in
some measure, yet these two Provinces were, during a long series of Years, the
Theater of War and Calamity. However, we may say that these Mishaps served only
to awaken the Zeal of these People, and to make them the more sensible of the
Aversion they ought to have to the Idolatry which reigned in the East; and
which it seems God was willing to punish with the Scourge of the Saracens, the
great Enemies of Images and Idolatry. For not only did the Bishops of these
Diocesses preserve their Purity in the Faith, which they made appear at the end
of this Century, by their opposing the Opinions of Felix Bishop of Vrgel, and
of Elippandus Archbishop of Toledo, who revived Nestorianism; but they also
gave a public Testimony of their Aversion to the worshipping of Images, which
the Popes asserted in Conjunction with those of the East.

The Judgment of these Diocesses concerning Images appeared in Public, when
their Deputies assisted at the Council of Francfort, which condemned the 2 d
Council of Nice, notwithstanding that it had been approved by the Pope. The 2 d
Council of Nice had in the year 787, ordained the Adoration of Images, under
the Penalty of being Anathematized. The East was entirely overrun with this
Superstition; and what we have already seen of Serenus Bishop of Marseille,
makes it evident, that it had likewise made great Progress in the West.
Charlemain and the whole Body of the Western Churches, if we except Rome and
some Partisans of the Pope in Italy, were desirous to stop this torrent:
England condemned the Decrees of the Nicene Council, and censured them by the
Pen of the famous Alcuin. His Writings were subscribed by all the Bishops of
England, and sent to Charlemain. This great Emperor thereupon, in the year 794,
assembled at Francfort a Council of the Bishops under his Government; that is,
those of Italy, Aquitain, and Provence, as well to condemn Elipandus
Archbishop of Toledo, and Felix Bishop of Vrgel, as to make an enquiry into
the Acts of the 2 d Council of Nice. They were examined in presence of the
Pope's Legates. And this Council finding that the 2 d Council of Nice had
Anathematized all those who refused to render to the Images of the Saints, the
Worship and Adoration which are only due to the Trinity; she denied the Service
and Adoration of Images, despised the Nicene Acts, and condemned those who
received them.

Now that we may exactly know the Opinions which obtained in these Diocesses,
whose Bishops approved the Book of Charlemain; the Reader needs only consider
carefully the Positions of Charlemain against several Opinions which have since
prevailed in the Church of Rome.

1. In his Preface, he expressly rejects Traditions; when he says, That as for
themselves, they were content with Prophetical, Evangelical and Apostolic
Writings.

Lib. 1. cap. 13. page 84.
2. He maintains; That we are principally to believe the truth of the Hebrew
Original; Hebraeae veritati potissimum fides adhibenda est. Thus he expresses
himself by way of opposition to Translations, and the vulgar Latin in
particular.

3. He lays it down for a Rule, that God alone is the lawful Object of
religious Worship. Page 32.
It is no small Error to serve any thing with religious Worship besides him who
says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And
he repeats this afterward; Neither do we read that any thing is to be
worshipped besides God; Lib. 2. cap. 5. page 184.
because it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve.

4. Would we know his Opinion concerning the Worship which at this day is given
to Angels and Saints? We may find it, Lib. 1. cap. 9. p. 69. Moreover, says
he, for as much as we see that John in the Revelation is restrained by the
Angel from worshipping him; and that Peter the Pastor of the Church forbad the
Worship of the Centurion; and that the chosen Vessel, together with Barnabas,
with a strong Opposition, rejected the Adorations of the Lycaonians; we are
without doubt to conclude from these Examples; that Adoration, which only
belongs to God, who alone is to be worshipped and alone to be served, is not to
be rendered to any Creature whatsoever, except only by way of Salutation, Lib.
6. cap. 25. page 227.
to express our Humility. So afterward; The Gospel-Rule of the Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, which is sometimes recommended to us in the Words of our
Lord himself, and sometimes by Examples, sometimes is represented to us by
Oracles either more obscure, or more plain and open; sometimes is taught in
plain, and other-times in figurative Expressions, rejecting the Adoration of
all other things whatsoever, save only the Adoration whereby we mutually salute
one another, enjoins the Adoration of God alone. Page 228
And again; Neither Men nor Angels are in the least to be adored, save only by
that Adoration which is given to express our Charity, and as a Salutation.

5. He distinguishes very well between the Honor we give to Saints, and that
which we render to God, when he says; God alone is to be worshipped, Lib. 2.
cap. 21. page 218.
God alone is to be adored, God alone is to be glorified; of whom it is said by
the Prophet, The Name of him alone is exalted; and to the Saints, who having
triumphed over the Devil, do reign with him, Veneration is to be rendered,
either because they have fought courageously for the Preservation of the State
of the Church, or because they are known to assist it with their continual
Patronage and Intercession. So likewise, Lib. 4. cap. 23.
We venerate the Saints who are dead with the triumph of Merits, but they are
not to be adored with Divine Worship, for that very reason, because it is
Divine Worship. Seeing therefore, says he, that God alone is to be worshipped,
Lib. 4. cap. ult.
the Martyrs and all other Saints are rather to be venerated than worshipped,
as we have said before in this Book. And the same thing we meet with also, cap.
28. Page 248.
toward the end.

6. It appears clearly from what he says concerning the means whereby we
obtain Remission of Sins, that he owned no other Sacraments of the Church
besides Baptism and the Eucharist; for indeed he mentions only these two. Lib.
3. cap. 6.


7. He was so far from owning either the Infallibility of the Pope, or of a
Council which the Pope has approved, Lib. 3. cap. 11. page 340.
that he maintains it was a piece of Folly to look upon the 2 d Council of Nice
as universal, and calls it a Council of one Part of the Church only; and he
afterward censures the Fathers of that Council for giving it the Title of
Universal, Page 340.
whereas it had been convened, without the Participation and Consent of many
Catholic Churches. This Remark made such an Impression upon the Learned Jesuit
Sirmondus, T. 2. Council. Gall. page 91.
that he seems not to own the second Council of Nice as a general Council.

8. The Fathers of the second Nicene Council having made a Comparison between
the Eucharist and Images, and used these following Expressions, which are not
to be found at present in the Copies of that Council: As the Body of our
Savior passes from the Fruits of the Earth, into an excellent Mystery; so
Images formed by the Industry of Artificers, pass to the Veneration of those
Persons, according to whose Likeness they have been wrought. Charlemain does
censure those who had made a Parallel between Images and the Eucharist, in such
a manner as shows that he knew nothing of Romish Transubstantiation. He says,
That the Eucharist is made by the Hand of the Priest, and by calling upon the
Name of God, both Priest and People joining their Prayers in the Consecration
thereof; whereas Images stand in no need of Consecration, but are made at the
Discretion of the Painter. He says that Melchizedeck did not present an Image
as a Type of the Body and Blood, but Bread and Wine: that Moses commanded a
Lamb to be eaten as a Type of our Savior, wholly rejecting the Custom of
worshipping Images. That the Psalmist who sang that Men should eat the Bread of
Angels, that is, Jesus Christ, has also declared, that the Makers of Images
are like unto the Images they have made. That the Sacrament is of Divine
Institution; whereas the insolent Use of Images, is not only without Scripture,
but also directly contrary to the Writings of the Old and New Testament. That
our Savior never instituted the Memory of his Suffering to be kept up by the
Works of Artificers and worldly Arts, but by the Consecration of his Body and
Blood: that he was not willing that his Faith and his Confession should be
expressed by Pictures, but by the Mouth and the Heart.

We are carefully to take notice, that the Authors of this Book, who desired to
exalt the Sacrament of the Eucharist with all their Might, never give the least
hint that Jesus Christ had instituted it, to make it an Object of Adoration.
They say that the Eucharist, according to the Judgment of St. Paul, is
preferable almost to every other Sacrament; that it is made invisibly by the
Spirit of God, and consecrated by the Priest, who calls upon God; that it is
carried by the Hands of Angels, and laid upon the Altar of God in Heaven; that
it can neither increase nor be diminished; that it is confirmed by the Old and
New Testament; that it is the Life and Nourishment of Souls, that by its
Manducation it leads to the Entrance of the Heavenly Kingdom; that it can never
be abolished, no not in the time of Persecution; and that no body can be saved
without receiving of it. Whereas Images are visibly made by the Hand of the
Workman, painted by the Art of the Painter, placed on the Walls by the Hands of
Men, that by them, if Men inconsiderately abuse them, Sins are increased; that
they can increase and diminish in Beauty, according to the Ability of the
Workman; that Age spoils them; that they only feed the Eye; that they only
bring to remembrance things past, by looking upon them; that they may be
spoiled by taking wet; that they who keep to the true Faith are saved, without
having any Regard to Images. And to exaggerate the Folly of their Anathema's
pronounced against those that did not worship them, they conclude that this
Anathema strikes at the Saints of old, of whom we never read that they adored
them; that the same was levelled at the Martyrs, who from the Baptismal Font
passed immediately to the Kingdom of Heaven, without any Adoration of Images;
and lastly, that it is darted against little Infants, who cannot worship them,
and of whom notwithstanding, the Son of God says, Suffer little Children to
come to me, etc. I own that Charlemain censureth Gregory Bishop of Neocaesaria,
for giving to the Eucharist the Name of the true Image of Jesus Christ: For
after having made out, that no Artificer can form a true Image of Jesus Christ;
he adds, when he speaks of the Eucharist; That Jesus Christ did not offer up to
God the Father for us in Sacrifice, any Image or Prototype but himself; and
that he who of old had been foretold by visible Resemblances under the Shadow
of the Law, in the Immolation of the Lamb, and in some other things, as being
the Sacrifice that was to be offered, by truly accomplishing the things that
had been prophesied of him in the Oracles of the Prophets, did offer up himself
to God the Father, for a saving Sacrifice, and bestowed upon us (the Shadows of
the Law being past away) not some imaginary Sign, but the Sacrament of his Body
and of his Blood. For the Mystery of the Blood and Body of our Lord, must not
now be called an Image, but the Truth; not the Shadow, but the Body; not a Type
of things to come, but that whith had been prefigured by the Types of old: For
now (according to the Song of Songs) the Day is risen, and the Shadows are
gone; now Jesus Christ, the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes, is come, he has now fully accomplished the Law. Now upon those who
sat in the Region of the Shadow of Death, a great Light is risen. Now the Vail
is taken off from the Face of Moses; and the Vail of the Temple being rent,
has opened to us all Secrets and Things hid. Now the true Melchizedeck, Christ
the King of Righteousness and King of Peace, has bestowed upon us not
Sacrifices of Beasts, but the Sacrament of his Body and of his Blood, and has
not said, This is the Image of my Body and of my Blood; but, This is my Body
which shall be given for you, and this is my Blood which shall be shed for many
for the Remission of Sins.

But it is plain that Charlemain understands by the Word Image, a Prototype,
like the Shadows of the Law, with respect to which it is true, what many of the
Fathers have said, that the Sacraments of the New Testament are the Body and
the Truth; though otherwise considered as Sacraments, they are sacred Signs,
which cannot be confounded with the things signified by them, without
renouncing the Light of common sense. Moreover, we are to observe that
Charlemain never said that the Eucharist is properly the Body of Jesus Christ.
If he denies Jesus Christ to have said concerning the Eucharist, this is the
Image of my Body, taking the Word as a Prototype, and a Shadow of things to
come; yet he always holds that it is his Body in a Sacramental Sense, for he
never speaks of the Eucharist as the Body of our Lord, without adding the
Restriction of Sacrament, or of Mystery. If, says he, he hears the Mystery of
the Body and of the Blood, once mentioned, and twice together, he has bestowed
upon us the Sacrament of his Body and of his Blood: And lastly, the Mystery of
the Body and of the Blood, cannot be called an Image. Now the Word Mystery,
according to the constant Use of the Church, properly signifies the Symbol, the
Figure, the sacred Sign of the Body and Blood of our Savior.

Lastly; We ought to observe, that though he says that the Sacrament is the
Body of Jesus Christ, yet he never says that it ought to be adored. Indeed he
ought to have drawn up an Impeachment against these Worshippers of Images, upon
this Article, and a very important one too, because it is very evident that the
Greek Worshippers of Images did not adore the Eucharist, but gave only a simple
Veneration to it, like to that which they bestowed upon the Cross, the Altar
and the Gospel, as one of their Authors tells us, in a Book which they call, An
Invective of the Orthodox against the Opposers of Images, Scriptores post
Theophanem, p. 309.
printed at the Louvre in 1685. in the Collection of Authors, who have writ
since Theophanes.

CHAP. IX. The Faith of the Churches of Aquitain and Narbon, in the Ninth
Century.
CHarlemain, that great Man, who lived till the Year 814. maintained the Spirit
of Opposition against the Errors and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, that
espoused the Interest of the Image-Worshippers, by approving the second Council
of Nice. This Council having established the Authority of Tradition, as being a
necessary Principle to support the Worship of Images; we find that the Churches
of Aquitain and Narbon, kept themselves firmly to the Authority of the
Scriptures, grounding their Faith thereon, and regulating their Worship
according to the same.

Of this we have an illustrious Example in the Council of Arles, assembled in
the Year 813, by the Order of Charlemain, whereat the Archbishop of Narbon
assisted with his Suffragans. For the Fathers of this Council thought fit to
begin it with a Profession of their Faith, which is nothing but an Extract of
that Creed, which bears the Name of Athanasius, and this is that which they
ordain should be preached to the People for the Catholic Faith, without so
much as mentioning one Word of those Articles of Faith that the Church of Rome
now imposes.

Charlemain had ordered a Collection of Homilies to be made out of the Works of
Origin, St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, St. Jerome, St. Augustine, St. Leo, St.
Maximus, St. Gregory and Bid, which he caused to be published in these
Diocesses, as well as the rest of his Empire; now these Homilies do so strongly
oppose the most part of those Novelties, which were then endeavored to be
introduced, that this Book for a long time served as a Bar, to hinder People
from leaning too much toward those things that incline Men to Superstition.
There is no Protestant in the least versed in the Matters of Controversy, who
seeing the Names of those ancient Doctors comprised in this Collection, will
not remember how much these Fathers have opposed themselves to a Multitude of
Corruptions which prevailed at last, by the factious Endeavors of some of the
latter Popes; wherefore I may excuse my self from making an Extract of this
Collection, choosing rather to produce other Witnesses, which the same Diocese
affords us concerning the Faith of these Diocesses in the ninth Century.

I can only produce three or four; but to recompense the smallness of their
Number, they are Men against whose Authority the most contentious Adversaries
will have nothing to oppose. In the first place it is certain, that as the
Bishops of Aquitain and Narbon had set themselves against the Superstition and
Idolatry of the Greeks and the Pope in the matter of Images at the Council of
Francfort; so their Successors imitated their Zeal and Vigor in the Synod at
Paris in 824, upon the same Question; where they determined that Pope Adrian,
who had writ an Answer to the Book of Charlemain, and therein undertaken the
Defense of the second Council of Nice, had made use of in the said Reply,
superstitious Testimonies, and not at all to the purpose, answering what he
thought fit, and not what was agreeable. And besides they drew up a new
Collection of great Numbers of Arguments against this superstitious Worship, to
recall Pope Paschal and those of his Party from their doting on Images.

We can show further, that the same Zeal was continued in this Diocese.
Baluzius has acknowledged, and so has Massonus before him, that the Book of
Agobardus Archbishop of Lions* concerning Pictures, expresses no more than
the general Opinions of the Bishops of France and Germany, concerning this
Point. But it may not be amiss to quote it in particular, not only to show what
were the Opinions of the Churches of Aquitain and Narbon (because though he was
born in Spain, yet he had continued for a long time in Aquitain, whither he was
invited, because of the general Esteem he had gained, to be the Coadjutor to
Leidradus Archbishop of Lions, to whom he succeeded;) but also because it
appears by his Works, that the most illustrious Bishops of Gallia Narbonensis
carefully consulted him in Matters of Difficulty, as their Master, being indeed
a most famous Doctor, able to instruct and inform them.

1. He declares, as St. Augustine did before him, that we can never equalize the
Authority of any Interpreter whatsoever, T. 9. B. P. Paris. page 1245.
to that of the Apostles: Concerning Expositors also St. Austin has delivered;
That we are to hold far otherwise than you do, whom not only in his Book, which
he has writ against Faustus the Manichee, concerning those who have been
blamed by the Doctors, yea the best of them, speaks thus; which sort of
Writings, that is to say Expositions, are not to be read with a Necessity of
believing, but with a Liberty of judging; for those Books only, that are of
Divine Authority, are to be read not with a Liberty of judging, but with a
necessity of believing, which form the Apostle himself delivered, saying,
Quench not the Spirit, despise not Prophecies, try all things, hold fast what
is good, abstain from every Appearance of Evil. Which is absolutely false, if
an infallible Principle has continued in the Church; whether in the Person of
the Pope, or in Councils, or that we must of Necessity explain Scripture
according to the Sense of the Fathers, as the Church of Rome has defined.

2. We see with what force he maintains the Canons of the Gallican Church,
Epist. ad Imperat. p. 1222.
against the Contempt which some cast upon them, because they had been made
without the Pope's Concurrence.

3. We do not find, that in his time, they applied to the Blessed Virgin the
Words of the first Promise, by reading, Ipsa tuum conteret caput, Page 1183.
She shall bruise thy Head; for he reads, Ipse tuum, He shall bruise, etc. when
he disputes against Felix Bishop of Vrgel.

4. He maintains in the same place, that the Notion of a Peoples being without
Sin, who yet confess themselves to be Sinners out of Humility, Page 1243.
is pure Pelagianism. That if this is the Property of humble Saints, why then
does John the Apostle say, If we say that we have no Sin, we deceive our
selves, and the Truth is not in us; but if we confess our Sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our Sins? Who if like you, he had been inclined to have
not mean, but great Thoughts of himself; he had whereof he might glory, because
he lay in the Bosom of his Lord, and was beloved of him above the rest of his
Disciples. James the Apostle also says, In many things we offend all; which if
any shall imagine not to be spoke in Truth, but by way of Humility, let him
know that therein he follows Pelagius.

5. He plainly declares that our Communion in the Sacrament is the same with
that of the Believers of old, when he applies that Passage of the 1 st to the
Corinthians, chap. 10. ver. 1, and 2. of the drinking of the Holy Ghost, and
maintains in these terms that there is no other Difference between the
Believers of the Old and New Testament, Page 1250.
but this, That the great Sacraments of Salvation which are wrought by the
Mediator for us and for them, save us as being already past, but them as yet to
come, because we believe and hold what is past, they believed and held what was
to come; they held them only in their Minds, as Figures of future things, but
we in an open Profession, Vows and Declaration of things past, under the
Signification of sensible Sacraments, as those two who carried one Cluster of
Grapes upon a Staff, did indifferently do the same Work, only that the one of
them had it behind his Back, and the other before his Face.

I should be obliged to transcribe his whole Book against Pictures and Images,
if I should go about to extract all that it contains in Opposition to the
Opinions of the Church of Rome. It will be sufficient for us to observe, that
the Romish Index Expurgatorius, has forbid this Book, as well as the rest,
till its Errors be expunged: and indeed it did deserve no less; for it
maintains, according to the Doctrine of St. Augustine, that we ought not to
adore any Image of God, but only that which is God himself, even his eternal
Son; and that it is a piece of Folly and Sacriledg, to vouchsafe any Worship to
Images, and to call them Holy, as the second Council of Nice had done. He
refutes the Excuse of the Council of Trent, which only considers those as
Idolaters, that attribute something of Divinity to the Image. He maintains it
to be mere Paganism to have Images for any other use than that of a Memorial;
and at the same time asserts, that Images are of as little Use and Advantage as
the Picture of a Mower, or of some Hero in Armor, can advantage a Mower or
Soldier, who looks upon those Pictures. In a Word, he speaks exactly like a
true Iconoclast; for after he had said, that it was impossible any longer to
bear with the Abuses against which he had taken Pen in hand, he adds: From
whence we may plainly infer, that if Hezekiah, a Godly and Religious King,
brake the brazen Serpent, made by God's express Command, because the mistaken
Multitude began to worship it as an Idol, for which his Piety was very much
commended; much more religiously may and ought the Images of the Saints (they
themselves approving it) be broken and ground to Powder, which were never set
up by God's Command, but are absolutely human Inventions.

But besides this, there are four other Articles, which are as disrelishing to
the Church of Rome as these:

1. Page 1267.
He maintains that there is no other Mediator between God and Men, save Jesus
Christ God and Man, which he proves by the Authority of St. Augustine, de Civ.
Dei, l. 9. c. 15.

2. He looks upon those as worthy to be anathematized and excommunicated from
the Church of God, who should undertake to dedicate a Church to the most
excellent of Saints or Angels. If any of us, says he, Page 1272.
should make a Temple of Wood or Stone to any, though the most excellent of
Saints, we ought for doing that to be anathematized from the Truth of Christ,
and from the Church of God, because by so doing we should give that Worship to
the Creature, which is only due to the Creator.

3. Having given a Relation of the manner how the Faithful gathered up the
Bones of St. Polycarp, Page 1275.
and interred them in a place where they intended to meet and celebrate his
Memory, to encourage Believers to imitate the constancy of that Martyr; he
declares that all manner of Worship or Honor done to them over and above this,
is unlawful, religious Worship being due to God alone.

Page 1281, and 1282.
4. He proves that his Judgment concerning these Points is founded upon the
Example of the ancient Doctors, up-their Opinions, and upon the Book of the
Sacraments of the Church of Rome, that it was the ground of the ancient Doctors
of the Church, who rejected the Worship which the Arians gave to Jesus Christ
as idolatrous, tho they owned him to be no more than a Man.

The Reader needs not take much pains to apprehend why Rome thought fit to
condemn these Books of Agobardus; tho he may be at a loss, how it comes to
pass, that notwithstanding all this, he is at this day held for a Saint, and
publicly adored at Lions under the Name of St. Agobo. This is a Riddle which
has strangly perplexed the Learned Jesuit, Theophilus Raynaldus, as well as le
Cointe, in his Annals of the Church of France. But he is not the only Person
that has opposed the Belief and Worship of the Church of Rome, and is publicly
adored by her.

I have another Author to produce, who gives us so clear an Idea of the belief
of this Diocese, wherein he was born, concerning the Eucharist, that the
Papists have never been able to return any pertinent Answer to it, save only
this, that the Passage we quote is supposititious. The Person we speak of, is
Christianus Druthmarus, Monk of Corbie, whom it seems God was willing to oppose
to the corrupt Notions of Paschasius Radbertus, his Abbot. The Passage is this,
[ And as they were at supper, Jesus took Bread, and blessed it and brake it.]
After that he had fulfilled the Command concerning the old Passover, and put an
end to the old Shadows, he makes a beginning of new Grace, and of a new
Sacrifice. He took Bread which strengthens the Heart of Man, and which does
most of all support Men's Bodies, and in it places the Sacrament of his Love:
but much more does that spiritual Bread fully strengthen and comfort all sorts
of Creatures; because in him we move and have our Being: First, he blessed it,
because in himself who was Man, he blessed all Mankind; for having taken humane
Nature upon him from the Blessed Virgin, he thereby demonstrated that the
Blessing and Power of the Divine Immortality, was really therein. He brake the
Bread himself, because he voluntarily offered up himself to suffer; and that he
might fill and satisfy us, he made no difficulty to break the Mansion of his
Soul, as himself said: I have Power to lay down my Life, and have Power to take
it up again. [ And gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my
Body] He gave to his Disciples the Sacrament of his Body for the Remission of
Sins, and Preservation of Charity, that they remembering this Act of his, might
always perform that in a Figure, which he was now about to do for them, and
might not forget that, This is my Body, that is in the Sacrament. [ And he took
the Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it to them, saying;] Forasmuch as amongst
all sorts of Food, Bread and Wine are found to be the most effectual to
strengthen, and refresh our weak Bodies; he with good reason thought fit by
these two, to ratify and confirm the Ministry of his Sacrament; for Wine not
only exhilarates, but also increases Blood, and therefore is the Blood of
Christ very properly typified thereby; because whatsoever comes to us from him,
does enliven us with a true Joy, and increases all our good. And lastly, As
when a Person that is to take a far Journey, leaves to his Friends that love
him, some Pledge or Token of his Love upon this Condition, that they use it
every day, that they may not forget him: So likewise has God commanded us,
having spiritually changed his Body into Bread, and the Wine into Blood, by
these two, to remember what he has done for us with his Body and Blood, and
not to be unthankful to his most endearing Love and Charity. And because Water
is mingled with the Sacrament of his Blood, it represents his People, for whom
he was pleased to die. And neither is the Wine without Water, nor the Water
without Wine; because as he died for us, so must we die for him, or for our
Brethren, that is, for the Church. Wherefore also Water and Blood came forth
from his Body. And whereas he says, This is my Blood of the New Testament;
this is added in contradistinction to that of the Old Testament, which by the
Blood of Goats, could not purge away Sin from those who were still in bondage
to Sin. [ But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit of the
Vine, until that day when I shall drink it new with you in my Father's
Kingdom.] The Vine is Judaea, the Wine that of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
other Elect. For till that time, Judaea had brought forth Clusters of Grapes,
from whence Wine flowed forth, that is, Works done in Faith; but from the Death
of our Lord wild Grapes only, until the time that Enoch and Elias shall carry
them up into the Kingdom, that is, the Church of Christ, at the end of the
World. Or else more simply the Words may be thus taken, That from the hour of
his supping with his Disciples, he would drink no more Wine, until he was
become immortal and incorruptible after his Resurrection. Whereas also he was
pleased not to administer the Sacrament of his Body and Blood to his Disciples
till after they had supped, and that we are not commanded to take it Fasting;
this may be the reason, the Lord had a mind to show that the figurative
Testament was only commanded till the true was come, and he had now put an end
to the Old Testament, and instituted a New One, and therefore it was that he
celebrated the Old before the New. The Apostles also for a long time continued
the same Custom, and after their other Food, took this by the Lord's
Appointment; but afterward when many Jews came to communicate, it was enjoined
in a Synod, that every one (if he was cleansed from other Sins) should first
take the Repast of Spiritual Bread, before he took that of the Temporal.

This place, which contains an exact Commentary upon the Institution of the
Holy Supper, has much enraged the Papists; and they have wrested it into all
Senses, to avoid the threatening Blow. Sixtus Senensis tells us, that in another
Copy, after the words, This is my Body, that is in a Sacrament, was added,
truly subsisting. But this Copy was never yet produced, though they who
reprinted the Work of Druthmarus in the Bibliotheca Patrum of the Cologne
Edition, have been pleased to put this Falsification of Sixtus Senensis in the
Margent.

Cardinal Perron, who was as able as any Man of France to justify the fair
dealing of Sixtus Senensis in the business of this Manuscript of Lions, but did
not care to concern himself about it, has boldly maintained, that he might
with the more ease slip his Neck out of the Collar, that this Passage of
Druthmarus had been corrupted by the Protestants. But it has already shown,
that the Edition published in 1514, by Wimfelingius, before Luther begun to
write against Leo X. of which the Reverend Dr. Tenison has a Copy in his
Library, with the Privilege of the Emperor Maximilian, and the Arms of Pope Leo
X. contains this Passage whole and entire. So that it is obvious to judge, that
Druthmarus who was born in Aquitain, taught nothing at Corbie, but what he had
learned from his Infancy, and that which was the common Doctrine, before
Paschasius had undertaken to publish his Extravagancies, which he did not till
the year of our Lord 835.

We ought also here, to take notice of an Action that happened in this Century
concerning the Eucharist. In the year 844, Bernard Earl of Barcelona and Duke
of Septimania, made a Treaty with King Charles the Bald, near the City of
Toulouse in the Abbey of St. Saturninus, where they mingled the Blood of the
Eucharist with some Ink, to sign the Treaty they had agreed upon. The thing has
been published by the famous Baluzius, in his Notes upon Agobardus, and is
lately reprinted by the same Author. The words of Odo Aripertus, Mareae Hispan.
Lib. 4. page 533, and 534.
who relates the matter, translated, run thus: The Peace therefore being
severally ratified and sealed by the King and Earl with the Blood of the
Eucharist; Bernard Count of Toulouse, came from Barcelona to Toulouse, and did
Homage to King Charles in the Abbey of St. Saturninus near Toulouse.

De Re Diplom. L. 2. c. 22.. 21.
Mabillon acknowledges that this was not a Fact without Example. Now let any
Man imagine if he can, whether People that believe Transubstantiation, would
ever have been capable of such a Profanation of the Blood of Jesus Christ, or
whether the Monks, in whose Abbey the thing was done, would ever have suffered
it, had the thing appeared as horrible unto them, as it must of necessity
appear to those who defend the Opinion of the Church of Rome.

I shall conclude this Chapter, with giving an account of that courageous
Opposition which the Bishops of Aquitain and Narbon made in the year 876, in
the Council of Pontyon, against the Enterprises of Pope John VIII; who being
backed by the Emperor Charles the Bald, had a mind to subject all the Bishops
of France and Germany to Ansegisus, Archbishop of Sens, as their Primate; but
at the same time as to his Vicar, that he might execute his Decrees, and inform
him of the most important Affairs of those Churches, which he pretended, ought
to be decided and ended at Rome, which if so, would have abolished the Power of
Synods and Metropolitans. This was in a manner the last considerable Effort
they ever made, to preserve their ancient Discipline; for soon after the Popes
knew to manage the Kings, that stood in need of them in Italy, so well, that by
little and little they at last gained the Point, and so made themselves
absolute, the Synods and Metropolitans retaining only an empty Name, without
almost any Authority at all.

CHAP. X. The State of these Diocesses in the Tenth Century.
WE are now come to the Tenth Century, in which Ignorance and Barbarism
overwhelmed well nigh all the West; and the Church of Rome fell at the same
time into such monstrous Corruptions, that those who have wrote the History
thereof, do not mention it without Horror. I don't intend to make any stop
here, in alleging Proofs for what I say, from the concurrent Testimonies of
Genebrard, Baronius, and other Doctors of the Church of Rome. It Is a thing not
denied by any one, that has ever heard speak of the History of the Church; and
has been particularly set forth by Gerbertus Archbishop of Rheims, who was
afterward advanced to the Papacy.

But yet in the mean time, whatever the Corruption may have been, which was
scattered elsewhere; we have good ground to believe, that it had not quite
stifled the ancient Doctrine and Religion of these Diocesses, which may be
easily made out by the following Observations.

1. I own that we find in the Writings of Odo, the first Abbot of Clugny, who
was born in Aquitain, some Expressions which import that he inclined to the
Opinions of Paschasius, as appears in his Collations; which might make one judge
that this Notion began then already to be propagated in Aquitain, whose Duke
William was the Founder of Clugny. But we must here take notice of two things:
The first is, That the ancient Customs of this Monastry do plainly show, that
when this Congregation was founded, those who were the Authors of these
Customs, were not of Paschasius's Opinion. This is evident from chap. 30. of
the second Book, and from chap. 28. of the third. The second is, That though
Odo might have entertained this Opinion of Paschasius concerning the carnal
Presence of Jesus Christ, yet we may easily observe that he never owned the
Consequences of it. For we find in the Relation of the Death of this Odo, who
died at Rome in the year 942, that he received the Eucharist, but there is no
mention made of any Adoration that he paid at his receiving it.

2. We are to observe, that in this Description of Odo's Departure, which was
made by one of his Disciples, we meet with neither Confession before the
receiving of the Eucharist, nor the receiving of the Sacrament of Extreme
Unction, which are sufficient Proofs that he knew nothing of these Sacraments.

3. It appears by the Writings of Gerbertus, who was educated in the Monastery
of Aurillac, what was the Faith of this Diocese. He had been the Tutor of
Robert Son to Hugh Capet, who raised him to the Archbishopric of Rheims in the
year 991, in the room of Arnulphus, who was deposed. He has writ an Apology
for the Council which deposed Arnulphus, wherein he gives full evidence what
esteem he had for the Pope, and how little he believed the Papacy necessary to
the Church, not only because of the Vices of the Popes of his time, but also
for several political Reasons, which engage every Church not to subject
themselves to a foreign Power. Tom. 10. Baron. Page 899. n. 30.
Suppose, says he, that by the warlike Incursions of barbarous Nations, there
be no way open for us to go to Rome; or that Rome it self, being become subject
to some barbarous Prince, be at his Pleasure made part of his Kingdom, shall we
in this case be reduced to the necessity of having no Councils at all? or shall
the Bishops of the World, to the loss and ruin of their own Kings, expect the
Advice and Counsels of their Enemies, for the Management of the Affairs of
Church and State.

We may see another Assertion of his in a Letter to Seguinus Archbishop of
Sens: Page 905.
I do resolvedly affirm, That if the Pope of Rome himself should sin against
his Brother, and being often admonished, should not hear the Church, that this
same Pope of Rome ought to be looked upon as a Heathen and Publican. Whereupon
Baronius exclaims, Here is a Sentence indeed, worthy only to proceed from the
Mouth of some great Heretic, or of some most impudent Schismatic, which
abrogates all sacred Councils at once, cuts the Throat of Canons, strangles
Traditions, and treads under foot all the Rights of the Church, that it seems
impossible that a Catholic should ever dream of such things, much less, so
saucily utter and assert them. We may also gather from the subsequent Words,
whether or no he conceived Communion with the Church of Rome, to be of absolute
necessity. If he (the Pope of Rome) do therefore judge us unworthy of his
Communion, Ibidem.
because none of us will comply with him in his Anti-evangelical Sentiments,
yet he cannot separate us from the Communion of Christ; seeing a Priest ought
not to be removed from his Function, except he have confessed, or be convict of
the Crime laid to his charge: especially when the Apostle faith, Who shall
separate us from the Love of Christ? And again, I am certain that neither Death
nor Life, etc. And what greater Separation can there be, than to debar any
Believer from the Body and Blood of the Son of God, which is daily offered up
for our Salvation? And if he be a Murderer, that takes away the Bodily Life
from himself or his Neighbor, he that robs himself or another of Eternal Life,
by what Name shall we call him?

We find in another Letter which he wrote to Wilderod^^ Bishop of Strasburg,
what work he makes with those false Decretals, which were foisted in on purpose
to make the whole Church submit to the Papal Yoke, as if before Syricius all
the East and West had belonged to the Papal Jurisdiction; wherein he exactly
follows the Footsteps of Hincmar, who confuted them with all his Might.

If we enquire into the rest of his Opinions, we shall find, that he did not
believe that the Popes had received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, in any
other manner, than all other Bishops. See how he explains himself in a
Discourse to Bishops, when he was Bishop either of Rheims or Ravenna. And as woe
is me if I do not preach the Gospel, Analect. T. 2. Page 217.
or if I hide long in my Heart the Treasure that I have received, burying it in
the Ground; or if I keep the Candle of the Divine Word covered under a Bushel,
and do not expose it on a Candlestick to the Eyes of all: so likewise if I do
not open the Locks of human Ignorance, with those Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which all of us, who are Priests, have received in the Person of St.
Peter; so that upon this account, I may deserve according to my small measure,
to hear that, Well done good and faithful Servant, because thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will set thee over many. And again; Page 219.
For so the Lord said to St. Peter, Simon Peter, love thou me? and he, Thou
know, Lord, that I love thee. And when he had asked this a third time, Page
220.
and had been as often answered, the Lord repeated a third time, Feed my Sheep.
Which Sheep, and which Flock, St. Peter not only received at that time, but
also has received them with us, and all of us have received them with him.

He shows that he did not believe the necessity of the Priests Intention in the
Sacraments, when he says in the same piece, speaking to those that were guilty
of Simony, I do once more enquire of my Brother Bishop, Page 233.
lest we should seem to have omitted any thing that belongs to a true Proof and
Trial, Who is it, Brother Bishop, that confers Episcopal Grace? is it God or
Man? God without doubt, but yet by Man. Man lays on his Hand, and God confers
Grace; the Priest serves God with his suppliant Hand, and God blesses with his
powerful Right Hand: The Bishop admits thee into the Order, but God makes thee
worthy of it. O Justice! O Equity! If Money be given to a Man, who in
Ordination does no more but discharge a piece of Service laid upon him, why is
the whole denied to God, who bestows the Order it self upon thee? Does it seem
just to thee, to honor the Servant, whilst thou do affront the Lord? And
whilst the Priest unrighteously takes Money, shall God be injured by Man? And
seeing God expects nothing from thee, for the Order bestowed upon thee, why
does the Priest impudently look for Money? God is willing to bestow it upon Man
for nothing, but the ravenous Bishop demands Money. God of his Kindness and
Love vouchsafes it for naught, but the malicious Priest captivates him and ties
him to Terms: For what have thou that thou have not received? And if thou have
received it, why do thou boast as if thou had not received it?

Lastly, We see in his 26 th Epistle the Confession of Faith that he makes,
which contains nothing besides the Symbol or the Apostles Creed, to which he
adds only what follows: I do not forbid Marriage.... I do not condemn second
Marriages; I do not blame the eating of Flesh; I own that reconciled Penitents
ought to be admitted to the Communion. I believe that in Baptism all Sins
whether original or actual, are forgiven; and do profess that out of the
Catholic Church no Body can be saved; and I confirm and ratify the four holy
Universal Synods, which the Mother Church confirms and approves of.

It Is worth observing, that he does not speak one word concerning the Romish
Traditions; so far was he from authorizing the Definitions of the second
Council of Nice, which the Church of Rome has been pleased to authorize in the
Council of Trent.

Lastly, We may take notice, that Leuthericus Archbishop of Sens, who died in
the year 1032, had been the Disciple of this Gerbertus, Lib. 5. cap. 45.
which is attested by the Continuator of Aimoinus: and Clarius Monk of St.
Peter le Vif at Sens, has accused Leuthericus of having laid the Beginning, and
cast the Seeds of Berengarius's Heresy.

I don't believe any one will think strange that I have quoted Gerbertus
amongst the Writers of Aquitain, under pretense, that probably he might have
changed his Opinions, after that he was elevated to the Papacy, under the Name
of Sylvester II. It is but too well known to be customary, for those who used
to speak according to their own Judgment, and the Opinions of the Place where
they were educated, as soon as they have been elevated to the Papal Dignity, to
change their Notes. Of this we have an illustrious Example in Aeneas Sylvius,
whom we find quite transformed into another Man as soon as he had taken upon
him the Name of Pius II. the Papal Diadem having changed him from White to
Black. And I am much mistaken if the 11 th Century does not furnish us an
Example every whit as remarkable, in the Person of Gregory the 7 th, who having
been before Prior of the Monastry of Clugny, the Customs whereof, as I have
hinted, did not suit well with the Doctrine of Paschasius, seems thence to have
derived his Opinions concerning the Eucharist; for Vrspergensis takes notice
that the Council of Bresse, where he was deposed by 30 Bishops, laid to his
charge, That he was of Berengarius's Opinion, as being his ancient Disciple;
and we shall find this Accusation not to be without ground, if we cast our Eyes
on his Commentary on St. Matthew; of which I have elsewhere given an Extract.
Yet for all this, we see, that this Pope, complying with his own Interest,
became afterward one of the most furious Persecutors of Berengarius.

I suppose these few Remarks will be sufficient for my purpose: tho I might
add, that St. Fulbert as well as Leutherick, having been the Disciple of
Gerbert, had derived the same Doctrine concerning the Eucharist from him; this
is so certain, that a Doctor of the Sorbonne named Villiers, found no other
means, about the beginning of this Century, to make him speak to his mind, in
publishing of his Works, than by inserting some Words in the Text, which might
make it to be looked upon as the Objection of Heretics; whereas indeed it is
an Answer of his own, wherein he sets down his Opinion, and he does it in the
self-same Terms used by St. Augustine. But I keep my self within the Bounds of
what concerns those Diocesses, whose History I am upon.

I shall only take leave to add one thing, which is, that tho Gerbertus seems
in his 26 th Letter, which contains his Confession of Faith, to make an
Allusion to some of the Opinions of the Manichees; yet we may be sure, that he
did not express himself in this manner, to show, that he held nothing of their
Tenets; no, he had other Reasons for it, which it is not necessary to unfold
here. Besides, it is notorious that the Manichees did not spread themselves in
Aquitain, till he was a very old Man: at least, it is true, that Ademarus does
not make them to appear in Aquitain till the year 1011, and that the first
Synod held against them, did not meet at Toulouse till the year 1019, that is
to say, 16 years after his Death, which happened in 1003.

CHAP. XI. The beginning of the Manichees in Aquitain, and the State of those
Churches as to Religion in that Age.
THere appeared in Lombardy and in France some Manichees chased from the East
by the Emperors of Constantinople. Ademarus Cabannensis Monk of St. Eparque at
Limoges, says, that they first were taken notice of in Aquitain, a little after
the Year 1010. and he afterward speaks of a Council assembled at Charoux,
against them. The Bishop of Meaux makes no Question, but that this gave rise of
the Albigenses; and to evidence the Solidity of his Conjecture, he accuses,
besides some Writers of the 11 th Century, the Canons whom Robert caused to be
burnt at Orleans, to have been the first Disciples of these Manichees,
supposing all this while that the Albigenses derive themselves from the same
source, and that they defended the same Opinions.

Now because it is a matter of small Importance to the History of the
Albigenses, whether the Canons of Orleans were Manichees or not, I might very
well excuse my self from entering upon that Enquiry. They may have been
Manichees, and yet the Churches of Aquitain and Narbon not the least concerned
in the matter. Neither do I think my self obliged to repeat here, what I have
already delivered, concerning the differing Opinions of the ancient and modern
Manichees in the 15 th, 16 th, and 17 th Chapters of my Remarks upon the
History of the Churches of the Valleys of Piedmont, supposing that my Reader
may easily have Recourse to them. Our Business is to see what was the Faith of
these Diocesses, and question not but we shall make it appear in the Sequel,
that those whom the Bishop pretends to convict of Manicheism, are falsely
charged therewith; the Romish Party having bestowed that Name upon them, only
to make them the more execrable to those of their Communion.

Nevertheless, because Ademarus Cabannensis testifies, that these Canons of
Orleans had been instructed, not by a Woman, come from Italy, as their History
records the Story, but by a Country-fellow (as some MS. Copies of Ademarus tell
us) of Perigueux, I am not unwilling to enquire a little into the Authority of
this History. Glaber relates it, Lib. 3. cap. 8. page 308. Tom. 2. Spicileg.
but besides his Relation D' Achery has given us, though not the very Acts of
the Synod that condemned them, but the account of a private Man of Chartres,
who professes that he set down in Writing what passed in that Synod, which
seems to be of sufficient Authority. Be it as it will, they suppose from these
Proofs, that these Canons were Manichees, and I own they are very like them, in
the Relation that is given of this Synod, as well as in Ademarus.

But yet after all, there are several things which seem to give us ground to
doubt of the Truth of this whole Relation. 1 st, It scarcely seems probable,
that a Woman, who was a Stranger, or a Peasant, should have been able in so
short a time to make so many Proselytes amongst the Canons and Citizens of
Orleans, as to be able to form secret Conventicles amongst them, and to
propagate such monstrous Doctrines as those of the Manichees were. Neither can
we, with any appearance of reason, suppose, that one of these Canons, who
formerly had been Confessor to the Queen, was so stupid a Fellow, as all on a
sudden to fall into the Enthusiasm of the Manichees. 2 dly, It is evident, that
in perusing these pretended Acts, we find that all the Witnesses which are
produced against them, are reducible to one only, and he too of no credit,
because himself had been engaged once of their Communion. I say all their
Proceedings were founded upon the Depositions of one single Man, and then
afterward they make the Men once executed, speak what they please. It will be
objected perhaps, that the Interrogatories were made in public, in the
Presence of the People; but then let us consider, that all this was writ after
the Death of Robert, to justify so bloody an Execution. 3 dly, We do not find
in these Acts the same Accusations, one accuses them of one thing, and another
of another, though it be evident that the Design of all these Authors is
equally to defame them, and make them execrable. 4 thly, We find in those Acts,
that these pretended Manichees justify themselves against the capital
Accusations of Manicheism, chiefly upon the Article of the Creation. 5 thly, We
find that they expressed at their Martyrdom a Hope directly opposite to the
Principles of Manicheism. 6 thly, Their very Enemies themselves are obliged to
give them a most illustrious Testimony, as to the Sanctity of their Lives and
Manners.

It is certain that the accusing them of denying Transubstantiation, and
rejecting Baptism, cannot justly be looked upon as a Badg of Manicheism, if we
consider on the one hand, that the Question, Whether the Bread be changed into
the Body of Jesus Christ? has no relation to the Doctrine of the Manichees,
but respects only those novel Doctrines which Paschasius had introduced: and on
the other hand, that the Church of Rome accuses all those for being Enemies to
Baptism, who in that Point do not espouse all the Opinions she teaches, in
holding, as she did at that time, the absolute necessity of that Sacrament.

And as for their being charged with celebrating horrible Festivals, full of
Incest and Abominations, we know that the same has been imputed to some
Heretics of old, but falsely. It was laid to the charge also of the Waldenses,
but was never proved to be other than a mere Calumny: Our first Reformers have
been accused of the same, but with an Impudence, for which the Church of Rome
ought still to blush, if that were a possible thing.

In a word, I find nothing in all this Relation that makes it look probable,
but only two or three Characters, which agree with the barbarous Maxims of the
Church of Rome. The first is, That it attributes to Queen Constance an unusual
Action, that with a Stick she put out the Eye of Stephen, who had been her
Confessor. The second is an Action, much resembling the course that is taken
now adays to surprise Heretics, and to discover them; for according to the
Practice of the Inquisition, we cannot find fault with the Method made use of
by this Arefastus, who feigned himself willing to become a Manichee, that he
might the better discover their Opinions. It seems this Casuist of Chartres had
not much studied St. Paul, who tells us, We ought not to do Evil, that Good may
come of it. The third is, The manner of their taking up the dead Body of
Theodatus the Canon, out of his Grave, who died three years before, and
examining it by the trial of Water, that they might be certain whether he was
an Heretic when he was alive. This is an Action well becoming this barbarous
Age, very like the Inquisitors; and accordingly this was the compendious Method
which St. Peter of Luxemburg put in practice for the trial and discerning of
Heretics. I don't remember ever to have read any thing that might authorize
this barbarous and extravagant Custom, save only the second Canon of the 2 d
Council of Sarragossa, held in the year 592, where it is ordained, That the
Relics which should be found in the Churches that had been possessed by the
Arians, should be carried to the Bishop, that he might try them by Fire.

The Bishop of Meaux might have been as sensible of most of these things as we,
in perusing these Acts, and then it would have been easy for him to judge
whether the Authority of Vignier, who simply relates what he met with in
Historians did deserve to be pressed against us. But it seems it was enough for
him to delude his Reader, and the Name of Vignier (though otherwise he does not
accuse these Persons of Manicheism) seemed to make for his purpose.

But whatsoever Judgment a Prudent Reader may pass on this Accusation of
Manicheism, upon which these Canons of Orleans were burnt in the year 1017, it
will be easy for us to show that the Diocesses of Narbon and Aquitain, where
some of those Eastern Manichees took refuge, did never quit the Faith or
Worship of their Ancestors. This is what we shall easily make out in the sequel
of this Discourse.

Ademarus a Monk of St. Eparque at Limoges, has writ a Chronicle from the
beginning of the French Monarchy until the year 1030, wherein he informs us,
what was the Faith of the Churches of Aquitain at the Beginning of the Eleventh
Century.

1. He relates, without passing any Censure upon it, T. 2. N. Biblioth. MS.
page 157.
the Synod held at Gentilly under Pepin, about Images that are set up in
Churches, and shows that the Bishops of Aquitain assisted at the same, and that
they opposed themselves to the Church of Rome, and to the Greeks.

2. Though he grossly mistakes in his Chronology about the Age of Bid, Ibid.
page 159.
yet he makes it plain enough who they were whom he looked upon as the
Preservers of the true Theology. He makes this Encomium of Rabanus; A most
Learned Monk, the Master of Alcuinus; forbid taught Simplicius, and
Simplicius, Rabanus, ( whom the Emperor Charles sent for from beyond Sea, and
made a Bishop in France,) who instructed Alcuinus, and Alcuinus informed
Smaragdus, Smaragdus again taught Theodulphus of Orleans, and Theodulphus,
Elias a Scotchman, Bishop of Angoulesm; this Elias instructed Heiricus, and
Heiricus left two Monks, Remigius and Vebaldus, surnamed the Bald, his Heirs in
Philosophy.

This is a most convincing Proof of the Judgment of the Churches of Aquitain,
concerning the Controversies that Puschasius had kindled.

1. We find here that they followed the Opinions of Bid, whose Homilies Paulus
Diaconus had inserted in his Collection, for the use of the Pastors of Gaul,
together with those of St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine, St. Maximus,
and several others. Now the Opinions of Bid are diametrically opposite to
those of the Church of Rome. This has been formerly proved by a vast number of
Passages. I shall content my self with setting down one or two of them: The
first, is upon the third Psalm, where he extols the Patience of our Savior to
Judas, because he did not exclude him from his most Holy Supper; wherein, says
he, He delivered the Figure of his most sacred Body and Blood to his Disciples.
The second, is upon the Evangelists, in that part of them which speaks of the
Institution of that Sacrament, where he declares, that because Bread
strengthens the Body, and Wine produces Blood in the Flesh, the Bread is
mystically referred to the Body of Jesus Christ, and the Wine to his Blood.

2. They followed Alcuinus's Notions who had a great hand in all the Writings
of Charlemain, and especially in that concerning Images, where we find also his
Judgment concerning the Eucharist, opposite to that of Paschasius.

3. We find they followed the Opinions of Theodulphus Bishop of Orleans, in
whom we see a hundred things that are contrary to the Opinions of the present
Church of Rome.

4. They followed the Opinions of Rabanus Maurus, whom Abbot Herigerus has
cried down, for maintaining, that the Eucharistical Body of Jesus Christ goes
to the Draught, together with our other Food; and whom one Waldensis, in his
Epistle to Martin, places with Heribaldus, amongst the number of those
Heretics who have dishonored Germany.

5. Ademarus proves beyond contest, that they did not adore the Eucharist in
their Communion; when on the one hand, speaking of those of Narbon; Page 177.
he says, That to prepare themselves to oppose the Mores of Corduba, who had
invaded their Coasts, they received the Eucharist at the hands of their
Priests, without mentioning any Adoration paid to the Sacrament, in so extreme
and threatening a Danger: and on the other, Page 183.
speaking of the Death of Earl William; Whereupon, says he, the Earl accepting
of the Penance laid upon him by the Bishops and Abbots, and disposing of all
his Goods, and particularly bequeathing his Estate and Honor amongst his Sons
and his Wife; he was reconciled and absolved, and the whole time of Lent
frequented Mass and Divine Worship, till the Week before Easter, when after he
had received the holy Oil and Viaticum, and adored and kissed the Cross, he
yielded up the Ghost in the Hands of the Bishop of Roan and his Priests after a
very laudable Manner. It is a thing singular and observable, that this Earl
pays his Adoration to the Cross, though at the same time he forgets to worship
the Sacrament, which yet is the chief Object of Adoration. Moreover, We are to
observe, that the Latin word Adorare, when spoken of the Cross, imports only a
Reverence, which we own was practiced on these Occasions long before this time,
because the Cross being no Image, there was no fear of incurring the Sin of
Idolatry in saluting of it. This Count died in the year 1028.

But since this Eleventh Century was in a manner wholly taken up by the
Papists, in opposing Berengarius, who, upon several Attaques maintained the
Interest of Truth, against Paschasius and his Followers; it will be our
Business to represent how far these Disputes were serviceable in hindering the
Opinions of Paschasius from getting the upper-hand in the Diocesses of Aquitain
and Narbon, and how this prepared their Minds for a Separation from the Church
of Rome.

Never was any Man so often condemned as Berengarius, never was any Man more
backed than he, nor ever did any Man give more trouble to those who endeavored
to crush him, than he did. An Author of the 12 th Century has writ a Book,
Concerning Berengarius 's manifold Condemnation; De Multiplici Berengarij
Condemnatione.
and Mabillon has taken care to collect the Names, and the Times of all those
Assemblies wherein he was condemned; but withal we may assert, that the Reasons
and Authorities he produced, gave his Enemies a terrible deal of Trouble. His
Adversaries have employed their utmost Efforts to abolish the Memory of his
Works; but a sufficient part of them have been preserved by their own care, to
enable us to judge of the Injustice of their Calumnies against him, and of the
Purity of his Faith in the Matter of the Eucharist. And for as much as he was
of considerable use to the Albigenses, in their opposing of the Doctrine of the
Carnal Presence, which the Faction of Paschasius and his Followers endeavored
to introduce and establish under the shelter and favor of that gross
Ignorance, which reigned at this time, I suppose I may affirm, that his Works,
whereof Lanfrank has given us an Extract, were of no small Service to oblige
those, who undertook his Defense, to separate themselves from the Communion of
the Pope, or rather, to hinder him from subjecting them to his Yoke; seeing it
was at this very time, that the Popes began to make them selves Masters of the
Churches of the West.

It will be of great moment to prove that the Popes had not as yet made
themselves absolute Masters of this Part of the Church, which was always
careful to maintain its Rights against their Encroachments and Usurpations. My
intent therefore, is to employ the following Chapter upon this Subject, before
I proceed to enquire how the Faith was preserved in these Diocesses in the next
Age, when they refused to submit themselves to the Authority of the Popes of
Rome.

CHAP. XII. That these Diocesses continued independent of the Popes, until the
Beginning of the Twelfth Century.
I Acknowledge, that were the business to be decided by the modern Pretensions
of the Popes of Rome, to the Empire of all the Churches of the World, and in
particular to a Patriarchate over all the Churches of the West, we should be
forced to own, that they had been subject to them ever since the time that the
Gospel was first preached in Gaul, in both these respects. They have made it
their business to persuade Mankind that the whole World is but the Pope's
Parish; and that more particularly, the Churches of the West, which have been
founded by their Ancestors, who sent them the first Preachers of the Gospel, do
belong to their Patriarchate; as if these Envoys of the ancient Popes, in their
Endeavors to propagate the Gospel of Jesus Christ throughout the World, had
designed to establish the Papal Empire over all the New Conquests that they
acquired to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

But notwithstanding all these newfound Claims and Pretensions of the Popes,
we can prove, that nothing can be imagined more vain, or more destitute of any
Ground or Foundation than they are. For it is not true that those Churches,
which have received the Gospel from another, are therefore subject to it, as we
can demonstratively evince by the Examples of the Churches of Vienna and Lions,
which were founded by Persons sent from the Churches of Asia; upon which
account it was, that St. Irenaeus sent them a Relation of the Persecution they
suffered. Neither is it true, that the ancient Popes, how careful soever
otherwise they might be to promote their own Authority, did ever pretend to be
the Patriarchs of all the West, or of Gaul in particular.

This is a Truth we can unanswerably prove, by the Testimony of the first
Council of Nice, which assigns no other Jurisdiction to the Pope, save that
which he enjoyed in those which Rufinus calls the Suburbicarian Regions, and
which the Learned Men of the Church of Rome at present own to have been
comprehended within the ten Provinces of Italy, to which the Papal Ordination
did belong, as we see it was under Honorius, and which were distinguished from
the Diocese of Italy, properly so called, that is to say, the seven Provinces,
which constituted the Diocese of Milan. This Canon therefore looks upon it as a
thing not to be questioned, that Gaul was a Diocese distinct from that of the
Popes, having its Authority within it self, governed by its own Synods, without
having the Ordination of its Clergy, the Determination of its Affairs, or the
Authority of its Assemblies subjected to the Pope's Authority, as their
Superior.

If we had not this Canon of the first Council of Nice, which distinctly
determines the Pope's Diocese, yet would it be very easy to prove it by other
Arguments, such as these;

1. We find that the Churches of Gaul convocated a Synod, upon the contest
about Easter, toward the end of the 2 d Century, without receiving any Orders
from Pope Victor for so doing.

2. We find, Optat. Lib. 1.
that when the Donatists were condemned by the Pope, they desired the Emperor
that they might be judged by the Bishops of Gaul: and accordingly we find that
Marinus Bishop of Arles, presided in the great Council of Arles in the year
314, at which were present 83 Bishops, twenty One of Italy, eleven of Spain,
eleven of Africa, five of Britain, and thirty five of Gaul.

Since the Council of Nice, we find the Churches of Gaul governing themselves
with the same Independency, under the Conduct of their several Metropolitans.

We are to observe in general, that these Churches had their peculiar Code of
Canons, made by themselves, and that these Canons continued to have the force
of a Law till the 8 th Century, when their Discipline began to receive a great
Alteration, by the cares of Bonifacius Bishop of Mentz, and his Successors. T.
1. Bibl. Jur. Can. page 21, 22, 23, 24.
This is amply proved by Justel, in the Preface to his Collection of the
ancient Canons. Now it is visible, that a Church which had its particular
Rules, could not be dependent on the Pope, whose Diocese had its own particular
Rules and Canons.

We can truly affirm, that the Bishops of Gaul were so far from acknowledging
the Pope as their Patriarch, that his Name was not so much as ever recited in
the Churches of Gaul till the year 529, as may be clearly collected from the
Council of Vaison; where it was first determined, that the Pope should be
mentioned in their public Prayers.

And indeed if we enquire into the constant Conduct of the Bishops of Gaul,
throughout the several Centuries that are past since the Council of Nice, we
shall easily perceive, that they never conceived themselves to be subject to
the Pope of Rome.

In the year 337, Maximinus Bishop of Triers, defends St. Athanasius, as Pope
Julius also did, and admits to his Communion Paul Bishop of Constantinople, and
writes in favor of him to the Council of Sardica.

In 356, Saturninus Bishop of Arles, convened the Council of Beziers, which
condemned St. Hilary of Poictiers, in consequence of which he was sent into
Banishment.

In 358, The Bishops of Gaul condemned the Confession of Faith of Sirmium, as
we are informed by Sulpicius Severus.

In the year 360, St. Hilary vigorously defended the Faith against the Arian
Party, in favor of which Pope Liberius had declared himself; and it is well
known what Anathemas were discharged in Gaul by St. Hilary and his Friends,
Sozom. Lib. 5. cap. 8.
against that Apostate Pope.

Pope Leo was so fully convinced of their Authority as independent upon his,
that he sent to them in the year 450, that dogmatical Epistle, which he was to
send to the East, as soon as the Synods of Gaul had approved of it.

And it was upon the same account, that he sent them the Decrees of the Council
of Chalcedon against the Eutychians.

In the 6 th Century we find Avitus Bishop of Vienna using his utmost
Endeavors to appease the Differences between the Church of Rome, and that of
Constantinople.

We find likewise Pope Hormisda communicating to the Bishops of Gaul, Tom. 1.
Council. Gall. page 188.
his Reconciliation with the Patriarchs of Constantinople.

We find in 529, Tom. 1. Council. Gall. page 215, 223.
the Fathers of the Council of Orange handling the Questions about Grace, and
sending their Decrees to Boniface II. who approved them the year following.

In 550, Tom. 1. Council. Gall. page 287, and 294.
Pope Vigilius gives an account to the Churches of Gaul, of what had passed in
the East; and the Prelates of Italy entreat the Bishops of Gaul, to endeavor
to appease Justinian, in favor of Vigilius and Dacius Bishop of Milan.

In the 7 th Century, we find that the Gallican Bishops confirmed the Lateran
Council that was assembled under Martin I.

We find Pope Agatho inviting the Bishops of Gaul to come to a Council that he
intended to call, whither also they sent their Deputies at his Request.

The 8 th Century being in a manner wholly spent in Wars, affords us little or
nothing considerable in this matter; however, we may easily discern that this
Diocese did even then maintain its Authority, in spite of all the Popes
Endeavors to the contrary: whereof we have two most evident Instances. 1 st,
Pope Adrian I. was so little informed of what passed in France, that he knew
not whether the City of Bourges was subject to the Jurisdiction of another
Archbishop or no; as appears from the Codex Carolinus, Epist. 87. 2 dly, Their
Independency clearly appears from the several Councils assembled about the
Controversy of Images, contrary to the Designs of the Popes, and particularly
from the Council of Francfort.

We find the same Spirit also in the following Century. And to speak truth,
whatever Change the ancient Discipline under-went by occasion of the new
Decretals, which the Pope's Emissaries had published, in order to subjugate all
the West, and France in particular; yet we find that the Bishops of France
hindered the Popes from concerning themselves with their Affairs: The Business
of Hincmar of Laon alone, evidently shows, that they did not acknowledge that
new Right, invented to make them buckle to the Papal Yoke; for we see that they
maintained that the Determinations of their Synods, were not to be altered by
the Popes, they having no power to concern themselves about their Ordination,
or any part of their Jurisdiction. About the end of the 10 th Century, in the
year 991, we find the Bishops of France that were assembled at Rheims,
maintaining themselves by the Canons of the African Code, in opposing the
Pope's Encroachments, who would, in pursuance of those spurious Decretals of
the ancient Popes, arrogate to himself a Right of reviewing and altering the
Determinations that were made by the Synods of France.

I own, that since the middle of the 5 th Century, we find the Popes granted a
kind of Vicarship to some of the Bishops of South- Gaul; but withal, we know
that this Power was so extremely wavering, that it stood in need of being
confirmed at the Instance of Leo I. by the Emperor Valentinian III. 2 ly, That
these were in a manner of no Efficacy at all, these Vicars having scarcely had
the Power of convening Synods, but in virtue of the Right they had as they were
Metropolitans, and little or no Authority as to the Ordination of Bishops in
general, and of Metropolitans in particular.

It cannot be denied also, but that the Popes since the 8 th Century, began to
grant diverse Privileges, to the violating of the ancient Discipline, though
under the pretense of preserving it in the Monasteries, against the Attempts of
the Bishops, because most of the Bishops, being turned Soldiers, thought of
nothing else but Robbing them, under color of holding their Visitations. But
it is worth our while, to consider the esteem that Hincmar of Rheims had of
these sort of Privileges in his Letter to Nicholas I. Now I did not, says he,
desire the Privileges of the Apostolical See, as supposing that the Holy
Canons and Decrees which the Church of Rome grants to every Metropolitan, were
not sufficient; neither did I, nor do I desire any other or ampler Privileges,
than what have been formerly granted to the Church of Rheims; but because not
only my Diocese, but also my Province, is divided between two Kingdoms,
belonging to two several Kings; and because the Concerns of the Church,
committed to my Charge, seem to lie under the Jurisdiction of several Princes,
from whom our Church can reap little or no Advantage; because the ancient
Constitutions being already condemned by some carnal and brutal Men, they might
at least be frightened by these new Decretals, into a more reverential Carriage
toward the Church, which is committed to the Care of me, though unworthy. From
whence we may see what it was that Hincmar meant.

We may make the same Reflection upon those Vicarships aforementioned: We have
an illustrious Example to this purpose, in the Case of Ansegisus Archbishop of
Sens, xi Kalend. July, Indiction IX. After the Bishops were met together, and
the Gospels were read before the Synod, and in view of the Imperial Throne,
(which were afterward laid up at Pontyon) the Emperor Charles came with the
Legates of the Apostolical See, and after the singing of several Hymns, and a
Prayer pronounced by John Bishop of Tusculanum, the Emperor took his Seat in
the Synod. After which, John the Bishop of Tusculanum, read some Letters sent
from the Pope, and amongst them one, recommending to them Ansegisus Archbishop
of Sens for their Primate; that as often as the Interest of the Church should
require it, either in calling of Synods, or in the managing of other Concerns
in France and Germany, he might be looked upon as the Apostolical Vicar; and so
by his means, the Decrees of the Apostolical See, might be made known to the
Bishops; and on the other hand, that any Matters of importance might by him be
communicated to the Apostolic See, and that all Affairs of moment and
difficulty, might by his Suggestion be recommended to the Apostolic See, to be
cleared and determined. Whereupon, the Emperor demanded of the Bishops, what
Answer they designed to return to these Apostolical Letters: who answered to
this effect, That saving the Right and Privileges of each Metropolitan,
according to the sacred Canons, and the Decrees of the Popes of the Sea of
Rome, promulg'd from the said sacred Canons, they would obey the Apostolical
Commands of Pope John. And when the Emperor, and the Apostolical Legates had
done their utmost Endeavors to persuade the Bishops to an absolute Answer,
that they would obey without reserve, in accepting of Ansegisus for their
Primate, as the Pope had written; yet could they never draw from them any other
Answer. Then the Emperor commanded a Chair to be set above all the Bishops of
his Cisalpine Kingdom, next to John Bishop of Tusculanum, who sat at his
Right Hand, and commanded Ansegisus to take place of all the Bishops that had
been ordained before him, and to sit down in that Chair; the Archbishop of
Rheims protesting against it, in the hearing of them all, as a thing directly
contrary to the sacred Canons. In like manner, the day before the Ides of July,
the same Letter concerning the Primacy of Ansegisus, was read a second time, at
the Emperor's Command, and the Bishops Answer demanded thereupon. Whereupon,
the Archbishops answered severally for themselves, That as their Predecessors
had been regularly obedient to his Predecessors, so would they be to his
Decrees. So likewise, at the Command of the Apostolical Legates, that the
Bishops should meet the 17 th day before the Kalends of August; the Emperor
entered the Synod at nine a Clock in the Morning -- being accompanied by the
Apostolical Legates -- and all took their Places as before. Then Johannes
Aretinus read a certain Paper, which had neither Reason nor Authority.
Afterward Odo Bishop of Beauvais read some Articles set down by the
Apostolical Legates, and by Ansegisus and Odo, without the Knowledge of the
Synod, between -- containing nothing to the purpose; and besides, void of all
Reason and Authority, which for that reason, are not here added. And then
again, a Motion was made concerning the Primacy of Ansegisus, who after all,
could obtain no more this last time, than he did at the first day of the Synod.
From which account; it is most evident, that notwithstanding all the pains
Charles the Bald took to oblige the Pope, whose Friendship he had occasion for,
and whose Ambition he maintained, by trampling upon the Ecclesiastical Laws,
and the Rights of the Prelates of France; yet the Bishops continued firm in
their Judgments, and would not suffer themselves to be enslaved, as the Pope
would fain have had them. This happened in the year 876.

In particular we may justly observe concerning these Parts, where the
Albigenses have appeared with the greatest luster, 1 st, That the greatest part
of these Diocesses, being rent off from the Empire after the year 409, when
Alaric made Toulouse the Seat of the Kingdom of the Visi-Goths, it continued so
divided, till it was again reduced under the Power of the French by Clovis, in
the year of our Lord 507. 2 dly, That since that time, we find that these parts
of France, have been almost always united with the Churches of Spain, as
appears from the Subscriptions of the Synods held in Spain. 3 dly, That they
were never, to speak properly, reunited with the Body of the Churches of
France, till the Reign of the Emperor Charlemain. 4 thly, That the Power of the
Popes in France, has been so very inconsiderable, that a Legate of the Pope
having undertaken to consecrate a Chapel in Anjou by the Duke's Order, but
without consent of the Bishop; Radulphus Glaber, who relates this History,
could not forbear exclaiming against this Encroachment* Baronius on the other
hand, storms against Glaber, but the one of them writ what those of his time
thought and spoke concerning it; whereas the other gave himself entirely up to
the Power of Prejudice, and followed the Design he had undertaken of
accommodating ancient History with the Interest of the Court of Rome, on which
he had his Dependence.

But we are especially to observe, that the Popes never began to exercise their
absolute Power there, till they had settled their Legates in those Parts, and had
brought all Causes to be tried at their Tribunal. Thus Paschal II. appointed
Girard Bishop of Angoulesm, to be his Vicar in the Provinces of Bourges,
Bourdeaux, Tours and Britain, in the year 1107, as appears by the Commission
granted by Paschal II. T. 3. Spicileg. page 131.
to Girard Bishop of Angoulesm, published by D' Achery.

Thus the Legantine Power in the Diocese of Ausch was given after the year
1102, to William Archbishop of Ausch, as De Marca shows, Page 278.
on the Council of Clermont.

What I have just now observed, is so certain, that Mezeray has publicly
owned it in his Chronological Abridgment. From the time of the 8 th Century,
the Popes found ways to lessen the Power of Metropolitans, by obliging them by
the Decree of a Council held at Mentz by St. Boniface, which forced them to
receive the Pallium at Rome, and to subject themselves, and be canonically
obedient in all Points to the Church of Rome; which Profession was afterward
changed into an Oath of Fidelity, under Gregory VII. They also attributed to
themselves, excluding all others, the Power of annulling the Spiritual
Marriage, which a Bishop contracts with his Church, and to give him the liberty
to espouse another. They had extended their Patriarchal Jurisdiction all over
the West, by obliging the Bishops to take Confirmation from them, for which
they paid certain Dues, which in process of time, were changed into what they
call Annates, and by taking cognizance of those things, which belonged to the
Bishops only. Nay what is more, they had in a manner wholly abolished the
Provincial Councils, in taking away their Sovereignty, by nulling of their
Decrees; so that these Assemblies were at last wholly left off as useless,
because they afforded nothing to those who assisted at them, save the
Displeasure of frequently seeing their Determinations made void at Rome,
without once hearing their Reasons. Gregory VII. established it for a Rule of
Common Right, that no Body should dare to condemn any Person, who had appealed
to the Holy See. But they never made a greater Breach upon the Liberties of the
Gallican Church, than when they introduced this Opinion, that no Council could
be assembled without their Authority; and when after several Attempts to
establish perpetual Vicars in Gaul, they found the way of having their Legates
received there. To this purpose, they first made use of a Canon of the Council
of Sardica, which gave them Power to send Legates into the Provinces, to examine
the Processes, and the Depositions of any Bishops, in Cases where any complaint
was made. After that they had thus accustomed the French Bishops to admit their
Legates in this Case, they by little and little gained another Point, when the
Princes were weak, which was to send some amongst them without any Complaint or
Appeal at all; and at last, after they had submitted to the Yoke, Alexander II.
established it as a Rule, that the Pope ought to have the Government and
Administration of all Churches.

Of these Legates, some had a whole Kingdom under their Jurisdiction, others
some part only: they came thither with full Power to depose Bishops, yea, the
Metropolitan himself, when ever they pleased to assemble the Councils of their
District, and to preside therein with the Metropolitan; but taking place of
him, to make Canons, to send the Decision of those Matters to the Pope, to
which the Bishops would not give their Consent, as likewise all the Acts of the
Council, whereof he disposed at his Will and Pleasure. And it is to be
observed, that their Suffrages outweigh'd those of all the Bishops together,
and that oftentimes by their simple Authority, they judged and determined the
Causes of the Elections, of Bishops, of Benefices, of the Excommunications of
Laymen, and the like. Insomuch, that these Assemblies which before were so
Sacred and so Sovereign, for the supporting and maintaining of Discipline,
having no Power any longer, were, to speak properly, rather Councils to
authorize and ratify the Will and Pleasure of the Pope, than any lawful or free
Councils.

So that it was not till the Papacy of Alexander II. and Gregory VII. that the
Churches of Aquitain saw themselves in danger of losing their Liberty, by
submitting to the Papal Yoke, as well as the rest of the French Churches. We
are now to see how they avoided this Yoke, which was thus imposed upon them in
some measure.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Opposition that was made by a Part of these Churches, to
the Attempts of the Popes, and of their Separation from the Communion of Rome
before Peter Waldo.
IT is difficult precisely to set down the Year, wherein a considerable Part of
these Diocesses, rejected the Power of the Pope's Legates, and lowdly condemned
the Errors which they would have introduced, under the Name of Councils, which
the Popes had so often assembled against Berengarius. But we have great reason
to conclude, that it happened under Gregory VII. when he undertook to oblige
the Bishops of France to swear an Oath of Fidelity to him, in much a like Form
as Vassals swear to the Lords of the Fee, for in reality it is the very same;
this strange Piece of Novelty, which at one Blow destroyed all the Rights of
the Church, excited both Pastors and People to defend their Liberties, and to
reject this imperious Yoke. Then it was also, that he endeavored to change the
Common Service of the Church, by striking out all that was not agreeable to the
Roman Service, which was very proper to inflame the Minds of the People, and
make them more watchful for the Preservation of the Doctrine and Ceremonies of
Religion, which they had received from their Ancestors.

For instance, It is certain that in the 11 th Century, they changed the
Collects which concerned the Prayer for the Dead. We have an Example of it that
was inserted in the Decretal of Gregory IX. Lib. 3. Tit. 41. cap. 6.
It Is an Answer of Innocent III. to John de Beauxmains, Archbishop of Lions,
who at that time was retired in the Abbey of Clairvaux. It contains the Question
which that Archbishop, who was the Persecutor and Condemner of Peter Waldo,
propounds to Innocent III. together with the Pope's Answer.

Your Brothership has inquired why there was a Change made in the Service of
Saint Leo; so that whereas the ancient Books express the Prayer thus, Grant to
us, Lord, that this Offering may be of advantage to the Soul of thy Servant
Leo; in the modern Books it is expressed thus, Grant to us, O Lord, we beseech
thee, that by the Intercession of St. Leo, this Offering may be of advantage to
us?

To which we answer, says the Pope, That since the Authority of Scripture
assures us, that he does an Injury to a Martyr, who prays for a Martyr, we are
by a Parity of Reason to judge the same of other Saints, because they need not
our Prayers, as being perfectly happy, and enjoying all things according to
their Wishes: but it is we rather that stand in need of their Prayers, who
being miserable, are in continuable trouble, by reason of the Evils that
surround us. Wherefore such Expressions as these, That such an Offering may be
of advantage to this or that Saint, for their Glory and Honor, which we meet
with in most Prayers, are thus to be understood, That it may conduce to this
end, that he may be more and more glorified by the Faithful here on Earth.
Though most suppose it a thing not unworthy of the Saints, to assert that their
Glory is continually increased until the Day of Judgment; and therefore that
the Church may in the mean time, lawfully wish for the increase of their
Glorification. But whether in this Point that Distinction may take place, which
teaches us, that of those who are dead, some are very good, others very bad,
others indifferently good, and others indifferently bad; and therefore whether
the Suffrages of Believers in the Church for the very good, are Thanksgiving;
for the very bad, Comforts to the Living; for those who are indifferently good,
Expiations; and for the indifferently bad, Propitiations; I leave to your
Prudence to enquire.

Moreover, the Popes, Nicholas II, and his Successors, undertook to defend the
Celibacy of the Clergy, by which means a great many Pastors were deprived of
the Functions of their Ministry, which obliged also a vast number of them to
separate themselves from the Communion of the Pope, whose Creatures, after the
Decree was past for authorizng Celibacy, looked upon the married Clergy to be
no more than simple Laymen; not to mention now that the Multiplicity of
Schisms and Anti-popes, had reduced most of the Diocesses of France into a
strange Confusion, some holding for one Pope, others for another.

But though we cannot assign the precise Epoch of the beginning of this
courageous Opposition to the Sea of Rome, which had no other Original, but the
just Defense of their Liberties, and the Desire of preserving their ancient
Truths; yet thus much seems to be certain, as far as we can gather from the
poor Remainder of Records which the Barbarity of the Inquisitors has suffered
to come down to us;

1. That this public Opposition against the Efforts of Popery, was made about
the beginning of the 12 th Century.

2. That without great Ignorance both in History and Chronology, it cannot be
supposed that the Albigenses were the Disciples of Peter Waldo, and that
consequently they are to be looked upon as a Colony of the Vaudois.

It is necessary, that we prove both these Articles with the greatest clearness
that may be; as well, on the one hand, to make it appear, that the Bishop of
Meaux has no ground to suppose that these Diocesses were peaceably united to
the Church of Rome, and in dependence upon it, before the Albigenses appeared
amongst them; and on the other hand, to disabuse some of our own People, who
too lightly have believed, because the Albigenses are esteemed by some to be
the same with the Vaudois, that they borrowed their Light from Peter Waldo.

The first Article can be very solidly proved by an Argument which seems beyond
all Exception; I observe therefore, that Radulphus Abbot of Tron, about the
year 1125, would not return from Italy through the Southern Parts of France,
Audiebat pollutam esse inveterata Haeresi de Corpore and Sanguine Domini:
Because he heard they were polluted with an inveterate Heresy concerning the
Body and Blood of our Lord.

We see clearly that the Heresy that reigned in these Diocesses, was that of
Berengarius, who had bestowed the Title of Mystical Babylon upon the Church of
Rome, and not that of the Manichees. This Passage of Radulphus of Tron, agrees
perfectly with what Petrus Cluniacensis, and Baronius after him tell us, that
Peter de Bruis had preached in the Diocese of Arles about the beginning of the
12 th Century. Now it is ridiculous to suppose, that one can declare a Country
to be infected with an inveterate Heresy, except there be great numbers of Men
who publicly profess it.

True it is, that they bestow the Name of Petrobusians upon the Disciples of
Peter de Bruis, as if he had been the Author of that Sect; but this does not
overthrow what we have said, and only shows that the Papists are usually ready
to bestow upon the Disciples the Name of their Masters, thereby to reflect upon
them as Innovators. Thus they called the Followers of Berengarius,
Berengarians, as if he had been an Innovator, who indeed took upon him the
Defense of the old Notions, against the Innovations of Paschasius Radbertus. In
like manner, they called those Henricians, who followed the Doctrine of Henry,
who yet followed and preached the Doctrine of Peter de Bruis and Berengarius;
so that it does not follow from thence, that Henry was the first that ever
preached that Doctrine. Thus afterward they gave the Name of Esperonites to
the Disciples of Esperonus, as if he had been the first Author of that Sect.
And is not this very conformable to that ancient Method, whereby Lindanus
Bishop of Ruremonde, made as many Heads of the Reformation as there were Men of
note that had a hand in that great Work? A different Method, or the least
Article wherein they did not agree with their Brethren, serving him for a
sufficient Pretense to make them so many different Heads of distinct Parties.

The Proofs I am about to produce in Confirmation of the second Article, do no
less show the Truth of what I have laid down, that these Diocesses had a long
time since a great number of People and Pastors, who were of different Opinions
from those of the Church of Rome. I do acknowledge that toward the end of the
12 th Century, there may have been some of the Disciples of Peter Waldo in
these Diocesses of Aquitain and Narbon, which has occasioned that several
Popish Writers have almost persuaded some Protestants, that the Waldenses were
the Authors of the Reformation amongst the Albigenses. Perrin takes it for
granted in the beginning of his History, which he was the more easily persuaded
to believe, since he had observed that the Albigenses have maintained the same
Faith with the Waldenses.

But it is not true that the Waldenses ever carried their Faith into these
Countries, but they found it there already established, and they joined
themselves to those who defended the same, before ever any of Waldo's Disciples
came thither to seek refuge for themselves.

This is a Matter of Fact which it is easy to prove beyond controversy; for
seeing that St. Bernard was in that Country in the year 1147, to preach there,
and that he made but small progress in it, (so firmly were they grounded in
their Faith) we must necessarily infer from hence, that they had for a long
time been engaged in the same. And indeed, it appears from the manner of St.
Bernard's expressing himself in his Sermons, and in his Epistle to the Count of
St. Gilles, that these Opinions so opposite to those of the Church of Rome, had
of a long time been entertained in these Countries.

We have the 4 th Canon of the Council of Tours in the year 1163, which
declares the Antiquity of this pretended Heresy in Gascoin and the Country
about Toulouse, and speaks of their Meetings, which the Title of the Canon
justly refers to the Albigenses, ^. 10. p. 1411.
in these Words; In the Country about Toulouse, there sprung up long ago a
damnable Heresy, which by little and little, like a Cancer, spreading it self
to the neighboring Places in Gascoin, has already infected many other
Provinces; which whilst, like a Serpent, it hid it self in its own Windings and
Twinings, crept on more secretly, and threatened more Danger to the Simple and
Unwary. Wherefore we do command all Bishops and Priests, dwelling in these
Parts, to keep a watchful Eye upon these Heretics, and under the pain of
Excommunication, to forbid all Persons, as soon as these Heretics are
discovered, from presuming to afford them any Abode in their Country, or to
lend them any Assistance, or to entertain any Commerce with them in Buying or
Selling; that so at least by the loss of the Advantages of human Society, they
may be compelled to repent of the Error of their Life. And if any Prince,
making himself Partaker of their Iniquity, shall endeavor to oppose these
Decrees, let him be struck with the same Anathema. And if they shall be seized
by any Catholic Princes, and cast into Prison, let them be punished by
Confiscation of all their Goods: and because they frequently come together from
diverse Parts into one hiding place, and because they have no other ground for
their dwelling together, save only their Agreement and Consent in Error;
therefore we will, that such their Conventicles be both diligently searched
after, and when they are found, that they be examined according to Canonical
Severity.

This Canon expressly declares; 1 st, That this pretended Heresy had appeared a
long time before. 2 dly, That it had infected several Provinces of these
Diocesses. 3 dly, That most severe Methods were made use of to reduce them.
This appears by the Council of Lateran, in the year 1179, in the last Chapter.
And it is plain also from the Letters of the Archbishop of Narbon to King Lewis
VII; Epistolae diversorum de Rebus Francicis. Epist. 33. ad Ludovicu^ VII.
Juniore^ Scripta a Narbonensi Archiepiscopo.
My Lord the King, we are extremely pressed with many Calamities, amongst which
there is one that most of all affects us, which is, that the Catholic Faith is
extremely shaken in this our Diocese, and St. Peter's Boat is so violently
tossed by the Waves, that it is in great danger of sinking. Now since Lewis VII
died in the year 1180, having reigned ever since the year 1137, it appears
clearly that Languedoc was full of the Disciples of Peter de Bruis, and Henry,
a long time before ever Waldo or any of his Disciples had begun to preach.

We may gather the same from what is related by Henry Abbot of Clairvaux in the
Annals of Hoveden, Anno 1178, where he says; That this Plague was come to such
a Head in that Country, that they had not only made themselves Priests and
Popes, but also had their Evangelists.

I own that Hoveden seems to suppose, that the Faith of these Albigenses came
from Italy, by his calling them Paterines; for as for the name of Publicans, it
was like that of Cathari, given them on purpose to blacken them, and is the
same with that of Bulgarians and Paphlagonians, all relating to the Original of
the Manichees who came out of those Countries at first.

3 dly. It appears from the Edicts quoted by Hoveden, that they were made
against People of a more ancient standing than the Disciples of Waldo. Page 585.
Wherefore, because the damnable Perverseness of those Heretics, whom some call
Cathari, others Publicans, others Paterines, and others by other Names, is
increased in Gascoin, the Country of Alby, and other Places, so far that they
do no more now, as in other Places, exercise their Impiety in private, but
manifest their Errors publicly.

Epist. 92.
Stephen of Tournay is an unquestionable Witness to the same Truth; he wrote a
Letter to Johannes de Beauxmains Bishop of Poictiers, in the year 1181, to
persuade him to comply with the Election of those of Lions, who desired him for
their Archbishop, and lays before his Eyes the notorious Infidelity of the
Diocesses of Languedock, Gascoin, and Septimania County of Roussillon.
, and the general Desolation of the Churches of the Romish Party in those
Parts. Far be it, Father, says he, from your Clemency, that you should have
any Inclination for the Barbarity of the Goths People of Languedoc, which was
called Gothia, because the Visi-Gothes settled long there.
, the Levity of the Gascoins, or for the cruel and savage Manners of those of
Septimania, where Infidelity is above Faith, Famine above Fame, Treachery and
Trouble more than can be conceived. I lately saw in my Passage, when the King
sent me to Toulouse, a terrible Image of Death, frequent and fervent in that
Country, the Walls of Churches half demolished, sacred Buildings half burnt
down, their Foundations dug up, and where there were formerly the Dwellings
of Men, now nothing but the Habitations of Beasts. I confess I shak'd and
trembled when I heard you were invited to those Parts, in which tho you might
chance to be a Bishop, yet you might easily be so without any Advantage.

We have the concurrent Testimony of the Archbishops and other Prelates
assembled at Lavaur against the Albigenses, Cap. 66.
who declare in their Letters to Innocent III, that this Heresy had been sown
in these Countries long before, in these Terms: For whereas the Heretical
Pestilence, which of old time has been sown in those Parts, was now grown to
that height, that Divine Worship was scorned and derided, and the Heretics on
one hand, and the Robbers on the other, harassed the Clergy and the Churches
Revenue, and that both Prince and People being given over to a reprobate Mind,
swerved from the true Faith, now by means of your Armies, by which you have
most wisely designed to purge away the Infection and Noisomness of this
Pestilence, and their most Christian Leader, the Earl of Montfort, an undaunted
Warrior, and unconquered Fighter of the Lord's Battles; the Church which was
so miserably ruinated, begins again to lift up her Head, and both Enemies and
Errors being for the most part destroyed, the Land which has so long been
wasted by the Followers of these Opinions, will at length accustom it self
again to the Worship of God.

Lastly, The same thing appears by the Testimony of Peter a Monk of Veaux
Cernay, in the first Chapter of his History: In the Province of Narbon, where
formerly the Faith flourished, the Enemy of the Faith has begun to sow his
Tares. The People there are distasted with the Sacraments of Christ, who is the
Savor and Wisdom of God, being become profane and unwise, by forsaking the
Wisdom of true Godliness. And after having represented how the Monks, Petrus de
Castro Novo and Radulphus, the Pope's Legates, had forced those of Toulouse to
abjure their Faith for fear of Punishments, but that soon after they returned
again to their former Opinions; he adds, For being perjured, and relapsing into
their former Calamity, they concealed the Heretics that preached at Midnight
in their Conventicles. O how difficult a thing it is to pluck up a deep-rooted
Custom! This treacherous City of Toulouse, from its very first Foundation (as
it is said) has seldom or never been clear of this detestable Plague; this
Poison of Heretical Pravity, and superstitious Infidelity, having been
successively diffused from Father to Son. Wherefore she also, as a due
Vengeance for so great Wickedness, has endured the Effects of avenging Hands,
and the Ruin of a just Desolation. -- Yea what is more, she has suffered this
Heretical Nature, and homebred Heresy, after it had been driven out by a
well-deserved Severity, to return again upon her; being desirous to imitate her
Ancestors, and refusing to degenerate. By the Example of whose Neighborhood,
as one rotten Grape taints another, and as a whole Herd of Swine are infected
by the Scabbiness of a single Hog, so the neighboring Cities and Towns having
once had these Arch-hereticks rooted amongst them, are become wonderfully and
miserably infected with this Plague, by the springing Shoots of their
Infidelity. The Barons of the several Lordships in these Provinces, being
almost all of them become the Defenders and Entertainers of Heretics, loving
them sincerely, and defending them against God and the Church very warmly.

One needs only to reflect upon what I have here produced, concerning the time
of the Promotion of Johannes de Beauxmains to the Archbishopric of Lions, and
to recollect that it was he that persecuted Peter Waldo, to make us acknowledge
that we cannot suppose the Albigenses to have been the Disciples of this Peter
Waldo.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Opinions of Peter de Bruis, and Henry, and their Disciples,
and whether they were Manichees or not.
WE find that tho some Manichees settled themselves in Languedoc, yet it seems
they have only served to give the Papists a color, to accuse those whom their
Errors, and their false Worship obliged them to look upon as an Antichristian
Church. This will appear yet more clearly, by the account we are about to give
here of the Opinions of Peter de Bruis, of Henry, and of their Disciples, whom
the Bishop of Meaux would willingly have thought to have been Manichees.
Baronius was not so quick-sighted as the Bishop; but because it happens often,
that those who stand upon the Shoulders of a tall Man can see a little further
than he, we must enquire, by examining this Matter carefully, whether we are to
believe Baronius, or the Bishop of Meaux.

The care of the Inquisition, has scarely left us any record of Peter de Bruis;
so that we know scarce any thing of what concerns him, but what we have from
the report of his Enemies, and those Enemies too to that degree, that they used
Fire and Sword to destroy him; which alone is sufficiently a strong
Presumption, that they had little or no Inclination to extenuate the Horridness
of his Opinions, nor to put a reasonable Sense upon them, when according to the
Rules of Equity, they could have given them a good one. Be it as it will, Peter
Abbot of Clugny, bears witness that Peter de Bruis, from whom the Albigenses
have been called Petrobusians, had taught almost 20 years in the Diocesses of
Arles, Embrun, and in Gascoin, whither the Persecution, which he suffered from
the Bishops and Archbishops of those Diocesses, stirred up against him by Peter
de Clugny, had forced him to take refuge. He declares that he had made a great
number of Disciples, and exhorts these Prelates to oppose themselves against the
Progress of his Doctrine, by forcing him in this his Retreat, not only by
preaching against him, but also if it were needful, Vi armata per Laicos, with
armed Force by Laymen.

These Bishops answered these Exhortations of Peter de Clugny perfectly well;
so that after they had obliged him to keep more private, they watched him so
closely by their Votaries, that at last they seized him at St. Gilles, where
they caused him to be burnt in the year 1126, to the great satisfaction of
Peter de Clugny and of Baronius, who highly extol the Zeal of those, who by
this means had avenged the Injury he had done to Crosses, in burning them to
boil his Meat on Good Friday.

This is one of the Crimes laid to his Charge by Peter de Clugny, a Crime of
such a Nature, that King Hezekiah may upon the same account, be looked upon as
a most profane Person, though we know that his Zeal herein was approved by God
himself. At this rate also, John of Jerusalem must be looked upon as a very
negligent Prelate for not burning St. Ephiphanius, who at Anablatha, had torn
the Hangings of a Church in which he found the Pictures of Jesus Christ, and of
some other Saints. And Gregory I, must pass for a negligent ignorant Person for
not burning Serenus Bishop of Marseilles, who broke down the Church-Images, as
well as Peter de Bruis, in a Time when Idolatry was not yet come to its height.
For as for his boiling Meat with the Wood of the Cross on Good Friday, and
eating of the same, supposing he had indeed done so, (though there be great
probability to the contrary, and that it was only one of those slanderous
Imputations the Monks make use of to stir up the Fury of the ignorant Rabble)
it would at the most have been no more than a notable Action to awaken these
Idolaters, by setting before them their own Pagan Folly, described by the
Prophet Isaiah in the 44 th Chapter of his Prophecy.

But this was not the only Crime of Peter de Bruis; he was not only an
Image-breaker, but he had besides, during these twenty Years of his Ministry,
preached up many Heresies: the chiefest of which Peter de Clugny reduces to
five Articles, as being more horrid than the rest. And because, says he, the
first Seeds of this erroneous Doctrine were sown and propagated by Peter de
Bruis for almost 20 years together, they brought forth chiefly five poisonous
Shoots, against which I opposed my self as much as I was able.

The First consisted in denying that Infants could be saved by Baptism, when
they are under the Age of Reason; and that the Faith of the Parents can be
available to those who are not of Age to believe.

The Second consisted in maintaining that no Temples or Churches ought to be
built, and that those already built, ought to be destroyed; and that Christians
did not need holy, that is, consecrated Places to worship God in, etc.

The Third consisted in asserting that they ought to break down and burn the
holy Crosses, because that Figure, and that Instrument wherewith Jesus Christ
had been so cruelly tormented and put to Death, was so far from being worthy of
Adoration, Veneration, or any other kind of Supplication, that it ought to be
dishonored with Indignity, broke to pieces and burnt, to revenge our Savior's
Torments and his Death.

The Fourth consisted, not only in denying the Truth of the Body and Blood of
our Lord, which is offered up every day, and continually by the Sacrament of
the Church; but also in maintaining that it was nothing, and ought not to be
offered.

The Fifth consisted in deriding all the Offerings, Prayers and Alms, and other
good Works done by the Faithful that are living, for those that are dead,
because they could not by any of these means, afford them the least Comfort.

These were the Heresies which Peter de Bruis had taught for 20 Years together,
which is time enough to know the Opinions of one Man. And though Peter de
Clugny, by his Character of being a Monk, and his mortal Enemy, was easily
persuaded to indulge his Credulity so far as to believe some Reports spread
abroad concerning the Disciples of Peter de Bruis, that they did not own the
Old Testament, which put him upon proving the Divinity thereof, yet he insisted
so little upon it, that he shows he was not persuaded in his Conscience that
the Petrobusians were Manichees: and the Bishop of Meaux ought to have imitated
his Discretion in the same Matter.

But, says the Bishop, they rejected Baptism, which is one of the Characters
of the Manichees. If he had said that Peter de Bruis had revived the Error of
the Hieracites, whom St. Epiphanius speaks of, he would have had more Reason on
his side; for the first Article, as Peter de Clugny has expressed it, comes
very near the Opinion of the Hieracites: but it is absolutely false, that it
agrees with the Belief of the Manichees concerning that Sacrament. The
Manichees absolutely rejected Baptism; whereas, if we will believe Peter de
Clugny, the Petrobusians did not look upon it as needless, but only to Infants.
In a word, Peter de Clugny attributes to them a kind of Anabaptism, which
maintained, that Infants were not capable of Baptism, and that it was only to
be conferred upon such as were full grown, because at the receiving of it, they
were to make Profession of their Faith for themselves. At this rate we might as
well accuse Tertullian, St. Gregory Nazianzen, and Walafridus Strabo of
Manicheism. We shall find hereafter, that this Error was not general amongst
them, because the Disciples of Peter de Bruis and Henry, reject it as a
slanderous Imputation, and because the Malice which appears in the wording of
this Calumny, is nothing but the effect of that Hatred wherewith Peter de
Clugny was inflamed against these pretended Heretics.

The second Article is visibly nothing else, but a Consequence drawn from the
Aversion the Petrobusians had for the Popish Churches, because of the
Idolatries there committed, and of their Consecrations to the honor of Saints.
It is no such strange thing to see Men condemn Temples to be demolished, which
they believe to have been profaned by Idolatry. Gregory I was one of the first
that ever consecrated Pagan Temples into Meeting-Places for Christians; whereas
before, the Emperors had ordered them to be shut up, and caused some of them to
be pulled down. It is very ordinary for those who detest the Idolatry reigning
in Churches, to be desirous to remove all the Objects of it at the greatest
distance from those whose Salvation they endeavor to procure. Lastly, We know
that the Petrobusians judged the Pope to be the Antichrist, which might very
well prompt them to so great an Aversion for these kind of Buildings, in which
Antichrist had his Throne, as St. Hilary of Poictiers had distinctly foretold.
But let Men think what they please, this Article has nothing of Manicheism in
it.

The third Heresy of the Petrobusians, has still less of Manicheism than the
former. It is evident that this also is nothing but a popular Consequence
against the Worship of the Cross, which was then practiced upon diverse
occasions, of which we have before seen an Example, at the Death of a great
Lord of that Country. But whereas he supposes that the Petrobusians did
acknowledge, that Jesus Christ has endured the Cross, and that he died upon it;
in so doing he fully acquits them of being Manichees, since they did not own
that our Lord Jesus Christ truly died upon the Cross. Moreover it must be
confessed, that no Man could better have renewed the Doctrine of St. Agobardus,
than Peter de Bruys, when he maintained that neither Veneration, Adoration, nor
Supplication were due to the Cross, and that they were to be broken in case
People were found to bestow any such Worship upon them. For this was the
Doctrine of Agobardus, in his Discourse of Pictures.

The fourth Heresy is expressed in very odious terms, Tom. 9. Bib. Patr. Paris.
p. 1278.
and after the Popish manner, who own nothing to be real in the Sacrament, if
the Flesh of Jesus Christ and his Blood be not there in Substance, and who do
not believe he is present in the Sacrament upon any other account, but as he is
offered up to God before he is eaten. But yet here there is nothing in this
double Article of Manicheism. On the contrary we may assert that the Romish
Opinion rather is a Branch of Manicheism than theirs: for is not the Body of
Jesus Christ in the Bread? and does not the Substance of the Bread become the
Substance of Jesus Christ? and the Priest, or the Faithful when they digest it,
do they not restore the Body of Christ to Liberty, in freeing it of its Bonds,
by which the Charm of Consecration tied it up?

The Act of Oblation which the Petrobusians blamed in the Mass, is more clearly
explained by their Disciples, as we shall see hereafter. In the mean time, it
is worth observing, that they opposed the Change, which then began to be made
in the Church of Rome, and which being accomplished, produced that Addition in
the Liturgy, where they make the Priest say, Et pro quibus tibi offerimus, And
for whom we offer up to thee; whereas before the whole Offering respected only
the People, Qui tibi offerunt, Who offer up unto thee, in Allusion to that
Custom of the People's offering the Bread and Wine which was used at the
Communion. As soon as the Faith of the Real Presence was once entertained, they
presently inquired what use might be made of it, and they found that it might
be offered up to God, before it was offered to the People: and when they were
once confirmed in the Belief of this Custom, they found it was necessary for
the Priest to express a Sacerdotal Act; whereas therefore the People before
simply offered the Bread and Wine to God, in order to celebrate the Communion
with it, after Consecration they thought good to substitute the Priests
offering of them up for the People. This was more distinctly practiced in the
thirteenth Century, as Menardus the Benedictine informs us in his Discourse
upon the Sacramentarium of St. Gregory, though before that time we find some
Footsteps of this Opinion.

The fifth Article which rejects Purgatory, and maintains, that the Living
cannot help the deceased Believers by their Prayers, Alms or good Works, nor by
any Masses designedly said for them, has as little Manicheism as the former:
For as the Petrobusians cannot be said to be Manichees, for condemning the Use
of Infant Baptism; so neither can they be esteemed Manichees for denying
Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead. Let the Bishop of Meaux turn over as long
as he pleases the Catalogue of Heresies, he will nowhere be able to find that
the rejecting of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead, are Characters of
Manicheism.

Is not the Bishop therefore, think we, very judicious, in taking Peter de
Bruys and his Disciples for Manichees? whereas he ought to have taken notice of
two things in Peter de Clugny: The 1 st, is that Peter de Bruys, whom they
accuse of having boiled Meat on Good Friday with broken pieces of the Cross,
eat of it when he had done, with those who assisted at that Execution. The 2 d
is, that he maintained, Epist. 2.
that Priests and Monks ought rather to marry, These. Cath. Tom. 2. l. 8. Art. 6.
than to live in a single State defiled with Impurity: Coecius makes this
Article one of the Heresies of Peter de Bruys.

One clearly sees what solid Grounds the Bishop of Meaux had to accuse Peter de
Bruys of Manicheism: Let us now see whether he has any better Success with
Henry the Disciple of Peter de Bruys.

The Burning of Peter de Bruys at St. Gilles, did not stifle the Doctrine that
he maintained, it had taken too deep Root in these Diocesses: On the contrary
it increased very considerably, after it was once watered with the Blood of
that Martyr. The Opposition which the Disciples of Peter de Bruys made to the
false Worship of the Church of Rome, which they endeavored to introduce into
these Diocesses, after that they had made them submit to her Yoke, was very
useful to awaken the People. Pope Eugenius, the Disciple of St. Bernard, being
then in France (where he was more exactly informed of these Difficulties than
the Roman Emissaries) took the Alarm very hotly. See here how St. Bernard
describes the State of Affairs, in a Letter of his to the Count St. Gilles.
Epist. 240.
How great Evils have we heard and known that Henry the Heretic has done and
does every Day in the Churches of God? He wanders up and down in your Country
in Sheeps Clothing, being indeed a ravenous Wolf: But according to the Hint
given by our Lord, we know him by his Fruits. The Churches are without People,
People without Priests, Priests without due Reverence; and lastly, Christians
without Christ. The Churches of Christ are looked upon as Synagogues, the
Sanctuary of God is denied to be holy; Sacraments are no longer esteemed
sacred; holy Feasts are deprived of festival Solemnities; Men die in their
Sins; Souls are frequently snatched away to appear before the terrible
Tribunal, who are neither reconciled by Repentance, nor armed with the sacred
Communion: The Life of Christ is denied to Christian Infants, by refusing them
the Grace of Baptism; nor are they suffered to draw near unto Salvation, though
our Savior tenderly cries on their Behalf, Suffer little Children to come unto
me. -- This Man is not of God, who acts and speaks things so contrary to God;
and yet alas he is listened to by many, and has a People that believe him. O
most unhappy People! at the Voice of an Heretic all the Voices of the Prophets
and Apostles are silenced, who from one Spirit of Truth, have declared that the
Church is to be called by the Faith of Christ out of all the Nations of the
World: So that the Divine Oracles have deceived us, the Eyes and Souls of all
Men are deluded, who see the same thing fulfilled, which they read before to
have been foretold: which Truth, though it be most manifest to all, he alone by
an astonishing and altogether Judaical Blindness, either sees not, or else is
sorry to see it fulfilled; and at the same time, by I know not what Diabolical
Art, persuades the foolish and senseless People not to believe their own Eyes,
in a thing that is so manifest; and that those that went before have deceived,
those that come after have been deceived; that the whole World, even after the
shedding of Christ's Blood, shall be lost, and that all the Riches of the
Mercies of God, and the Grace of the Universe, are devoted upon those alone
whom he deceives.

Pope Eugenius finding things in this Posture, names Albericus Bishop of Ostia
for his Legate to the People of Toulouse, and to the Count of St. Gilles.
Baronius in his Annals gives us an Account of this Henry, the Disciple of Peter
de Bruys, and his Death, in the Year 1147, which seems to be very exact, Epist.
240.
because St. Bernard writ to the Count of St. Gilles, to exhort him to drive
Henry out of his Country, where he preached his Doctrine very freely: But the
Earl died in the Holy Land, having been poisoned there (as it was said) by the
Queen: Wherefore in the Year 1147, Henry suffered Martyrdom, at the
Solicitation of St. Bernard Abbot of Clairvaux, by the Cruelty of Albericus
Bishop of Ostia, Cardinal and Legate of Pope Eugenius II at Toulouse, where he
caused him to be burnt, after they had brought him thither laden with Irons.
Baronius sets down with great Care, whatever he thought might blemish the
Reputation of the Martyr. He relates all that St. Bernard wrote against him to
Aldephonsus Earl of St. Gilles. He quotes St. Bernard, who calls Henry an
Apostate Monk, and accuses him of having made use of the great Talents he had
in Preaching, as a means to get Money to spend at Gaming, and upon his Lusts.
He says, that Henry was a Man defiled with Adulteries, who for his frequent
Crimes, durst not appear in several Parts of France and Germany, and who by
Consequence was not to be endured in the Territories of the Count of St.
Gilles: but yet he does not lay any thing of Manicheism to his Charge, no more
than Peter de Clugny and St. Bernard: Nay, Baronius does more, for he formally
distinguishes him from those Heretics whom St. Bernard opposed under the Name
of Apostolicks, in his 66 th Homily upon the Canticles.

How then could the Bishop of Meaux make a Manichee of him? Perhaps the loose
Life, whereof St. Bernard accuses him, may be a Character of it. But not to
undervalue the Vanity of this loose Accusation, without any Proof, and
proceeding from a sworn and cruel Enemy, which was quite overthrown by the
courageous Martyrdom of Henry: At this rate the Clergy of the Church of Rome,
who were so generally guilty of Sodomy, that St. Peter Damian writ a Book,
entitled, Gomorrhaeus, must have been Manichees; and upon the same Ground
Johannes Cremensis, a Cardinal, the Pope's Legate in England, for abolishing
the Marriage of the Priests, must likewise have been a Manichee; for the
English Historians say that this Holy Cardinal, having assembled a Synod at
Westminster, wherein he represented to the Priests, that it was the worst of
Crimes to rise from a Whore to consecrate the Body of Jesus Christ, was himself
surprised in Bed with a common Whore, the same Day that he had said Mass. Upon
this Account also the Legates of Anacletus, the Competitor of Eugenius II, must
have been Manichees, for they are taxed with carrying Women along with them in
Men's Habits, probably to avoid the Inconvenience that Johannes Cremensis fell
into in England, for want of taking this Care beforehand.

They charge Henry with the same Heresies which they attributed to Peter de
Bruys; so that what I have already said concerning the Heresies of the
Petrobusians, I need not repeat here. Baronius adds, I confess, that Henry had
superadded to these Heresies this Proposition, Additis irrideri Deum Canticis
Ecclesiasticis, That the Singing in Churches was but a mocking of God. And
accordingly Peter de Clugny refutes this pretended Heresy with a great deal of
Earnestness: But if I may speak my Opinion in this matter, neither did this
Proposition contain any great Crime. De Offic. page 184. and cap. 10.
For 1 st, Singing in general was owned by Isidore as an Innovation. It was
about 70 Years before, that the Popes had abolished the ancient Liturgies, to
substitute the Roman Liturgy. The Gothic Liturgy, which was used in the
Diocese of Languedock, and other neighboring Diocesses, which at that time
depended on the Kings of Spain, had been suppressed, because it was not
over-favourable to the Opinions of the Church of Rome. 2 dly, They had at the
same time introduced a sort of riming Verses, which they call Proses, so
ridiculous, so foolish, and so full of Novelties, both as to the Worship of
Saints, and as to the fabulous Stories they contained, that it was very
difficult for those who looked for Wisdom in their Prayers, not to take them
for Profanations. The Hymn composed by King Robert, in Honor of Queen
Constantia, may give us an hint what sort of things they were, O Constantia
Martyrum, etc. And now let any one judge whether Henry was a Manichee, because
he condemned this sort of Profanations.

This also is what has been owned by Mezeray, in his Chronological Abridgment
of the History of France, printed at Amsterdam in 1673, Page 577.
where upon the Year 1163, he says, That there were two sorts of Heretics,
the one ignorant and loose, who were a sort of Manichees; the other more
learned and remote from such Filthiness, who held much the same Opinions as the
Calvinists, and were called Henricians or Waldenses, though the People
ignorantly confounded them with the Cathari, Bulgarians, etc.

Mezeray had spoken more exactly, had he said, That the People were abused by
the Bishops and Clergy, who purposely confounded the ancient Followers of Peter
de Bruys and Henry, with the Manichees and Cathari, to make them odious.

CHAP. XV. That it does not appear from the Conference of Alby, that the
Albigenses were Manichees.
HAving thus justified Peter de Bruys, Henry, and his Disciples, from the
Imputation of Manicheism, which the Bishop of Meaux has endeavored to fasten
upon them: We will yet further endeavor to clear this Point, by examining the
Conference of Alby, from whence the Bishop thinks that he has drawn a solid
Argument to confirm his Imputation. Let us see how this Conference is related
by Roger Hoveden, in his Annals upon the Year 1176.

It was in this Year that the Arian Heresy was condemned, which had well nigh
infected all the Province of Toulouse. There were, says he, certain Heretics
in the Province of Toulouse, who called themselves the Good Men; they were
supported by the Militia of Lombez, and preached and taught the People contrary
to the Christian Faith, professing themselves not to own the Law of Moses, nor
the Prophets, nor the Psalms, nor any part of the Old Testament, nor the
Doctors of the New Testament, save only the Gospels and the Epistles of St.
Paul, with the seven Canonical Epistles, the Acts of the Apostles and the
Revelation.

Being questioned concerning their Faith, proceeds he, and concerning the
Baptism of Infants, and whether they were saved by Baptism; and concerning the
Body and Blood of our Lord, where it was consecrated, or by whom, and who were
those that received it; and whether it were more or better consecrated by a
good Man, than by a wicked Man; and concerning Marriage, if a Man and Woman
could be saved, that knew one another carnally. They answered, That they would
say nothing of their Faith, nor of the Baptism of Infants; neither were they
obliged to say any thing of those Matters. Concerning the Body and Blood of our
Savior they said, That he who received it worthily, was saved; and that he who
received it unworthily, procured his own Condemnation. Concerning Marriage they
said, that a Man and Woman join themselves together to avoid Fornication, as
St. Paul says. They also declared many things, without being questioned; as
that they ought not to use any Oaths whatsoever, as St. John said in his
Gospel, and St. James in his Epistle. They said also that St. Paul had foretold
that they ought to ordain Bishops and Priests in the Church, and that if these
Orders were not conferred upon such as he there commands, that then they were
neither Bishops nor Priests, but ravening Wolves, Hypocrites and Deceivers, who
loved the Salutations in the Marketplaces, the first Places, and the first
Seats at Feasts; who love to be called Masters, against the the Commandment of
Jesus Christ; who wear white and shining Garments; who wear Rings of Gold, and
precious Stones on their Fingers, which their Master never commanded them.
Accordingly they maintained, that since the Bishops and Priests were like to
those Priests who betrayed our Savior Jesus Christ, they ought not to obey
them, because they were wicked.

After diverse Reasons alleged on both sides in Presence of the Bishop of Alby,
they chose and settled Judges on both sides, with Consent of the Bishop of Alby.
After this, Roger Hoveden observes, that the Prelates cited diverse Authorities
out of the New Testament (for these Heretics, says he, would not be
determined but by the New Testament) and that afterward the Bishop of Lions
pronounced the definitive Sentence, drawn from the New Testament in these
terms, I Gislebert Bishop of Lions, at the Command of the Bishop of Alby and
his Assessors, do judge that they are Heretics; and I condemn the Opinions of
Oliver and his Companions, wherever they are: And we judge this from the New
Testament: I bring therefore for this Reason, Proofs to confirm the Divinity of
the Old Testament, drawn from the New, and thereby oppose these Heretics,
because they owned, that they received Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms,
only in those Particulars, which Jesus and his Apostles had by their Testimony
approved, and not in others: whereupon he maintains with reason, that if an
Instrument or Testimony in Writing is allowed of in one part, the whole must
needs be owned, or else wholly cast aside.

In the second place, says he, We convict them, and judge them to be Heretics,
by the Authorities of the New Testament; for we say, that he has not the
Catholic Faith, who does not confess it when he is required, and when it is
exposed to any Danger; whence it is that our Lord in the Acts of the Apostles,
says to Ananias, speaking of Paul, For he is to me a chosen Vessel, to carry
my Name, etc. These Heretics also boast themselves, that they do not lie;
whereas we maintain that they lie manifestly, for there is Deceit in holding
ones Peace as well as speaking; wherefore also Paul boldly resisted Peter to
his Face, because he gave way to the Circumcised.

In the third place, says he, We convict and judge them to be Heretics by the
Authorities of the New Testament; for we say that God will have all Men to be
saved, etc. After which he produces the Proofs for Infant Baptism, and solves
the Objection, taken from Infants wanting Faith, without which it is impossible
to please God: We say that it is by the Faith of the Church, or of their
Godfathers, as the Man sick of the Palsy was healed by the Faith of those who
presented him, and let him down through the Tiling of the House.

In the fourth place, says he, We do convict and judge them as Heretics by the
Authorities of the New Testament, because the Body of our Lord cannot be
consecrated but by a Priest, be he good or bad; which he proves, because
Consecration is made by the Words of Jesus Christ. Moreover, he proves that the
Consecration of the Body of our Lord must be celebrated in the Church, and by
the Ministers of the Church only, whose Authority he asserts from Passages of
Scripture.

Clerks therefore and Laymen, pursues he, must be obedient for God's Sake to
these Priests, Bishops and Deacons, be they good or bad, according to what our
Lord says, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses's Chair, whatsoever
therefore they say, do ye; but do not according to their Works, for they say,
and do not.

In the fifth place, We convict and judge them to be Heretics by the Authority
of the New Testament, because they will not own that Man and Wife, if carnally
joined, can be saved; and yet they are wont to preach in public, that Man and
Wife cannot be saved if they know one another carnally: by striving to preach
up the Study of Virginity, says he, they seem to derogate from the State of
Marriage, and to condemn it; which he refutes by the common Proofs.

In the sixth place, says he, We convict and judge by the Authorities of the
New Testament, that they are Heretics, and separated from the Unity of the
Church; for we say, that the Lord has given the Power to St. Peter, of binding
and absolving, saying, Whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound,
etc. and St. James says, If any one among you be sick, let him call for the
Priests of the Church, etc. and again, Behold, I send unto you wise Men and
Scribes; but as our Lord says, All Men cannot comprehend this Saying.

Moreover, We say, that they ought to have stood up, in Answering and Disputing
concerning the Gospel, because all Christians stand when the Gospels are read;
now if we ought to stand when they are read, much more ought we to stand when
they are read and expounded together. Neither ought they to have sat down after
that they had once chosen to stand. Besides, We have many Authorities, by which
it plainly appears, that we ought to be standing when the Gospel is reading, as
that, where it is said, And Jesus stood in the Plain; and again, Jesus stood
and cried, saying; and again, There stands one in the midst of you, whom ye
know not. Moreover, Jesus was in a standing Posture, when, after his
Resurrection, he confirmed his Disciples, and preached unto them; as it is
written, Jesus stood in the midst of his Disciples, and said, Peace be with
you. And as for them, says the Bishop, they have no right to judge, but only to
answer; for the Lord ought to sit, to whom all Judgment is committed by the
Father. But as for them, they judge not, but are judged, and it is not permitted
to them to preach in the Churches. These Heretics are such, as St. Paul
foretells of, when he says, that there shall be wicked Men and Seducers, who
will go on to grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; for the time
shall come, that they will not bear sound Doctrine, but will turn their Ears
away from the Truth to Fables. And again, From which some going astray, have
given themselves to vain things, who desiring to be Teachers of the Law,
understand not what they say or affirm. He maintains, that they ought to punish
the Disobedience of those Heretics, and to give them public Correction,
according to St. Paul's saying, That Sinners should be reproved openly in the
Presence of all for their Amendment. St. Paul also speaking to Bishops, says,
Being always ready to reprove every Disobedience, and having Power to confute
those that gainsay; and again, Exhort, rebuke, and reprove with all Authority;
and again, I have delivered them to Satan, etc. Moreover, Being absent, I have
already judged, etc. And lastly, Who ever shall preach any other thing, let him
be accursed.

In the seventh place, the said Bishop questioned them concerning Repentance,
whether it were saving when performed at the last Gasp, or whether Soldiers
mortally wounded, may be saved if they repent at last; or whether every one
ought to confess their Sins to the Priest and Ministers of the Church, or to
some Layman, or to those of whom St. James says, Confess your Sins one to
another? To which they answered, that it was sufficient for those that were
sick, to confess to whom they would. As for Soldiers, they would answer
nothing, because St. James there speaks only of the Sick. It was also asked
them, whether one single Act of Contrition of Heart, and one Confession of the
Mouth were sufficient, or whether Satisfaction were necessary, after Penance
had been enjoined, in deploring their Sins, by Fasting, Alms, and Affliction,
if they had opportunity. To which they answered, saying, that St. James said,
Confess your Sins one to another, that you may be healed; so that by these
Words, they knew that the Apostle did not enjoin any thing else, but only to
confess to one another; and that so they should be saved, and that they would
not be better than the Apostle, by adding any thing thereto of their own, as
the Bishops do.

The Heretics added besides, that the Bishop who pronounced Sentence, was an
Heretic, and not they; and that he was their Enemy, and a ravening Wolf, a
Hypocrite, and an Enemy of God, and that he had not judged rightly, and that
they would not answer any thing concerning their Faith, because they mistrusted
him, as our Lord had commanded them in the Gospel; Beware of false Prophets,
who come unto you in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves. And
that he was their malicious Persecutor, and they were ready to make it appear
from the Gospels and the Epistles, that he was not a good Pastor, neither he,
nor all the rest of the Bishops and Priests, but rather Hirelings.

The Bishop answered, That the Sentence had been duly pronounced against them,
and that he was ready to verify the same either in the Court of Ld. Alexander
the Catholic Pope, or in the Court of Lewis King of France, or of Raimond Earl
of Toulouse, or of his Wife who was present, or in the Court of Frenkwel, who
was there present, that he had passed a right Judgment, and that they were
evidently Heretics, and branded as such. He promised also that he would indict
them for Heresy, and that he would denounce them to be such in all Catholic
Courts.

The Heretics seeing themselves convicted and confounded, turned themselves
toward all the People, saying, Good People, the Faith which we now confess, we
confess for your Sakes. The Bishop answered, You say, That you speak for the
Sake of the People, and not for God's Sake. And they said, We believe that
there is one only God, in three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; and that the Son of God has taken our Flesh upon him, that he was
baptized in Jordan, that he fasted in the Wilderness, that he has preached our
Salvation; that he suffered, died, and was buried; that he descended into Hell,
that he rose again the third Day, that he ascended into Heaven, that he sent
the Holy Ghost on the Day of Pentecost, that he shall come at the Day of
Judgment to judge both the Quick and the Dead, and that All shall rise again. We
know also, that what we believe with our Heart, we ought to confess with our
Mouth. We believe, that he is not saved, who does not eat the Body of Jesus
Christ, and that the Body of Jesus Christ is not consecrated but in the Church,
and by the Priest be he good or bad; and that it is no better consecrated by a
good than by a bad one. We believe also, that none can be saved but those that
are baptized, and that little Children are saved by Baptism. We believe also,
that Man and Wife are saved, though they be carnally joined; and that every one
must repent with his Mouth and Heart, and be baptized in the Church by a
Priest; and that if they could show them more from the Gospels and Epistles,
they would believe and own it.

The said Bishop told them also, That if they should swear, they would be
obliged to keep the Faith, and if there were any thing else, that they ought to
confess it, because before they had maintained wicked Opinions, and had spoken
ill. They answered, That they could not swear at all, because in so doing, they
should sin against the Gospel and the Epistles. Whereupon, they produced
against them Authorities out of the New Testament; and after they had been
cited and heard on both sides, one of the Bishops standing up, past his
Judgment in this manner.

I Gozelin Bishop of Lodeve, by permission and command of the Bishop of Alby
and his Assessors, do judge and declare openly, That these Heretics are in a
wrong Opinion concerning the matter of Oaths: they must swear, if so be they
desire to be received: for in Matters of Faith, Men ought to swear; and
forasmuch as they are infamous and stained with Heresy, they must clear their
Innocence; and returning to the Unity of the Church, they must confirm their
Faith by an Oath, as the Catholic Church holds and believes; that so the weak
ones that are in the Church be not corrupted, and that the infected Sheep may
not spoil the whole Flock. Neither is this contrary to the Gospel, or to the
Epistles of St. Paul; for though it be said in the Gospel, Let your
Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; and thou shall not swear neither by the
Heaven, nor by the Earth, etc. yet it is not forbidden to swear by God, but
only by the Creatures; for the Heathens worshipped the Creature; and if it were
permitted to swear by Creatures, we should give to the Creatures the Respect
and Honor which is due to God alone; and thus Idols and Creatures would be
adored as God.

After several Arguments to prove the Lawfulness of Swearing, he added; Or it
may be those Expressions in the Gospel and the Epistle of St. James, are only
by way of Advice, and not by way of Precept, because if Men did not swear, they
would not be forsworn; and whatsoever is more than these, comes of Evil; that
is, of Sin or of the Devil, who persuades Men to swear by Creatures. Finding
therefore, that they were convicted in this Point also, they said that the
Bishop of Alby had agreed with them, that he would not force them to swear;
which the Bishop of Alby denied, and standing up, said, I confirm the Sentence
which Gozelin Bishop of Lodeve has pronounced, which was given by my Order,
and I give notice to the Militia of Lombez, not to protect them. This was
signed by the nine Bishops, Clerks, Abbots, and Laymen, with this Conclusion,
We approve this Sentence, and we know they are Heretics, and we reject their
Opinion.

This is the Substance of what past at the Conference of Alby, according to the
Relation of Roger Hoveden. One sees that he represents to us these three
Things; 1 st, The Accusations laid to the charge of the Albigenses; they are
accused of several Articles, which are pure Manicheism. 2 dly, The Arguments
they brought to convict them. 3 dly, The Confession of Faith of the Albigenses,
in opposition to their Accusations.

As for their Accusations, we are to observe, that they are only Consequences
of their being looked upon as Heretics, such as they pretended had been long
since condemned in the Councils held against the Manichees; and accordingly
they make a Recapitulation of the Errors, either defended by the Cathari, or
commonly attributed to them, and with these they charge the Albigenses without
further Ceremony.

They produce indeed some Witnesses who accuse them, and maintain, That they
have heard some of them maintain Manichean Propositions.

But the manner of their justifying themselves, confounds this Accusation, and
these Witnesses. 1. They declare, That the Silence they kept, was like that of
Jesus Christ, who sometimes held his Peace, without answering the Questions of
the Pharisees. 2. They called the Persons appointed to confront them, false
Witnesses and Impostors, in as handsome a Manner as could be shown to Persons of
their Quality, who appeared against them. 3. They propound their Confession of
Faith, in Terms wholly Orthodox, addressing themselves to the People, who had
been Witnesses of these horrid Accusations.

Probably some will say, Here is a Company of Men actually accused of
abominable Heresies, and here are Persons produced to prove it really upon
them. To this, I have three things to answer. 1. That we have this Conference
from the hand of their Enemies only. 2. That what is insisted on concerning the
Authority of their Witnesses, is overthrown by a very natural Reflection; which
is, That the Integrity of the Waldenses was so well known, and their
Adversaries so much noted for their Inclinations to Calumny, that the Princes
and all the People favored them. This is observed by Puylaurens in his
Chronicle, and it is taken notice of by Ribera in his Antiquities of Toulouse,
and yet their Enemies have still gone on to accuse them of Manicheism.

CHAP. XVI. The Albigenses justified by a Conference, whereof we have an
Account written by Bernard of Foncaud.
WHat I have here represented in general, might be sufficient to clear the
Albigenses from the charge of Manicheism, which the Bishop of Meaux after so
many Ages, has improved against them, but that we have something more to say.
This Bishop, who makes the Waldenses only Schismatics from the Church of Rome,
though he looks upon them as another sort of Schismatics than the Donatists,
has pretended to prove this business infallibly, by the Conference, whereof
Bernard Abbot of Foncaud has given us the Relation, and which was held in
Presence of Bernard Archbishop of Narbon. He observes therefore, that it
appears from the said Conference, that those against whom the Dispute was
maintained, differed from the Church of Rome, only in the following Articles.

The Dispute, says he, chiefly concerned the Obedience that is due to Pastors,
which we find that the Waldenses denied, and that notwithstanding all
Prohibitions to the contrary, they believed they had power to preach, both Men
and Women; and since this their Disobedience could not be grounded but upon the
Unworthiness of the Pastors, the Catholics in proving Obedience to be due unto
them, prove it to be due even to those that are wicked; and that whatsoever the
Channels be, Believers do not fail of receiving Grace through them. For the
same reason, they show, that this speaking against of their Pastors, whence the
pretense of disobeying them was taken, is forbidden by the Law of God.
Afterward they confute the Liberty that Laymen took to themselves of Preaching
without leave of their Pastors, and indeed in opposition to their Prohibitions;
and they show that this seditious kind of Preaching, tends to the Subversion of
the Weak and Ignorant. Above all, they prove from Scripture, that Women, to
whom Silence only is recommended, must not undertake to teach. Lastly, They
represent to the Waldenses, that they do ill in rejecting Prayer for the Dead,
which has so much Foundation in Scripture, and so clear a Succession in
Tradition. And as these Heretics absented themselves from the Churches, to
pray amongst themselves in private in their Houses, they tell them, that they
ought not to leave the House of Prayer, the Holiness whereof was so much
recommended in Scripture, and even by the Son of God himself.

Here we may see the Albigenses, in case they be the Persons concerned, (though
the Bishop pretends they are the Waldenses) sufficiently cleared from all the
Accusations of Manicheism that can be formed against their Faith. For according
to these Articles, if we believe the Bishop of Meaux, they cannot be charged
with any thing of Arianism, much less of Manicheism.

I cannot perfectly agree to what the Bishop of Meaux concludes, from their
examining only these pretended Differences, in the Conference held before the
Archbishop of Narbon, that there was no other Difference betwixt the Church of
Rome, and those against whom the Papists disputed at this Conference. There are
solid Reasons that hinder me from being of the Bishop's Opinion: but however it
be, he cannot defend himself from having furnished his Adversaries with the
most compendious way in the World, to overthrow without much enquiry, all that
he had done to prove that the Albigenses were guilty of Manicheism.

For in truth this Dispute, whereof the Abbot of Foncaud gives us an account,
was not maintained against the Vaudois, but against the Albigenses. For 1. the
Bishop might easily have discovered as much, from the Presence of the
Archbishop of Narbon, the Matter in question relating to the Interest of his
Diocese. 2. Because the Abbot of Foncaud, who is the Relator, was one of the
principal Actors, his Abbey being in the Diocese of Narbon. 3. Because this
Conference, with some others, served as a Prologue to the Cruelties exercised
against the Albigenses; the Church of Rome and her Ministers, having already
made use of these Ways of Sweetness, before they came to the Extremities of a
Croisade, which interrupted their other Projects toward Greece and the
Holy Land.

It follows clearly from hence, that according to the Acknowledgment of the
Bishop, the Albigenses cannot be more justly accused of Manicheism, than the
Vaudois, concerning whom he pretends, that the Abbot of Foncaud speaks.

I cannot imagine how the Bishop can answer the Force of this Argument, except
only by denying that he is mistaken, and pretending that this Conference was
held with some of the Vaudois who had fled into the Diocese of Narbon, and had
so considerably propagated their Doctrine there, that a public Dispute was
judged necessary to stop the progress of it.

But 1 st, it would be very strange, that they should be able in so short a
time to make themselves more considerable than the Petrobusians and the
Henricians, with whom we know that the Diocesses of Aquitain and Narbon were
already filled, according to the Testimony of their Enemies. 2 dly. Were it so,
it would be necessary to suppose, that Bernard Archbishop of Narbon, who died
the second of October 1191, made it his Business to stop the Progress of some
of Waldo's Disciples, who at that time, could scarcely be known, ( John de
Beauxmains Archbishop of Lions, who condemned Peter Waldo, not having possessed
his See above 10 Years, as far as we can judge, which he then quitted to retire
to Clairvaux,) whilst in the mean time, he took no notice of the Petrobusians
and Henricians. 3 dly. It is ridiculous to suppose, against the Credit of all
Historians, that the Vaudois composed a distinct Body from the Albigenses, who,
as we shall show hereafter, clearly suppose, that there were no Vaudois that
had Churches, and that made a distinct Body. 4 thly. Neither do we find that
the cruel Inquisition made any such like distinction about this Matter, in
using more or less Cruelty, according to the Degrees of Schism and Heresy, as
it is pretended they ought to do, in case they would act justly.

But whatever Answer the Bishop may invent to defend his Opinion, we have a
sure Way to overthrow it without remedy, and it is the same which he himself
has furnished us with; for he owns that the Conference of 1206, mentioned by
the Monk of Vaux Cernay, was a Conference with the Vaudois. Besides, Page 222.
that which Bernard Abbot of Foncaud has set down, we have another, says he,
in Peter of Vaux Cernay, about the year 1206, where the Vaudois were
confounded: now all Men know, that the Conference of 1206, was held with the
Albigenses, as Peter of Vaux Cernay, who lived at that time, assures us in his
History of the Albigenses.

But why then will the Bishop say, Did not they dispute before the Bishop of
Nismes, and the Archbishop of Narbon, but only upon these four Points? The
Question is easily answered: They disputed about many other Articles, but
either he who wrote the Conference, did not give us a Relation of the whole, as
not supposing it convenient to publish their Objections against those other
Opinions and Superstitions, which the Albigenses opposed; or else they wanted
time to examine the other Articles of the Roman Faith which they rejected.

What I say now, is not a Conjecture at random, produced only to stop the
Bishop's Answer, but is Matter of Fact grounded upon the Relation which we have
of the Conference of Montreal, as I shall show hereafter.

All this will lead us to pass a true Judgment on the Condemnations which the
Popes, King Alphonsus, and the Emperor Frederick II, issued out against the
Albigenses, in their Bulls and Edicts. They endeavored in short, to make them
be looked upon as infamous Manichees, as a Company of Arians, and as the most
execrable Heretics. The Popes prepossessed the Kings and Emperors with these
Notions, by the reproachful Names which they fastened upon them, after they had
gotten the power to lead them by the Nose as so many wild Beasts: hence
proceeds that heap of Names which we find in the Bulls and Edicts of that time.

The Reflection we ought to make on all these Terms of Obloquy, is this, that
excepting only the Names of Publicans and Cathari, particularly given to the
Manichees, it appears from these Edicts, that the Albigenses and the Waldenses
did both believe the same thing.

But if what I have said is sufficient to show the Injustice of the Bishop of
Meaux, in making the Albigenses pass for Manichees; the matter may be still
further cleared, if we turn over the Books of Alanus Magnus, surnamed the
Universal Doctor; Contra Albigenses and Waldenses, Paganos and Judaeos Opus
quadripartitum.
for it appears clearly from his Treatise against the Heretics of his time,
and above all against the Albigenses, which he dedicated to William Prince of
Montpellier; that it was the Fashion at that time to treat the Albigenses as
Manichees; and to confound them with those Heretics, whereas their Faith was
very opposite to that of the Manichees; for in his Refutation he huddles them
altogether, without almost any Distinction, though their Principles were very
different. It seems he made use of this way, that he might make use of his
common places the better; or else he did it to avoid frequent Repetitions.

In the first place therefore Alanus refutes the Manichees, who asserted that
there were two Principles, whereof the one was Good, the other Evil; and
maintained that the evil God had created the World; of whom also some affirmed,
that the Souls of Men were Apostate Angels, who should be saved after their
Abode in humane Bodies; and that the Souls of the Patriarchs had no share in
the Salvation of Jesus Christ. They held likewise that Jesus Christ did not
take upon him a true Body, and that he never eat or drunk. They believed that
the Body of Man was the Workmanship of the Devil, and that it should not rise
again, and they seemed to think that Souls perished with their Bodies.

He refutes some, who though they believed the Flesh of Jesus Christ, yet
denied him to be the Son of God: others who maintained that Jesus Christ had
taken a celestial Body; that the Virgin had been created in Heaven, and had
neither Father nor Mother. He takes up the first 34 Chapters of his first Book
in confuting these Opinions.

Afterward in his 35 th Chapter, he refutes the Opinion of those who pretended
that the Law of Moses was published by the Devil, and that the Fathers of the
Old Testament were all damned.

As to the Sacraments, whereof he treats from the 39 th Chapter, he owns that
some of those Heretics, whom he opposes in general, absolutely rejected
Baptism; these were Manichees; that others denied the Efficacy of it to
Infants, denying Original Sin; that others again believed it unprofitable to
Children, and only useful for those of riper Years; and he disputes against
every one of these Opinions.

In Chapter 45, he disputes against those who denied Baptism to be useful
without the Imposition of Hands. Afterward he confutes those that maintained,
that we ought not, after having obtained the Pardon of our Sins in Baptism,
hope to obtain the same Grace a second time by Repentance, which obliged them
to excommunicate those who relapsed into their Sins after Baptism, which they
proved from the 6 th and 10 th Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and
because Penance was no more to be reiterated than Baptism or Orders. It seems
that these Albigenses had a Discipline like that, which prevailed in the
Church, before the Council of Carthage in Tertullian's time, where they never
admitted to the Communion those who had committed any great Crimes after their
Baptism.

In the 50 th Chapter he attacks other Heretics, who asserted that Penance did
not procure Remission of Sins, because it is God alone that can pardon Sins.
One sees plainly enough what they meant, especially because he adds, that they
believed it was sufficient to confess their Sins to God, which they proved by
the Authorities of St. Ambrose, St. Maximus, and St. Chrysostom.

He says that these Heretics denied Transubstantiation. It Is worth observing
to see with what Force and Subtilty they disputed against this Doctrine: I
shall produce the Arguments themselves of the Albigenses, which Alanus
endeavors to confute. Et hoc sic probare conantur: Si singulis diebus panis in
corpus Christi mutaretur, Page 243, and 244.
illud in infinitum augeretur. Quaerunt etiam utrum ille panis desinat esse: si
desinit esse, adnihilatur, and ita etiam corrumpitur. Item, quaerunt quomodo
corpus tantae quantitatis intrat per os hominis? Item, si corpus Christi
comeditur, dentibus atteritur, and ita in parts dividitur: Item, panis fit
corpus Christi, ergo erit corpus Christi, and ita aliud quam sit. Item, panis
fiet corpus, ergo de pane fiet corpus Christi, and sic de pane erit materia
corporis Christi. Item, post Transubstantiationem remanent accidentia; ergo in
alio subjecto, vel in Ae^re; sed si in Aere, aliqua pars Aeris est rotunda,
sapida, and secundum quod illa forma defertur per diversa loca, mutant
accidentia subjectum. Item, in eadem part Aeris manent illa accidentia, and
illa soliditas est in Aere, cum illa sint solida, and sic Aer solidus est: Ex
his videtur, quod accidentia illa non sint in Aere, sed nec in corpore Christi
sunt: nec est assignare aliquid corpus in quo sint, ergo non videntur remanere
accidentia. Item, cum forma illa sub qua latet corpus Christi dividatur in
parts, sub illa forma desinit corpus Christi: quomodo ergo sub singulis
portionibus illius Hostiae datur corpus Christi? Item, si corpus Christi latet
sub illa exigua forma, ubi est Christi caput vel pes? Et ita indistincta sunt
membra illius. Item, Christus dedit suum corpus discipulis ante Passionem: sed
dedit eis mortale vel immortale: si immortale dedit, sed tunc erat mortalis;
ergo quando erat mortalis immortalis erat, quod est impossible. Item, ponatur
quod aliquis celebraverit divina tempore passionis Christi, corpus existens
Romae, passum fuisset Romae, quia ubicunque erat, patiebatur tempore passionis,
and sic non patiebatur tantum in Jerusalem, sed in multis aliis locis. Item,
ponatur quod mus accedat ad Pyxidem, in qua est Christi corpus; mus aliquid
comedit, ergo Era, vel accidens, vel corpus: sed quod comedat Era, vel
accidens, absurdum est, and magis absurdum quod comedat corpus Christi. Item,
cum sanguis Christi glorificatus sit, nec faciat localem distantiam, videtur
quod Calice repleto sanguine, alius liquor possit infundi. Item, Christus ait
in Evangelio, Omne quod in os intrat, in secessum emittitur. Ergo Christi
corpus non intrat, quando ad manducandum datur, nec in secessum emittitur. And
this they endeavor to prove thus: If the Bread every Day should be changed
into the Body of Christ, it would be infinitely increased. They inquire also
whether the Bread cease to be: If it cease to be, then is it annihilated, and
so it is spoiled. Also they ask, How a Body of so great a Bulk can enter into
the Mouth of a Man? Whether the Body of Christ be eaten, chewed with Teeth, and
consequently divided into parts? Whether the Bread becomes the Body of Christ,
because then it will be the Body of Christ, that is to say, something else than
it is? Whether the Bread becomes the Body; and if so, then Bread is the Body of
Christ, and so Bread will be the matter of Christ's Body? Also after
Transubstantiation the Accidents do remain; if so, they must be in another
Subject, in the Air, for Instance; but if there, then some part of the Air must
be round, savoury and white; and as this Form is carried through diverse places,
so the Accidents change their Subject. Again, these Accidents abide in the same
part of the Air, and thus Solidity will be in the Air, because they are solid,
and consequently the Air will be solid. Hence it appears that these Accidents
are not in the Air; neither are they in the Body of Christ; neither can any
other Body be assigned, in which they are, so that the Accidents do not seem to
remain. Again, when the Form or Figure, in which the Body of Christ lies hid,
is divided into Parts, the Body of Christ continues no longer in that Figure
which it had before: how therefore can the Body of Christ be in every part of
that Host. Again, if the Body of Christ be hid in that little form, where is
the Head or Foot? and consequently his Members must be indistinguish'd. Again,
Christ gave his Body to his Disciples before his Passion: Now he gave it them
either mortal or immortal; if he gave it immortal, yet it is certain that then
it was mortal: and consequently whilst it was mortal, it was immortal, which is
impossible. Again, suppose we that some one or other had celebrated the
Communion at the time that Christ suffered; the Body that was (suppose) at
Rome, would have suffered there, because wheresoever it was, it suffered at the
time of the Passion; and so Christ would have suffered not only at Jerusalem,
but in many other places. Again, suppose that a Mouse should come to the Pix,
in which the Body of Christ is, and eat some part of it; the Mouse would eat
either Air, or Accidents, or the Body of Christ; but it is absurd to say, that
the Mouse should eat either Air, or Accidents, and much more absurd it is to
say, that it eats the Body of Christ. Again, Seeing that the Blood of Christ is
glorified, and does not fill a Place, it seems to follow, that when the Cup is
full of Blood, some other Liquor may be poured into it. Again, Christ says in
the Gospel, whatsoever enters in at the Mouth, is cast forth into the Draught;
whence it will follow, that the Body of Christ does not go in at the Mouth when
it is given to be eaten, or if it does, it must be cast forth into the Draught.
In the 59 th Chapter, Page 246. col. 2.
he relates this Objection of the Albigenses concerning the same Matter:
Quaerunt etiam Haeretici, utrum sit Articulus fidei Christianae panem
transubstantiari in Corpus Christi, cum de hoc non fiat mentio in aliquo
Symbolo: non enim in Symbolo Apostolico: scilicet, Credo in Deum; vel in
Nicaeno, Credo in Unum, etc. vel in Symbolo Athanasii, Quicunque vult, etc. Cum
in his Symbolis, de omnibus Articulis Christianae fidei fiat mentio, cur non
fiat mentio de illo ineffabili Sacramento, cui magis videtur obviare humanae
Ratio: The Heretics also demand, whether it be an Article of the Christian
Faith, that the Bread is transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, seeing
there is no mention made of it in any Creed; for we do not meet with it in the
Apostles Creed, that is, Credo in Deum; nor in the Nicene, that is, Credo in
Vnum; nor in the Athanasian, Quicunque vult: and since in these Creeds are
contained all the Articles of the Christian Faith, why is there no mention of
this ineffable Sacrament, which of all things, seems most contrary to Reason.

I have set down these Arguments in order, 1 st. because it is visible to any
one that will take the pains to examine them, that they are the same that were
urged by Berengarius, as appears by the Extracts of his Book, which Lanfrank
has preserved, and afterward by those, who in the 12 th Century endeavored to
qualify and defend the Absurdities of the Confession, which they made
Berengarius sign. 2 dly. Because it plainly appears that those who admitted the
three Creeds, the Apostles, the Nicene, and the Athanasian, did not reject the
use of Matrimony, which yet he lays to their charge, Chap. 63.
there being nothing more remote from Manicheism. Neither does he impute it,
save only to some of these Heretics, which makes it manifest, that he has
confounded all these People together, and that he only pursued his Matter, and
his common Places, without giving us particularly the Opinions of every one of
these Heretics.

We find, that he charges them with rejecting the Sacrament of Confirmation,
Chap. 66.
because there is no mention made of it, neither in the Gospel, nor in the
other Books of the New Testament, as an Institution of Christ. They rejected
also the Sacrament of Orders, as it was believed in the Church of Rome. See
what Alanus says of it: Chapter 67. p. 251.
Dicunt etiam fidei Catholicae inimici, Ordinem, ut Diaconatum vel Sacerdotium*
non esse Sacramentum, quod sic probare conantur: Non legitur in aliqua Canonica
Scriptura Apostolos ordinatos fuisse in Sacerdotes, cur ergo little Vicarios sic
ordinari oportet. Item, Apostoli qui majores Sacerdotes dicti sunt, non
leguntur uncti fuisse Chrismate, cur ergo unguntur eorum Vicarii? Praeterita
merita faciunt and suffragantur ut quis sit dignus aliquo Officio, quid ergo
confert Ordo? Besides, the Adversaries of the Catholic Faith affirm, that the
Order of Deacons or Priests, is not a Sacrament, which they endeavor to prove
thus. We do not read in any part of Canonical Scripture that the Apostles were
ordained Priests, and therefore what necessity is there that their Vicars
should be so. Again, The Apostles who are said to be the higher Priests, were
never anointed, and why then are their Vicars anointed? It is forepast Merit
and true Worth that makes one fit for any Function, what need therefore is
there of Orders?

Concerning extreme Unction, they believe after this manner: Dicunt etiam
extremam olei Vnctionem, quae datur infirmis, nec esse Sacramentum, nec aliquem
habere effectum, quia hoc Sacramentum Vnctionis infirmorum ab Apostolis
institutum non legitur: They say, Chap. 68.
that Extreme Unction which is conferred upon sick Persons, is neither a
Sacrament, nor otherwise of any efficacy, because this Sacrament of Anointing
the Sick, is not found to be of Apostolical Institution.

As to Churches, we find that they followed the Opinions of Henry the Disciple
of Peter de Bruis: Chap. 69.
Non desunt qui dicant locum materialem non esse Ecclesiam, sed conventum
fidelium sanctum: quia, ut aiunt, locus ad orationem non pertinet; sicut enim
ubique est Deus, sic ubique adorari vel orari potest. Hoc autem probare
nituntur Authoritate Christi, dicentis Samaritanae, Mulier creed mihi, venit
hora, quando nec in Monte hoc, nec in Hierosolymis, adorabitis Patrem: Sed
venit hora and nunc est, quando very adoratores adorabunt in Spiritu and
Veritate. Item, Si locus facit ad Orationem, cur Heremitae antiquitus in locis
abditis habitantes, Ecclesias non habebant? Cur etiam Sacramenta effectum suum
habent, etsi non celebrantur in loco qui dicitur Ecclesia? Item, quid operantur
Parietes ad supplicandum ei qui ubique est, cum in uno loco non magis sit quam
in alio? Christum etiam in montibus and locis desertis legimus orasse, non in
locis orationi dedicatis. Item, estne fructuosior oration quae fit in Templo,
quam illa quae fit in agro, si par fuerit devotio? There be some who affirm,
that the Church is not a material Place, but an holy Assembly of Believers;
for, say they, Place is not of any concern to Prayer, because as God is every
where, so he may every where be worshipped and prayed to. This they endeavor to
prove by the Authority of Christ, saying to the Samaritan Woman; Woman, believe
me, the hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem,
worship the Father; but the hour comes and now is, when the true Worshippers
shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. Again, If the Place be any
furtherance to Prayer, why had not the Hermits of old, who lived in desert
Places, their Churches to pray in? Or how can the Sacraments be of any
efficacy, when they are not celebrated in the Place called a Church. Again,
What do Walls help us to pray to him who is every where, and not more in one
Place than he is in another. We read also, that Christ went aside to Mountains
and desert Places to pray, and not to Places appointed for Prayer. Again, Is
the Prayer that is performed in the Church of more efficacy than that which is
offered up in the Field, supposing the Devotion of both to be alike?

Against the Prayers that are made to Saints, they objected as follows: Dicunt
etiam Heretici quidam, Chap. 72.
Orationes Sanctorum non prodesse vivis, nec vivorum orationes mortuis: probare
etiam videntur; quod Sancti non orant pro vivis, qui sciunt qui sint salvandi
vel damnandi; pro illis autem quos sciunt salvandos non orant, quia superflua
esset eratio, quia sive orent, sive non, salvabuntur: Si vero orarent pro
damnatis non assequerentur quod petunt, and ita beati non essent; beatus enim
est, cui omnia optata succedunt. Item, Quilibet judicabitur secundum opera sua,
and non aliena merita, nec pro alienis meritis reddetur ei: and ideo orationes
Sanctorum non prosunt; vel quantum ad meritum, vel quantum ad praemium; quia
non augent merita vel praemia. Item, Sancti non sunt in loco merendi, sed
recipiendi; ergo orationibus nec aliis bonis merentur sibi vel aliis. Item, In
Evangelio Lucae legitur, Quod Abraham dixit animae Divitis quae erat in
inferno, Magnum Chaos firmatum est inter nos and vos; ubi Chaos nihil aliud
vocavit, nisi dissimilitudinem bonorum and malorum tantam, ut etiam sancti
damnatis non compatiantur. Si vero non compatiantur, nec orant pro eis. Some
Heretics also assert, that the Prayers of Saints are of no use to the Living,
nor those of the Living to the Dead. That the Saints do not pray for the
Living, they prove thus: Because the Saints knowing who shall be saved, and who
damned, they can not pray for those they know shall be saved, since their
Prayers would be superfluous, seeing whether they pray or no, they will be
saved: but should they pray for those that shall be damned, they would not
obtain what they pray for, and so would not be happy; for he is only happy, who
has all his Desires. Again, Every one shall be judged according to his Works,
and not according to the Merits of another, neither shall any Man receive
according to the Merits of other Men; and therefore the Prayers of the Saints
profit nothing, either in regard of Merit or Reward, because they cannot
increase either a Man's Merit or Reward. Again, The Saints are not in a Place
where they can merit, but only where they receive; and therefore by their
Prayers or other good Works, can neither merit any Good for themselves or for
others. Again, We read in the Gospel of St. Luke, that Abraham said to the Soul
of the rich Man that was in Hell, There is a great Gulf fixed between us and
you; where by Gulf he means nothing else but the Disagreement there is between
the Good and the Wicked, which is so great, that the Saints are neither
sensible, nor have any compassion for the Damned; now if so, neither can we
suppose that they pray for them.

At last, He attributes to some of them, the Belief that it is unlawful to eat
Flesh, upon very ridiculous Grounds, but such as have nothing common with the
Doctrine of the Manichees.

It seems to me to be evident from this Book of Alanus, 1 st, That he owned
there were several sorts of Heretics in the Country of the Albigenses,
Manichees, or Cathari, who rejected the principal Articles of the Christian
Religion. 2 dly, Another sort of People who renounced all the chief Doctrines
of the Romish Religion, which the Protestants rejected afterward. And since he
quotes no Author in particular, it is obvious to judge, that he made but small
Distinction of the Nature of the several Objections which he pretends to
refute, and which he had frequently assigned to the Albigenses in general;
which without doubt, ought not to be attributed but to some of them, and which
possibly, and very probably too, was only taken up from the Mouths of the
common People amongst them, by those who had a Design to expose them.

CHAP. XVII. The Calumnies raised against the Albigenses, refuted by the
Conference at Montreal.
THose who will reflect a little upon the Innocence of the Primitive
Christians, and the horrid Slanders cast upon them, will not be much surpised
to see the Innocence of the Albigenses attacked after the same manner. The
Devil having found this Method succeed in the first Beginnings of Christianity,
was not so careless of his Interest to forget to employ the same against those
who opposed themselves to the Corruptions which he had introduced, and which he
was willing to substitute, instead of the Religion of Jesus Christ.

He made use of the same Method against those of the Reformed Religion. Whoever
reads the Writings of the Jesuits, shall find that they have accused our
Reformers of the same Heresies which the Devil raised to put a stop to the
progress of Christianity. The Jesuit Gauthier alone may be a sufficient Witness
hereof, in his Chronological Table; and we may well say that in this Point, he
has at least equaliz'd the Impudence of Feuardentius, if he has not out done
him. Why should any Man therefore think strange, that the Church of Rome and
her Adorers, should take the same course against the Albigenses, which she
practiced in our days; and which she has not yet left, because she believed it
would not fail of certain Success? so prodigious is the Stupidity of the People
of her Communion. And truly the Managers for the Church of Rome, were no less
diligent to employ these devilish Artifices against the Albigenses, than
against us. Here are some Instances of it, for it is impossible to relate all;
I begin with some of the more general Articles.

1. They accused them of Novelty, sometimes supposing them to have been only
known since the time of Peter de Bruis, or of Henry his Disciple, though the
contrary be evident from the History of this Church, as we have set it down;
and by the Public Liturgy, which the Papists themselves have published not
long since.

2. They accused them of being the Disciples of Peter Waldo, and from thence
raised this Accusation, that they were only a Company of Laymen, without
either Ministry, or right to administer the Sacraments; whereas it is certain,
that they had a lawful Ministry, and indeed a thousand times more lawful than
that of the Church of Rome.

3. They accused them in general of being Manichees, perhaps because formerly
the Priscillianists, who were a Branch of the Manichees, had had a Party in
that Province, or near it, as Philastrius tells us, and of whom some were
scattered through Languedock, after the year 1010, though indeed the Albigenses
disputed against them, and solidly confuted them, as we are informed by William
Puylaurens.

4. They endeavored to make them own the Opinions and Crimes, that were proper
to the Manichees, by producing false Witnesses to convict them thereof. We have
an illustrious Example of this, in the History of the Earls of Toulouse.
William Catel, Counselor for the King in the Parliament of Toulouse, tells us,
that two Heretics, whereof the one was called Raymond, the other Bennet,
having appeared before the Pope's Legate, it was witnessed against them, that
they had been heard to preach that there were two Gods, the one good, and the
other evil; that Priests could not consecrate the Holy Host; that married
Persons could not be saved if they had to do with their Wives; that Baptism is
not necessary to Infants, and many other Heresies, which they would never
acknowledge, notwithstanding all the Witnesses that appeared against them; but
said, they were false Witnesses, and that they believed what the Catholic
Religion engages us to believe. But notwithstanding these their solemn
Protestations, they further object against them all the Consequences of
Manicheism, as natural Inferences from the former Opinions, of which they
pretended that they had convicted them by Witnesses. This probably was the rise
of those fine Controversies we find in Alanus Magnus, and other Polemical
Writers who copied him.

5. They have been charged with forswearing themselves before a Court of
Justice without scruple, though at the same time they are accused for
maintaining that every Lie is a mortal Sin. This is done by Alanus, who falls
upon them very heavily upon that account.

6. They are accused of being Arians, though Alanus distinguishes them, and
that the Popish Priests ought rather to be accused of favoring Manicheism and
Arianism, than the Albigenses, who subtly disputed against these Heresies.

But it will be easy to refute these Calumnies, by the Conference of Montreal,
in the year 1206, related by the Monk of Vaux Cernay. It was offered to the
Bishops by the Albigenses, under certain Conditions, That there should be
Moderators appointed on both sides, Men of Authority, able to hinder any Tumult
or Sedition: Also, that the Place where the Conference was to be, might be free
and safe for all those that should assist at it: Moreover, that the Subjects to
be disputed upon, should be agreed to by joint consent, and not to be quitted
till they were wholly discussed; and that those that could not maintain their
Opinions by the Word of God, should be looked upon as overcome. The Bishops and
Monks accepted of all these Conditions. The Place they agreed upon, was
Montreal near Carcasson, in the year 1206; the Moderators agreed on on both
sides, were B. of Villeneufve, and B. of Auxerre for the Bishops, and for the
Albigenses, R. de Bot, and Anthony Riviere; Arnoldus Hot the Pastor of the
Albigenses, accompanied with those that were thought fit for this Action,
appeared first at the Place and Time assigned; and afterward came the Bishop
of Ozma, and the Monk Dominic a Spaniard, with two of the Pope's Legates, Peter
Castle, and Radulphus de Lust, Abbot of Candets, P. Bertrand Prior of Anterive,
as also the Prior of Palate, and several other Priests and Monks.

The Theses propounded by Arnoldus, were, That the Mass and Transubstantiation
were the Invention of Men, and not the Ordinance of Jesus Christ or his
Apostles.

That the Church of Rome was not the Spouse of Christ, but the Church of
Confusion, drunk with the Blood of the Martyrs.

That the Polity of the Church of Rome was neither good nor holy, nor
established by Jesus Christ.

Arnaud sent these Propositions to the Bishop, who demanded a Fortnight to
prepare his Answer, which was granted. At the Day appointed the Bishop failed
not to appear with a large Writing; whereupon Arnaud Hot desired leave to be
heard upon the Spot, extempore, declaring that he would answer all the
Particulars contained in the said Writing, desiring the Auditors not to be
tired, if he took up some time in answering so long a Discourse; they promised
he should be heard with Attention and Patience, without the least Interruption.
He discoursed at several Hours, for four days together, with so much Admiration
of the Assistants, and Dexterity on his Part, that all the Bishops, Abbots,
Monks and Priests, could have been willing to have been farther off; for he
deduced his Answer according to the several Points laid down in that Writing,
with so much Order and Perspicuity, that he made his Auditors perceive, that
though the Bishop had writ much, yet he had concluded nothing that could be
made use of, to the Advantage of the Church of Rome, against these Propositions.

This done, Arnaud demanded, that since the Bishops and he stood engaged to one
another at the beginning of their Conference, to prove their Assertions by the
Word of God alone, the Bishops and Priests might be commanded to prove the
Authority of the Mass, as it was sung in Churches, piece by piece, that it was
instituted by the Son of God, and sung in the same manner by his Apostles,
beginng at the Introit, as they call it, to the Ite missa est: but the Bishops
could not prove that any of those Parts had been instituted for that Purpose by
Christ or by his Apostles. Here it was that the Bishops were covered with Shame
and Regret, for Arnaud had reduced them to the single Canon, which they
pretended was the best Piece of the Mass; where he proved that the Holy Supper
of the Lord was not the Mass, saying, that if the Mass were the Lord's Supper,
there would be all after Consecration, that there was before in the Lord's
Supper: Whereas, said he, in your Mass there is no Bread, for by
Transubstantiation the Bread vanishes; wherefore the Mass being without Bread,
cannot be the Supper of the Lord, wherein all know there is Bread. Jesus Christ
brake Bread, Saint Paul brake Bread, the Priest breaks the Body, not Bread,
therefore the Priest neither does what Jesus Christ, nor what St. Paul did. As
Arnaud was about to proceed in these Antitheses, between the Lord's Supper and
the Mass, to prove that it was neither of Christ's nor of the Apostles
Institution, the Monks, Bishops, Legates and Priests thought fit to withdraw
themselves, being resolved to hear no more, for fear they might fix Impressions
on those that were by, which might extremely shake their Belief of the Mass.

The Monk of Vaux Cernay endeavored to render this Action suspected, in
saying, that when these heretical Judges perceived the Weakness of their Cause,
and the Misfortune of engaging in such a Dispute, they refused to pronounce any
Judgment concerning it, as likewise to restore us our own Writings, for fear,
adds he, they might come to be published, but restored the Heretics theirs.
But how could two of the Pope's Legates, and so many Bishops, Abbots, Monks and
Priests suffer themselves to be drawn into a Place, there to be thus abused and
tricked? The Monk himself says in the same place, that the Heads of the
Heretics came to meet with the Catholics at the Castle of Montreal, to
dispute with them: the Catholics therefore were in Possession of the Castle;
there could be therefore no Opportunity of foul Play, nor of any such Violence;
neither was it necessary, that the Moderators should pronounce their Judgment
in a Case of Dispute, seeing they hold that no other Judgment is necessary, but
that of the Pope, who cannot err. Besides, how could this Monk know that the
Albigenses were overcome, seeing that no Sentence was given.

Perrin could have given us a faithful Extract of this Conference, because
himself observes, that it had been brought to him from the Albigenses, by Mr.
Rafur, Minister of the Church of Montreal, in an old Manuscript: From whence,
though he does not express it in so many Words, I judge that he reduced the
Points in Question between the Albigenses and the Church of Rome, to six
Articles.

I. Article. The Doctrines which they asserted in opposition to the Church of
Rome, were, That the Church of Rome was not the Holy Church, nor the Spouse of
Christ, but that it was a Church which had drunk in the Doctrine of Devils; the
Whore of Babylon which St. John describes in the Revelations, the Mother of
Fornications and Abominations, covered with the Blood of the Saints.

II. That the Mass was neither instituted by Christ nor his Apostles, but a
humane Invention.

III. That the Prayers of the Living are unprofitable for the Dead.

IV. That the Purgatory maintained in the Church of Rome, is no better than a
human Invention, to satisfy the Avarice of the Priests.

V. That the Saints ought not to be prayed unto.

VI. That Transubstantiation is a human Invention, and erroneous Doctrine; and
that the worshipping of the Bread is manifest Idolatry.

That therefore it was necessary to separate from the Church of Rome, in which
the contrary was said and taught, because one cannot assist at the Mass,
without partaking of the Idolatry there practiced, nor expect Salvation by any
other means than by Jesus Christ, nor transfer to Creatures the Honor which is
due to the Creator; nor say concerning the Bread that it is God, and worship it
as such, without incurring the Pain of eternal Damnation, because Idolaters
shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. For all these things therefore which
they asserted, they have been hated and persecuted to Death.

This Account of the Conference of Montreal, which I have copied from Perrin,
is enough in my Judgment fully to refute any Scruple that might remain in the
Mind of a Reader, who reads in Roger Hoveden the Letters of Peter Cardinal of
St. Chrysogon, writ in the Year 1178, which testify, that the Manichees of
Toulouse had been convicted by the Confession which many of them had made of
the greatest part of the Articles of that Heresy. It is very visible that it
was upon the Authority of these Letters, or upon some Informations of this
Nature, that Alanus, who was born at Lisle in Flanders, and who had spent the
greatest part of his time at the University of Paris, has built his Catalogue
of the Heresies which he refutes in his Treatise against the Albigenses,
whereof I have given an Extract in the foregoing Chapter.

So that it is necessary to suppose one of these three things, Either that the
Earl Raymond of Toulouse, and those whom he protected, were really Manichees,
as they are accused to be by the Pope's Legates, by the Bishops, and by Peter of
Vaux Cernay, who sets down this Accusation and the forced Confessions of the
Albigenses, who own themselves to be Manichees; or that the Albigenses who were
the Disciples of Peter de Bruys, and of Henry, that were no Manichees, had gone
over to that Sect toward the End of the 12 th Century, and afterward again
become Petrobusians and Henricians at the Beginning of the 13 th, as it plainly
appears they then were, from the Conference of Montreal, where they freely
proposed their Opinions, entirely opposite to Manicheism; or that the Legates
and Monks that persecuted them with Fire and Sword, were great Impostors, in
taking Advantage against them from some Confessions extorted from Manichees,
who were here and there scattered in those Diocesses, and which they made use
of to animate the People of the Roman Communion, and to engage the Princes and
Bishops of all places to exterminate without Mercy a sort of People, who
utterly subverted all the Rules of Morality, which is the Band of Society, and
all the Principles of both natural and Christian Religion.

CHAP. XVIII. Reflections on the Convictions of Manicheism, which were said to
be proved upon the Albigenses.
ONE of the most plausible Objections that can be made against the Purity of
the Faith of the Albigenses, is the Testimony of the Inquisitors, who have
filled their Trials with plain Confessions which several Albigenses, judged and
condemned by them, have made of sundry Errors of the Manichees. I shall produce
an Extract of the Acts of the Inquisition of Toulouse, which are in the Hands
of Mr. Wetstein Bookseller at Amsterdam, as it was sent me out of Holland, and
which was made by a Man of great Reputation. The Albigenses, says he, held
some Opinions, in common with the Vaudois; as, That to a Christian all Oaths
are unlawful; that the Confession of Sins, made to the Priests of the Church of
Rome, is wholly unprofitable; and that neither the Pope, nor any one else in
the Romish Church, can absolve any Man of Sin: but that they have power to
absolve all those from their Sins, who will join themselves to their Sect, by
the Laying on of Hands. This last Clause is also laid to the charge of the
Vaudois; viz. That they have Power from God alone, as the Apostles had, to hear
Confessions both of Men and Women that believe them; and of imposing Penance
upon such as confess to them, as Fasting, and several Repetitions of the Lord's
Prayer, whereupon they absolve their Penitents: and that this Absolution and
Penance is as available to the Salvation of their Souls, as if they had been
confessed to their own Priest. (That here is some wresting or mutilation of the
Opinion of the Vaudois, is manifest from the Confession of a certain Woman,
who, as we read, declared her Faith to this purpose; That God alone forgives
Sin, and that he to whom Confession of Sins is made, gives only his Advice what
the Person ought to do, and so enjoins Penance, which any wise and prudent Man
may do, whether he be a Priest or no.) That the Opinions of the Albigenses that
were proper to them were, that there be two Lords, the one Good and the other
Evil: That the Body of Christ is not in the Eucharist, but only mere Bread:
That Baptism is of no use. One of the Albigenses was said to believe, that the
Baptism of Water celebrated by the Church, stands Infants in no stead, because
they did not consent to the Sacrament, but cried at the receiving of it. ( I
believe, says he, who examined these Acts, that they denied Baptism to be the
Instrument of Regeneration; or perhaps they might be against Infant Baptism.)
That an external Anointing of the Sick, with material Oil, was of no use. That
the Orders of the Church of Rome, had no Power of binding and loosing, since
they themselves, who conferred them, were great Sinners. That Marriage is
always joined with Sin, and never can be without Sin, and that it could never
have been instituted by the good God. That our Lord did not assume a real
humane Body, and true Flesh of our Nature, and that he did not truly, but only
in Likeness, rise again in the same, and perform the other Works of our
Salvation; and that he never really ascended to the right hand of the Father.
They deny the Resurrection of the Body; (but in the Declaration of Petrus
Anterius, a chief Teacher amongst them; this is more clearly and distinctly
explained; that they feign that certain spiritual Bodies, and a certain
internal Man, should rise again in such sort of Bodies. And elsewhere, they
express themselves, that though the Souls of Men shall come to Judgment, yet
they shall not come in their own Bodies). They said, that the Souls of Men were
Spirits, which fell from Heaven for their Sins; so that they seem to have
believed the pre-existence of Souls. Man (they say) must not worship what he
eats. Moreover, it is ascribed to them, that they believe Man is saved, by the
Laying on of Hands, which they confer on their Believers, and that by the same
means, all Sins are forgiven without Confession and Satisfaction. That they can
bestow the Holy Ghost for Salvation, upon those whom they receive. That the
Virgin Mary never was a carnal Woman, but their Church, which they say is true
Repentance, and that this is the Virgin Mary. (The very Obscurity of these
Words, shows that this Opinion is wrested; because it is better expressed in
another place thus, That God never entered the Womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
and that he only is the Mother, Brother, and Sister of God, who keeps the
Commandments of God the Father.) These are said to be the Doctrines of the
Albigenses, whereof none are ascribed to the Waldenses, but others different
from these, whereof we find no mention made in the Opinions of the Albigenses;
and they are these; That all Judgment is forbid by God, and that it is contrary
to the divine Prohibition, for any Judge, in any Cause whatsoever, to judge or
sentence any Man to Punishment or Death. That Indulgencies granted by the
Prelates of the Church of Rome, are of no use or efficacy. That there is no
Purgatory for Souls after this Life; and that consequently the Prayers and
Suffrages of Believers for the Dead, are of no use to them. That the Soul when
it departs from the Body, goes either to Paradise or Hell. That there are no
more than three Orders in the Church, of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

From these Acts, it appears how much the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Albigenses differed from those practiced by the Vaudois. Besides, says the
Author of the Extract, the Rites and Institutions of them both were very
different. Of the Albigenses there were two Sorts, some who professed their
Faith and Rites, and they were called perfect or comforted: others who had
entered into a Covenant with the former Sort, called Perfect, which they call la
Convenenza, the Agreement, that at the end of their Life, they should be
received by them into their Sect. This Reception is frequently called by them
Exercise, and is performed in this manner; The Benedicite or the Blessing
conferred upon one Molinerius when he was sick. Bernard Goes one of the
Albigenses, held the Hands of the sick Person between his own Hands; and
besides, held a certain Book over him, wherein he read the Gospel of St. John,
In the Beginning was the Word; and delivered to the sick Person a fine Thread
to tie about him as a Mark that he was admitted into their Heresy: upon some
others it is said, that they laid a white Linen Cloth, and besides that many
Genuflections were performed by the Bedside. This Reception was supposed to
save the Soul of him who was received, and was called a Spiritual Baptism or
Consolation, a Reception, and a good End, and sometimes a Melioration, by means
of which they believed that the Person was sanctified; so that it was not
lawful for a Woman to touch any one that was thus received. Now, because it
might sometime happen that the Person thus received, after his recovery, might
relapse into his former Defilements, therefore they always deferred this
Reception till the extremest Weakness, when there was no longer hopes of Life,
for fear they might afterward lose the Good they had received. For which reason
also some sick Persons amongst them, though the Person who thus initiated them
was already come, yet were not received, because they were not believed to be
at the point of Death. But they who were thus received in their Sickness, were
commanded to put themselves upon Hardship, that is, to hasten their own Death,
by abstaining from all Meat: and there are several Examples of those, who are
said to have killed themselves, not only with Fasting, but by opening of a
Vein, wounding of themselves, yea and sometimes too, by drinking Poison. But
others who had no mind to submit themselves to so hard a Law, refused to be
received, though this their Teacher was come for that purpose. They had also a
peculiar Way of saluting, by way of embracing one another, laying their Hands
on each side of one another, and turning their Head to both Shoulders, saying
each time Benedicite: which kind of Salutation seems to have been usual amongst
them, because it is to be met with in several Accounts of their Opinions; and
sometimes it was performed with bended Knees, sometimes with their Hands let
down to the Ground. Which Salutation was sometimes called Melioration. Neither
did they only require this Salutation from those who were received, but from
them also who were called Perfect amongst them, and received others, observed
the same way of Salutation. We read also in many of their Books, that such a
one did eat of the Blessed Bread of the Heretics; and in some it is added, And
saw the Manner of blessing it; but what that Manner was, is no where described,
neither is any Circumstance added, from whence it might be gathered, whether
they blessed the common Bread at their Dinners and Suppers, or whether this was
only a Ceremony used by them at the celebrating of the Lord's Supper. Though it
is added in one place, that they call this blessed Bread, the Bread of Prayer.
Three days in the Week they keep a Fast with Bread and Water. But we do not
read that any of these things were observed by the Waldenses, but what was
vastly different, as, That they had some Elders of their own: That even Laymen
bless the Table before and after Meat; they pray kneeling, and bowing
themselves to the Ground. It is usual for them to bless the Table. They profess
to observe Apostolical Poverty. And besides, they are said to differ from the
common Conversation of other Believers in their Life and Manners. These are the
chief things we meet with in this Book concerning the Albigenses and Waldenses;
for there is no mention made of the Opinions of any other Party. This is the
Extract which was sent me, with some Passages, wherein the Author gives his own
Judgment.

One would think, that nothing could be of greater force to convict the
Albigenses of Manicheism, especially if we consider, that Emericus in his
Directory for the Inquisitors, ascribes almost the very same Opinions to the
Manichees of Italy. Par. 2. cap. 14.


But I have three Things to say, to take off this Prejudice; the first is, That
nothing ought to be more suspected by us than these Acts of the Inquisition;
for he that is a Murderer, is certainly a Liar and a Knave. I have showed in
my Remarks upon the History of the Valleys of Piedmont, that nothing can be
conceived more false than the Carriage of the Inquisitors, and that they never
pretended to any thing less than to Faithfulness in their Accounts of things.

This appears from the Trials of the Waldenses, whom the Monks have endeavored
to make the most infamous Heretics; and yet in the mean time, if we will
believe the Bishop of Meaux, they were very far from being Manichees. What
Authority therefore can the Testimonies of the Inquisitors have against the
Albigenses, since the Bishop himself acknowledges that they can be of no
Authority against the Waldenses, who have been no less accused of Manicheism,
than the Albigenses themselves?

Now that the Reader may be thoroughly convinced of the Justice of this our
denying to admit these Testimonies of the Inquisitors, and Emericus in
particular, I might alledg here what Emericus has said of the Eternal Gospel,
attributed commonly to John of Crema, the seventh General of the Cordeliers.
Natalis Alexander saecul. xiii, and xiv. page 322, 323.
This Book contained the most horrid Propositions imaginable, and yet now it is
pretended, that he was overborn by a Cabal of the Inquisition, and they
endeavor to justify him against all the Accusations of Emericus. But I can do
more than this, for I have received from a Friend of Mr. G. Advocate of N. an
Extract of the Acts of the Inquisition of Toulouse, which may serve as a
Pattern to judge of their other Trials, which are found in that Register, where
there is scarce any thing of these Accusations: The Extract runs thus: Anno
Domini 1283. 8o Idus Julii, Guilhelmus de Maunhaco filius quondam Guilhelmi
Arloyer de Maunhaco Diocesis Aniciensis, eductus de carcere Inquisitorum
constitutus in praesentia fratris Joannis Vigorosi, ordinis Praedicatorum,
Inquisitoris haereticae pravitatis, requisitus per dictum Inquisitorem quod
juraret ad sancta Dei Evangelia, ut veritatem diceret de fide sua, respondit,
quod non juraret: Inquisitus, si erat ei licitum jurare super sancta Dei
Evangelia, respondit, quod non. Inquisitus si Papa Ecclesiae Romanae Dominus
Martinus qui nunc est, habet potestatem ligandi atque solvendi, respondit, quod
non. Inquisitus si Ecclesia Romana, cui praeest Papa, sit caput fidei,
respondit, quod nec Papa, nec Ecclesia cui praeest, est caput fidei, nec
Christianitatis, nec agnoscit, nec credit aliquem hominem carnalem esse Papam
nisi Iesum Christum. Inquisitus si Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and alii
Ecclesiarum Praelati per Romanam Ecclesiam ordinati sunt very Praelati, and si
habent potestatem ligandi atque solvendi, respondit, quod non. Inquisitus si
aliquis baptizatur, ita quod baptizans dicat, Ego te baptizo in nomine Patris,
and Filii, and Spiritus sancti, Amen, valeat baptizato, and si per talem
Baptismum habet remissionem peccatorum, respondit, quod non credit, quod
aliquis carnalis homo possit baptizare nisi solus Deus. Inquisitus si
Sacramentum confirmationis quod confert Episcopus quando confirmat, valet
confirmato, respondit, quod nihil valet ei, nec Sacramentum est, nec ille qui
confert Sacramentum est Episcopus, nec aliquid potest. Inquisitus si
Sacramentum extremae Vnctionis valet infirmo, quando ei ministratur a
Sacerdote, respondit, quod non credit quod valeat ei, nec quod sit Sacramentum.
Inquisitus si Sacramentum ordinis collatum ab Episcopo valet aliquid, and si
est Sacramentum, respondit, quod nihil valet, nec est Sacramentum, nec
Episcopus potest aliquod Sacramentum confer. Inquisitus si panis quem
Sacerdos tenet in manibus suis dum celebrat, postquam sacerdos protulit verba
consecrationis, Hoc est corpus meum, remanet panis; respondit, quod panis erat
ante, and panis remanet post, and quod magna injuria fit Deo, quod panis
commutetur in corpus Christi. Inquisitus si verba sacerdotis absolventis
aliquem ei confessum de peccatis, dicendo, Ego te absolvo ab omnibus peccatis
tuis, valent confesso; respondit, quod nihil valent confesso, nec est
Sacramentum. Inquisitus si est licitum jurare super sancta Dei Evangelia in
aliquo casu, dixit quod non. Inquisitus si Rex Franciae qui nunc est, comburit
vel facit comburi aliquem pro crimine Haeresis, vel facit suspendi aliquem pro
aliquo crimine, peccet, respondit, quod peccat, nec est ei licitum facere
vindictam nec justitiam. Item requisitus si vult credere Sacramenta Ecclesiae
Romanae sicut nos credimus, and sicut Ecclesia Romana praedicat and observat,
respondit, quod nihil aliud crederet nisi quod superius dixit. Haec deposuit
Tholosae coram fratre Laurentio Aurelianensi, and dicto fratre Johanne Vigoroso
Inquisitore, in praesentia and testimonio fratris Arnaldi Del Gras, fratris
Bertrandi Jacobi, and fratris Raymundi Navarrii ordinis fratrum Praedicatorum,
and Juliani Vasconii publici Tholosae Notarii, qui haec scripsit. In the Year
of our Lord 1283, the 8 th of the Ides of July, William of Maunhaco, formerly
the Son of William Arloyer of Maunhaco, of the Diocese of Anecy, being brought
out of the Prison of the Inquisitors, and set in the Presence of Brother John
Vigorosus, of the Order of Preachers, an Inquisitor of heretical Pravity, being
demanded by the said Inquisitor to swear by the Holy Gospels, that he would
declare the Truth concerning his Faith: he answered, that he would not swear.
Being demanded, whether it were lawful for him to swear upon the Holy Gospels?
he answered, No. Being demanded, whether Lord Martin, the present Pope of the
Church of Rome, has the Power of binding and loosing: he answered, No. Being
demanded, whether the Church of Rome, over which the Pope presides, be the Head
of the Faith? he answered, That neither the Pope, nor the Church he presides
over, is Head of the Faith, or of the Christian World: neither does he own or
believe that any carnal Man can be Pope, but only Jesus Christ. Being demanded,
whether Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates of Churches, ordained by the
Church of Rome, were true Prelates, and whether they have the Power of binding
and loosing? he answered, No. Being demanded, whether if any one be baptized,
the Baptizer saying, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, Amen; whether this be of Efficacy to the Party baptized;
and whether by such Baptism he can obtain Remission of his Sins? he answered,
That he did not believe that any carnal Man can baptize, but God alone. Being
demanded, whether the Sacrament of Confirmation, which the Bishop confers, be
of any Use to the Person confirmed? he answered, That it was of no Use at all;
neither is it a Sacrament; neither is he who confers it a Bishop, nor has the
Power to do any thing. Being demanded, whether the Sacrament of extreme
Unction, be of any Use to the Sick, when it is administered to him by a Priest?
he answered, That he did not believe that it did him any good, or that it is a
Sacrament. Being demanded, whether the Sacrament of Orders conferred by the
Bishop, were of any Use, and whether it be a Sacrament? he answered, That it is
of no Use; neither is it a Sacrament; neither can a Bishop confer any
Sacrament. Being demanded, whether the Bread which the Priest holds in his
Hands, whilst he celebrates, after he has pronounced the Words of
Consecration, This is my Body, still remains Bread? he answered, That it was
Bread before, and continued Bread still, and that it was a great Injury to God,
to say that the Bread is changed into the Body of Christ. Being examined,
whether the Words of a Priest, whereby he absolves one that has confessed his
Sins, saying, I absolve thee of all thy Sins, be of any Use to the Party
confessed? he answered, That they were of no Use, neither is it a Sacrament.
Being examined, whether it be lawful to swear upon the Holy Gospels of God, in
any Case? he answered, No. Being examined, whether the King of France that now
is, by burning, or causing any one to be burnt for the Crime of Heresy, or by
hanging any other Criminal, does Sin? he answered, He does; and that it is not
lawful for him to execute Vengeance, or do Justice. Also being examined,
whether he was willing to believe the Sacraments of the Church of Rome, as we
believe, and as the Church of Rome preaches and observes? he answered, That he
believes nothing but what he had said before. These things he deposed at
Toulouse, before Brother Laurence of Orleans, and the foresaid Brother John
Vigorosus the Inquisitor; in the Presence of the Witnesses Brother Arnold Del
Gras, Brother Bertrand James, and Brother Raymond Navarr, of the Order of
Friars Preachers; and of Julian Vascon, public Notary of Toulouse, who wrote
this.

The Letter which Mr. G. writ to my Friend, concluded with these Words. I must
not forget to tell you, that according to my Copy, the Albigenses said of
themselves, that they were de illis qui non reddebant malum pro malo, of those
who did not render Evil for Evil; that boni homines, good Men were their
Ministers. The Formality they observed when they made a Proselyte, was this,
Haereticaverunt eum ponentes librum and manus super caput ejus, and
interrogantes eum si volebat se reddere Deo and Evangelio. They made him a
Heretic by laying a Book, and their Hands upon his Head, and asking him,
whether he were willing to surrender himself to God and the Gospel? I have
observed from several Passages, that on this occasion they were used to read
more particularly the Gospel according to St. John, and that after these
Solemnities the Proselytes adorabant dictos bonos homines, flexis ter genibus,
dicendo, Benedicite; Haereticis respondentibus, Deus vos benedicat; Paid their
Reverence to these good Men, by thrice bending of the Knee, saying, Give us
your Blessing: the Heretics answering, God bless you. The Inquisitors call the
Proselytes and those that are born Albigenses, Heretics.

It is easy to judge by this Specimen, that it is almost impossible to give any
Credit to the Deposition of Inquisitors, concerning the Matters, which they
say, they have made the Albigenses confess; and that therefore this pretended
Conviction of the Albigenses, by the Registers of the Inquisitors, is
absolutely null.

The second thing that I am to represent to the Reader, is, that the Testimony
of the Inquisitors cannot be set against the contrary Confessions of the
Albigenses, which those who have read, find very conformable to the Faith of
the Protestants. This is that which Paradin affirms in his Annals of Burgundy,
where he confesses that he has read some Histories, which excuse the
Albigenses, with their Princes and Lords, of all those Crimes which many have
cast upon them, affirming them to be wholly innocent, as having never done any
thing else, but reprove the Vices and Abuses of the Prelates of the Church of
Rome.

This is also acknowledged by James de Ribera, in his Collections concerning
the City of Toulouse. Catal. Testium veritat. page 446.
In these times there were frequent Disputes held with the Heretics several
times at Viride Folium, and at Pamiers; but the famous Disputation was at
Montreal, where two Noblemen were chosen Arbitrators, Bernardus de Villa nova,
and Bernardus Arrensis; and two of the Commons, Raimond Godius, and Arnoldus
Ribera; but they who were accounted Heretics, could not agree about any thing;
the Names of the chiefest of them were these, Ponticus Jordanus, Arnoldus
Aurisanus, Arnoldus Othonus, Philibertus Casliensis, Benedictus Thermus. They
all constantly affirmed, that the Church of Rome was not the Holy Church, nor
the Spouse of Christ, but a Church that had imbibed the Doctrine of Devils;
that she was that Babylon which St. John describes in the Revelation, the
Mother of Fornications and Abominations, covered over with the Blood of the
Saints: That what the Church of Rome approved of, was not approved by the Lord:
That the Mass was neither instituted by Christ, nor by his Apostles, but was
merely a human Invention.

The same has been owned by Carolus Molineus the Glory of the Bar of France,
who declares that the Albigenses of Provence taught this very thing expressly,
in the Reign of Lewis XII, which was afterward taught by those of the Reformed
Religion in France. This Testimony is alleged by Camerarius in his Historical
Account of the Brethren of Bohemia. This obliged Vignier, in his Historical
Library, to contemn all the Calumnies cast upon the Albigenses. In his Account
of the year 1206, he relates, that a Gascon, a Man of Reputation, assured him,
that he had read one of their Confessions in the old Gascon Language, which was
preached before the late Chancellor de l' Hospital, a little before the second
Troubles of France, which had not one word of these Opinions, but only those
Articles, which we formerly ascribed to the Waldenses. Amongst which they
expressly declared, that they received the Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, and that they rejected every Doctrine that was not grounded upon, or
authorized by them, or was contrary to any one Point of Doctrine that may be
found there. According to which Maxim, they confessed that they rejected and
condemned all the Ceremonies, Traditions, and Ordinances of the Church of Rome,
which they declared to be a Den of Thieves, and the Whore that is spoken of in
the Revelation. Upon which account also, the Colloquies, Disputes, and
Conferences, which the Legates of the Pope, and their Commissioners, had
together, were only upon these Points, as we shall prove by the Testimony of
James de Ribera, in his Book entitled, Collectanea Tholosae.
His Collections about the City of Toulouse.

The third Thing that we are to observe, is, that this Conformity of Faith
between the Waldenses and the Albigenses, has made many People take them for
the very same.

I suppose there is no Reader that is ever so little just, but will allow me to
make a very great difference between the Accounts of the Inquisitors, and the
Truth. The Inquisitors make the Albigenses guilty of the Errors of the Cathari
and Manichees, as if they had been all one, and that they had exactly answered
the Description which is given us of them in the Directory of the Inquisitors,
by Emericus. Par. 2. p. 13.
But we have other ways of knowing, from their own Confessions of Faith, that
they were not at all polluted by Manicheism; and the most part of those
Authors, that have writ with any degree of Honesty, call them Waldenses,
because they held the same Faith and Opinions.

The same Authors acknowledge, that it was against the Waldenses that St.
Bernard preached in Languedock; and that it is with them, whom they
promiscuously call Albigenses, that those Conferences were held, which the
Bishop of Meaux owns to have been held with the Albigenses. This is
acknowledged by James de Ribera Counselor of State, in his Collections
concerning the City of Toulouse, that are set down in the Catalogue of the
Witnesses of the Truth. P. 446. of the Strasburg Edition in 1562.
This is owned by Gretzer the Jesuit, in his Prolegomena to the Authors who
have written concerning the Sect of the Waldenses, where he acknowledges that
the Waldenses and Albigenses were the same, and were called insabbatati,
because of their Shoes: And that the Albigenses and Waldenses differ only in
their Names. Cardinal Hosius also had the fame Notion of them, in his Book
concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, where he speaks of the Henricians
and Petrobusians. This was the Opinion of Andrew Favin in his History of
Navarre, where he says, that the Heresy of the Albigenses, is otherwise termed
the Heresy of the Waldenses. Genebrard in his Chronology says expressly, that
the Fathers of the Calvinists were the Petrobusians, the Henricians, and the
Albigenses; and it is well known, that the Calvinists are no Manichees. Catel
in his History of Toulouse, Lib. 2. page 121, and 231.
acknowledges that the Henricians were the Forerunners of the Albigenses, and
that they had not this Name till after the Council of Alby, in the year 1178.

CHAP. XIX. Whether the Albigenses were Manichees, because they accused the
Pope of being the Antichrist.
AS one Day gives Light to another, so the Bishop of Meaux has at last
discovered that the Accusation charged upon the Pope by the Albigenses, as
being the Antichrist, was a Character of Manicheism. He thought fit to reveal
this great Secret to the World, in his History of the Variations, and
afterward he makes it an express Character of Manicheism, in his Explication
of the Revelation. But saving the Reverence due to this Prelate, there is
nothing falser, nothing that seems more to be raving.

For, 1. Has he found this Character of the Manichees in the Writings of
Archelaus Bishop of Mesopotamia, which the late Mr. Bigosa has communicated to
the Public; or in St. Cyril of Jerusalem, who confutes the Manichees in his
Catechetick Lectures?

2. Has he found any thing like it in the Writings of St. Epiphanius, who has
given us so large a Catalogue of their Heresies?

3. Has he found any thing to this purpose in St. Augustine, who has writ so
many Books against these Madmen; or in St. Leo, in his Epistle to Turribius
Bishop of Tarracon?

4. Has he found any such thing in the Treatise of Predestinatus concerning
Heresies, published by Sirmondus?

5. Has he found this Character of the Manichees in any of those Authors that
have written since, as in Isidore of Sevill, in Johannes Damascenus, in the
Catalogue of Heresies, published by Cotelerius?

6. Has he found any thing to this purpose in Petrus Siculus, who lived in the
9 th Century, and who conversed and disputed at Tibrica with the Manichees,
Historia de ortu, progressu, and occasu Manichaeorum. Bibl. Patr. Edit. Lugd.
Tom. 16.
whose Opinions he sets down?

All the Greek Authors which speak of the Manichees, before and after the 9 th
Century, and all the Latin Authors, without so much as excepting one only, know
of no such thing; who could therefore discover this Character of Manicheism to
the Bishop?

We must conclude that the Bishop, who has made a Discovery which none of the
Ancients, no nor Modern Writers neither, whether Papists or Protestants, have
been able to make, must have had it from the Revelation of some Angel, albus an
ater nescio; since he speaks so very positively of this new Character of the
Manichees.

But, says he, the case is plain, the Albigenses were Manichees, and they
called the Pope the Antichrist, and with an invincible Obstinacy have
maintained that this Title belongs to him; wherefore it must follow, that this
Accusation of the Pope must be a Character of Manicheism.

If the Bishop had reflected never so little upon what he here asserts, this
single Character of the Albigenses, who accused the Pope of being the
Antichrist, would have made him draw a quite contrary Consequence, that is to
say, that the Albigenses could not be Manichees.

For it is most certain, that the Manichees never taught any such thing; this
Heresy which sprung up in the East, never attacked the Bishop of Rome in
particular, but the whole Body of Christians, who received the Books of the Old
Testament, and who owned the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be the Creator
of the World.

But whence comes it then, may some say, that the Albigenses have peculiarly
affected to call the Pope Antichrist? which certainly must be looked upon a
Character of the Albigenses, unless we should find it to be a Character of the
Manichees, as the Bishop of Meaux pretends.

The question would not have been so difficult to resolve, had not the Bishop
affected to appear ignorant in a Question which he ought to have enquired into,
since he has undertaken to handle it in a Commentary on purpose.

In a word, France, which first bestowed upon the Popes the temporal Dominions
they now enjoy, long since owned the Pope to be the Antichrist. For Gregory I,
having declared in twelve several Letters written against the Patriarch of
Constantinople, who assumed the Title of Universal Bishop, that whoever claimed
that Title for himself, was either the Antichrist, or the Forerunner of him: It
was not long after, that Pope Boniface III, persuaded Phocas to give him the
Title of Universal, which all his Successors took up afterward with joy, and
affected to use it: For which reason the French, fearing lest they should fail
of the respect which they had for St. Gregory, if they should accuse themselves
of having so often made use of a false Way of reasoning, at last called the
Pope Antichrist.

They were not therefore Manichees that were come from the East, in the 11 th
Century, to settle themselves in the West, who first set on foot this
Accusation: but they were the French, who in a full Council at Rheims, after
the 10 th Century, called the Pope Antichrist.

Seguinus Archbishop of Sens, having maintained that Arnulphus Bishop of
Rheims, could not be deposed without the consent of the Pope; Arnulphus Bishop
of Orleans, who had the greatest Reputation of any Man of his Time, solidly
maintained from the Canons and Customs of the Church, that the Pope's Sentence
was not to be waited for in that Case; Ab eo responsa petere, marmora consulere
est; To desire an Answer from him, is to consult the Stones; speaking to the
Assembly of the Council. He further says, Who do you think that Man is, who
sits in his high Chair? he is, answers he, the Antichrist, who sits in the
Temple of God, and shows himself as God. And the rest of his Discourse is a
sufficient Evidence, that he took the Pope to be the Antichrist, and that he
acknowledged that the Mystery of Iniquity was then coming in upon the Church.
It was Gerbertus, afterward Pope, that digested the Acts of that Council, and
who in an Epistle to Seguinus Archbishop of Sens, makes it appear, that in his
time they were not much concerned for the Pope's Excommunications, and that it
was not pretended that he was the Center of Christian Communion. Non est ergo
(says he) danda occasio nostris aemulis, ne Sacerdotium quod ubique unum est,
sicut Ecclesia una est, ita uni subjici videatur, ut eo pecunia, gratia, metu,
vel ignorantia corrupto, nemo sacerdos esse possit, nisi quem hae virtutes
commendaverint: We ought not therefore to give an Opportunity to our Rivals,
lest the Priesthood, which is everywhere one and the same, as the Church is
one, should come to be so subjected to one, as that he being corrupted with
Money, Favor, Fear, or Ignorance, no Man should be able to obtain that Order,
except he had these Virtues to recommend him. Here we see the true Style of the
Albigenses, before ever any Manichee was come from the East into France.

Now after this was once set on foot, it was maintained from Century to
Century, by those who were brought up, and that died in the Communion of the
Church of Rome. It would be an easy matter to give a Catalogue of those who
have spoke at this rate, to show what heed there is to be given to the most
positive Assertions of the Bishop of Meaux.

If the Bishop of Meaux, in the least desired to undeceive himself, he need
only read what Aventinus says in his Annals of Bavaria, Lib. 6.
of Pope Gregory VII, who there is termed Antichrist, by Persons who were very
far from being Manichees: he need only read in the Acts of the Life of Paschal
II, what the Bishop of Florence openly preached concerning this Matter; Cent.
12. Magdeburg.
or to read in the Life of Richard I, written by Roger Hoveden, what Abbot
Joachim maintained before Richard I, without being ever accused of Manicheism;
or he may take notice in Matthew Paris, upon the year 1253, what Notions Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, one of the greatest Bishops of his time,
maintained: or he may peruse the Revelations of St. Brigit, Lib. 1. cap. 41.
and the 16 th Epistle of Petrarch, in his second Tome. And yet never were any
of these Persons accused of Manicheism. But this has been treated of at large
already by Wolfius in his Various Lections; and besides, this would lead us too
far from the Subject we are upon at present.

I shall content my self therefore with observing three things concerning this
matter.

The 1 st is, That nothing was more common with the Popes and Anti-Popes, than
mutually to brand each other with the Title of Antichrist: And the Writers of
both Parties kept always close to this Style, and yet all of them lived and
died in the Bosom of the Church of Rome, and never were thought to be the
Disciples of the Manichees.

2 dly, That there are many Authors, and even several of those that have been
canonized, who have made use of the same Notions, in speaking and writing of
the Church of Rome, and yet none have ever condemned them of Manicheism.

The 3 d is, That ever since the Reformation, though the Bishop pretends that
the Prophecy concerning the Beast has been already fulfilled; there is
scarcely (if you except the Bishop) any one Popish Author, who does not own
that Rome is to be the Seat of Antichrist.

What I say now, deserves to be considered, because in the Year 1516, December
the 19 th, in the 11 th Session of the Lateran Council, under Leo X, in whose
time Luther began to preach, we find that there was a Prohibition against
handling the Question of Antichrist in the Pulpit, though under the Pretense of
advancing some new Revelation concerning it, without having obtained leave from
the Holy See, or from the Bishop. The Words of the Canon which oblige all those
who should ever undertake to preach on this Subject, are these: And we command
all who bear this Charge, or who shall bear it for the future, that they preach
and explain the Evangelical Truth, and the Holy Scripture, according to the
Exposition and Interpretation of those Doctors, whom the Church or long
Tradition has approved, and has hitherto allowed to be read, or which shall be
so for time to come, without adding any thing that is contrary to, or
disagreeing from the proper sense of them, but that they always insist upon
such Matters as do not disagree with the Words of the Scripture, nor with the
Interpretations of the foresaid Doctors. Neither let them presume to fix in
their Sermons any certain time of the Evils to come, of the coming of
Antichrist, or of the Day of Judgment; forasmuch as Truth assures us, that it
is not for us to know the Times and Seasons. Moreover, if the Lord should be
pleased to reveal to any of them in the Church of God, future things by some
Inspiration, as he has promised by the Prophet Amos; and seeing the Apostle
Paul says, Despise not Prophesying, etc. we will not have such as these
reckoned amongst Impostors and Liars, or that they shall be any ways hindered:
But because it is a matter of great Moment, and that we are not upon light
Grounds to believe every Spirit, but are to try them whether they be of God; we
command that by a constant Law any such asserted Inspirations, before they be
published or preached to the People, be henceforward understood to be reserved
to the Examination of the Apostolical See: but in Case this cannot be done
without the Danger of too long a Delay, or that urgent Necessity should
otherwise persuade; then observing the same Order, it may be signified to the
Ordinary of the place, who taking along with him three or four learned and
grave Men, and diligently examining the matter with them, if they see it
expedient (which we charge upon their Consciences) they may grant them Liberty:
but whosoever presumes to commit any thing contrary to the Premises, shall
incur Excommunication, from the which he shall not be absolved but by the Pope
himself; that so by their Example others may be deterred from presuming to do
any such thing, for which Reason we decree that they be for ever made incapable
of the Office of Preaching, any Privileges whatsoever to the contrary
notwithstanding, etc.

It Is not our Business to examine the Question, whether the Bishop of Meaux
has exactly followed the Rules that this Canon prescribes, in his Explication
of the Scripture, and especially about the matter of Antichrist, though they be
Rules by which Bishops are no less bound, than the meanest Divines. It may be
the Church of Rome finds the Bishop's new System so much for her Interest, that
it inclines her to suspend the Severity of her Canons, in Favor of a Person,
who has so dexterously plucked a Thorn out of her Foot, which has troubled her
so long, and which has always caused new Pains to her, as often as any of her
Doctors have endeavored to pluck it out.

But I fear I have insisted too long upon so vain a Conjecture, and which
scarce deserved to be confuted. There are able Men of the Church of Rome, who
have taken the Pains to refute the Conjecture of some Papists who would needs
have Mahomet to be the Antichrist: This was the Chimaera of Annius of Viterbo,
a Monk famous for his Impostures; this likewise was the Whimsy of Fevardentius
and some others, whom Pererius the Jesuit has refuted so solidly, as that he
has put the Bishop of Meaux to the trouble of inventing a new System to oppose
the Protestants. I hope his System will meet with the same Destiny amongst his
own Party, that so the Protestants may not be put to the trouble of giving it a
formal Confutation. For indeed, though the Politics of the Church of Rome do
bear with several Opinions that differ from the common Hypotheses of their
Society, yet the Divines of that Party are not patient enough to dissemble the
Dislike they have to see their old Opinions which have been maintained for
several Ages, trod under-foot. The Bishop himself has an Example hereof, which
he cannot well have forgot in the Person of Cardinal Capizucchi, who having
given his Approbation to the Exposition of the Romish Faith, made by the Bishop
of Meaux, in which he sweetens the Worship of Images so very much, for Fear of
incensing the Protestants, whom he designed to bring over to his own Side, was
not wanting some Years after to publish a Treatise, wherein he shows that he
gave that Approbation, only upon the Account of Reason of State, and not
because he sincerely approved the way which the Bishop had taken to make the
Worship of Images appear more tolerable to the Protestant Party.

CHAP. XX. Of the Morals of the Albigenses, and of their Ecclesiastical
Government.
HAving thus justified the Albigenses, as to their Doctrine and Worship, it is
time now to proceed to show the Regularity of their Discipline, by representing
the Nature of their Church Government, and Conduct of those Churches in matters
that related to their Manners. This will not be a matter of any Difficulty; for
it is easily conceived that these Diocesses being stored with People, who
maintained the Doctrine of Berengarius, as the Abbot of Tron tells us, they had
a great Party of the Clergy at the Head of them. I do not say this without good
Grounds; for 1 st, We see that in the Councils held against Berengarius, there
were very great Contests about this Matter, and that the opposite Party carried
their Point only by downright Violence. 2 dly, That according to the Testimony
of Sigebert, if many Persons wrote against Berengarius, many also wrote in
favor of him, and who can doubt of their being Churchmen? 3 dly, That his own
Bishop Bruno, Bishop of Angers, where he was Archdeacon, declared himself for
him. 4 thly, That in Aquitain in the Year 1075, Giraldus Legate of Pope Gregory
VII, was obliged to call a Council at Poictiers, where Berengarius narrowly
escaped being murdered, as we are assured by the Chronicle of St. Maixant, the
Circumstances whereof there set down, they that published it took care to leave
out. 5 thly, That five Years after they were obliged to convocate another
Council at Bourdeaux, where Berengarius gave an Account of his Faith, as the
same Chronicle acquaints us. We ought naturally to observe that from the Year
1050, wherein Berengarius appeared at Rome, where he maintained his Opinions
with so much Courage, that Leo of Ostia, Abbot of Mont-Cassin, owns that there
was no Body able to oppose him, until the Year 1080, in which the Council of
Bourdeaux met; the Church of Rome could not overthrow Berengarius's Party,
though she had employed by turns, both Councils and Violence, which shows that
there were amongst Berengarius's Followers, a considerable Party of the Clergy,
and of those of Aquitain in particular.

Neither was it only this Difference in Point of Doctrine that strengthened the
Berengarian Party, but also the Regulations of Pope Nicholas II, and his
Successors, and above all those of Gregory VII, in the Council of Rome, in
1074, and 1075. We may see the Effect of his prohibiting Matrimony to Priests,
as Sigebert has recorded it upon the Year 1074. Gregory the Pope, says he, at
a Synod held by him, anathematized all that came into Preferments by Simony,
and removed all married Priests from their Functions, and forbad Laymen to
assist at their Masses, by not only an unheard of Precedent, but also (as
several People thought at that time) by an inconsiderate Prejudice, contrary to
the Opinion of the Holy Fathers, who have written, that the Sacraments used in
the Church, to wit, Baptism, Chrism, and the Body and Blood of our Lord, have
the self-same Efficacy by the secret Operation of the Holy Ghost, be the
Dispensers of them good or bad. Wherefore then since they are quickened by the
Holy Spirit, so that they are neither amplified by the Worthiness of the good
Dispensers, nor lessened by the Sins of the Wicked, whence is this Man that
baptizes? which thing has given so great occasion of Scandal, that never was
the Holy Church rent with a more dangerous Schism at any time by a prevailing
Heresy, than it is now, whilst some act for Righteousness, others against it;
some openly are guilty of Simony, others cover the Stain of Covetousness with
an honest Name, selling that under the Name of Charity, which they pretend to
give freely, as Eusebius says of the Montanists, whilst under the Name of
Offerings, they more artificially receive Bribes. By this means also things are
brought to that pass, that there are very few that practice Continence, whilst
some make only an hypocritical Show of it for Gain and Boasting; and others
aggravate their Incontinence by forswearing themselves, and by multiplied
Adulteries. Besides, upon this occasion Laymen rise up in Rebellion against the
Holy Orders of the Church, shaking off the Yoke of Ecclesiastical Subjection;
Laymen profane Holy Mysteries, and dispute about them, baptize Infants, using
the filthy Excrement of the Ears instead of the Holy Oil and Chrism; on their
Deathbeds they scorn to receive at the Hands of married Priests the Lord's
Provision for their last Journey, and the usual Service of Church-Burial. The
Tithes that are assigned to the Priests they consume with Fire: and that by one
horrid Profanation you may make an Estimate of the rest, Laymen have been often
seen to trample the Body of our Lord, that had been consecrated by married
Priests, under their Feet, and wilfully spill his Blood upon the ground* and
many such things against the Laws of God and Man are daily committed in the
Church. By this means also many false Teachers rise in the Church, who by their
profane Innovations alienate the Minds of the common People from the
Discipline of the Church.

This therefore was the great occasion that was given to many of the Clergy and
People of Aquitain, not to entertain any Communion with the Church of Rome, or
to submit themselves to the Yoke which she was preparing for all the Western
Churches.

I have in my Remarks upon the History of the Churches of Piedmont, given an
Account of the Rise of the Opinion of those who believed that the Popes
Excommunications deprived such as had been duly ordained, of all Power to
exercise their Functions, and did incapacitate them to confer Orders upon other
Ministers. This was the true Reason that made all that maintained the
Principles of the Church of Rome, look upon the Bishops, Priests and Deacons,
who had thus renounced the Roman Communion, as a Company of Laymen, and to
consider their Ordinations as null. I need not repeat the same here, it being
sufficiently confirmed by the Passage of Sigebert, which I just now quoted.

It appears therefore that the Discipline of the Albigenses was the same that
had been practiced in the Primitive Church: They had their Bishops, their
Priests and their Deacons, whom the Church of Rome at first held for
Schismatics, and whose Ministry she at last absolutely rejected, for the same
Reasons, that made her consider the Ministry of the Waldenses as null and void.
We find in Peter the Abbot of Clugny, that he reproacheth the Petrobusians, for
being joined with Schismatics; whereas they took the Name of Apostolical Men.
See how he speaks to them; Vos Magistri Errorum, and caeci duces caecorum,
faeces Haeresium, and reliquiae Schismaticorum! O you Masters of Errors, and
blind Leaders of the Blind, the Dregs of Heretics, and the Relics of
Schismatics! Who were these Schismatics but the Berengarians? It is manifest
that Union with the Church of Rome being become impossible, by reason of the
Errors she had defined, and the Tyranny she had usurped over the State and
Church: there was even before his time a Separation made of the greatest Part
of the Diocesses of Narbon, Toulouse, Again, and other places; and that Peter
Bruys and his Disciples were of his Party, appears from his 2 d Epistle, which
is considerable, to this purpose. In your Parts, says he, the People are
rebaptized, the Churches profaned, the Altars overthrown, Crosses burnt, and
Flesh eaten on the very Day of our Savior's Passion, Priests are whipped, Monks
imprisoned, and forced by Terrors and Torments to marry. The Heads of which
Contagion you have indeed by the Divine Assistance, and the Help of Catholic
Princes, driven out of your Country; but the Members, as I have already said,
remain yet amongst you, infected with this deadly Poison, as I my self lately
perceived. By which Passage we find that the same Disorders had happened in
those Diocesses which he speaks of, that Sigebert had before observed. Bouchet
in his Annals of Aquitain, understands the thing after the same manner, where
he speaks thus of the Voyage of St. Bernard. In the mean time, whilst all these
things were a doing, Godfry Bishop of Chartres, and Innocent's Legate in
France, and St. Bernard, who were to employed purge the Schismatics out of
Aquitain, or to reduce them to the Union of the Church, went first to Nantes,
etc.

I have showed how Henry opposed himself to the Abuses and Superstitions, which
the Church of Rome endeavored to introduce into these Diocesses. But whatever
Efforts the Romish Party made use of to overthrow this happy Work, it seems
that they could never attain their End. We have a Letter writ by an Earl of
Toulouse to the Abbot of Cisteaux, and to the general Chapter of that Order,
Chron. Gervas. inter 10 script. Angl. page 1441.
in the Year 1177, which declares that the Clergy sided with the Party which he
accuses of Manicheism; and that the Popish Churches were reduced to extreme
Desolation, he himself being in no Condition to remedy it, or to oppose himself
against the Torrent, most of the great Lords having declared themselves for
them. So far, says he, has this noisome heretical Infection prevailed, that
almost all closing with it, believe that in so doing they do God good Service;
and the wicked one who is now exerting the Mystery of Iniquity in the Children
of Unbelief, does so transform himself into an Angel of Light, that the Wife
separates from her Husband, the Son from his Father, and the Daughter-in-Law
from her Mother-in-Law. And O miserable! has the Gold lost its Luster amongst
us to that Degree, that it is trod under the Devil's Feet like Dirt? for even
the Priests are depraved with the Filth of Heresy; and the ancient and once
venerable Churches appointed for Worship, are left desolate, and lie in Ruins.
-- And now what shall I say? there are none that consider with themselves, and
say in their Hearts, What do we do? for we see that these Men do a great deal
of Mischief. If we let them alone, all Men will believe in them; and he who
has swallowed down a River already, will not wonder at it, from the Boldness
of his wicked Presumption, if Jordan should flow into his Mouth. For my part,
who am girt with one of the two divine Swords, and who do own my self an
Avenger of the divine Wrath, and Minister of God appointed for that Purpose,
whilst I endeavor to set Bounds, and put a Stop to this Infidelity, do find
that my Power is too weak to effect such and so great a Work, because the most
part of the Gentry of my Dominion, having drunk of this Poison of Infidelity
already, are wasted away with its Contagion, and together with them, the
greatest part of the common People, fallen from the Faith, pines likewise; so
that I neither dare nor am able to undertake it.

Roger Hoveden sets down a Letter of Peter Cardinal Legate at Toulouse, wherein
he makes mention of the Albigensian Pastors, Raymond Baimiac, Bernard Raimond,
and some other chief Heretics, who came to speak with him, under his and the
Earl of Tholouse's safe Conduct, and made profession of their Faith in a great
Assembly in the Church of St. Stephen.

He afterward gives us an account of a Letter of Henry Abbot of Clairvaux, who
lamenting the Corruption of Toulouse, by these Arch-hereticks, adds these
Words: Yea so far had this Plague prevailed in the Land, that they had not only
made to themselves Priests and Bishops, but had also their Evangelists, who
having depraved and cancelled the Truth of the Gospel, had copied to themselves
new Gospels, and from their wicked Hearts, preached to the deceived People new
Doctrines. I lie if there was not amongst them a Man of a great Age, of a very
plentiful Estate, who had several Brethren and Friends, and who had the
Reputation of a great Man amongst the greatest of the City, whom, in Punishment
for his Sins, the Devil had so blinded, that he declared himself to be John the
Evangelist, and he distinguished the Word that was in the Beginning with God,
from another Principle of things, as from another God: he was the head of these
miserable Wretches, and the Ringleader of the Heretics in this City; who,
though a Layman and an Idiot, and so knew nothing, yet as a Fountain of
diabolical Wisdom, the bitter Waters of Perdition and Death flowed from him
amongst them. A Company of dark Owls associated to him at Nights, where he
sitting amongst them in a Garment like a Rochet, and a Surplice over it, seemed
like a King with his Army standing about him, and was the Preacher to these
Fools. He had filled the whole City with his Disciples and Doctrine; no Body
daring to oppose him, because of his Power and Riches. Yea, so great was the
Licentiousness of these Heretics, that at our entrance into the Town, as we
passed through the Streets and Lanes, they mocked us, and pointed at us with
their Finger, calling us Apostats, Hypocrites, and Heretics.

Peter Monk of Vaux Cernay, owns that the Albigenses had their Teachers, Hist.
Alb. cap. 2.
whom they called Bishops and Deacons. He takes notice that the Earl of
Toulouse, who never went any whither without a New Testament, had always with
him some of these Ministers for his Instruction and Consolation.

We find in the Council of Montpellier, in the year 1214, that there was some
difference between the Heretics that were the Pastors, and the Believers, that
is to say, the People; as it is particularly taken notice of in the Preface,
and in the 29 th Canon of the Council of Gallia Narbonensis.

Page 40, and 54.
We find in Matthew Paris a Letter of the Bishop of Porto, the Pope's Legate for
this Business of the Albigenses, written in the year 1223, to the Archbishop of
Roan, where he mentions one Bartholomew a Bishop of the Heretics, who had
removed himself into the Country near Toulouse, where he created Bishops, and
set Rules to the Churches of his Communion. His Words are these, Etenim de
Carcassona oriundus, vices illius Antipapae gerens, Bartholomaeus Haereticorum
Episcopus, funestam ei exhibendo reverentiam, sedem and locum concessit in
villa quae Perlos appellatur, and seipsum transtulit in parts Tholosanas. Iste
Bartholomaeus, in literarum suarum undique discurrentium tenore, se in primo
salutationis alloquio, intitulat in hunc modum, Bartholomaeus servus servorum
sanctae fidei, tali salutem. Ipse etiam inter alias enormitates, creat
Episcopos, and Ecclesias perfide ordinare intendit. For this Bartholomew the
Bishop of the Heretics, Vicar to that Antipope, originally of Carcasson,
paying him an unhappy Reverence, yielded him his Seat and his Place in the
Village called Perlos, and removed himself into the Country near Toulouse; this
Bartholomew styled himself Servant of the Servants of the holy Faith, and in
his Letters which he sent about amongst his Flock, as also in his first
Salutations of those who addressed themselves to him, he always assumed that
Character. He also added to his other Crimes, that of creating Bishops, and
perfidiously took upon him the Government of those Churches.

Lucas Tudensis speaks of one of their Bishops that was burnt. Lib. 3. cap. 15.


William of Puylaurens, in his Chronicle, at the Beginning, speaks of the great
Respect that was given to these Ministers of the Albigenses, whom he calls
Waldenses, because of the Holiness of their Lives.

Lastly, We see in the Acts of the Inquisition of Toulouse, several Names of
those that were Pastors of the Albigenses, and who had been ordained to the
holy Ministry, by Men of their own Communion. This therefore was the Government
of these Churches, the Succession whereof we cannot distinctly set down; but
this ought not to surprise any Body, the Captains of the Croisade, and the
Inquisitors, can best satisfy the World in this Point, wherein we must
acknowledge our Inability.

As for their Morals and Behavior, who ever will but reflect upon the
Debauchery and general Corruption which reigned in the 11 th Century, will
easily judge, that those who renounced the Communion of the Church of Rome, and
who called her the Mystical Babylon, because of her false Worship, and the
horrid Corruption of her Ministers, must needs be more pure in their Morals,
and more orderly in their Behavior; and indeed we find it true in the
Albigenses, as well Pastors as People.

The Pastors recommended to the People, the having of the Books of the New
Testament in their Mother Tongue, and pressed the Reading thereof with so much
Care and Application, that Raymond Earl of Toulouse, never stirred any whither
without taking that holy Book with him. This was the certain Badg and Mark of
all these Heretics, and that whereby they defended themselves. For which
reason, the Council of Toulouse, fearing lest their Croisades should not be
able to exterminate the Albigenses, as long as they had the Bible in the vulgar
Tongue, took care to prohibit the having of it, in these Terms; We prohibit the
Permission of the Books of the Old and New Testament to Laymen, except perhaps
they might desire to have the Psalter, or some Breviary for the Divine Service,
or the Hours of the Blessed Virgin Mary, for Devotion; expressly forbidding
their having the other Parts of the Bible translated into the Vulgar Tongue.

It was by means of this Purity of their Morals, that, as Petrus Cluniacensis
witnesses, the Petrobusians found so much favor with many of the Clergy, of
the Bishops, of the Princes, and of the Laity, at the same time when they
preached openly, that the Church of Rome was not the Church; but that they were
the true Church, as being truly Apostolical.

Indeed a cursory Reflection upon the Nature of the enormous Crimes laid to
their Charge, as if those Abominations had been the general Character of their
Religion, is sufficient to discover the Imposture of their Accusers: For they
are Crimes that overturn the Foundations of all Society, by destroying the
Honor of Families, and filling every Place with abominable Adulteries and
Incests. Can any Man imagine, that such a Sect as this, could ever have been
able to propagate it self throughout all Europe, as Wilhelmus Newbrigensis
declares the Waldenses did, if the Manners of those that profess it, had been
founded upon Principles that trample upon the Laws of Nature, which have always
been respected even amidst the thickest Darkness of Paganism? We do not find
that Manicheism went so far, even then when it caused the greatest Disturbance
in the World, nor that the Corruption into which it plunged those that were
tainted with it, had any very great influence upon others; whereas we find,
that the Religion of the Albigenses has spread its Roots far and near, and
even procured Esteem and Affection from those of the Romish Party, that were
not wholly transformed into the Nature of Brutes and Madmen, being natural
Consequences of that insulting Spirit which has animated the Popes and the
Clergy in these latter Ages.

What I say here, is evident from the Testimony of William of Puylaurens, in
his Chronicle, who owns that the Albigenses had a show of Godliness, though,
says he, they denied the power of it; that they were had in extreme Veneration
by the People; and that more Legacies were left to them than to Churchmen:
whereas on the other hand, the Romish Clergy were fallen to that extreme
Contempt, that Laymen instead of the common Wish, I had rather be a Jew, used
to say, I had rather be a Chaplain.

The Case must needs have been very evident, since Pope Innocent III, who left
nothing unattempted to root it out, yet could not but do them the justice to
own, that they were very free from several Vices. Epist. 149.


Indeed we may easily judge of their Morals and Demeanor, by their Constancy in
suffering the most cruel Torments in the defense of the Truth. Matthew Paris
tells us, of one Robert an Inquisitor, who buried alive, or burnt 50 of them in
two Months time, and yet not one of them rerenounced his Faith, in the midst of
the greatest Violence of their Torments. Perrin and Chassagnon give us great
Numbers of parallel Examples, as well as the Acts of the Inquisition of
Toulouse. Lucus Tudensis, who endeavors to ridicule this Constancy of their
Martyrs, is at the same time a Witness for it beyond all manner of Controversy.

Mezeray was juster than the Bishop of Meaux; for though he was not ignorant of
the Slanders cast upon them, yet he has given this Testimony of the
Albigenses, whom he calls Waldenses; he says, There were two principal Sorts
of them; the one of them were very ignorant, and given to Lewdness and Villainy;
these Men maintained gross and filthy Errors; and these were indeed a kind of
Manichees. The others were more learned, and less disorderly, and keeping
themselves at the greatest distance from the Filthinesses now mentioned,
maintained much the same Opinions with the Calvinists, and to speak properly,
were Henricians and Waldenses.

This Testimony so agreeable to Truth, may well make those blush who copy the
Forgeries of the Jesuit Mariana, who to make the Albigenses pass for Atheists
and Epicureans, has changed the Title of Lucus Tudensis his Book, which was
only in these terms, De altera vita, fideique controversiis.
Concerning another Life, and Controversies of Faith, by adding to it, Adversus
Albigensium errores.
against the Errors of the Albigenses.

CHAP. XXI. Concerning the Persecutions which the Albigenses have suffered from
the Pope and his Party.
MY Design is not to enlarge here upon a particular Description of their
Persecutions. This would be too vast a Field to enter upon, in a Work of this
kind, which I have undertaken: but withal, I should think my self to blame, if
after having showed with how much Zeal the Albigenses maintained the Truth of
the Gospel, by their Preaching, and practiced the Morals thereof in their
Conversation, I should not give a short Account of what Persecutions they have
suffered, and with what Constancy, by their Martyrdom, they have born witness
to the same Truth.

We have already taken a view of the Persecutions exercised against Peter de
Bruis and Henry his Disciple, at the Solicitation of Peter de Clugny, and
Bernard Abbot of Clairvaux, who caused them to be sacrificed to the Interest of
the Church of Rome, which after the 11 th Century, begun to persecute with
Sword and Fire, all those who durst be so bold to oppose her Greatness, by
undervaluing her Decrees. It was in compliance with this Method, that Petrus
Cluniacensis, writing to the Archbishop of Arles and Ambrun, and to the Bishops
of Die and Gap, concerning the Petrobusians and Henricians, tells them; It is
your Duty to drive out the Heretics from those Places, (where they rejoice to
have found lurking Holes,) not only by your Preaching, but also, if need be, by
armed Force of Laymen.

The Council of Toulouse, assembled in 1119, where Calixtus II was present,
gave occasion to these bloody Executions. The third Chapter enjoins all Powers
to repress the Heretics, and that those that favor them be subject to the
same Condemnation.

In the year 1163, the Council of Tours, Chap. 4.
assembled by Alexander III, had ordained, that the Bishops of those Provinces,
where any of them were found, should not suffer any one to harbor or shelter
them; that no Commerce should be held with them about the things of common
Conversation; and ordered temporal Princes to imprison and condemn them, and
confiscate their Estates and Goods.

In the year 1179, the same Pope Alexander III, Cap. 27. Council. Later. 3.
renewed the same Orders, forbidding also their being buried in Places set a
part for the burial of Papists.

In 1181, Henry, who from Abbot of Clairvaux, had been made Bishop of Alby,
having as Legate gathered together some considerable Forces by his Preaching,
went to visit them with armed Force, but they to avoid the Storm that threatened
them, pretended to abjure their Errors; but no sooner was the Storm blown over,
but they lived as they did before. So that the Contagion spread it self through
several Provinces, on both sides of the Loire: and one of their false Apostles
called Terric, who had hid himself a long time in a Cave at Corbigny in the
Diocese of Nevers, was taken and burnt, and many more suffered the same
Punishment in several other places.

This was that Sweetness of the Church of Rome, which the Bishop of Meaux so
much boasts of, and which she put in practice long before she came to
Conferences, which served only for a Prelude to the utter ruin of the
Albigenses, which the Popes had designed long before.

Accordingly Innocent III, as Mezeray tells us in the History of Philip
Augustus, Page 616.
finding himself unable to reduce the Heretics of Languedoc, who had almost
gained that whole Province, resolved to make an Example of Raymond Earl of
Toulouse, because he was their chief Favourer, and because he had caused Peter
de Chasteauneuf, a Cistertian Monk, and the first that ever exercised the
Function of Inquisitor, to be put to Death: He excommunicated the Earl,
absolved his Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and gave his Lands to the
first that should seize them, yet so as without Prejudice to the Right of
Sovereignty of the Kings of France.

Whereupon the Earl was so frighted, that being come to Valence, to meet with
Milo the Pope's Legate, he wholly submitted himself to him, and gave eight
strong Places for ever to the Church of Rome, as a Security of his Conversion:
and the Year following, to obtain Absolution, he suffered himself to be lashed
with Rods before the Gate of the Church of St. Giles, where Peter de
Chasteau-Neuf was buried, and afterward to be dragged to the Tomb of that Monk
by the Legate, who put a wooden Yoke about his Neck, before twenty Archbishops,
and an infinite multitude of People: after this he took upon him the Croisade,
and the Year following joined himself with those that took his own Cities, and
those of his Confederates.

But it was not his Repentance that engaged him to endure so dreadful a
Disgrace, but the Apprehension he had of a terrible Tempest, that was just then
breaking over his Head, for the Pope turning his Torrent of Zeal against the
Heretics, which pushed the People on to the Deliverance of the Holy Land, had
this same Year ordered the Croisade to be preached up against the Albigenses,
and a great number of Noblemen, Bishops and common People, had already listed
themselves in that Service, the King himself furnishing 15000 Men, maintained
at his own Charges.

It is worth our taking notice, 1 st, That Pope Innocent III, to encourage the
Lords and People to the Holy War, granted a Plenary Remission of all their Sins
to all those who took up the Badg of the Cross, vouchsafing also the Protection
of the Holy See to their Persons and Goods, as may be seen in his Epistles. He
absolved the Cities that had sworn to the Earl of Toulouse, from their Oath of
Allegiance, upon that excellent Principle of the Church of Rome, That Faith is
not to be kept with Heretics, because they do not keep theirs with God or the
Church. 2 dly, That the Earl of Toulouse was not guilty of the Murder of Peter
de Chasteau Neuf; for we read that Earl Raymond went to meet King Philip, to
obtain of him Letters of Recommendation from the Pope, that he might be fully
acquitted of the Murder of the Monk Peter de Chasteau Neuf, whereof they had
most unjustly obliged him to confess himself guilty, only because the said
Murder had been committed in his Territories, for which the Legate Milo had
imposed upon him a most unjust and unheard of Penance. From the Court of the
King of France he went to Rome, where he received Absolution immediately from
the Hands of Pope Innocent III; this being a Case reserved to him, the Pope
received him very civilly, presented him with a rich Robe, and a Ring of great
Value, and granted him plenary Remission and Absolution from the said Murder,
declaring that he looked upon him as sufficiently cleared upon that Account.

In the Year 1209, the Army of these Crossed Soldiers, which consisted of no
less than 500000 Men, entered Languedock, and attacked the City of Beziers,
being one of the strongest Places the Albigenses had, took it by Force, and put
all they found in it to the Sword; so that above 60000 Persons were killed
there, as Mezeray informs us.

There happened one thing very remarkable at the taking of this City, which
was, That the Zeal of these consecrated Soldiers was such, that they put to
the Sword all the Papists and Romish Clergy that were in the City. The Earl of
Beziers came out of the City, and cast himself at the Feet of the Legate Milo,
begging his Grace in Behalf of his City of Beziers, and entreating him, that he
would not involve the Innocent in the Punishment of the Guilty, which would
certainly come to pass, in case the City should be taken by Force, (which would
soon be done by such a great and powerful Army, that was ready to scale the
Walls in every Part round the whole City) that it could not be otherwise, but
that in this Case much Blood would be spilt on both sides, which he might
prevent. That there were in Beziers great Numbers of good Catholics, who would
be involved in the same Ruin, contrary to the Pope's Intention, whose Design
was only to chastise the Albigenses. That if he did not think fit to spare his
Subjects, for their own sakes, that at least he would be pleased to take pity
of his Age and Profession, since the Loss would be his, who was under Age, and
an obedient Servant of the Pope, as having been educated in the Church of Rome,
in the which he was resolved to live and die. That if he was offended that such
Persons as were Enemies to the Pope, had been tolerated in his Territories,
that this ought not to be imputed to him, because he had no other Subjects, but
such as his deceased Father had left him; and that in this his Minority, and
during the short time that he had been Master of his Estate, he had neither
been able by reason of his Incapacity to discern the Evil, or to suit a Remedy
to it; though indeed this was his Intention, and that he hoped for the time to
come, to give all manner of Satisfaction to the Pope and the Church of Rome, as
became an obedient Son of both.

The Pope's Legat's Answer was, That all his Excuses should be of no Use to
him, and that he might shift for himself the best he could.

The Earl of Beziers being returned to the City, called the People together,
and represented to them, that after having submitted himself to the Pope's
Legate, he had interceded for them, without being able to obtain any thing, but
a Pardon, upon condition that those who professed the Faith of the Albigenses,
should abjure their Religion, and promise to live according to the Laws of the
Church of Rome. The Roman Catholics beseeched them to give way to this extreme
Violence, and not to be the cause of their Death, because the Legate was
resolved not to pardon one of them, except they all unanimously resolved to
live under the same Laws. To which the Albigenses answered, That they would
never forsake their Faith, for the base Price of this frail Life: That they
were well assured that God could protect them, if it seemed good unto him; but
withal, neither were they ignorant, that if he rather chose to be glorified by
the Confession of their Faith, it would be an exceeding Honor to them to die
for Righteousness sake. That they had much rather displease the Pope, who could
only destroy their Bodies, than offend God, who could destroy Body and Soul
together. That they detested the Thought of being ashamed of, or denying that
Faith by which they had learned to know Christ and his Righteousness; and for
fear of eternal Death to embrace a Religion which entirely takes away the Merit
of Jesus Christ, and destroys his Righteousness; that therefore they might make
the best terms for themselves they could, without promising any thing that was
contrary to the Duty of true Christians.

As soon as the Roman Catholics understood this, they sent their Bishop to the
Legate, to beseech him not to comprehend them in the same Punishment with the
Albigenses, they having always adhered to the Church of Rome, and of whom he
who was their Bishop had good Knowledge; judging also that the rest had not gone
so far from the ways of Repentance; but that they might be reduced by a
Sweetness well becoming the Church, which takes no Delight in shedding Blood.

The Legate being enraged at this, with horrible Threats and Oaths protested,
That except all that were in the Town did acknowledge their Fault, and submit
themselves to the Church of Rome, they should all be put to the Sword, without
any regard had to Catholics, to Sex or Age; but that all should be exposed to
Fire and Sword: and immediately commanded the City to be summoned to surrender
at Discretion, which being refused, he commanded all the warlike Engines to
play, and to discharge their Instruments, and to cast Stones, ordering them at
the same time to give a general Assault, and to scale the City round, so that
it was impossible for those within to sustain the shock; for being pressed upon
by above 100000 Pilgrims, they at last, says the Compiler of the Treasure of
Histories, discomfited those within the City, and entering in all at once,
killed vast numbers of all sorts, and afterward putting Fire to the City, they
burnt it to Ashes.

When the Town was taken, the Priests, Monks and Clerks, came in Procession out
of the great Church of Beziers, called St. Nazari, with the Banner, Cross, and
Holy Water, bare-headed, clothed in their Ecclesiastical Vestments, singing Te
Deum, in token of their rejoicing for the City's being taken and purged of the
Albigenses. But the Pilgrims, who had received an express Order from the Legate
to kill all, rushed in amongst this Procession, cutting off the Heads and Arms
of the Priests, striving who could do most, till they were all cut to pieces.

These Cruelties exercised upon the City of Beziers, upon the Papists
themselves, yea, and upon their very Clergy, having opened the Earl of Beziers
his Eyes, to see that the Pope under the Pretense of Religion, had a mind to
ruin the Earl of Toulouse his Uncle, as well as himself, he shut up himself in
his City of Carcasson, with a Resolution to defend it against the Legate and
his Pilgrims. The King of Arragon his Kinsman having discoursed with him, the
Earl plainly declared, That he knew this to be the Pope's Design, because when
he was treating for his Subjects of Beziers, he refused to receive his
Catholic Subjects into his Favor, nay, would not so much as spare the
Priests, who were all cut in pieces in their Sacerdotal Ornaments, under the
Banner and the Cross; that this Example of cruel Impiety, joined with what they
exercised upon the Village of Carcasson, where they had exposed all to Fire and
Sword, without any Distinction of Age or Sex, had fully convinced him that
there was no Mercy to be looked for from the Legate or his Pilgrims, and that
accordingly he would choose rather to die with his Subjects, defending
themselves, than to be exposed to the Mercy of an inexorable Enemy, such as he
had found the Legate to be: and though there were in the City of Carcasson many
of his Subjects, of a Belief contrary to that of the Church of Rome, yet that
they were Persons that had never done any Injury to any one; that they had
always assisted him in time of need, and that for this their good Service, he
was resolved never to abandon them, as they on their Parts had promised him to
hazard Life and Estate in his Defense: That he hoped that God, who is the
Reliever of those who are oppressed, would assist them against this great
Multitude of ill-advised Men, who under the Pretense of meriting Heaven, had
quitted their own Habitations to come and burn, pillage, ravage and murder in
the Habitations of others, without either Reason, Judgment or Mercy.

The King of Arragon returned with this Remonstrance to the Legate, who
assembled a great number of Lords and Prelates to hear what he had to say, who
declared to them, that he had found the Earl of Beziers his Ally, extremely
scandalized at their inhuman Proceedings against his Subjects of Beziers, and
of the Village of Carcasson; and that he was fully persuaded, seeing they had
neither spared the Roman Catholics, nor the Priests themselves, that it was
not a Religious War, as was pretended, but a kind of Robbery under the Color
of Religion: That he hoped God would be so favorable to him, as to make his
Innocence, and the just occasion he has had to defend himself, sufficiently
known: That they must not hope now to have them surrender at Discretion, since
they had found that there was no other to be expected from them, but that of
killing all they met with. That it had never been found good Policy to drive an
Enemy to Despair: wherefore if the Legate would be pleased to afford any
tolerable Composition to the Earl of Beziers and his Subjects, that Mildness
would be a better Method to reduce the Albigenses to the Church of Rome, than
extreme Severity: and that he ought also to remember that the Earl of Beziers
was a young Man, and a Roman Catholic, who might be very serviceable in
reducing his Subjects, who had so great Confidence in him, to their Obedience
to the Church.

The Legate told the King of Arragon that if he would withdraw a little, they
would advise what were best to be done. The King being called in again, the
Legate told him, That in Consideration of his Intercession, he would receive
the Earl of Beziers to Mercy, and therefore if it seemed good to him, he might
come forth, and eleven with him, with his Goods and Baggage; but that as for
the People that were in the City of Carcasson, they should only deliver to his
Discretion, of which they ought to have a very good Opinion, he being the
Pope's Legate; and that accordingly they should come forth all stark-naked,
Men, Women and Children, without Shirts or any other Covering on their Bodies.
Also that the Earl of Beziers should be delivered into sure Hands, and that all
his Estate should be surrendered up to the future Lord of his Territories, who
should be chosen for Conservation of the same.

The King of Arragon having endeavored to bring the Legate to easier terms for
the young Earl: the Legate told him, that these Conditions were very
favorable; and yet what follows, is still more infamous. The Legate employes a
Person of Quality to endeavor to draw the Earl of Beziers out of Carcasson,
and to bring him to him, with Assurance under Oath, that he would send him back
to his City of Carcasson, in case he should not be satisfied with the Legat's
Proposals. The Count of Beziers upon this Assurance comes to the Legate, and
represents to him, That if he would think fit to treat his Subjects with more
Kindness, he would easily induce them to comply with his Desire, and recall the
Albigenses from their Error to the Church: That the Terms which had been
mentioned to him, were shameful and undecent for those who were to keep their
Eyes chaste as well as their Thoughts: That he knew his People would rather die
than see themselves reduced to so scandalous an Ignominy, and therefore
entreated him to come to easier Terms, and that he did not question but to make
his Subjects accept of any other more tolerable Conditions.

The Legate's Answer was, That the People of Carcasson might consider what they
had to do; that he would concern himself no further, since the Earl was his
Prisoner, and should continue so till the City were taken, and his Subjects
acknowledge their Duty.

When Simon Earl of Montfort was made General for the Church, he was so careful
to destroy the Albigenses, that he seized upon all the places belonging to
Popish Lords, that lay convenient for him, so that the King of Arragon was
forced to complain to the Pope of these his Proceedings, in some Letters yet
extant, to oblige him to make Restitution. And for the merciful temper of this
renowned Earl, take but this one Instance of it: After a Siege of six Months
the City of Lavaur was taken by Storm, and scaling of the Walls, and all that
were found in it were put to the Sword, except fourscore Gentlemen whom the
Earl caused to be hanged and strangled, and Almericus was hanged on a Gallows
higher than the rest. The Lady of Lavaur was cast alive into a Pit, and there
stoned to Death.

The Conduct of the Pope, and the Lateran Council, in the year 1215, is worth
taking notice of, because it was nothing but a Confirmation of all these
Proceedings. Mezeray gives this Account of it. Prince Lewis took upon him the
Badg of the Cross to go against the Albigenses, and assisted in the Expedition
of Languedoc; the Earl of Montfort met him at Vienne, and the Legate at
Valence; when he was come to St. Gilles, Montfort, who accompanied him,
received Bulls from the Pope, who, pursuant to the Decree of the Council of
Montpellier held some Months before, had given him the whole Territory of
Toulouse, and all the rest he had conquered with his crossed Pilgrims, provided
he could get Investiture from the King, and would pay him the accustomed
Homage: So that we may say, that the Pope nominated him to his Dignity, and the
King in compliance with the said Nomination, conferred it upon him. From thence
Lewis went to Montpellier, and then to Beziers, where he gave order for the
demolishing of the Walls of Narbon and Toulouse. In the mean time, the Council
of Lateran, notwithstanding the pitiful Remonstrances of the Earl of Toulouse,
who was present there in Person with his Son, adjudged the Propriety of his
Lands to Montfort, reserving only the Lands he had in Provence for his Son, and
400 Marks of Silver a Year for his own Subsistence, and that too upon condition
of his being obedient to the Church. Afer this, Montfort assumed the Title of
Earl of Toulouse, and came and received his Investiture from the King in the
City of Melun.

I should never have done, should I barely mention all the Cruelties and
Barbarities which the Romish Party exercised for near twenty Years together by
their continual Croisades, against a People who were taken to be Heretics as
soon as they found a New Testament in the vulgar Tongue about them.

I shall conclude this Chapter with setting down the Laws which the King of
France enacted in the year 1228, against the Albigenses. Wherefore because the
Heretics have now of a long time spread their Poison in your Parts, polluting
our Mother the Church after several Manners; we do in order to their utter
Extirpation decree, that all Heretics deviating from the Catholic Faith, by
what Name soever they are called, as soon as they are condemned of Heresy by
the Bishop of the Place, or by any other Ecclesiastical Person that has Power
to do it, be without delay punished; Ordaining also, and firmly enacting, That
no Man do presume to harbor or protect the said Heretics, or favor or trust
them; and that if any one do presume to commit any thing contrary to these
Premises, he be made incapable of being a Witness, or of any Honor whatsoever,
as also of making a Will, or inheriting any thing. Moreover, We enact, That all
his Goods, real or personal, be ipso facto, confiscated, never to return to him
or any of his Posterity. We also enact and command, That all Barons of the
Land, and our Bailiffs, and other our Subjects present and future, be careful
and diligent to purge the Land of Heretics, and heretical Contagion,
commanding them to be very industrious in searching them out, and faithful in
discovering them, and as soon as they have found any of them, to present them
without delay before the Persons above named, that so being convict in their
Presence of Error and Heresy, they may, setting aside all Hatred, Entreaties,
Rewards, Fear, Favor and Love, give Sentence against them. And that those who
are diligent and careful in the searching for, and seizing of Heretics, may
not want the Encouragement of Honor and Reward, We do enact, will and command,
that our Bailiffs, in whose Bailiwicks the said Heretics shall be seized, pay
to the Taker for every Heretic, two Marks in Silver, for the Term of two
Years, and after that time expired, one Mark only.

Hitherto we have taken a View of what was charged upon the Magistrates and
Lords, to whom the Execution of these Laws was committed. Let us now consider
what other means the Church of Rome made use of; which was, the erecting the
Tribunal of the Inquisition, the Maxims and Conduct whereof, Pope Gregory XIII,
thought good to make known to the World, by publishing the Directory for
Inquisitors. This Tribunal erected by the Popes for the Extirpation of the
Albigenses, is a Thing in it self so very horrid, that it strikes the Papists
themselves with Horror, that are not used to it; and yet such as it is, it has
justly been esteemed, and is still to this day thought to be the right Hand of
the Church of Rome. One may see from some of the published Registers of these
Inquisitors, and by some of their Trials of the Albigenses, the horrid
Impostures of these Inquisitors, and the terrible Punishments they have
inflicted upon the Albigenses in all Places, where from Age to Age they have
been able to discover them.

CHAP. XXII. That the Doctrine of the Albigenses spread it self in England, and
continued there till the time of the Reformation.
HEnry Knighton tells us, De eventibus Angl. l. 2. c. 15.
that the Albigensian Heretics came over into England in the Reign of King
John, and that some of them were burnt alive. But yet we must not think that
their Doctrine by this means was wholly extinguished; for we find the same
appearing again in the Persons of the Lollards and Wicklefites. I distinguish
the Lollards from the Wicklefites, as being more ancient than they, having
appeared in Flanders and Germany from the beginning of the 14 th Century, as
appears from the Testimonies of Johannes Hoesemius, and of the Abbot
Trithemius; though the same Name was afterward given to the Wicklefites, as is
evident from the Writings of Walfingham and William Thorn. They seem to have
come from the Waldenses and Albigenses, by what Kilianus tells us; Lollardus
quoque dicitur Hereticus Waldensis: A Lollard is also called a Waldensian
Heretic.

I need only therefore speak of their Numbers, which as Knighton assures us,
covered all England: but since they have been charged with most horrid Crimes,
because they spoke against the Images of the Saints, and the rest of the Romish
Superstitions, as well as the Vices of the Clergy; it will be absolutely
necessary to clear them from these false Imputations, in the most authentic
Manner that may be.

Let us therefore examine the Calumnies charged upon them by Trithemius in his
Chronicle of Hirsauge, on the year 1316, Saecul. 13. p. 1. p. 387, and 388.
as they were copied by Natalis Alexander, a Jacobite Friar, in his
Ecclesiastical History. The Heads of the Heresies which Trithemius reckons up,
are these;

I. That Masses were vain Things, to which neither any Reverence was due, nor
were they of any use or profit.

II. That Lucifer with his Devils, being unjustly driven out of Heaven, should
be restored to Bliss again; and that Michael, with all the Angels, should be
sentenced to everlasting Punishment; and that all those that were not of their
Sect, should be damned after the same manner.

III. That the Blessed Virgin Mary, if she continued a Virgin after her
Delivery, must have brought forth not a Man, but an Angel.

IV. They boasted themselves to have twelve Apostles, who every year visited
the whole Empire; and that two of these being Elders in Order and Profession,
did every year enter Paradise, and there received from Enoch and Elias, the
Power of Binding and Loosing, which they afterward communicated to the other
Professors of their Sect.

V. They derided the Sacrament of Baptism; saying, If Baptism be a Sacrament,
then every Bath is a Sacrament, and by consequence, every Keeper of a Bath must
be God.

VI. They shamefully abused the Sacrament of Penance, by confessing their Sins
not to Priests but Laymen, and expressing them only in general, and not in
particular, and yet they hoped by this their Confession, to obtain full and
perfect Forgiveness both of Guilt and Punishment.

VII. The Sacrament of the Lord's Body, they did not believe at all, calling
the consecrated Host, a God made with Hands.

VIII. They called the Sacrament of Matrimony that was sworn to, Fornication.

IX. They derided the Sacrament of Extreme Unction; and being examined what
they thought of it, they unanimously answered, We believe that Herbs, the more
they are laid in Oil, the better they are: And they vilified all the
Consecrations and Blessings used in the Church, as so many vain and useless
Ceremonies.

X. They blasphemously asserted, That God neither knew nor punished any Sins
that were committed under the Earth, for which Reason they used to meet in
Caves and Places under ground, where Fathers committed Filthiness promiscuously
with their Daughters, and Brothers with their Sisters.

XI. That the Church of Rome was not the Church of Christ, but of infidel
Heathens; and they despised all Ecclesiastical Laws, together with all the
Bishops and Ministers of the Church.

XII. Fasts they mocked at, eating Flesh at all times, Good Friday not
excepted.

XIII. They kept no Holidays, but wrought even upon Easter Day.

XIV. They denied that Perjury was a Sin.

XV. They denied that the Merits or Intercessions of the Saints, could prevail
with God for the Pardon of Men's Sins. And he says, that beside these they
professed many other Errors, which he omits, for fear of being tedious to his
Readers. He adds also, That this Heresy did so far prevail, that in Austria,
Bohemia, and the neighboring Provinces, there were above four-score Thousand
Men who were sworn to the Profession of this Sect. From these Dregs of Heresy,
says he, Bohemia being then infected, continues tainted with the same to this
Day. He subjoins, that many of these Heretics were at the same time burnt in
diverse places of Austria, who all of them continued obstinately in their
Heresy, with great Cheerfulness until Death. Walter, a chief Man of that Sect,
was burnt at Collen in the Year 1323, as Trithemius tells us in his Chronicle
of the Monastery of Hirsaugen, in the Diocese of Spires.

Nothing can be imagined more horrid than these Calumnies, and we need not
doubt but they were supported by many pretended Convictions made by the
Inquisitors of Germany: but it is easy to demonstrate, that there is scarce any
ground for all these Accusations, which therefore is a plain Proof of what I
have elsewhere maintained concerning these persecuted Persons, who used it for
a Proverb in England, He lies like a Monk.

We have an authentic piece of the Lollards, which Roger Dimmock a Jacobite
Friar has confuted in a Manuscript, whereof there are two Copies at Cambridg,
the one in the public Library, and another older than that, in Trinity
College. They presented this Confession of theirs to the Parliament, which gave
occasion to this Monk to insert it in English, together with his Latin
Translation, into a Book which he dedicated to King Richard II. I need only set
down the Original, with the Latin Translation of Roger Dimmock, which will be
sufficient to confound all the Calumnies of the Inquisitors.

The Petition of the LOLLARDS.
NOS pauperes homines thesaurarii sive thesaurus Christi and Apostolorum ejus,
denunciamus vobis Dominis and Communibus praesentis Parliamenti certas
Quaestiones and Veritates pro Reformatione sanctae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, quae
caeca extitit and leprosa annis plurimis per manutenentiam superbae praelaciae
supportatae adulationibus privatarum religionum, sive privatae religionis
multiplicatae ad magnum onus, and est effectus populisonerosus in Anglia.

Secunda Conclusio hanc continet Sententiam. Quando Ecclesia Anglicana incoepit
delirare in possessione temporalium secundum novercam suam magnam Romanam
Ecclesiam, and Ecclesiae mortificatae erant sive occisae per appropriationem
diversorum locorum: fides, spes and caritas coeperunt fugere extra Ecclesiam
nostram, quia superbia cum sua prole perversa peccatorum mortalium vendicabant
Ecclesiam nostram titulo haereditario. Ista quaestio est generalis and probata,
ut dicunt, experientia and more, ut audies in sequentibus.

Haec est secunda Quaestio: Sacerdotium nostrum usuale quod incoepit in
civitate Romana ficta altioris potestatis potestate Anglica, non est
Sacerdotium a Christo suis Discipulis ordinatum. Probatur sic haec quaestio,
Sacerdotium Romanum fictum cum signis and ritibus ac Episcoporum
Benedictionibus, est pravae virtutis, nullibi in sacra Scriptura exemplatum:
quia Ordinalia sine rubricae Episcoporum pravae sunt fidei vel autoritatis in
novo Testamento, and nescimus videre quod spiritus sanctus dat dona sua propter
aliqua talia signa, quia ipse and nobilia dona sua stare non possunt cum
peccato mortali in aliqua una persona.

Corrolaria hujus quaestionis est, quod valde extraneum sive novum est pluribus
hominibus sapientibus videre Episcopos ludere cum spiritu sancto in suorum
ordinum collatione, quia coronas conferunt in caracteribus loco servorum
alborum, and illa est liberata Antichristi sive ejus signum in istam Ecclesiam
introductum ad otium palliandum.

Tertia quaestio dolorosa est ista, Lex continentiae sacerdotio annexa quae in
praejudicium foeminarum fuit primitus introducta, inducit Sodomiam in
universalem sanctam Ecclesiam: sed per Bibliam excusamus nos propter suspectum
decretum quod dicit quia nem^ non deberemus nominar^^d peccatum: ratio and
experientia hanc probat quaestionem, quia deliciosi cibi and potus
Ecclesiasticorum requirit necessariam purgationem naturalem vel pejorem,
experientia occultae probationis talium, ergo non habent delectationem in
mulieribus, and cum talem repereris, nota enim been, quia ipse estunus exillis.
Correlaria hujus quaestionis est quod dignum valde esset adnullare privatas
religiones hujus peccati incoeptores: sed Deus ex sua magna potestate de
peccatis privatis manifestam sumat vindictam.

Quarta quaestio quae plus damnificat populum innocentem, est quia fictum
miraculum sacri panis inducitomnes homines, paucis exceptis ad Idolatriam, quia
ipsi aestimant quod corpus Domini quod nunquam exibit Coelum, virtute verborum
sacerdotis sit in exiguo pane quem ipsi populo ostendunt; sed utinam vellent
credere quod Doctor Evangelicus dicit in suo Trialogo, quia panis altaris est
habitudinaliter corpus Christi; quia supponimus quod isto momento potest
quilibet vir and foemina in lege divina conficere Sacramentum panis sine aliquo
tali miraculo. Correlarium hujus quaestionis est, quod si corpus Christi sit
dotatum gloria aeterna, officium corporis Christi compositum per Sanctum Thomam
non est verum, and depictum plenum falsis miraculis; and hoc non est mirum,
quia frater Thomas illo tempore tenens cum Papa, voluit fecisse miraculum de
ovo gallinae; and been novimus quod quodlibet mendacium aperte praedicatum,
cedit illi in verecundiam and injuriam, qui semper est fidelis and sine defectu.

Quinta quaestio est haec, Exorcismi, sanctificationes, consecrationes sive
benedictiones factae in Ecclesia sancta vini and panis, aquae, olei, salis,
cerei incensi, sive thuris, mensae altaris, murorum Ecclesiae, vestimentorum
mitrae, baculi pastoralis, baculorum peregrinorum and hujusmodi, vera practica
sunt Nigromanciae potius quam sanctae Theologiae.

Haec quaestio probatur sic, per tales exorcismos and consecrationes creaturae
sunt oneratae esse altioris virtutis quam sunt ex natura propria, and nihil
mutationis vide^us in hujusmodi creaturis exorcizatis vel consecratis nisi per
falsam fidem, quae est principale in omni art diabolica.

Correlarium si liber qui exorcizat aquam benedictam aspersam in Ecclesiam Dei
esset totus verus nobis, videtur veraciter, quia aqua benedicta in sancta
Ecclesia usitata optima esset medicina, cujus contrarium experimur.

Sexta quaestio quae sustentat multam superbiam, est, quod Rex and Pontifex in
eadem persona, Praelatus and Judex temporalis causae, Curatus and Officiarius
in servicio mundiali quod libet regnum reddit sine regula debita vel
convenienti regimine. Haec quaestio probatur sic, potestas temporalis and
spiritualis sunt duae parts totius sanctae Ecclesiae and in eo qui se uni
eorum deputavit non deberet se interponere cum altero, quia nemo potest duobus
dominis servire, and nobis videtur quod Hermefodrita vel Ambidexter esset
conveniens nomen talibus hominibus duplicis status.

Correlarium, nos procuratores Dei in ista causa instamus and prosequimur ac
petimus in isto Parliamento, quod omnesmodi curatores tam alti quam bassi sint
plene excusati abomni officio temporali, and se occupent cum curis suis, and de
nullis aliis se interponant.

Septima quaestio quam nos potenter affirmamus, est, quod speciales orationes
factae in Ecclesia nostra pro animabus defunctorum, proferendo unum ex nomine
potius quam alium, est falsum fundamentum elemosinae super quod omnes domus
elemosinariae in Anglia male fundantur. Haec quaestio probatur duplici ratione;
primo quia oration meritoria and valoris deberet esse opus procedens ex alta
caritate, and perfecta caritas non accipit personas, quia diliges proximum,
etc. quia propter nobis videtur donatio bonorum temporalium collatorum
sacerdotibus and domibus elemosinariis, est causa principalis hujusmodi
orationum specialium, quae non multum distat a simonia; quia speciales
orationes factae pro hominibus damnatis ad poenam aeternam multum Deo
displicent, and quamvis dubium sit, tamen verisimile est fideli populo, quod
fundationes domorum elemosinariarum propter ipsorum venenosam dotationem pro
majori part transiissent viam latam. Correlarium. Oration valoris procedens a
perfecta caritare debet se extendere in generali ad omnes quos Deus vult
salvare, and dimittere debent Mercancias orationum spiritualium modo usitatarum
pro mortuis hominibus factas mendicantibus Possessionatis and aliis Presbyteris
peculiaribus animarum, qui sunt populus magni oneris toti regno manutenentes in
otio; quia probatum extitit in quodam libro quem Rex audivit, quod centum domus
elemosinarum sufficerent toti regno, and ex hoc contingeret maximum commodum
possibile parti temporali.

Octava quaestio necessaria referri populo decepto, peregrinationes, orationes,
and oblationes, caecis imaginibus crucifixi and surdis imaginibus de ligno and
lapide sunt propinquae naturae Idolatriae and multum distant ab operibus
caritatis sive elemosinae, and quamvis prohibitae imagines sint liber erroris
populo laicali, adhuc imagine sanctae Trinitatis usualis est maxim
abominabilis. Hanc quaestionem Deus aperte monstravit, mandando operam
misericordiae fieri hominibus indigentibus quia ipsi sunt imago Dei in majori
similitudine quam lignum vel lapis; quia Deus non dixit, Faciamus lignum vel
lapidem, etc. sed hominem ad similitudinem nostram, quia altus honor latria a
Clericis vocatus soli debetur Deitati; and honor vocatus dulia debetur homini
vel Angelis, and aliis creaturis inferioribus. Correlarium: officium de ligno
crucis bis in anno celebratum in nostra Ecclesia est plenum idolatria, quia si
lignum crucis, Christi lancea, and clavi essent tanto honor venerandi, tunc
labia Judae proditoris solennes essent reliquiae, si quis posset illa obtinere:
sed nos rogamus te peregrine quam oblationem facis ossibus sanctorum
incrismatorum in aliquo loco ut intendis relevare indulgentiam sanctam in
Coelo, vel domus pauperis Elemosinariae quae ita been dotatur, qui Deus novit
quomodo homines qui modo canonizantur, and ut apertius loquamur fideles Christi
supponunt quod puncta propter quae moriebatur nobilis vir quem homines
appellant sanctum Thomam, non sunt causa Martyrii nec fuerunt.

Nona quaestio quae deprimit populum, est quod articulus confessionis dictus
necessarius hominum salvationi cum potestate ficta vel praetensa absolutionis,
exaltat sacerdotum superbiam, and dat iis opportunitatem occultae vocationis
alterius quam dicere volumus in praesenti: quia Domini and Dominae sunt
arrestati propter timorem suorum confessorum qui non audent dicere veritatem:
and tempus confessionis est tempus valde aptum precationi and continuationis
peccatorum mortalium; dicunt etiam se esse commissarios Dei ad judicandum de
quolibet peccato ad deformandum and purgandum illos quos volunt. Dicunt se
habere claves Coeli and Inferni, and excommunicare possunt vel benedicere,
ligare vel solvere secundum prepriam eorum voluntatem in tantum quod propter
bursellum frumenti vel duodecim denarios annuatim ipsi volunt vendere gloria^
regni coelestis cum clausa Warantisationis sigillata communi sigillo eorum.
Haec quaestio est visa in usu, quae alia non indiget probatione.

Correlarium: Papa Romanus se fingit altum thesaurarium totius Ecclesiae,
habens dignum jocale passionis Christi in custodia, cum meritis omnium
sanctorum Coeli, per quod dat fictam indulgentiam a poena and a culpa, est
thesaurizarius maxim bannitus extra caritatem ex quo potest liberare omnes
prisinarios existentes in poenis ad voluntatem propriam, and scriptum facere
nunquam venire ibidem: sed quamlibet Christianus fidelis been potest videre
quod multa secreta falsitas est abscondita in Ecclesia nostra.

Haec est decima quaestio; Homicidium per bellum vel per legem justiciae
aliquam praetensam perpetratum propter causam temporalem vel spiritualem sine
speciali revelatione express est contrarium novo Testamento, quod est lex
gratiae and plenum misericordiae. Haec quaestio manifest probatur exemplo
Christi praedicantis hic in terra, qui maxim docuit dimittere inimicis and
misereri adversariorum, and non occidere eos: cujus ratio est, pro majori enim
part quando homines pugnant post primum ictum dirumpitur caritas, and
quicunque caritate in morte exuitur, transit recta via ad inferna. Et ultra hoc
nos been novimus quod nullus clericus scit per sacram scripturam invenire vel
rationem legalem ostendere quod poena mortis est infligenda potius uni peccato
mortali quam alteri; sed lex misericordiae quae est novum testamentum, prohibet
omne homicidium in evangelio, dictum est antiquitus non occides.

Correlarium est, sancta spoliatio pauperis populi, quando Domini premant
indulgentias a poena and a culpa hiis qui subsidia conferunt exercitui eorum
collecto ad interficiendum Christianum populum in terris remotis propter bona
temporalia obtinenda sicut alias fieri vidimus, and milites qui discurrunt ad
Paganiam vel Sarracenos ad obtinendum sibi magnum nomen in occisione hominum,
acquirunt sibi indignationem magnam Regis pacis, quia per humilitatem and
tolerantiam lex nostra extitit multiplicata, and pugnatores ac homicidas odit
Christus, and eisdem minatur dicens, Qui gladio percutit gladio peribit.

Conclusio undecima verecunda; dictum votum continenciae factum in nostra
Ecclesia a mulieribus quae sunt fragiles and inperfectae in natura, est causa
horribilissimi peccati possibilis naturae humanae; quia quamvis occisio
puerorum ante baptismum eorum, procuratio aborcii, aut destruction seminum ante
formatum foetum, facta per medicinas, sint gravia peccata valde: adhuc
conjunctio mutua foeminarum contra naturam in actu carnali, vel earum coitus
cum bestia irrationali, vel cum creatura insensibili non viva, transcendit in
demeritoria action, dignum poenis inferni.

Correlarium; Nos vellemus quod viduae and tales quae voverunt castitatem,
investitae annulo and mantello, deliciose pastae, vel delicate nutritae essent
desponsatae, quia eas nescimus excusare de occultis peccatis.

Duodecima quaestio; Multitudo artium non necessariarum homini in nostra
Ecclesia, multum peccatum nutrit in superflua curiositate and diffiguratione
hominum per vestes curiosas: hoc ostendit experientia, and ratio probat, quia
natura cum paucis artibus sufficeret humanae naturae.

Correlarium; Ex quo Apostolus Paulus dicit, habentes victum and quibus
tegamur, his contenti sim^^; nobis videtur quod aurifabri, and fabri armorum,
and omnia genera artium non necessariarum homini secundum Apostolum, destrui
debent propter augmentum virtutum: quia quamvis istae duae arts nominatae,
necessariae fuerunt in veteri lege; novum tamen Testamentum has arts cum
multis allis evacuavit.

WE pore Men Tresorers of Christ and his Apostels, denouncyn to the Lords and
Commens of the Parliament, certain Conclusions and Treuthes for the Reformation
of Holy Church of Inglond, the which has been blend and leprouse many year, be
the Mayntenance of the proud Prelaci, born up with Flateryng of private
Religion. The which is multiplied to a great Charge, and onerous to Pepil here
in Inglond.

When the Chirch of Inglond began to dote in Temperalte after her Stepmoder the
great Church of Rome, and the Chirches were slain be Appropriacion to diverse
Places: Feythe, Hope, and Charity, begone for to fle out of our Chirch, for
Pride wit his sori Genealogy of dedely Sins chalangith it, be Title of
Heritage. This Conclusion is generale, and is proved by Experience, Custum and
Manner, as you shall heryn affter.

The secund Conclusion is this: Our usuel Priesthode, the which began in Rome,
feyned of a Power heyer than Angels, is not the Priesthode, the which Christ
ordained to his Apostells. This Conclusion is proved; for the Priest-hode of
Rome is marked with Signs, Rites, and Bishopes Blessyngs, and that is of litel
Virtu, no where ensamplede in holy Scripture. For the Bishopes Ordinals in the
New Testament ben litel of Record, and we can not se that the Holy Ghost for any
such Signs gifes any Gifts: for He and his holy Gifts may not stond with
dedely Sin in no manner Person.

The Correlary of this Conclusion, that it is full unketh to many that be wise,
to se Bishopes play with the Holy Ghost in making of her Orders, for they gif
Crowns in Carecters instead of whit hertes, and that is the Liveray of
Antichrist brought into holy Church to color Idleness.

The trid Conclusion sorrowful to here, is that the Law of Continence enexed to
Priest-hode, that in Prejudice of Wymmen was first ordeynet, inducyth Sodomy in
all holy Chirch: bot we excuse us be the Bible, for the suspecte Decre that
says, that we shall not name.
it. Reason and Experience provyth this Conclusion, for delicious Metis and
Drynkes of Men of holy Chirch, will haf nedful Purgation of Kind or Wers.
Experience for the privy Asay of such Men, is, that thai lik no Wymmen, and
when thou provest such a Man, mark him well, for he is on of tho. The Correlary
of this Conclusion, that the private Religions Begynners of this Sin, were
most worthi to ben anulled: but God of his might of prive Sins send open
Vengeance.

The ferth Conclusion that most harmeth the innocent Pepel, is this, that the
feyned Miracle of the Sacrament of Bred inducyth al Men but a few, to Idolatre;
for thai wen that Goddis Bodi that nevere schal out of Heven, be virtu of
Priestis Words be closed essentiali in a litel Bred, that thai show to the
People: but wou^^ God they would believe what the Doctor Evangelicus seis in
his Trialoge, quod Panis altaris est habitudinaliter Corpus Christi. For we
suppose that on this wise, may every true Man and Womman in Gods Law, make the
Sacrament of this Bread without any such Miracle. The Correlary of this
Conclusion is, that if Christ's Bodi be dowid with everlasting Ioi, the Servys
of Corpus Christi, made be Friar Thomas is untrew, and peynted full of falls
Miracles; and that is no wonder, for Friar Thomas that same time holdyng with
the Pope, would haf mad a Miracle of an Hen Egg: and we know well, that every
Lesyng openly preached, turns him to Vilany that ever was true, and without
defaut.

The fifth Conclusion is this, that Exorsyms and holowyng mad in the Chirch of
Wine, Bread, and way-Water, Salt, Oil, and Encense, the Stone of the Altar,
Something wanting in the MS.
upon vestment Myter, Croys and pilgrim Staves, be the very practis of
Nygromancy, rather than of the holy Theologi.

This Conclusion is proved thus; for be such Exorsymes Creatures be charget to
be of heyer Virtu then her own Kind, and we see nothing of change in no such
Creature, that is so charmed but be falls beleve, the which is the Principal of
the Develes craft.

The Correlary of this, that if the Book that charmeth hali Water sprede were
al true, us thenk verily, that holy Water used in hali Chirch, schuld be the
best Medecyn to all manner of Seknes.

The syxt Conclusion that maynteneth mychel Pride is, that a King and a Bishop
al in on Person, a Prelate and a Justice in Temperal Cause, a Curate and an
Officer maken any Roem out of good Rewle. This Conclusion is oponly schemed,
for Temperalte and Spiritualte be two Partis of an holy Chirch, and therefore
he that has taken him to that one schuld not mell him with that other, Quia
nemo potest duobus Dominis servire; and us think that Hermifodrita or
Ambidexter, were a good Name to such manner of Men of dowble estate.

The Correlary is, that we the Procuratours of God in this Cause, do prosti to
this Parliament, that a^ manner of Curates, both hey and low, ben fully excused
of temperel Office, and occupy hem with her cure and not else.

The sevent Conclusion that we myghtily (...) is, that special Prayers fordede
Men's Souls mad in owre Chirch, preferring on be Name more than another, This
is the false ground of Alms Deed, on the which al Alms houses of Inglond ben
wikkidly grounded. This Conclusion is proved by two Skilles, on is, for Prayer
memory and of value schold be a Weck procedyng of hey and perfect Charity,
accept no Persons, quia diliges proximum, etc. Wherefore us thenkes that the
Gift of temporel Gods to Priests, and to Almes-Houses, is principal cause of
special Prayer, the which is no fer fro Symony. Another Skill for special
Prayer, mad for Men, dampened to everlastand Pain, is to God greatly displesant,
and thou it be dowt, it is likli to true Christ's People, that the Fownders of
Almes-Howses, for her venymous Dotation ben for the most part passed the broad
Wey. The Correlary is, the Prayer of value spring and out of perfect Charity
schold embrace in general, al tho that God would haf saved, and leve Merchaundys
now usyd for spiritual Prayers, ymade to Mendicaunts, Possessioners, and other
soul Priests, the which ben a Pepel of great coarge to all the Reme mayntenyd
in Idleness; for it was proved in a Book, that the King hard that a hundredth of
Almes-Hous suffised to all the Reme, and there schold fall the gretest increase
possibil to Temporel Parti.

The eight Conclusion nedful to tell to the Pepel begiled, is the Pilgrinage,
Prayers and Offering made to blind Rodes, and to defe Images of Tree and of
Ston, that be ner of kyn to Ydolatri, and fer fro Alms Deed. And thou this
forboden Ymageri, be a Book of Error to the lewd Pepul, yet the Image usuel of
the Trinity, is most abominable. This Conclusion God openly schews,
commandyng to do Almes-Dede to Men that be nedy, for thai be the Image of God
in a mor liknes than the Stok or Stone: for God sais not, faciamus lignum ad
imaginem and similitudinem nostram, bot faciamus hominem, etc. for the hey
Worchip that Clerks clepen Latria, longes to the Godhede alone; and the low
Worchip that they clepen Dulia, perteneth to Man and to Angels, and to lower
Creatures. The Correlary is, that the Service of the Rode tree donn twyes every
yer in our Chirch, is full filled of Ydolatrie; for if the Rode-tre, Nail, Sper,
and the Crown of God schoul be so heyle worchiped, than were Judas Lips, who
so might ham get a wonder great Relick. Bot we pray the Pilgrine us to tell,
what thou offers to Seintes schryned in any place, wheder releves you the Seint
that is in Blis, or the pore Almes-Hous that is so well endowed for Men
canonized God wot how. And to speak more in plain, true Christen Men supposen,
that the point of that noble Man, that Men clepen Seint Thomas, were no cause
of Martyrdom.

The nint Conclusion that holds the Pepel low is, that the Articles of
Confession that is said necessari to Salvacion of Man, with a feyned Power of
Absolucion, enhaunceth Priests Pride, and gyf hem oportunite of prive calling,
other than we will now say. For Lords and Ladys ben arrested that for fere of
here Confessors they dur not seyn a Truth. And in time of Confession is the
best time of Wowing, and of prive Continuance of dedely Sin. Thai seyn thai
ben Comissaries of God to deem of every Sin, to foulen and to cleanse whom so
thai like. They sai that thai have the Keys of Heven and of Hell, they may
curse and bless, bynd and unbynd, at her own will; insomuch that for a Busshel
of Whete or twelve Pence be yer, they will sell the Bliss of Heven be Chartir,
of Clause, of Warrantise en sele with the commun Sele. This Conclusion is so
seen in use, that it nedyth no other Prof.

Correlarium, The Pope of Rome that feynet him hey Tresorer of holy Chirch,
havand the worthi Jewel of Christ's Passion in his kepying with the Deserts of
al hollowen of Heaven, by which he geveth the feyned Pardon, a poena and a
culpa, he is a Tresorer most banyst out of Charity seyn he may deliver the
Prisoners that been in pain at his own will, and make himself so that he schall
never com there: Her may every true Christen Man well se that there mich prive
falshede hid in our Church.

The tent Conclusion is, that Manslaut be batail or onn Law of Rigtwisenes, for
temporel Cause or spirituel, without special Revelacion, is express
contrarious to the New Testament, the which is a Law of Greece and full of
Mercy. This Conclusion is oponly proved be ensample of Christ's Preching here
in Earth, the wyche most taugte for to low and have mercy of his Enemies, and
nogt for to sle hem. The reason is of this, that for the more Party there Men
fi^t affter the first Stroke Charity is ybroke, and who so deyth out of
Charity, goth the hey wey to Hell. And over this, we know well that no Clerk
can find be Scripture or be Reason, lawful punischment of Death, for on dedely
Sin and not for another. Bot the Law of Mercy, that is the New Testament,
forbede al Manslaugte in Evangelio, dictum est antiquis non occides.

The Correlary is, it is holy robbing of the pore Pepil when Lords purchase
Indulgence, a poena and a culpa, I think it should be praemiant.
to hem, that helps to his often to Instead of all perhaps it should be kill.
all the Christen Men in far Lands for temporel Good as we haf seen, and
knygtes that run to Heyennes to geten hem a Name, in sleying of Men get much
maugre of the King of Pees; for be Meknes and Sufferaunce, our Beleve was
multiplied, and Figters and Mansleyrs, hem Christ hates and manasseth, Qui
gladio percutit gladio peribit.

The elevent Conclusion is scham for to say, that the avowe of Continence made
in our Chirch of Wymmen, the wych ben febil and unperfite in kind, is cause of
brynging of most horribel Sin possible to Mankind; for thou sleying of
Childeren or they ben Christened, abortyse, or stroying of Kind be Medicine ben
full synful: yet knowing hem self, or unreasonable Best, or Creature that bears
no, passyd in Worthiness to ben punisched in pains of Hell.

The Correlary is, that Wydewes, and such as han taken the Mantel, and the
Ryng, deliciouslych fed, we would they were wedded, for we ne can excuse hem of
pryvy Sins.

The twelf Conclusion is, that the multitude of Crafftes nogt nedful used in
our Church norisch mykel Sin in wast Curiosity and disgysing. This schewes
Experience, and Reason proves, for Nature with a few Crafftes sufficed to need
of Man.

The Correlary is, that sais Seint Poule, we havand our bodily Fode, and
cleying we schuld hold us paid. Us think that Goldsmythes and Armorers, and al
manner Crafftes, not nedful to Man after the Apostel, schuld be destryed, for
the encres of Virtu. For thou this twey Crafftes nemed were much more nedful in
the Old Law, the New Testament has voyded these and many other.

I suppose it is not necessary, after the Perusal of this Piece, to observe
that the Romish Clergy cast those Crimes upon the Lollards, whereof themselves
were guilty, and which the Lollards laid to their Charge in the Face of Heaven
and Earth.

It will be said perhaps that this Petition contains several Errors: I own it:
but we are to observe, 1 st, That it is part of the Frailty of Mankind, to fall
into the contrary Extreme, whilst we endeavor to avoid those things that
appear to us to be mortal. 2 dly, That these Failings may be easily extenuated
by the same Charity which we commonly make use of, when we speak of the
Ancienest Fathers of the Church.

But this will some object, respects only the Lollards of England, and cannot
be extended to the justifying of the Lollards of Germany, who might have been
guilty of the Crimes whereof they are accused. To this Objection I answer: 1
st, That since the Lollards, according to the Testimony of Kilianus, reported
by M. du Cange, were the same with the Waldenses; the Bishop of Meaux has
already drawn up their Apology, by maintaining that they differed only in a
very few things from the Papists. 2 dly, That if one should reject the Bishop's
Opinion, yet sufficient Matter for their Justification may be found in the
Writings of the more honest Authors of the Romish Communion, such as Aeneas
Sylvius and some others, without speaking of their own Writings or Apologies,
whereof we have some few Remnants printed.

Be it as it will, to return to our English Lollards; Fox in his Acts and
Monuments, Tom. 1. p. 574, and 575.
gives us a Bull of Pope Boniface IX, directed to John Bishop of Hereford, to
oblige him to put King Richard II, upon persecuting of them. As likewise the
Bull sent to King Richard on the same Subject, which imports, that he had
commanded the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, to prosecute them with the
utmost Rigor and Severity; and afterward sets down the Commission of Richard
II, for the Trial of one Walter Brute, one of that Party.

He has also given us the History of the Manner of their being hanged and
burnt by the King's Order in 1414. But because it will be of moment to acquaint
the Public, in what Points they chiefly differed from the Church of Rome; and
because there is come into my Hands a Register of some of the ancient Bishops
of Salisbury, wherein are contained many Trials of these ancient Christians, I
thought it necessary to add some of those Trials at the end of this Book,
faithfully copied from the Original. There is no doubt but that there are many
of them in the Registers of Canterbury, of York, and of several other Sees,
which could demonstrate, that the Romish Clergy have never, till the very
Reformation, omitted their utmost Endeavors toward the Extirpation, by Fire
and Faggot, of all those that rebuked them for their Vices, and for the
Corruption of their Doctrine.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Doctrine of Wicklef and his Disciples, in England.
BUT whether the Lollards maintained the Doctrine of the Albigenses in England
or no, certain it is, that it received new Luster from the Learning of Wicklef,
and those who joined with him in the defense of the Truth, against the Friars
and Court of Rome. My Design is not to examine the whole History of Wicklef,
and of his Disciples, to the bottom: The Bishop of Meaux has done his
Endeavors to blacken them, and to load them with the foulest Calumnies; I only
say in short, that the Bishop did not take the pains to consult what Mr. Wood
has writ on this Subject, in his History of the University of Oxford; where he
cites the Registers of the University, which refute the greatest part of those
Slanders that the Romish Party have published against Wicklef.

However, thus much is evident, that John Wicklef was the most renowned Man of
that Age, both for Learning and Piety. He had been Educated at the University
of Oxford, where Scholastical Divinity had established its Empire, by the Care
of Robert Grosthead, John Duns, Occam, Richard of Armagh, and diverse others. He
there publicly professed Divinity, and was at last made Rector of Lutterworth
in Leicestershire, where he died peaceably, after great and long Troubles,
which he suffered for the defense of the Truth.

The Pope had at this time usurped almost the whole Royal Authority, and more
especially in England, where, after King John had made himself a Vassal of the
Church of Rome, under Innocent III, the Popes commanded the Kings of England at
pleasure. We see by the Writings of Herveus Brito, who wrote at Paris about the
Beginning of this Century, where he was Professor, that the temporal Power over
all the World was directly attributed to the Pope, neither did any Kings oppose
themselves against it. It is well known that the Canonists, who had then the
Reputation, had no other Song in their Mouths but that of the Pope's Divinity,
his Succession to the Rights of Jesus Christ, and consequently his absolute
Empire over all the World. This we meet with in all their Writings, and more
especially in those who writ in defense of the Popes, against the Emperor Lewis
of Bavaria.

The Friars Mendicants, whom Cardinal Albizi did very truly call the Pope's
Soldiers, had usurped all the Rights of the Secular Clergy, and advanced their
Conquests for the Pope to that Degree, that the Authority of the Princes and
Bishops signified nothing any longer in England, except only when they acted in
favor of the Monks. From the time of Matthew Paris, who gives us so strange a
Description of their Insolence, and of their Attempts against the Authority of
the Clergy, things were carried to that height, that nothing was any longer
able to oppose them.

Without doubt there was great need of Courage, as great as Wicklef's was, and
Learning too as vast as his, to stop so impetuous a Torrent. This great Man set
himself against it, and carried on his Design after such a manner, that the
Effects and Consequences of it, continued to the very Reformation. It would
take up a Volume to give a particular Account of what he wrote in the Reigns of
Edward III, and Richard II. I shall content my self to take notice only of some
few Particulars, and I shall afterward treat of his Doctrine, which diffused
it self through Germany, and brought about a great Reformation there.

1. He publicly opposed in his Professor's Chair, several Errors of the Church
of Rome, which the Monks and Popes by their Authority, endeavored to maintain
and countenance; in which Undertaking, he was always backed by the Body of that
University, where he had taught so long time.

2. He maintained his Doctrine by the Favor of the Court, and the most
illustrious and learned Members thereof, and with so great a Satisfaction of
the People, that Knighton is obliged to acknowledge, that one half, yea, the
greater Part of the People, owned his Doctrine.

3. He had made so great Progress amongst the Clergy, that he writes himself,
that above a third Part of the Clergy were ready to defend his Doctrine with
the hazard of their Lives: Accordingly, he appeared boldly at the Synod of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, in February 1377, to give an account of his Doctrine;
where he defended himself with that Vigor, that none durst gainsay him. He
appeared there again the same Year in May, neither durst the Archbishop then
decide any thing against him. And when in the year 1382, they in his Absence,
condemned some Articles which he maintained, yet he was there defended by the
Deputies of the University of Oxford, who gave a public and authentic
Testimony of his Piety, and his Purity in the Faith.

4. The University of Oxford had espoused his Quarrel with the Church of Rome
so far, that after his having been attacked by a Council at London, in 1382,
and after having maintained his Doctrine from the year 1367 with public
applause, his Writings continued recommended by a Decree of the University, to
all the Students both in the Public Schools and Colleges, and were not forced
from them, till after his Condemnation, which happened at the Council of
Constance, 28 years after his Death. We see the Esteem Wicklef had in that
University, by the Testimony they gave in 1406, against those that endeavored
to blemish the Memory of this great Man: for after they had spoken of his Piety
and Probity, as of a Thing known to all Men, after they had declared that he
was a courageous Defender of the Faith, P. 203. Hist. and antiq. Universit.
Oxon.
they add, Qui singulos mendicitate spontanea Christi Religionem blasphemantes,
sacrae Scripturae sententiis catholice expugnavit: That he had in a Catholic
Way, by Texts of Scripture, overthrown all those, who by a voluntary Poverty
blasphemed the Religion of Christ.

And since the Romish Party had not at that time a more formidable Enemy than
Wicklef, they were not wanting to muster all their Forces in order to suppress
his Doctrine. In the Year 1396, William Woodeford, a Cordelier, was chosen by
Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, to write against Wicklef's Trialogue,
which he did accordingly, refuting 18 Articles of his Doctrine. This Book is
printed in the Fasciculus.

In the Year 1411, Thomas Walden an Englishman, deputed to the Council of
Constance, dedicated his Doctrinal to Pope Martin V, against Wicklef, where he
accuses him of above 800 Errors. This Monk, as able as he was, was really one
of the most passionate Disputers that ever writ: but withal it is true also,
that to follow his Measures, we can scarcely imagine a more particular
Discussion of the Errors, Superstitions and false Suppositions, which the
Church of Rome makes use of to maintain her Errors and false Worship, than that
which Wicklef made use of. In the Account that Walden gives of it, we meet with
a great Knowledge of Holy Scripture, and great Skill in Antiquity, whose
Authority he makes use of to confound the Romish Novelties; we discover there a
great strength in his way of reasoning, and an extraordinary Method in his
Consequences; so that he seems to have fully penetrated the Weakness of the
Romish Cause, and overthrown its whole Foundations.

One may plainly discover this, by running over the Titles of the Doctrinal of
Thomas Walden, upon Matters of Faith, upon the Sacraments, upon those which he
calls sacramental things, or that belong to Sacraments; for we scarcely meet
with any Articles controverted between the Church of Rome and the Protestants,
which Wicklef has not touched and handled, and that with sufficient Exactness
too. This has obliged the Papists with so much Care to reprint Walden's Works
against Wicklef, as containing a Body of their Controversies against the
Protestants.

I am not ignorant that Walden objects some very harsh and impious Opinions to
him, and that the Council of Constance has mingled several of that Nature
amongst the 45 Articles of Wicklef, which are there condemned. But here I must
desire my Reader to call to mind four things. 1 st, That Woodeford has
objected no such thing to Wicklef, which shows that he never taught any like
Doctrine, but that they are only Consequences drawn by a scholastical Divine,
who was used to carry things too far. 2 dly, That Walden wrote at a time when
the Popish Party had the upper-hand in the Court of Henry V, who had condemned
the Wicklefites as guilty of high Treason, which Walden takes notice of in his
Dedication to Martin V. 3 dly, That it is very probable that this Catalogue of
45 Articles was drawn up by Walden himself, who was present at the Council of
Constance, on purpose to promote Wicklef's Condemnation. 4 thly, That the
Council of Constance was the first, where by public Consent that Maxim, That
Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, was ever put in Practice. Now let any
one judge what Equity or Truth can be expected from Villains of such profligate
Principles, who think it an Honor to act in every thing according to them?

After all this I might well excuse my self from setting down the Opinions of
Wicklef, or from saying any thing for his Justification; but I am willing to do
both the one and the other, for the Honor of this great Man, and for the
Readers Satisfaction. The Opinions of Wicklef with relation to the Doctrine of
Protestants, are these.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Calumnies that have been unjustly charged upon Wicklef by
the Papists.
1. WIcklef owns but 22 Canonical Books of Scripture, excluding all the rest,
which he calls Apocryphal De ver. script. page 110.
.

2. He teaches that the Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation.
Forasmuch, says he, as in Scripture all Truth is contained, it is evident that
all Disputes that take not their Rise thence, are profane Ibid. page 39.
. We are not to admit any Knowledge or Conclusion, which has not its Testimony
from Scripture Ibid. page 66.
.

3. He affirms, that every well-disposed Christian may understand the Holy
Scripture Ibid. p. 205.
. God has appointed the common sensible Scripture, to the comprehending of the
Catholic Sense, whereof God can never be wanting, because he always
enlightneth some particular Men, to which Illumination Holiness of Life
conduces very much, and it is the Duty of Divines to continue it in our Mother
the Church, which ought to keep within her Bounds; so that it is not lawful for
Divines to frame strange Doctrines, besides the Faith of Catholic Scripture.
For which End he lays down several Rules for the Understanding of the
Scriptures.

4. He asserts that the Scriptures ought to be translated into the vulgar
Tongue. Lib. Miscell, page 24.
The Truth of God, says he, is not more confined to one Language than to
another. Ibid. page 25.
Jesus Christ delivered the Lord's Prayer in a known Language. Ibid. page 24.
Why then may not the Gospel and other parts of Scripture be writ in English?
Ibid. page 26.
The Clergy ought to rejoice that the People know the Law of God. It was for
this Reason that he translated the whole Bible, whereof several Copies are
still to be found in the King's Library, and in several other Libraries in
England.

We may easily know what he thought of Tradition from these Words. De ver.
script. page 108.
We have a perfect Knowledge of all things necessary to Salvation, from the
Faith of Scripture. Art. 41. Oxon. condemnatus Reg. Acad.
Decrees, Statutes and Rites, that are added according to humane Traditions,
are all inseparably sinful, because they make the Law of God more difficult to
be kept, and hinder the Course of God's Word. De verit. script. page 411.
Traditions are hateful to God and the Church, except only so far as they are
grounded on Scripture. Ibid. page 333.
Men's own Inventions are chiefly to get Money: Ibidem.
they all sound for the Churches Gain.

1. See what he says of the Pope's Authority. Ibid. page 565.
In Constantine's time the Priesthood was removed; and it was not decreed, that
the Bishop of that Church should necessarily have a Primacy over all others, as
is here supposed. Expositio Decalogi, p. 5.
Neither do I believe that any Catholic is so foolish as to believe, that when
Christ's Vicar writes, Let it be done, and he, who spoke the Word and all
things were made, does not approve of it, he has any Right to command, because
of him alone it can be said with Truth, So I will, and so I command, let my
Will stand instead of Reason. And accordingly he was condemned by the Council
of Constance for believing, Art. 17. damnat. in Syn. Constable.
That it is ridiculous to suppose the Pope to be the Highest Priest, and that
Christ never approved of any such Dignity, neither in Peter nor in any one else.

2. Of the Power which the Popes assume to themselves over the Temporalities of
Kings, Wicklef wrote a particular Treatise, entitled De Civili Dominio, to
overthrow their Claims, Page 67.
where he speaks thus: In Civil Power there cannot be two Lords of equal
Authority, the one must be principal, and the other subordinate. We will not
subject our King in this matter to him, when he bestowing any Mortmain,
reserves to himself the capital Dominion.

3. He did not believe the Pope's Infallibility. De ver. script. page 456.
The Pope may sin as Head of the Church: Expos. De call. p. 123.
He may sin by Nature, having a capital Lord above him. De ver. script. page
457.
There is no doubt but that an Error may be committed in the Election of a
Pope, and yet more in his following Conversation. De Blasphem. page 30.
He may err in Feeding the Churches, or in Articles of the Faith. De verit.
script. page 181.
Many Popes have been corrupted with heretical Pravity. He believed it was
probable, Ibid. page 55.
That all the Bishops of Rome for 300 Years and more before his time, were
fully Heretics.

4. He made no Difficulty of saying, that the Pope was the chiefest Antichrist
De verit. Sermon. page 590.
.

1. Wicklef informs us what his Thoughts were of the Church of Rome, when he
says, De ver. script. page 182^
It is possible that the Lord Pope may be ignorant of the Law of Scripture, and
the Church of England may be far truer in her Judgment of Catholic Truth, than
the whole Church of Rome that is made up of the Pope and Cardinals.

2. He maintains that the Church of Rome may err, but that this does not
hinder, but that the Purity of Doctrine may be preserved in the Catholic
Church. Ibid. page 105.
It is necessary, says he, That the Catholic Faith be in the whole
Mother Church.

3. He did not believe that wicked Men were true Members of the Church, and
censures those who teach, that Men who shall be damned are notwithstanding.
Members of the Church, so joining Christ and the Devil: Contr. Frat. mendic.
page 39.
They teachen together, says he, that tho Men that shall be damned be Members
of Holy Church, and thus they wedden Christ and the Devil together: he says,
that unbelieving and ungodly Men Comm. in Psalm. page 2. in Praef.
, are in the Holy Church by Body, not by Thought; by Name, not by Deed; in
Number, not by Merit.

As to the Doctrine of Justification, it is very plain, that he was not of the
Opinion of the Church of Rome, as these Words show: De ver. script. p. 552.
The Merit of Christ is of it self sufficient to redeem every Man from Hell;
Ibid. page 553.
it is to be understood of a Sufficiency of it self, without any other
concurring Cause. Ibid. page 550.
All that follow Christ, being justified by his Righteousness, shall be saved
as his Offspring.

He rejects the Doctrine of the Merit of Works, and falls upon those Com. in
Psalm. p. 474.
which say, That God did not all for them, but think that their Merits help.
Ibid. p. 182.
Heal us Lord for naught, that is, no Merit of ours, but for thy Mercy: Ibid.
page 368.
Lord, not to us, but to thy Mercy give thy Joy.

As for what concerns the Lord's Supper, we find that this great Man did not
believe Transubstantiation: See how he expresses himself Confess. de sacr.
Euch. p. 58.
This Bread is fairly, truly and really, spiritually, virtually and
sacramentally the Body of Christ; Art. 4. in Syn. Constable. damnat.
as St. John the Baptist was figuratively Elias, and not personally. Art. 49.
Oxon. damnat.
As Christ is both God and Man at once, so the consecrated Host is the Body of
Christ, and true Bread at the same time, because it is the Body of Christ at
least, in a Figure, and true Bread in its Nature; or, which signifies the same
thing, it is true Bread naturally, and the Body of Christ figuratively. He
constantly affirmed that this Doctrine De Blasph. page 40.
lasted in the Church for a thousand Years, till Sathanas was unbound, and
Ibid. p. 37.
the People blinded by Friars, with the Heresy of Accidents without Subjects.

1. He owned but two Sacraments, as appears by the 45 th, 46 th, 47 th, and 48
th Articles, condemned at Oxford, and in the Council of Constance.

2. Art. 43. in Syn. Constable. damnat.
He was against the Use of Chrism in Baptism.

3. He maintained that extreme Unction was not a Sacrament. Art. 98. Oxon.
damn. vid. Wald. T. 2. page 268.
If corporal Unction were a Sacrament, as now is pretended, Christ and his
Apostles would not have been wanting to declare it to the World.

4. His Opinion concerning Confirmation, as it is practiced amongst the
Papists, he expresses thus. As for the Oil wherewith the Bishops anoint
Children, and the linen Coif that covers the Head, it seems to be a vain
Ceremony, Art. 8. in Syn. Constable. damn.
that can have no Foundation in Scripture, and that this Confirmation being
introduced without any Apostolical Authority, is Blasphemy against God.

1. He declam'd against the Use of Images with great Earnestness. Exp. Decal.
p. 48.
We ought to preach, says he, against the Costliness, Beautifulness, and other
Arts of cheating, wherewith we impose upon Strangers, rather to pick their
Pockets, than for the Propagation of Christ's Religion. Ibid. p. 48.
The Devil by his Falsehood deludes many, who sometimes suppose a Miracle to
have been wrought, when indeed it was nothing but a Cheat. Ibid.
The Poison of Idolatry lies hid in continued Imagination.

2. One may see how he distinguishes Sins. Miscell. p. 182.
Some Sins are called little Sins in comparison of greater, and De 7. pec. mort.
venial, because God's Son forgives them.

3. He did not own the Necessity of Auricular Confession: Art. 9. in Syn.
Constable. damnat.
Vocal Confession made to the Priest, introduced by Innocent, is not so
necessary. Art. 9. Londin. damnat.
If a Man be truly contrite, all outward Confession is superfluous and
unprofitable to him.

4. He wrote against the Doctrine of Satisfaction. Art. 47. Oxon. damnat.
The present Pope has reason to blush for the modern Penance, established by
him without any Ground, since it is not lawful for any Mortals, no not for the
Apostles themselves, to make the Law of God difficult, beyond what he himself
has limited.

5. His Judgment concerning Pardons and Indulgences he expresses in these
Words: Art. 42. Land. damn.
It is a foolish thing to rely upon the Indulgences of the Pope and the Bishops.

6. He gives this Rule concerning Fasting. De ver. script. page 8.
In Works of Humanity we must follow Christ, by doing such Works as bear some
Proportion with his. -- We must fast 40 Days from Sin, and as far as is
possible to Nature, from superfluous corporal Food.

7. Concerning Monks and their Vows, he speaks thus; Vita sacerd. p. 59.
Friars studien to be rich: Reg. S. Franc. p. 76.
they rob Men by begging. -- Touch a great Cup of Gold or Silver, but not a
Penny or Farthing. Ibid. p. 77.
They magnify more Obedience to sinful Men than to Christ.

8. Vid. de ver. script. p. 370, 406, 407. and Miscell. p. 63, 65.
He approved the Marriage of Priests.

9. He disapproved the Practice of the Church of Rome in the Matter of
Divorces. Miscell. p. 54. Exp. Decal. p. 117.
To make Divorce common, innumerable Subterfuges are invented.

10. He blamed the Custom of the Church of Rome, in granting Dispensations for
marrying in case of Propinquity of Blood. De ver. script. p. 399.
Such Dispensations as these bring Confusion into the Church.

11. He condemned all Equivocation, which so many Casuists of the Church of
Rome pretend to justify Vid. Capitul. 15. de verit. script. where he handles
this Subject at large, and p. 207.
.

12. He maintains that the King ought not to be subject to any foreign
Jurisdiction; For otherwise, says he, Kings would not be able fully to keep
the Peace in their own Kingdoms De ver. script. p. 453.
.

13. He blamed the too frequent Use of Excommunication De ver script. 368, 612.
Exp. Dec. p. 124.
.

14. He maintained, That a true Christian ought not to believe implicitly, but
with an explicit Faith, that expresses the Particulars, more or less according
as they are more or less obliged by God and his Gifts, and the Opportunity of
time De ver. script. p. 111.
.

15. He had no great Veneration for the Doctrine of Purgatory, when he says,
Whatsoever is said of Purgatory, is only spoke threatningly, as so many pious
Lies De ver. script. p. 267.
.

Thus we see what was Wicklef's Faith, and what his Judgment was concerning the
Superstitions and Corruptions of the Church of Rome; from whence we may gather
that he came very near to the Belief of the Protestant Churches.

It was no difficult matter therefore for Dr. James to justify him against the
horrid Calumnies of Walden, by consulting his manuscript Works, which are to be
found in several Libraries in England.

1. They objected against him, that he taught, that if a Priest or a Bishop
ordains or consecrates the Sacrament of the Altar, or administers Baptism,
whilst he is in mortal Sin, it can do him no Service.

But the Falsehood of this Objection, appears from Wicklef's own Words, which
assure us of the contrary; Except a Christian, says he, be united to Christ by
Grace, he has not Christ the Savior; nor without Falsehood, can he pronounce
the Sacramental Words, Tho they may do good to those who are capable of them:
for it behooves the Priest that consecrates, to be a Member of Christ; and as
some holy Men express it, to be in some sort Christ himself De ver. script. p.
138.
.

They objected against him, that he had asserted that it was not lawful for any
Ecclesiastical Person to have any temporal R^venue.

But nothing is more false, for Wicklef only says, that the Goods of the
Clergy are temporal Things, what way soever they come by them; and that the
Possession of them, is to be regulated by the Laws, as well as the Estates of
Laymen; De fund. leg. Ang. Lib. 1. cap. 32.
The Goods of spiritual Men, says he, be temporal, in what manner soever they
come to them, and must be ordered after the temporal Law, as the Goods of
temporal Men must be.

They said that it was his Opinion, that no Prelate ought to excommunicate any
Person whatsoever, unless he knew that God himself had excommunicated him.

But Wicklef only speaks of those rash and precipitate Excommunications, which
never fail to produce bad Effects, and which are only discharged from carnal
Respects. Exp. Decal. p. 130.
They like the Highpriests, Scribes and Pharisees, do not only eat the Flesh,
but the very Bones too; they do not water what is dry with the Word of God, but
endeavor to cut and break what is fat and full of Marrow. He says also, Ibid.
p. 123.
that Excommunications are the Fruit of Pride, to terrify poor Laymen.

They accused him of teaching, that a Man could not be either a Bishop or
Priest, as long as he continued in Mortal Sin.

But no such thing can be inferred from Wicklef's Words; for he still aiming at
the Reformation of the Clergy, which was very corrupt in his time, did not
carry it too far when he said, That De ver. script. p. 443.
it is not the Name that makes a Bishop, but the Life. Ibid.
Whosoever has only the Name of a Priest or Bishop, and does not endeavor to
add to that Name the reason of it, he is in truth neither Bishop nor Priest.

They affirmed, that he had taught that Sovereigns might deprive the Clergy of
their Possessions, if they thought good, as often as they committed any Fault.

But Wicklef never pretended, that the Clergy ought to be deprived of the Goods
they possessed for slight Faults. True it is, he did not think the Government
was obliged to maintain so many useless Monks: but as to the Bishops and
Priests, he never taught, that they ought to be deprived of their Benefices,
except they made themselves unworthy of them by a perfectly scandalous Life.

He taught, say they, that Tithes were only Alms, and that the Parishioners
might keep them back, and put them to what other Uses they pleased.

I own, that Wicklef often said, that Tithes were nothing else but mere Alms;
but it is false, that ever he asserted that the Parishioners might keep them
back: on the contrary, he says, De ver. script. p. 415.
It belongs to Parishioners for the good of their Souls, to minister Tithes and
Oblations to whom they are due. Ibidem.
The Priests of Christ ought to withdraw the Word of God from those who are not
rightly disposed for it; that is, if the People should be so obstinate and
disobedient to Holy-Mother the Church, as either to forbid, or not to minister
the Necessaries of Life to him who preaches the Gospel to them.

They object against him, that he despised temporal Things too much, for the
Love which he had for those that are eternal; and that he joined himself to the
Mendicant-Friars, approving their Poverty, and commending their Perfection. A
strange Crime indeed!

It is a surprising Thing to see them accuse Wicklef upon this account; but it
is no less astonishing to hear them assert, that he had great inclination for
the Begging-Friars: to be convinced of the Falsity whereof, we need only read
the complaint he made to the Parliament, and his Treatise against the Order of
Begging-Friars.

He held, say they, that Churchmen ought to beg.

Whereas on the contrary, he maintained that God had condemned Beggary, in the
Old and New Testament. See the fifth Chapter of his Book against the Order of
Friars Mendic.

They accuse him for condemning lawful Oaths.

But this is for want of having read his Works; for it appears by his Latin
Exposition of the third Commandment, and by his Book of the Truth of Scripture,
that he condemns all manner of Equivocations, and ambiguous Expressions,
whether with Oaths or without. He will not have any one to lie for a World, or
to save an infinite number of Souls, and much less to swear falsely.

He taught, say they, that all Things come to pass by an absolute Necessity.

We may easily see what Wicklef believed concerning this Matter. De ver.
script. p. 383.
God promises no Man either Reward or Punishment, but under either a tacit or
express Condition. Exp. Decal. p. 81.
Though all future Things do happen necessarily; yet God wills that good Things
happen to his Servants, through the Efficacy of Prayer.

He taught, said they, Doctrines tending to Sedition; as, That the Magistrate
cease to be a Magistrate, whilst he is under Mortal Sin; and that it is
lawful for the People to chastise their Princes, when ever they commit any
Fault. This Accusation is only founded upon this, that Wicklef put the King,
and all other inferior Magistrates in mind, that they did not bear the Sword
in vain. He says, If a King fails to do his Duty, and despises the
Engagements that lie upon him to govern his Subjects well, that he is not
properly nor truly King, that is to say, he does not perform the Duty of a
King; De ver. script. p. 513.
Perdens nomen officii and ordinis in effectu; Losing in effect the Name of his
Office and Order: Which are the very Terms of Bracton, the most renowned Lawyer
of England, who was never accused of endeavoring to incline the People to
Rebellion.

They accused him of not having the Modesty that a Divine ought to have, and
that he was too much given to Raillery.

I grant that when he was a young Man he was blamed for this Fault, which he
returned in a very edifying manner. I take God to witness, says he, De verit.
scripturae, page 145.
that I principally intend the Glory of God, and the Good of the Church, out of
a Veneration for the Scripture, and Observance of the Law of Christ; but if
with this Intention there may have crept in any sinister Aim of Vainglory,
worldly Profit, and Desire of Revenge, I am sorry for it, and by the Grace of
God shall endeavor to avoid it for the time to come.

They accused Wicklef that he was wont to dissemble his Opinions, to avoid the
danger which he might otherwise have drawn upon himself.

But we may with Truth give him this Testimony, that he was so little
acquainted with dissembling in Matters of Religion, that he was ready to suffer
Death for most of the Opinions that he maintained against his Enemies. De ver.
script. p. 183.
I am not suspected, says he, of being afraid to own these Conclusions; it
shall appear by the Grace of God, that I am not afraid to answer him and his
Accomplices, either to his Face, or in the Schools. Ibid. page 380.
If God will give me a teachable Heart, a persevering Constancy, and Charity
toward Christ, toward his Church, and toward the Members of the Devil, who
tear the Church of Christ, that so I may rebuke them out of pure Charity, how
glorious a Cause should I have to die for!

They say that his Rage against the Church of Rome, was because the Archbishop
of Canterbury had deprived him of a Benefice.

But besides, that we cannot build much upon the Testimony of Monks, who
invented this Fable, Wicklef himself protests all along, that he had no
particular Aim in all his Writings, and that he only disputes for the Honor of
God, and the Edification of the Church. De verit. script. page 145, and 15.


Lastly, They objected against him, that he maintained that every Creature was
God; and that God could not hinder himself from obeying the Devil.

Bellar. in Praef. Grets in defens. page 8.
But the first Part of this Objection is ridiculous, and raised by Men in a
Rage, who put a perverse Sense upon the following Words; Exp. Decal. page 46.
The word [ God] is to be taken in a twofold Manner, absolutely, Lord of Lords;
but when it is contracted or specified by a Mark of Diminution, so it signifies
any Good that a Man loves most. And the second Part of it is wholly grounded
upon his Manner of explaining the Doctrine of Providence in the case of Sin;
which is a Subject wherein it would be an easy matter to prove against the
Papists that they have maintained Propositions, that sound as ill as any thing
of his; and nothing but the Spirit of Slander, can impute it as a Crime to
Divines, that they make use of some improper Expressions in a Matter which is
so difficult to be handled, without seeming to contradict the Idea's which we
have of the Holiness of God, and his Hatred of Sin.

CHAP. XXV. That the Doctrine of the Albigenses was propagated in Spain, and
that it continued there till the Reformation.
WHatever Persecutions have been exercised against the Albigenses by their
Enemies, yet we are not to think that they were ever utterly destroyed. We find
that this Persecution continued in a manner without Interruption, until the
time of the Reformation. Frison, a Divine of Paris, in the Life of Spondanus
Bishop of Pamiers, reports, that that Bishop found a Church of them in the
Pyrenaean Mountains, where they had found a safe Retreat from the Violence of
their Persecutors, and where they lived apart by themselves.

We find the same thing also in Spain, where they spread themselves in great
Numbers. I grant indeed that there they were very cruelly persecuted under the
Reign of Alphonso, whose Edicts against them, and the Waldenses, are still to
be seen: but their Calamities were doubled upon them after the Inquisition was
set up, which was not long before the middle of the 13 th Century.

But with all this, it was thought necessary to employ the Pen against them, as
well as Fire and other Torments. This appears from the Writings of Lucas
Tudensis, who wrote under Gregory IX, and under his Successor, and who jumbles
and confounds them with other Heretics, and with the Manichees, to countenance
the Method of the Inquisition, and to authorize their bloody Executions. It
appears from the Writings of this Lucas Tudensis, that they disputed vigorously
against most of those Articles which we find fault with in the Church of Rome;
and that to convince them, they were obliged to use other Methods than those of
Disputing, that is, direct Violence, which indeed they employed in very good
earnest; and we perceive by Emericus's Book, entitled, The Directory of the
Inquisitors, that they spared neither Craft not Cruelty to surprise them, and
bring them to Destruction.

Rainaldus tells us, that in the year 1344, one John du Moulin Inquisitor of
the Province of Toulouse, prosecuting the Waldenses violently that were settled
there, they retired from thence, some into Bearn, and others into Arragon,
where they were persecuted at the Solicitation of this Inquisitor, who made
the Bishop of Pampelona take up Arms to suppress them.

But yet after all this, we find that the Albigenses were preserved there, and
gave no small Trouble to the Inquisitors. We have an illustrious Testimony
hereof in the Work of a Friar Inquisitor, of the Order of Cordeliers, who wrote
in the year 1461, his Fortalitium Fidei; In the 11 th Book, which he entitles,
Page 82, etc.
De Bello Haereticorum, he sets down these Heresies, which he afterward
refutes.

The third Heresy is, that which some Enemies of Christianity do profess, who
pretend, that Confession has no Virtue of its own to procure the Remission of
his Sins to any Man. This they prove after this following Manner:

First; They say it is clear, that when God pardons Sin, he does it not with
any respect to the Merit of any Man, but of mere Grace; whence it follows
evidently, that the Remission of Sins cannot be attributed to a Man's
confessing of them; for if it were so, we must own that the Remission is no
longer of Free-gift, but that it is a Recompense given by God to the Merit of
him that confesses.

Secondly; They say, if it be Confession that procures a Man the Pardon of his
Sins, what will become of that Passage in the third Chapter of the Epistle to
Titus, where it is expressly declared, That God has saved us of his Mercy, and
not according to the Works of Righteousness that we have done? Or, how shall we
explain that in the ninth of the Romans, That it is not of him that wills,
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy? We know, that the first
Grace that God works in us, is the Remission of Sins: now if this Grace be
absolutely the Effect of the Mercy of God, it cannot be the Effect of
Confession, which by Consequence is not necessary to Salvation.

And having thus endeavored to defend their Opinion by Reason, they endeavor
also to back it by the Authority of the Fathers, and quote St. Ambrose, who
says upon Luke, St. Peter wept, because his Sorrow was so great, that it did
not permit him to speak; we find that he wept, but not that he said any thing;
I read his Tears, but I find nothing of his Confession.

The fourth Heresy is of those who acknowledge that we ought to confess, but
add, that we are not to confess to Man. What need is there, say they, to
confess to a Man, now under the Covenant of Grace, seeing that even under the
Law it was sufficient to confess to God, by a single Act of Contrition. They
alledg also the Authority of St. Chrysostom, who says, upon the Epistle to the
Hebrews, It is not said, that you need publish what your Sins are to the World,
neither need you accuse your self before all Mankind; you are only enjoined to
practice the Exhortation of David in the 136 th Psalm, That you spread all the
Parts of your Life in the Presence of God, that you confess to him who is your
true Judge, and that you rather express your Repentance by the secret Groans of
your Conscience, than by the abundance of Words: this is the true way to obtain
Grace from Heaven.

They make use also of another Passage of the same Father, where he says, If
thou desire to have thy Sins blotted out, confess them; but if thou be
ashamed to discover them to any Body, repeat them every Day in the secret of
thine Heart: It is not necessary to tell them to Men, they might, it may be,
afterward reproach thee with them, but declare them rather to God, who only
can give thee such a Remedy as thou want; and though thou should not
confess them to him, yet he still sees thee, he was present, and looked upon
thee whilst thou did commit them. From all which he concludes, That we ought
to confess our Sins only to God. And this detestable Heresy, which is practiced
in secret Assemblies, has already infected a great number of People.

The sixth Heresy is of those, who maintain that it is not necessary to confess
to a Priest, when a Man can confess himself to a Layman.

The seventh Heresy is, That we ought to obey none but God alone. This is the
Error of a certain Arch-Heretick called Waldo, from whom the Heretics that we
now call Waldenses, derive their Name. This miserable Wretch without being sent
from God, took upon him of his own Head to form a new Sect; and without the
Permission of any Bishop, without Inspiration, without Knowledge or Learning,
set up for a Preacher; so that we may well say of him, as Alanus does in his
Book against Heretics, that he is a wise Man without Reason, a Prophet without
a Vision, an Apostle without being sent, and a Doctor who never had
Instruction. See here how his Followers undertake to defend his Heresy. We see,
say they, in the 5 th Chapter of the Acts, that St. Peter and St. John,
speaking to the Scribes and Pharisees, tell them, Judge ye-whether it be
reasonable to obey you rather than God, and not to do what he commands us,
because you forbid us? Moreover, these Heretics maintain, That if we obey a
Man, when we ought not to obey him, we commit a Sin, because then we don't obey
God: Samuel, say they, says to Saul, in the 15 th of the 1 st Book of Samuel,
that Disobedience (or Rebellion) is as the Sin of Witchcraft: Now he that
addicts himself to Witchcraft, does in a manner renounce God; but he that
refuses to obey a Man, does not therefore commit the Sin of Witchcraft, which
Sin is not committed but where a Man refuses to obey God. We ought therefore
to obey God and not Man, because in disobeying Man we are not guilty of that
Sin, but only when we disobey God.

The eighth Heresy is what these same Waldenses profess, that supposing we
ought to obey any Man, it must be such a Man as is not under Sin himself, and
that good Priests only have the Power of binding and loosing. This also was one
of the Errors of John Havel, that is to say, Wicklef, an Englishman, who
amongst many others which he taught, maintained, that a temporal Lord, a Bishop
or Prelate, have no Authority as long as they are under mortal Sin. And he has
been followed by another Fox, who asserted the same thing, John Huss a
Bohemian; and by another Viper, Jerome of Prague, who were both of them
condemned for Heretics in the Council held at Constance in the Year 1414, in
the Presence of Martin V. They say therefore that we ought to be obedient to
good Prelates, that is to say, to those who are no less Successors of the
Apostles in their Lives and Conversation, than in their Charge and Function;
but as for those whose Life and Conversation has nothing in it Apostolical,
they are Hirelings, and no true Shepherds: They endeavor to support this their
Error first, by the Words of St. Austin, in his Book of Baptism; That God
pardons Sins either immediately by himself, or by the Members of his Dove, and
that the Saints can either absolve us of our Sins, or retain them. He says
also upon Exodus, speaking of the Plate of Gold, which was to be always upon
the Forehead of the High Priest: This Plate was the Testimony of a good Life,
and that he only who has the Testimony of a good Life, not in a Figure, but in
Truth and Reality, can forgive Sins.

So likewise St. Gregory declares, That they only in this World have the Power
of binding and loosing, so as the Apostles had, who retain their Doctrine, and
imitate their Examples. And Origin speaking of the Power of St. Peter, says,
That the same is also granted to those who imitate him, because all those that
follow the Footsteps of St. Peter, can also lawfully bind and loose. Lastly,
It is said in Malachy, Chap. 2. I will curse your Blessings: And in Ezekiel,
Chap. 13. Woe to those that quicken the dead Souls, and who declare those dead
that don't die. If God, say the Heretics, do curse the Blessing of wicked
Pastors, and declares that the Souls which they pretend to quicken, do not
live; how can he communicate his Grace through their Channel?

The ninth Heresy is professed by the same Heretics, who maintain that it is
neither the Office nor the Order, but only the Merit of a good Life, which
confers the Power of binding and loosing, of consecrating and blessing; so that
this is their Conclusion, the Merit of a good and holy Life, say they, is of
greater Efficacy to confer upon any one the Right of consecrating and blessing,
of binding and loosing, than the Order or Office: and therefore they have not
received any Orders; yet they believe themselves to be just, and to have the
Merits of the Apostles, and so they take upon them to bless as the Priests do,
and say, That they can consecrate, bind and loose; because it is the Merit and
not the Office that confers this Power. And because they pretend to be the
Apostles Vicegerents, they say, that their Merit, gives them this Charge. In
this it is that they chiefly oppose the Faith of the Church, and declare
themselves to be Heretics. But they endeavor to defend their Heresy, by the
Authority of Esicius, who says, That the Priests do not bless by their own
Authority, but only because they represent Jesus Christ; and that it is because
Christ is in them, that they can bestow their plenary Benediction. And they
say, moreover, that not only a Priest, but every one that has Christ in
himself, and represents him in his Life, as Moses did, has the Power of
conferring Blessings.

The tenth Heresy is likewise taught by the same Heretics, who maintain that
the Dispensations or Indulgences which a Bishop grants at the Consecration of a
Church, or upon any other occasion, are not of any Value. Their Reason is this;
Suppose, say they, that a Man be obliged to a Penance of three Years, at the
Consecration of a Church, and one Bishop releases him of a third part of his
Penance; a second and third Bishop may do the like, and thus for three
Halfpence a Man shall be released of this three Years Penance: And which is
more, these sorts of Dispensations are unjust, for there is no Proportion
between a Halfpenny or a Crown, and one whole Years Penance.

The eleventh Heresy is, That the Prayers which are made for the Dead, by those
who are in any mortal Sin, are unprofitable. For, say these Heretics, how can
these Prayers do any Service to the Dead, since they can do none at all to
those who make them? Can Prayers which are hurtful to them that make them, be
of any Advantage to the Person for whom they are designed? Item, in 3 q. in
gravioribus, it is said, When a Judge is solicited for his Favor to a
Malefactor, by any one that he has no liking to, it serves only to incense him
so much the more, and to make him pronounce a more severe Sentence: So in like
manner, if any Man prays without Devotion, it is the same thing as if he
desired his own Condemnation; for how can any Man whose very Prayer is Sin,
obtain by that Prayer any good thing for his Neighbor? Or, how can he whose
Prayer deserves nothing at the Hand of God but Punishment, pray profitably for
another, seeing God says to the Sinner, Psalm 49. What have thou to do to
declare my Statutes, or why do thou take my Covenant into thy Mouth? They
call also Reason to their Assistance; When a Priest, say they, celebrates the
Mass, he being in mortal Sin, the Action that he does is evil, and deserves
eternal Punishment, and by Consequence he cannot merit for another the Pardon
of his Sins, because it is impossible to merit Good and Evil, Reward and
Punishment by the self-same Action. They quote the Canon Law also, which
forbids us to assist at the Mass of a Priest, who we are sure keeps a
Concubine. They prove likewise by another Authority, that Men ought not to pray
or sing Psalms in the Church, as long as they are under mortal Sin.

The twelfth Heresy is of those who deny Purgatory, and who say that it is a
mere Invention of the Church to make the People give Alms and Offerings, and to
be at the charge of pompous Funerals for the Souls of the deceased, or other
things of that Nature.

I confess he does not mention the Albigenses by Name, and that he confounds
these pretended Heresies of the Albigenses, with others that are much more
heinous, and some that were peculiar to some few Monks, and that he attributes
some of them in particular to the Vaudois, as if they had been proper to them
only.

But one may justly imagine that this Monk, who compiled this Work from the
Writings of other Monks or Doctors of the Church of Rome, had his Eye upon the
Albigenses, because he acquaints us that he follows Alanus, and that he copies
his Arguments. Now we know that Alanus wrote against the Waldenses and
Albigenses, as the manuscript Titles of his Books inform us, though like the
Author of the Fortalitium fidei, he confounds them in his Treatise with the
Arians, Manichees, and other pernicious Heretics, to render the Waldenses and
Albigenses suspected of defending all those Heresies which he opposes.

It may be thought strange perhaps that this Monk did not imitate Alanus, in
attributing to the Albigenses the rejecting of Transubstantiation, and the
Consequents thereof; but the Wonder will cease, if we consider, that he
designed hereby to deprive the Jews, against whom he disputes, of an Advantage
which they might reasonably draw from some Christians rejecting that Opinion,
though they owned Jesus Christ to be the Messiah, and the Books of the New
Testament to be of Divine Authority at the same time; and therefore he rather
chose to refute the Arguments against Transubstantiation, as coming from the
Mouths of the Jews, than as Objections made by the Albigenses.

And indeed, except the tenth Argument of the Jews against Transubstantiation,
which supposes the Christians who teach this Doctrine to be no better than
brute Beasts, as not having Sense enough to know that Jesus Christ being a Jew
by Birth, could not by the Circumstances of his Institution of the Eucharist,
intend any thing but a figurative meaning, as opposed to a real, and that his
Apostles being Jews likewise, could not form any other meaning in all this
Ceremony, but such as was figurative; there is scarce any other which this Monk
has not borrowed from the Disputes which the Albigenses and Vaudois have held
with those of the Romish Party.

We cannot but look upon Petrus Oxoniensis, a Doctor of Salamanca, in the Year
1479, as a Disciple of the Albigenses, in diverse Points, especially those nine
Conclusions which this Author was forced to retract by Sixtus IV th's Order,
who authorized the Archbishop of Toledo to condemn them. Any Man that reads
these nine Propositions which Caranza sets down, Caranza, page 880, and 881.
would think that it was only these Opinions that offenced the Archbishop of
Toledo; but if we will but read the Bull of Sixtus IV, De Haeresibus, lib. 4.
voce confessio, p. 310.
which has been published by Alphonsus a Castro, we shall find that this Doctor
opposed many other Points of Popery: The Pope's Words which are very remarkable
are these. Et alias propositiones, quas propter earum enormitatem, ut illi qui
de eis notitiam habent obliviscantur earum, and qui de eis notitiam non habent,
ex praesentibus, non instruantur in eis, silentio praetermittendas duximus. And
there are other Propositions, which are of so foul a Nature, that we think it
convenient to pass them over in silence, that so those who know them, may
forget them, and those that do not know them, may not be instructed in them by
these our Letters.

CONCLUSION.
THese are the Remarks I thought fit to make upon the History of the Churches
of the Albigenses. I suppose the Reader will own that I have deduced their
Succession from the Apostles, and their Independence on the Sea of Rome with
care enough, tho the Barbarity of the Enemies of the Truth, has done its utmost
Endeavors to abolish all the Monuments, which these illustrious Witnesses of
it had left in these Diocesses.

Neither do I believe, that the Bishop of Meaux will have any pretense for the
future, to accuse them of Manicheism, nor to reproach the Protestants, that
they can find no other Predecessors in Antiquity, but a parcel of Men, whose
Doctrine and Lives were equally execrable. Nothing but a Spirit animated with
such a Rage and Fury as produced those Crusades, can obstinately maintain such
horrid Calumnies, after all that we have here alleged for their Justification.

I might perhaps have been more particular in the Accounts which I have given
of the bad Construction the Inquisitors have put upon their Belief; but
besides, that I have sufficiently discovered the Injustice of these Ministers
of Hell; who is there amongst the Protestants, nay amongst the very Papists
themselves, that is not fully convinced of the Iniquity and profound Malice of
these Hearts of Tigers; who under the name of Defenders of the Christian Faith,
have racked their Brains to blacken the most innocent Lives of the most
religious Christians; and who have made it their Diversion to exterminate them
by the most dismal Torments?

The Bishop of Meaux may write as long as he pleases to maintain these
diabolical Calumnies: I am persuaded, that if any equitable Members of his
Communion will take the pains to compare the Carriage of the Heathens toward
the Primitive Christians, with the Behavior of his Church under Innocent III,
and Gregory IX, against the Albigenses; and the Patience of the Albigenses,
slandered and persecuted by the Church of Rome, with the Condition of the
Primitive Church, persecuted and slandered by the Heathens, they will find it
as difficult to look upon the Church of Rome, as the Daughter of the Primitive
Church, as it will be easy for them to acknowledge the Albigenses as the genuine
Offspring of those Primitive Christians.

I did not think it necessary for my Design, to tie my self Step by Step to
every particular, which I might justly have found fault with in the Book where
the Bishop of Meaux handles the History of the Albigenses: It is an endless
Labor to trace a Man that follows false Guides, and who has nothing new
besides the Art and turn of Expression: and because the naked Truth has always
the better of Works of this nature, it is sufficient to set it in a clear
Light, for the extinguishing that false Luster which Men bestow upon Lies, by
Ornaments put upon them only to hide their Deformity.

And it is my Hope after all, that as God has illustriously displayed the Care
of his Providence, in raising the Church of Piedmont from those Ruins, under
which the Spirit of Persecution thought for ever to have buried it; so he will
be pleased to vouchsafe the same Protection to those desolate Flocks, whom the
Violence of the Romish Party has constrained to dissemble their Faith, by
making a Show of embracing the Roman Religion, to avoid the Extremities of
their Persecution.

One would think that that God, who has wrought so many Wonders for their
Preservation, so many Ages together; and who even then, when they seemed
reduced to nothing by the bloody Vigilance of the Inquisitors, who Age after
Age have gleaned this Field, after the barbarous Rage of the Crusades was over,
should be unwilling to suffer this oppressed Light to be wholly extinguished,
but that he will make these his Witnesses rise from their Graves, now after the
Church of Rome has signalized her Joy for their Death and Destruction.

God of his great Mercy be pleased to restore to these afflicted Flocks the
same Joy and the same Comfort which their Ancestors felt at the time of the
Reformation, when they gave such public Evidence of their Zeal, and entered by
Crowds into the Bosom of the Reformed Church, whose Principles they had
maintained so many Ages before the Reformation; and to open the Eyes of their
Persecutors, giving them Grace to acknowledge, that they fight against God,
whilst they strive to force Men's Consciences, and to engage the People to own
that Religion as Divine, which is only the Product of human Policy, the very
Sink of the Corruptions of these last Times, and the Offspring of the Spirit
of Error.

EXTRACTS OF Several Trials OF SOME Pretended Heretics in the Diocese of
SARVM, Taken out of an old Register.
IN the Name of the Holy Trinite, Fadir, Son, and Holy Ghost, his blessed
Modir, and all the Holy Compeny of Hevyn; We Austyn Stere of Herry Benette of
Spene, William Brigger of Thachum, Richard Hignell, William Priour, and Richard
Goddard, of Newbery, and every of us severally in the Diocese of Sarum, gretely
noted, defamed, detecte, and to you Reverend Fadir in God, Thomas, by God's
Grace, Bishop of Sarum, our Judge and Ordinary, denownced for untrew belevyng
Men; and also that we and every of us should hold, afferme, teache, and defend
openly and prively Heresies, Errors, singular Opinions, and false Doctrines,
contrary to the commen Doctrine of our Modir Holy Church; and with Subtilites,
eville soundyng, and deceyveable to the Eres of true sympille understanding
Christian People, which be to us and every of us severelly now by your Auctorite
procedyng of Office promoted, judicially objected.

First, That I Augustyn Stere, have hold affermed and said, that the Church of
Criste is but a Sinagoge, and an House of Merchandise, and that Pristis be but
Scribis and Pharisais, not profyting the Christen People, but disseyvyng them.

Item, I have hold affermed, taught and beleved, that in the Sacrament of the
Auter is not the very Body of Criste. Farthermore, showing and seying that
Pristis may bie xxx such Goddis for one Penny, and will not selle one of them
but for two Penys.

Item, I have misbeleved, and to dyvers manyfestly showed that Images of Seynts
be not to be worshipped aftir the Doctrine of a Book of Commandments, which I
have had in my keeping, wherein is wreten, that no Man shall worship any thing
made or graven with mannys Hand attending the Words of the same literally, and
not inclynyng to the sense of the same.

Item, I have spoken and diverse times showed that Pristis be the Enemies of
Christ.

Item, I have belevyd, said and taught, that St. Petir was never Priste, but a
little before his Death. Ferthermore, showing that Simeon Magos geve him his
Tonsure of Prysthode, and in Spyte of him, Goddis Vicar contempnyng his Power,
called him a Panyer Maker.

First, That I Herry Benett, have hold and kept this Opinion, that
Pilgremaggis be not to be made moeved for this Cause, for only God is to be
warsshyped, and so not themmagis of Sayntis, insomoch that I would never goo a
Pilgremage but onys, and I have oftyn times reproved such as would spend their
Money in Pilgremage doing, seeing they might better spend hit at home.

Item, I have not belevyd steadfastly in the Sacrament of Thauter, seying of hit
this wise, that if there were three Hostys in one Pikkis, one of them
consecrate, and the odir not consecrate, a Mowse woll as well ete that Host
consecrate as the odir twayn unconsecrate, the which he might not if there were
the very Body of Criste, for if there were the Fadir, Son, and Holy Ghost, he
might not ete them.

First, That I William Brigger, have erred and mysbeleved in the Sacrament of
the Auter, seeing and holdyng that there should not be the very Body of Criste,
so taught and informed in this same great Error and Heresy, by one Richard
Sawyer, late of Newbery.

Item, I have spoke and hold ayenste the Sacrament of Penance, seeing in this
wise; If I have take a Manis Good, or stole his Cow, and be sorry in Heart, I
may as well be saved as though I were shreven thereof, for it is inowe to be
shryve to God.

Item, I have held and seyde ayenste the Doctrine of Prystys, affermyng of
them, that all Prystes techeth a false and a blind way to bring us all in to
the Myer. Ferthermore addyng herto, and seeing, how may it be that blind
William Harper may led anodir blind Man to Newbery, but both fall in to the
Dyche, so does all these Pristis to bring us all to Dampnacion.

First, That I Richard Hignel, have hold and mysbeleved of long time in the
Sacrament of the Auter, seeing that Christ offered to Simeon is the very
Sacrament of Thauter, so meaning and belevyng in mine Opinion, that the
Sacrament in form of Bread should not be very Godde, but only Criste hymselffe
in Hevyn is the Sacrament, and none odir, and so I have mysbelevyd and
continewed in this Error and Heresy unto this time of Examnacion.

Item, I have be adherente and associat with Heretics abjured, by whose
Doctrine I have erred, as I have before spoken.

First, That I William Priour, have said and hold against the Auctorite and
Power of Pristis, calling them Scribis, Pharisees, and thenmyes of Criste, not
teching but disseyving the Christian People.

Item, I have belevyd and diverse times shewid that Ymagis of Seynts be not to
be wurshyped, nether Oblacions to be made unto them, seeing and holding no such
thing to be wurshipped that is graven or made with manys Hand.

I Richard Goddard in long time here before, have had great dought how God
might be in form of Bread in Thauter, amoste syn the Years of Discrecion; and
now in few Years thought and utterly beleved that inasmoch as God is in Hevyn
he should not be in the Sacrament of Thauter, and so in this Error have
continewed unto the time of this my present Abjuracion.

These Articules, and every of them before rehearsed, and to us Austyn Stere,
Herry Benet, William Brigger, Richard Hignell, William Priour, and Richard
Goddard, and to every of us severelly by you judicially objected, we and every
of us singulerly openly knowledge our selffe, and confess of our fre Will to
have hold, learned and belevyd, and so have taught and affermyd to odir, which
Articules and every of them, as us concerns severelly, we and every of us
understand and beleve Heresies, and contrary to the commen Doctrine and
Determination of the universalle Church of Criste, and confess us and every of
us here to have be Heretics, Lerners and Techers of Heresies, Errors,
Opinions, and false Doctrines, contrary to the Christian Feith. And forasmoch as
it is so that the Laws of the Church of Criste and Holy Canons of Saints be
grounded in Mercy, and God wol not the Death of a Sinner, but that he be
converted and seve. And also the Church closes not her Lap to him, that woll
return: We therefore and every of us, willing to be Partiners of this forseid
Mercy, forsake and renounce all these Articules before rehearsed as us concerns
particularly, and confess them to be Heresies, Errors, and prohibit
Doctrine: And now contrite and fully repentyng them all and every of them,
judicially and solemply them forsake, abjuxe, and wilfully renownce for
evermor, and not only them, but all odir Heresies, Errors, and dampnable
Doctrines contrary to the Determination of the universal Church of Criste:
Also that we and every of us shall never herafter be to any such Persons or
Persons, Favorers, Counselers, Mainteners, or of any such prively or openly;
but if we or any of us know any such herafter, we and every of us shall
denownce and disclose them to you Reverend Fadir in God, your Successors or
Officers of the same, or else to such Persons of the Church as has Jurisdiction
on the Persons so fawty, so help us God and all Holy Evangelis, submyttyng us
and every of us openly, not coacte but of our fre Will to the Pain, Rigor and
Sharpness of the Law, that a Man relapsed owght to suffer in such case, if we
or any of us ever do or hold contrary to this our present Abjuracion in
part, or the hole thereof: In witness whereof, we all and every of us
severally subscribe with our Hands, making a Cross, and requir all Christian Men
in general her present, to record, and witness against us and every of us, and
this our present Confession and Abjuracion, if we or any of us from this Day
forwards offend or do contrary to the same; and ye Masters her
present....................... Lecta and facta fuit ista Abjuracio coram
Reverendo in Christo Patre and Domino Thoma, permissione divina Sarum Episcopo,
in Ecclesia parochiali Sancti Johannis de Wyndsour nova, per supra scriptos
Augustinum Stere, Henricum Benet, Willielmum Brigger, Richardum Hignell,
Willielmum Priour, and Richardum Goddard, xxviii die mensis Januarii, anno
Domini millesimo cccc nonagesimo, praesentibus tunc ibidem venerabilibus viris
magistris Laurencio Cokks, Edmundo Martyn, Johanne Mayhowe decretorum
doctoribus, Day sacrae theologiae professore, Radulpho Hethcote Canonico
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sarum, Willielmo Thynlawe Vicario perpetuo Ecclesiae
praefatae, Briano and Willielmo Birley artium magistris, Thoma Clerk in
legibus baccalareo, and Johanne Wely scriba and Registrario per dictum
Reverendum Patrem in hac part assumpto, and multis aliis.

Quibus quidem die and loco idem Reverendus Pater injunxit praefato Augustino
Stere, in part poenitentiae suae, quod ipse Augustinus nudus tibias pedes and
caput, corpore toga and camisia ac foemoralibus lineis tantummodo indutus, unum
fasciculum, sive fagotum super humerum suum, and unum facem anglice a bronde in
manu ejus gestans diebus and locis infra scriptis, viz. die sabbati, xxix die
mensis Januarii, anno praedicto, circa mercatum ville de Wyndesour nova, ubi
and quando fuerit populi multitudo die dominica extunc sequenti, viz. ultimo
die mensis ejusdem, circa Ecclesiam parochialem, beatae Mariae Rading die
Sabbati, quinto die Februarii, circa mercatum de Newbery, die dominica extunc
sequenti, circa Ecclesiam parochialem, ibidem die dominica prima quadragesime
in Ecclesia Cathedrali Sarum, die martis extunc sequente, circa mercatum ibidem
caeterisque diebus diversis per loca, scil. per Monasteria de Serne, Milton,
Abbottesbery, Abyndon and Shirborn, necnon circa Mercatum ibidem Sarum
Diocaeseos coram processionibus circa Ecclesias Monasteria and loca praedicta,
aut in eisdem locis prout aeris temperies permiserit, ut moris est faciendis
more humilis poenitentis incederet, finitisque hujusmodi processionibus vel cum
ab aliquo Curatorum hujusmodi Ecclesiarum sive locorum proceditur ad pulpitum
quibusdam literis in Anglico scriptis errores and opiniones dampnabiles
praedicti Augustini and ipsius Abjuracionem in se continentibus, lectis and
declaratis per ipsum Augustinum alta and intelligibili voce sua declarando,
exponendo and recitando, ac confitendo public, prout in eisdem literis
continetur; de qua quidem poenitentia per ipsum Augustinum been and fideliter
peracta prout sibi mandatum f^erit per curatos and alios de quibus supra sit
mencio praefatus Reverendus Pater and Dominus plenarie and sufficienter fuerit
certificatus; unde postea idem Reverendus Pater in tempore certificationis
hujusmodi sibi factae in complementum poenitentiae suae injunxit quod singulis
diebus vitae suae coram Ymagine crucifixi genuflectendo diceret devote,
quinquies oracionem Dominicam, and quinquies salutationem Angelicam, and semel
Symbolum Apostolorum, and quod injuncto die parassephes and vigiliis beatae
Mariae per unum annum integrum immediate sequentem in pane and aqua. Item, quod
lapso termino...... dierum per dictum Reverendum Patrem assignato ad villam de
Newbery, vel ad aliquem locum situatum infra septem milliaria a villa de
Newbery praedicta non accideret, nisi ex licentia praefati Reverendi Patris
petita primitus and obtenta.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined
and confuted, by several London Divines. 4 to. With a Table to the whole.

The Texts which the Papists cite out of the Bible for Proof of the Points of
their Religion, examined, and showed to be alleged without Ground. In twenty
five distinct Discourses, by several London Divines; with a Table to the whole,
and the Authors Names.

The Lay Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. By Dr. Stratford,
now Lord Bishop of Chester.

Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of
Piedmont. By Peter Allix, D. D. 4 to.

Reflections upon the Books of the Holy Scripture, to establish the Truth of
the Christian Religion. In two Parts. 8 vo. By the same Author.

The Judgments of God upon the Roman Catholic Church, from its first rigid
Laws for universal Conformity to it, unto its last End: With a Prospect of
these near approaching Revolutions: viz. (1.) The Revival of the Protestant
Profession in an eminent Kingdom, where it was totally suppressed. (2.) The
last End of all Turkish Hostilities. (3.) The general Mortification of the
Power of the Roman Church in all Parts of its Dominions.

Geologia: Or a Discourse concerning the Earth before the Deluge; wherein the
Form and Properties ascribed to it, in a Book entitled [ The Theory of the
Earth] are excepted against: And it is made appear, That the Dissolution of
that Earth was not the Cause of the Universal Flood. Also a new Explication of
that Flood is attempted. By Erasmus Warren, Rector of Worlington in Suffolk. 4
to.

The present State of Germany; or an Account of the Extent, Rise, Form, Wealth,
Strength, Weaknesses, and Interests of that Empire: The Prerogatives of the
Emperor, and the Privileges of the Electors, Princes, and Free Cities,
adapted to the present Circumstances of that Nation. By a Person of Quality. 8
vo.

Memoirs of what past in Christendom from the War begun 1672, to the Peace
concluded 1679. 8 vo.

V. CL. Gulielmi Camdeni, and illustrium virorum ad G. Camdenum Epistolae. Cum
Appendice varii Argumenti. Accesserunt Annalium Regni Regis Jacobi I.
Apparatus, and Commentarius de Antiquitate, Dignitate, and Officio Comitis
Marescalli Angliae. Praemittitur G. Camdeni vita. Scriptore Thoma Smitho S. T.
D. Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero.


