An Abstract of the Case of Francis Rockley Esquire hereunto annexed.
THat in June 1649. the said Francis Rockley being owner and possessor of the
Manors of Rockley and Worsbrough, and of diverse lands, Tenements and Mills
within the same, in the County of York, upon a Loan of 100 l. made unto him,
acknowledged a Statute of 800 l. unto one Sir Roger Bradshagh, and one William
Bradshagh Esquire

And on the first of Feb. 1652. the said Franuis Rockley demised unto Lionel
Copley of Rotheram Esquire three acres of ground within the Demeasne of Rockley, to
build a Furnace in, which the said Lionel was to pay for 5 l. per an. ground
rent, and 5 s per Tun, by Covenant, for every Tun of Iron that he should Found
there; and the said Lionel Copley upon agreement shortly afterward, granted
unto your Petitioner and his heirs, Liberty, with the said Lionels Utensils
annually to Found forty Tun of Iron at the said Furnace.

That on the 5th. day of the said Feb. upon a Loan of 900 l. the said Francis
Rockley demised the Demeasne of Rockley, with the appurtenances, unto James
Brook Alderman of the City of York, for the Term of 21 years and a half, at
the yearly rent of one Pepper-Corn, upon agreement with the said Brook, that
the said Brook should re-demise the same unto him in the name of one William
Hayford the said Mr. Rockleys Moenial Servant, for 100 l. per annum, with a
Clause of Redemption of the same from the said Brook after the first two
years, and the said Mr. Rockley acknowledged a Statute of 1800 l. to make good
his said Bargain to the said Brook. And the said Brook did re-demise the same
accordingly.

That in Anno 1655. or thereabouts; the said Mr. Rockley made another Deed of
the same for such like term, as so, only in the name of the said Hayford,
wherein he mentioned several debts payable by the said Hayford, amounting to
700 l. or thereabouts (besides what of the said 100 l. per annum should become
payable to the said Brook) the one half of which debts, or thereabouts the
said Francis Rockley caused to be discharged about a year after the making of
the said later Deed, by the hands of the said Hayford, out of other Receipts
which he had of the said Mr. Rockleys in his charge.

That the said Hayford was only to Act in any of Mr. Rockleys said Estate as
the said Mr. Rockleys Servant, and not by any power placed in him by either of
the said Deeds, as a Trustee for the said Mr. Rockley.

That at or about Michaelmas 1658. the said Mr. Rockley caused the said Hayford
to make a Deed of re-assignment of the said Deeds so made in his name, unto him
the said Francis.

That the said Francis Rockley being to have a Trial at the Assizes held at
York, in the long Vacation 1659. and then restrained a Prisoner for Debt in the
Fleet, and being denied a Writ of Habeas Corpus for his Liberty (by the then
Commissioners of the Great Seal) to attend the same, the said Mr. Rockley sent
unto the said Hayford his Key of a Desk, where certain of his Evidence lay, at
Rockley, which concerned the said Trial, with Order to him thereby to manage
the same; in the said Desk were also lodged the said Mr. Rockleys Keys which
lead to all his other Evidence, and the rest of his personal Estate there,
which were not immediately in the charge of the said Hayford before that time;
viz. the rest of his Evidence, Books of Accounts, and Study of Books.

That then the said Hayford, by Combination with Margaret his Sister, now the
Wise of Thomas West, smothered the abovesaid Deed of re-assignment made from
him to the said Mr. Rockley, and then placed himself in possession of the said
Lands to his own use.

That the said Confaederates procured all the said Mr. Rockleys personal
Estate, his Housholdstuffe, Stock upon his Ironworks, and other Goods left by
the said Mr. Rockley in the said Hayfords charge, to keep or manage for him, to
the value of 1000 l. and upwards (under pretense unto the Sheriffs Officers, of
preserving the same for the said Mr Rockley his Master) to be levied by an
Execution taken forth upon a Judgment of 100 l. granted by the said Mr.
Rockley, unto the said Margaret, for payment of 50 l. and have taken away all
the same to their own use.

That he caused all the said Mr. Rockleys Estate placed in his name, in the
condition the same was in, in his charge, better worth than 500 l. per annum,
over and besides the Wood growing upon the same, to be extended at the Suite of
the said Bradshaghs at 100 l. per annum, and then by foul practice engrossed
the same under the said Bradshaghs at the rate the same was so undervalued at,
to his own use, and made void such profits of the same, as he could not so
enjoy.

That he pretended to the said Bradshagh (the said Mr. Rockley his Master being
far remote a Prisoner) that he was to make great payments for the said Mr.
Rockley his Master out of the said Lands so placed in his name, and would
account to the said Mr. Rockley for the Overplus, but paid not one penny, save
twenty pound to one Mrs. Hester Bamforth, which he so ordered, as he might both
defraud her and the said Mr. Rockley of much more by.

That he caused Actions to be charged upon the said Mr. Rockley in Prison for
the same debts he pretended the said Deed to be made to him for discharge of,
and withholding and obstructing him from each penny of his Estate, barbarously
endeavored to starve him there, and sued the said Actions to Outlawry after
Judgment, and

That when the said Mr. Rockley called him to accounts by Bill in Chancery for
his Estate, and Evidence, the said Hayford pleaded Outlawries to the same, and
thereby abated such the said Mr. Rockleys proceedings had against him.

That he forfeited the said re-demise made by the said Brook in his name for
the said Mr. Rockley, by non-payments.

And That when the said Mr. Rockley in Jan. 1665. by the benefit of his
Majesty's most Gracious Writ of Habeas Corpus, attending his affairs in
Yorkshire, obtained a Precept to be awarded by the General Sessions of Peace
held at Doncaster, to place him in possession (notwithstanding the practice of
the said Hayford with his Consaederates, the said Margaret, now the Wise of
Thomas West, John Spencer, William Wilkinson, and others, by Forgery, Perjury,
Maintenance, and Barratry, by Arrest of the said Mr. Rockley and his
Adhaerents; amidst his endeavor so to repossess himself of his estate, to
defeat the said Mr. Rockley of the same) the said Confaederates Hayford and
Spencer, had obtained the said Brook to grant the Demise of the said Demeasne
of Rockley so forfeited to him as above, unto the said William Wilkinson, and
one Robert Beard, (yet so as the same should appear not to be forfeited, if
occasion should so require) and to Assign the said Statute of 1800 l. for
making the same good unto them, to the said Hayfords use (notwithstanding the
said Mr Rockleys Applications made to the said Brook before the said
Confaederates) upon secure terms to the said Brook to grant the same unto him,
and though all such pretensions also are satisfied (which the said Mr. Rockleys
estate is kept from him upon) then by most sinister practices, the said
Confaederates endeavored upon the said Statute of 1800, as well to evict what
is payable by the said Lionell Copley only by Covenant unto the said Mr.
Rockley (and therefore not extendible) as the rest of the said Mr. Rockleys
estate, from him, by supply thereof to accord with the said Mr. Rockleys
Creditors, by means of his own estate, to purchase the same from him.

To the High and Honorable the House of Peers in Parliament Assembled. The
Humble Petition of Francis Rockley, of Rockley, in the County of York Esquire now
Prisoner in the (...)
Shows,
THat your Petitioners most humble Suite is (being to be relieved against
several most horrid practices, cheats, and combinations exercised upon your
Petitioner, by means of an Imprisonment for debts contracted upon him by his
Fathers and his own Loyalty, by Confaederacy of one William Hayford ( a ^^te
Maenial Servant of your Petitioners held with Margaret his Sister, now the wife
of Thomas West, John Spencer, James Brook, William Wilkinson, and Robert
Beard, whereby your Petitioner is and has been after a most barbarous manner
bereft of his Liberty, and of an Estate of 850 l. per annum, and of most of the
same, for most of the time of eight years last past, and of a great personal
Estate, to the hazard of anutter ruin upon your Petitioner and his Family, of
very great Antiquity; and having no relief at Law against him for the same, as
by the annexed Case more fully appears, nor at equity of Law for what he is
thus bereft of, the said Hayford having pleaded Outlawries unto a Bill which
your Petitioner exhibited against him for the same in Chancery, and thereby
abated your said Petitioners proceedings.) That this most Honorable House will
cause all the said Confaederates to appear in this Court, there to answer the
Petitioners Case exhibited against them, and will cause them to produce all the
several Evidences which each of them have claimed any of your Petitioners
Estate real or personalby, and all your Petitioners other Evidence, Bonds, or
of what nature soever, in their or any of their hands, and will stay the said
Confaederates from committing any more waste in your Petitioners Estate, and
from taking away the product of what they have committed, and will stay
entrance of Judgment upon any Verdict obtained by them against any of your
Petitioners Tenants, the last Assizes held at York, till the hearing and
determination of this cause; and will give order for the Right Honorable the
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, to award his Majesty's Writ of Ne
Exeat Regnum, to secure the said Hayfords appearance before this Court (the
said Hayford having committed so many, and so enormous misdemeanors, and
engrofs'd so great sums of money out of your Petitioners Estate to his own use,
that it must be reusonably apprehended, the said Hayford intends to withdraw
himself, and avoid question.) And that this most Honorable House will be
pleased further to Order the said Right Honorable the Lord Keeper to award his
Majesty's most gracious Writ of Habeas Corpus to the (...) for your Petitioners
Liberty to attend the prosecution of this cause till the same be ended; and
that, upon a full hearing, such satisfaction and reparation may be given your
Petitioner for his damages, losses, and sufferings; and such punishments may be
inflicted upon the Delinquents, as the Justice and Merits of your Petitioners
cause shall require.

And your Petitioner, as bound, shall Pray, etc.
The Case OF Francis Rockley Esquire
FRancis Rockley being seized in June 1649 in his Demeasne as of Fee of and in
the Manor of Rockley, with the rights, members, and appurtenances thereof, and
of the Capital Message Rockley, and the Demeasne Lands thereof, and diverse
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Mills, Woods, Underwoods, and
Mines, within the Parishes of Silkeston and Darfield in the County of York, to
the said Manor belonging, then much lessened in their value by the injury of
the late commotions ( Robert Rockley, Father of the said Francis, during his
lise time, and the reft of his Family throughout all the said troubles having
been solely engaged in the Service of his Majesty King Charles the First,
against the late pretended Parliament) and being rightfully possessed of the
Manor of Worsbrough, and lawfully seized of and in diverse Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Mill^, Woods, Underwoods and Mines, part and parcel of the Manor of
Worsbrough, in Darfield, aforesaid, which last mentioned premises in Worsbrough
aforesaid (besides the Mines) were then in possession and Reversion of the
yearly value of 400 l. per annum and upwards.

The said Francis Rockley being of all the said premises so lawfully feized or
possessed, and being heir ar Law, and Executor of the said Robert Rockley his
Father (the said Robert Rockley the Father dying in or about November 1644) and
being become indebted unto diverse and sundry persons in several great sums of
Money for payment of portions to his Sisters, and contracted upon him by his
Fathers and his own Loyalty to his said Sovereign.

The said Francis Rockley toward the payment and satisfaction of his
Composition with the late pretended Parliament for his estate (sequestered from
him for his said Loyalty) after the especial direction of his said Majesty King
Charles the First, near the clause of his days, given unto the said Francis
Rockley so to do, and for and toward payment and satisfaction of some of his
debts; and for the better managery of his estate so laid waste as above.

About the 8th. day of June 1649. the said Francis Rockley acknowledged a
Statute staple of 800 l. before the then Lord Chief Justice of England, to the
use of Sir Roger Bradshagh of Haigh in the County of Lancaster, and William
Bradshagh Esquire upon the loan of 400 l. sterling, made to the said Francis (...)
And

On the 5th. day of February 1652. the said Francis Rockley did borrow of one
James Brook Alderman of the City of York, the sum of 900 l. in money upon
agreement that the said Francis Rockley should demise

1st. The Capital Message or Manor house of Rockley aforesdid, with all the
Site and Cir^^^^ of the same, Barnes, Staples, and other Out-howses,
Buildings, Yards, Closes, Orchards, Gardens, Grounds and Easements contained
within the said Site and Circuit, together with the Demeasne Lands, Arable
Meadow and Pasture, Woods and Underwoods, conte^ning by estimamation 550 Acres
and upwards, better worth than 250 l. per annum (...) And 2ly. All the
appurtenances to the same, viz. The Mines, Streams and Ironworks within the
same, (better worth than 300 l. per annum, Of a more useful and secure Revenue
than any Rent he had, in the condition he had molded the same into, over and
above 5 shills. per Tun payable by Lionel Copley of Rotheram Esquire (not liable
unto the said Brook by any Grant or Covenants made with him, as herein after
appears) unto the said James Brook his Eaecutors and Assigns, for the Term of
One and Twenty years and a half, to begin from the First day of January then
last past, under the Yearly Rent of a Pepper-Corn (...) And 3ly. That the said
James Brook should forthwith then after make a Re-demise of the said Manor
house and premises, during the said Term of One and Twenty years and a half,
unto the said Francis Rockley in the name of such person as the said Francis
Rockley should nominate and appoint to take the same, under the yearly rent of
100 l. to be paid unto the said James Brook and his Assigns, as aforesaid, and
not otherwise.
The said Francis Rockley according to, and in pursuance of the said agreement
by his Indenture bearing date the said 5th. day of February 1652.

1st. Did demise the said Manor house of Rockley, and other the
beforementioned premises, with their appurtenances, for and in consideration
of the said sum of 900 l. unto the said James Brook his Executors and Assigns,
for the term of 21 years and a half; at a Pepper-Corn rent (...) And 2ly. The
said James Brook did also in pursuance of the said agreement by his Indenture
bearing date the 25th. day of the said Month of February, Re-demise the said
Manor house and premises by the appointment of the said Francis Rockley, unto
one William Hayford, a Moenial Servant of the said Francis Rockley for the said
whole Term of 21 years and a half, under the yearly rent of 100 l. per annum,
to be paid by the said William Hayford unto the said James Brook his Executors
and Assigns, for and during the said whole Term of 21 years and a half, at such
days as in the said Indenture of Demise was and is expressed.
In which said Indenture of Re-demise it was agreed upon by the said James
Brook, that if the said William Hayford, his Executors or Assigns, or any of
them, should within two years after the said Re-demise, or at any time then
after, pay unto the said James Brook, the said sum of 900 l. together with all
such Rents and arrearages of Rents as should grow due in the mean time; That
then the said William Hayford his Executors and Assigns should hold all the
said Re-demised premises, acquitted and discharged of and from all Rents and
other payments whatsoever unto the said James Brook his Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns.

The said Francis Rockley on the said 5th. day of February acknowledged a
Statute Merchant of the sum of 1800 l. to the use of the said Brook, which was
to be Defeizanced that the said Francis Rockley should make good the said
Demise upon the said terms they had agreed upon, and was Defeizanced so
accordingly.

And the said William Hayford did by a Deed under his Hand and Seal, bearing
date the said 25th day of February 1652. Declare that the said Re-demise was
taken only in his Name, but he was to take no benefit, nor make any use thereof
to himself.

And notwithstanding such Re-demise was made in the name of the said Hayford,
yet the said Francis Rockley continued in possession of the Lands Leased, and
was holden to be the lawful Occupier thereof.

That on or about the first day of February 1652. the said Francis Rockley
(before he granted the aforesaid Lease to the said Brook) Demised unto one
Lyonel Copley of Rotheram in the County of York, (in the name of one Robert
Dawes of Rotheram, his Executors and Assigns) three Acres of Land lying in a
Close called the Carr, within the Demeasne of Rockley, with all Streams of
water coming into the same, with free liberty to build a Furnace there for the
founding of Raw Iron within the same: And also the Iron-stone Mine within the
same, for the Term of 21 years, to commence the 1st. of May 1653.

1st. Reserving a ground rent of 5 l. per annum, to be paid him by the said
Dawes, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for the said 3 Acres of
ground. 2ly. And upon Covenant with the said Robert Dawes and the said Lyonel
Copley. 1st. That the said Dawes should build a Furnace for the working of Raw
Iron within the said three Ares, before the feast of St. Martin the Bishop in
Winter 1663. And Secondly, That 2ly. The said Robert Dawes, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, should pay unto the said Francis Rockley, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns 5 s. per Tun for every Tun of Raw
Iron that the said Dawes his Executors, Administrators or Assigns should so
found at the said Furnace.

The said Robert Dawes assigned the grant of the said 3 Acres to the said
Lyonel Gopley; and that year they or one of them did build the said Furnace,
and pay and perform what they had agreed upon to perform.

Shortly after the said grant of the said 3 Acres of ground unto the said
Lyonel Copley, as above, (according to an agreement made betwixt the said
Lyonel and the said Francis Rockley for that purpose) the said Lyonel Copley
granted unto the said Francis Rockley and his Heirs, by Deed, free liberty of
Founding so many Tun of Raw Iron unto his own use yearly at the said Furnace,
as the said Francis Rockley could Found with Eighty Dozen of Char-coal, and a
proportionable quantity of Iron-stone for the same, and to have the benefit of
all the said Lyonel Copley's Utensils at the same Furnace for Founding of the
same. And according to the said Agreement the said Francis Rockley did every
year Found there 40 Tuns of Raw Iron, or upwards, to his own use, till about
the year 1660. the said Hayford endeavored by practice to defeat him of the
same.

And at or about Michaelmas 1655. the said Francis Rockley (having many Suits
commenced against him in Chancery, as Executor to Robert Rockley, the surviving
Trustee, of an estate of one Francis Burdett Esquire and fearing the pursuit of
some of his Creditors) the said Francis Rockley being for his defense in the
said Suits, to leave his abode at Rockley, and to repair to, and to his great
charge, to reside at London; and thereby disabled to satisfy the same, so
readily as was expected; the said Francis Rockley made unto the said Hayford
another Deed of the Manor house of Rockley, and of the Demeasne thereof, with
the appurtenances mentioned in the Deed made unto the said Brook, and
mentioned in the said Deed also, over and besides the 100 l. per annum, payable
unto the said Brook, certain of the said debts, to the value of 700 l.
principal moneys, or thereabouts (which the said Francis Rockley had otherwise
secured) to be payable by the said Hayford by virtue of the said later Deed,
occasionally, the better to enable the said Francis Rockley to pay the same,
and his other debts, against any encumbrance which might else befall his
Estate, and which might obstruct him in payment of the same.

And the said Francis Rockley at his departure so to reside at London, also
committed all his personal estate in and about the said Mansion house Rockley,
and upon the Demeasne thereof, and Ironworks to be kept and managed by the said
Hayford, as the several natures of the same required.

But notwithstanding such later Deed made by the said Francis Rockley unto the
said Hayford, and that he had also committed his said personal estate unto the
charge of the said Hayford, yet the said Francis Rockley continued in the
actual possession of the said Lands mentioned in the same, and of the personal
estate so committed to the care of the said Hayford, to be kept and managed by
him, and was holden the lawful Occupier of the same. And the said William
Hayford was not to dispose of any part of the said Francis Rockley's Estate,
real or personal, but as Servant to the said Francis Rockley, and according to
the direction of the said Francis; and for several years after making of the
said later Deed, and after the charge of the personal estate of the said
Francis so committed to him, the said Hayford did continue so to do and observe
the same.

And the said Francis Rockley discharged above 300 l. of the said 700 l.
mentioned to be payable by the said last recited Deed (within a year after the
Deed so made, or thereabouts) by his Order unto the said Hayford, who had also
other receipts of the said Francis Rockleys, out of which he discharged most of
the same.

At or about Michaelmas 1658. the said Francis Rockey (Leasing out some of his
said Lands, so placed in the said Hayfords name, as above, and parting with
some of his stock upon the same) caused the said Hayford to make a Deed of
Re-assignment of the said Deeds (whereby the same were so placed in his name)
to the said Rockley.

In the Long Vacation 1659. the said Francis Rockley, being to have a Trial at
Law, at the Assizes to be then held at York, being become a Prisoner in the
Fleet, in Execution for Debt, and denied by the then Commissioners of the Broad
Seal of England, the benefit of the Writ of Habeas Corpus to attend the same;
and the Cause then to be tried, being to be managed by a Deed made for the said
Mr. Rockley in the said Hayfords name, the state of which the said Hayford was
well knowing of, having been acquainted with the same by the said Mr. Rockley
his Master (and thereby the fittest to manage the said Trial) The said Mr.
Rockley sent down the Key of a Desk unto the said Hayford being at his house
Rockley, with directions to him to take out such Evidences as concerned him at
the Trial, and to manage the same.

In the said Desk were 1st. Other of the said Francis Rockleys Evidences
lodged. 2ly. Some of his Books of Accounts (...) And 3ly. Keys which did lead
unto his Study of Books, and unto all his other Evidence, Books of Accounts,
and personal Estate which were at Rockley, and not before committed to the said
Hayfords charge; None of which the said Francis Rockley could ever yet procure
into his hands again, nor any of his personal estate which he had committed to
the said Hayford to keep, or manage for him, as above.


And the more colourably to ingross the same to his own use.

In or about the beginning of August 1661 the said Hayford by combination with
Margaret Hayford his Sister, caused William Wilkinson an Attorney (one of the
Confederates herein after mentioned) to take out Execution forth of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, against the Goods of the said Francis Rockley,
and thereby (unknown to the said Mr. Rockley, until of long time after, he
being restrained a Prisoner at London) levied of the said Francis Rockleys
Goods [as the said Mr. Rockley is advised] to the value of 1000 l. and upwards
upon a Judgment on a Bond of 100 l. for the payment of 50 l. entered into by
the said Francis Rockley to the said Margaret [the Interest thereof most
probably satisfied till that time] producing then a Catalogue of all his
Masters Goods in his charge, unto the Sheriffs Officers, rated after the value
that the said Execution amounted unto, requesting the said Bailiffs to assign
the same to his said Sister at such a rate, under pretense that it was to
secure them for his said Master from other Executions And

1st. Defrauded the said Bailiffs of any Counterpart of such Catalogue, having
obtained them so to assign the same without a Counterpart, upon promise only
shortly after to give them one, but never would perform the same And 2ly. Ever
after that time denied that he had any thing of the said Mr. Rockleys his
Masters in his hands, unto such persons as Mr. Rockley had empowered to take
accounts of, and receive the same from him, and give discharges unto him.
And the said William Hayford [from the time he had so engrossed the said
Francis Rockleys his Masters Evidence as above] also withheld the growth and
other profits of his said Masters real Estate entrusted in his name, paying
only the 100 l. per annum to the said Brook thereout, till he could use such
means to defeat him of the same, as in time to ingross the same to himself; and
in order to ingross the same more sucurely to his own use, the said Hayford in
or about the beginning of March, Anno 1660. by Non-payment of Interest to some
of the Creditors of the said Francis Rockley

1st. Then caused the Lands of the said Francis Rockley his Master, entrusted
in his name as above [upon the abovesaid Statute acknowledged to the said Sir
Roger Bradshagh and William Bradshagh] to be extended at 100 l. per annum, by
his great interest with one Robert Waller, an Attorney at Law, employed by the
said Bradshagh's to extend the same. 2ly. Procured the Inquisition into the
said Lands taken at the suit of the said Bradshaghs for extending the same to
bear date before another Inquisition taken at the suit of one Gilbert Cowper
[though the same was taken after the Inquisition taken at the Suit of the said
Cowper.]
Thereby to come into possession of the said Lands so extended at the said
undervalue the same were extended at, without obstruction upon the said Statute
acknowledged to the said Bradshaghs, being of especial interest in the said
Waller, the said Sir Roger Bradshagh's Agent, who might dispose him into the
same, upon the said Statute; the only obstruction which could be given at Law
to the said Hayfords enjoyment of the said Demeasne of Rockley, with the
appurtenances, to his own use; by means of the Title unto the same, placed in
his name from the said Brook upon payment of the aforesaid rent of 100 l. per
annum unto the said Brook [after he had so engrossed the said Francis Rockleys
his Masters Evidence, as above] being treacherously disposed so to enjoy the
same.

The said Francis Rockley being then a Prisoner, and having Information of the
miscarriages of the said William Hayford in his service [which he was employed
in for the said Francis Rockley, as above] About the Month of July 1661, the
said Francis Rockley sent unto the said Hayford to return up unto him the
aforesaid Deed of Re-assignment of the Trust which the said Francis Rockley had
placed in his name, as above; and the said William Hayford at the instance of,
and by combination with the said Margaret his Sister not to return the same.

1st. Refused to return it. 2ly. And about June or July 1662. having managed
his practices, as above: He violently set up a Title unto the said Francis
Rockleys Iron works, and the stock thereupon to his own use, rebelliously
withstanding such persons as the said Francis Rockley had empowered to take
possession thereof to his use. 3ly. And about a fortnight after the said Robert
Waller ( under pretense of being Agent for the said Sir Roger Bradshagh upon
the said Statute extended) placed the said Hayford in possession of the same
And 1st. The said Hayford then commanded all the Workmen belonging to the said
Mr. Rockleys Iron works to atturn unto him, and work as his Servants, upon his
own terms, even to the ruin of some of them, and for his use; and from that
time professedly entitled himself to the said Works, with the stock and
profits of the same to his own use. 2ly. And shortly after at Rockley the said
Hayford pretending himself to one Mr. Christopher Bradshagh ( employed by the
said Sir Roger Bradshagh) that at the time when the said Francis Rockleys Lands
were extended by the said Sir Roger he was in possession of the said Manor and
Demeasne of Rockley, with the appurtenances, in his own right, by virtue of the
said Deed of Re-demise made unto him from the said Brook for payment of the
abovesaid 100 l. per annum to the said Brook, and of the other Deed made unto
him from the said Mr. Rockley for payment of the said 100 l. per annum to the
said Brook, and for payment of other Debts wherein he stood engaged, mentioned
in the said later recited Deed made to him Smothering as well 1st. The true
meaning of the said later mentioned Deed As 2ly. The said Deed of Re-assignment
made from him to the said Francis Rockley his Master And 3ly. Pretending the
said Debts (so provided for by the said Francis Rockley his Master to be
discharged by the said Hayford) to be great.


Yet in any one year passed which we had withheld the said Francis Rockleys
his Masters estate from him, he might near hand have paid the said debts
(mentioned to be payable by him by the said Deed made to him) remaining then
undischarged out of such estate of the said Francis Rockley, as was made in his
name, without making waste of any of the said Mr. Rockleys woods; or
diminishing any of the said Francis Rockleys stock upon his estate; or any
other of the said Francis Rockleys personal estate committed to the said
Hayford to keep, for the use of the said Francis Rockley, which were of much
more value than the said Debts (mentioned in the Deed to be payable by him)
amounted unto, over and besides that before that time he had engrossed very
much more of the said Mr. Rockley his Masters Estate into his hands than would
have satisfied the same.

However upon such pretenses of the said Hayfords, and upon the reputation
conferred upon him by the said Waller and Wilkinson, and being not long before
placed in possession of the same by the said Waller (Sir Roger Bradshaws
Attorney in that cause) the said Hayford was admitted by the said Mr. Bradshagh
to be continued in possession of the said Iron-works, and the rest of the said
Francis Rockles estate so extended, and placed in his name, as above.

He also further pretending to the said Mr. Bradshagh, that the Surplus of such
profit, as he should raise out of such of the said Francis Rockleys Estate,
which he did not pay to the said Bradshagh, nor discharge any of the debts
mentioned in the said last recited Deed (so made in his name, as above) he
would annually account for to the said Mr. Rockley his Master.

But the said Hayford, and his Confederates, or some of them, contrary to his
fair pretenses unto the said Bradshagh (as soon as the said Bradshagh was
departed thence, living far remote, in another Country)

1st. Over and besides that he cut down, and made waste of the said Francis
Rockleys woods, at his own will, and converted the same to his own use. 2ly. By
Law subjected such of the said Mr. Rockleys Tenants of the same, unto him, as
did not with ceremony own him their Landlord, causing them to take the same
upon hard terms from him, to the ruin of them. 3ly. Neither discharged any of
the Debts mentioned in the said Deed (made to him, as above) not so much as the
100 l. per annum, payable to the said Brook, and thereby forfeited the said
Re-demise made from the said Brook in the said Hayfords name, for the said
Rockleys use, in further design to take the same again from the said Brook so
forfeited, unquestionably to state himself in a title at Law unto the same,
without comptrol.
Only on or about the 29th. day of June 1664. he paid of the same, the sum of
20 l. to one Mrs. Hester Bamforth, (a person unto whom the said Francis
Rockley, with the said Hayford as his security, stood indebted in the sum of
200 l. for the payment of 100 l.) upon terms with her.

1st. Not to prosecute him for the rest of the debt due to her. 2ly. To extend
the Lands of the said Francis Rockley for the same. 3ly. That She should seal
to a discharge and acknowledgement of the said moneys so paid to her by him, in
place whereof, by his practice, and her ignorance in affairs of that kind, She
was surprised by the said Hayford to seal a General Release to the said
Hayford; whereby in accounts with the said Mr. Rockley his Master, he might
show an unquestionable discharge of the whole debt, and put a cheat upon him as
well as her. 4ly. He caused one John Carrington ( the sole person else who
stood obliged with the said Francis Rockley in any of the said debts, he
pretended the said later Deed made by the said Francis Rockley to him for the
discharge of) to be prosecuted for such debt as he stood so obliged in with
the said Francis Rockley, and thereby enforced the said John Carrington to pay
whatsoever could be extorted from him of the same. 4ly. The said Hayford did
not accommodate the said Francis Rockley his Master in Prison (as above) with
one penny out of the same, but contrarily 1st. By sinister practices he hindered
the said Mr. Rockley of each penny he possibly could 2ly. He troubled,
threatened trouble, or caused trouble to be brought upon all such as looked
toward the said Mr. Rockley his Master, Practice sed by the said Wilkin^^n to
the ru^^ of several ^^^d endea^oured by ^im upon o^^ers.
in order to the assistance of him. 3ly. And in Michaelmas Term following, viz.
1662. having charged, and caused the said Francis Rockley his Master to be
charged with diverse actions in prison (by the said Wilkinson his Attorney) for
several of those debts (which he pretended the said Deed to be made to him for
discharge of) which then remained unsatisfied by the said Mr. Rockley; he
caused the same to be sued to Outlawry after Judgment, the said Mr. Rockley
being by the practice of the said Wilkinson and Hayford, as he hopes to make
appear, occluded in a prison, never to come forth more, and thereby disabled
(being bereft also of any thing whatsoever whereby to maintain himself) to
prevent such prosecution of him.

Hereupon the said Francis Rockley, in Michaelmas Term 1663. Exhibited a Bill
in Chancery against the said Hayford, for discovery of what title he had to any
of the said Francis Rockleys estate, and to call him to account for what
moneys, and other Goods and Chattels he had of the said Mr. Rockleys in his
hands, and the said Hayford made a scoff of the same.

And pleaded the said Outlawries also (as well as other Outlawries, which by
want of his estate were contracted upon him) which he had so brought upon the
said Mr. Rockley, as above, and thereby abated the said Mr. Rockleys
proceedings against him in his said Suite in Chancery.

And however the said Francis Rockley (by Virtue of his Majesty's most gracious
Writ of Habeas Corpus out of the High Court of Chancery, having procured his
Liberty, in Order to the prosecution of certain of his affairs) on the Six and
Twentieth day of October 1665. being come unto his Estate in Yorkshire, and
finding his Mansion House Rockley, and the Demeasne thereof, with the
appurtenances be rio^^sly kep^ from him by the said Hayford and his
Con^aderates; and indevouring to repossess himself of his said Manors, Lands,
and Estate real and personal; the said Hayford (to escape question by the said
Francis Rockley for some crimes he had committed against the King as well as
against him the said Francis Rockley) on or about the First day of January 1665
made an Assignment of his pretended Title unto the said Manor house of
Rockley, and the Demeasnes thereof, with the appurtenances, unto one John
Spencer of Cannon Hall in the County of York, Gent.

And on or about the 19 of Jan. 1665. the said Hayford seeing that by Perjury
and subornation of Perjury, Maintenance, Forgery, Barratry, and other sinister
practices and combinations of and with the said Spencer, Wilkinson, and others,
to keep the said Spencer, and others whom he had placed there for his use, in
possession of the same) he was not like by any, nor by all those means, to hold
possession, being that upon an Indictment exhibited against the said William
Hayford, Margaret his Sister, John Spencer, and others, at the General Sessions
of Peace, held at Doncaster on the Seventeenth and Eighteenth days of January
1665. the said Confaederates were found Guilty of a forceable Detinue of the
said Francis Rockleys estate from him, and a precept was thereupon awarded to
the Sheriff of the County of York, for placing the said Mr. Rockley in
possession of the same, (though by practice with the said Sheriff, the said
Confaederates obstructed the said Francis Rockley from his possession thereof.)
The said Confaederate; suspecting (notwithstanding all their practices to the
contrary) that the said Francis Rockley should be then placed in possession of
the same, and should thereby place himself, as well in possession of his
personal as his real estate, by virtue and under pretense of the above
mentioned Judgment of 100 l. for payment of 50 l. (whereupon all the said
Francis Rockleys personal estate was levied, as above) within three days time
after the said precept so awarded to the Sheriff for placing the said Mr.
Rockley in possession.

1st. The said Confederates carried, or caused to be carried away all or most
of his said personal Estate. 2ly. All the principal Evidence of the said Mr.
Rockleys his Masters Estate, and all his Books of Account there.
And notwithstanding their great Combination to prevent the said Mr. Rockley
from being placed in possession, still fearing the same would be placed in him;
the said Confaederates also caused a Lease of Ejectment, (they, or some of
them, having engrossed the Deeds which most immediately concerned the same at
Law) to be delivered to the said Francis Rockley as of the foregoing Term, for
the said Lands, so placed in the said Hayfords name, as above; thereby
endeavoring forthwith to Eject him out of the same again, if he should have
been placed in possession by the Sheriff.

And the said Confaederates finding, that after they had obstructed his
Possession by the Sheriff, that the said Francis Rockley by application to the
said James Brook (upon the forfeiture the said Hayford had made unto him)
endeavored to procure the said Brook to place him in possession again, in the
name of one Thomas Gathorn of Rawcliffe, in the same County, Gent. They the
said Confaederates, William Hayford, and John Spencer, by Combination with the
said James Brook, to defeat the said Francis Rockley of his Estate, obtained
the said Jam^^ Brook, on the (...) Day of (...) in the year 166(...), to
Assign the same so forfeited, and also the aforesaid Statute of 1800 l. (for
making the above mentioned Demise good) unto the said Wilkinson and Beard (two
persons unresponsible for so great a charge) for the said Hayfords use.

1st. Though the said Francis Rockley, at and before the same time, offered a
better security, both for the said Brooks rent in arrear, and for what might
from time to time grow due unto the said Brook upon the above mentioned
agreement made with him, than they the said Wilkinson and Beard gave to the
said Brook for the same. And 2ly. Though the said Brook well knew that he had
re-assigned the same at the original agreement made in February 1652. in the
name of the said Hayford, for the use of the said Francis Rockley. And
And further, That at a General Sessions of Peace held at Doncaster, on the
next foregoing 17. and 18. Days of January, before such Grant or Assignment
made by him unto the said Beard and Wilkinson, that the said Hayford and
Spencer, the said Margaret and others their Confaederates were found Guilty of
a forceable and riotous Detinue of the said Francis Rockley Mansion house with
the appurtenances from him, and that a Precept was than (...) from (...) of the
(...) and that the ^^^d Wilkinson and Beard at that (...), and upon (...)ted
with the said Riotours, to keep them rioto^^^y in such poss^^sion of the same
(...) Yet notwithstanding the said Assignment of the Demeasne Lands of Rockley,
etc. and of the said Statute of 1800 l. made by the said Brook to the said
Beard and Wilkinson; the same was so contrived amongst the said Confaederates,
as that the aforesaid re-demise made by the said Brook to the said Hayford,
should appear not to be forfeited if occasion should so require.

And the said Confaederates, Spencer, Hayford, Wilkinson, and Beard, the more
securely to keep the said Francis Rockley out of possession of the same, in or
about January 1666. assigned the same from one to another, upon new bargains,
on pretense of moneys made amongst themselves, Covenanting to make the same
good, by a greater League to maintain themselves in, and to keep the said
Francis Rockley out of the same.

And to possess themselves also of all the rest of the said Mr. Rockleys
estate, the said Wilkinson and Beard then deliver Leases of Ejectment to all
the other Tenants of the said Mr. Rockley there, upon the said Statute of 1800
l. assigned unto them by the said Brook to Evict the same; threatening to
dis-possess such of the said Tenants as had or should show themselves against
them; and amongst others, the said Hayford being stated in a capacity, either
to be a party, or a Witness, as above (as occasion should require) The said
Wilkinson and Beard, by Hayfords false testimony, wrongfully evicted the said
Iron furnace in the hands of the said Lyonel Copley, thereby to enforce him
also to pay the said 5 s. per Tun, and the arrears thereof, to them; the sole
revenue which the said Mr. Rockley then had truly free for his subsistence
being unextendable, being payable only to the said Francis Rockley by Covenant,
as above.

That hereby they the said Confaederates (as the said Mr. Rockley is able to
Evidence) might be enabled by the said Mr. Rockleys estate, to procure the said
Mr. Rockleys Creditors to make assignment of such Debts as were owing by the
said Mr. Rockley unto them; thereby to keep him out of his Estate by his own
Estate, though the grounds of all their pretenses, viz. the Debt payable upon
the said Morgage made unto the said Brook; and all other pretensions they make
unto the same, are fully satisfied, with an Overplus; or the said
Confaederates, or some of them, have many times told more of the said Mr.
Rockleys in their hands than will satisfy the same.

The CASE and Petition of Francis Rockley Esquire

To be relieved in Parliament, against the Confederacy of William Hayford his
Servant, with others, to bereave his Master of his Estate.


