AN ABSTRACT OF THE Present State of the MINES Of Bwlchyr-Eskir-Hyr; And of the
Material Proceedings of the Committee, appointed for the Management thereof.
Published for the Information and Satisfaction of the absent-Partners, and at
their Request.
By Order of the Committee.
To the Absent Partners.
Gent'
THE Representation made by several Absent Partners living in the Country, of
the Inconveniences that have happened for want of some public Information of
the State of the Mines, together with their Request, that for the Satisfaction
of all the Partners, an Account thereof be Printed, with the Opinion of the
Committee concerning the same, has been taken into Consideration by the said
Committee; and though it was presumed that all the Partners in these Mines, would
either by themselves or friends have taken an Account thereof at the Office in
Lincoln's Inn, from the Original Letters and Entries, which they thought would
have been most proper and satisfactory, and which they may have access to, when
they please. Yet to show their respect to you who have reposed so great a Trust
in them, and how careful they have been and still are of your interest and
safety, they have ordered the following Abstract to be made from the Originals,
and (being perused and allowed by them) to be Printed and sent to you, By,
Gentlemen,

Jan. 31st. 1699/700. Your most Humble Servant, Francis Pigott, Sec'


Is It, IT was referred to Sir Humphry Mackworth, and William Player, of
Gray's Inn, Esquire (and to such other of the Committee as would then be present) to
view the Mines, and make a Report of the present State thereof, and of all
matters relating thereto.

IIdly, In pursuance thereof the following Letter was sent by them to the
Committee, viz.

Gent' June 20th, 1699.
On Wednesday the Seventh of this Instant June, Mr. Lydall, Mr. Leicester, and
Mr. Tucker, (a Person Experienced in Mineral Works) came with us into
Cardiganshire, and having several times viewed the Mines, and Examined the
Workmen, we cannot find but Mr. Waller has given us a very fair and just
Account of the Mines.

We have been every Day on Horseback viewing some place or other ever since we
met, and therefore must desire more time to make a particular Report, but we
have both taken Minutes of the Matter of Fact, and set our Hands to them; and
as soon as conveniently we can, our Report shall be sent you at Large, By, Gent'

Your most Humble Servants, H. Mackworth, Will. Player.



Gent'
We have perused the above-written Letter, and several times viewed the Mines
of Bwlchyr-Eskir-Hyr, and late of Sir Carbery Pryse, and Examined the Workmen,
and do entirely concur in Opinion with Sir Humphry Mackworth and Mr. Player,
and that the said Mines will turn to a very great Account.

Francis Leicester, Robert Lydall, Jonathan Tucker.



Note, Those Gentlemen are all well skilled in the Art of Mining, and
particularly Mr. Tucker, who is Manager of Mr. Player's Mineral Works near
Bristol.

IIIdly, The Report at Large from Sir Humphry Mackworth and Mr. Player, was
sent up to the Committee the Third day of July last, which being too long to be
inserted, the Adventurers are referred to the Original in the Office, but
(amongst other things) it is therein set forth:

1. That upon Examination of several Persons that actually wrought in the
Shafts formerly sunk in the said Mines, it appeared that the several Veins
proved quick, and were left in such manner as has formerly been Represented by
Mr. Waller, to the Mine-Adventurers: And though they could not have a view in
the deep Shafts, having much Water in them; yet the Water being drawn out in
the Shallow Cross-cuts and Shafts, Note, The great Vein was but one Foot thick
in Oar at the Surface.
on purpose to give them a view of the Veins, they saw Oar raised in four
several Veins at the day, near the Surface of the Ground, which Oar lay in
Ribs, the least of which was Nine Inches broad, and some of a Foot broad, or
thereabouts.

2. That they believe Mr. Waller's Map and State of the Mines then sent up, was
very exact, the Veins, Adits and Levels being measured in the presence of the
said Mr. Tucker, and that the works were then carried on in several cross
Drifts Night and Day.

3. They give an Account of the Buildings at Tallybout, and on the Mountain,
and of the Stores, and what Instructions they had left with Mr. Simon Pryse,
for the Method of his Accounts, for carriage of the Oar raised to the
Waterside, and to Mr. Waller for Expediting the Levels, Cross-drifts and
Shafts; for the Speedy raising of Oar; which was approved and Confirmed.

4. They deliver their Opinion by the Advice of the said Artists, that for the
speedy Smelting and Refining the Oar raised; and so making a quick Return of
Profit, Neath, in Glamorganshire seemed at present the most proper Place; where
there was a large Smelting-house, One hundred thirty five Foot in length, and
Thirty Two Foot in breadth, and all Buildings, Stacks, Furnaces, with a large
Water-wheel, Sturbridge Clay, Coal, and all other Materials in readiness, which
could not be provided in Cardiganshire in a long time; and that Sir Humphry
Mackworth was then making a Key at Neath-Bank, for the more convenient Loading
and Unloading of Vessels, where Coal is at no time wanting, if Sir Humphry
Mackworth's Coals should fail.

5. That about the latter end of September and beginning of October, they had
Visited the Mines a Second time, and found (amongst other things) that in the
Level Vein there appeared some strings of Oar; That in one of the Cross-drifts,
in the East-Level, not above Eight yards deep, toward the great Vein, they
crossed a Vein which had some Lead Oar mixed with Vein-Stone, and also a
settled Vein, which by the greenish Color of it seemed to be the Copper-Vein,
which they judged to be of no great Value in that place so near the Surface,
but that it had a very promising Aspect, when it took more Ground upon it.

That about Fourteen Yards South of the Bog vein, there was a new Cross-cut
made, wherein there was Oar raised in Two distinct places, but whether these
would prove profitable Veins was yet uncertain; That in order to Land Oar as
soon as may be, Mr. Waller was carrying on a Shallow Level to the Bog-Vein.

6. That Houses for Workmen were Erected to contain near a Hundred Men, and
that the Country People brought Provisions to the Mountain every Saturday, to
the great advantage of the Neighbors and Miners.

7. That since June last, Sir Humphry Mackworth had at the North-end of the
Smelting-House abovementioned, Erected another pile of Building Sixty Foot in
length, and Twenty Eight Foot in breadth; and Stacks or Chimneys for Six or
Seven Refining Furnaces; and was, below that, Erecting a Red-Lead Mill with
Storehouses convenient to them.

8. That Sir Humphry Mackworth had also since that time made a Cut or Canal
from Neath-River, of about Eighteen or Twenty Foot wide, and about Three
Hundred Yards in length, in which Trows and small Vessels with Thirty Tun might
come up within Four Hundred Yards of the Smelting and Refining Houses; and that
a strong Crane was also Erected, and the Partners Goods unloaded there, and
that this Cut may be carried one or two Hundred Yards nearer, which will much
shorten Land-Carriage, the said Works being near a Mile from Neath-Key.

Note, that Mr. Richard Curtis, who is a considerable Partner, and who went
down to the Mines for his own Satisfaction, and viewed and measured the Works
under Ground, and the Buildings in Glamorganshire, gives a very good Character
thereof, and exactly agrees with the Account abovementioned, which is also
confirmed by the Accomptant to the Company, who spent some time below in
Cardiganshire and at Neath, in taking an Exact Particular thereof.

IVthly, Sir Humphry Mackworth has Erected all those large Buildings and
Conveniences at his own proper Charge, without receiving one Penny from the
Public Stock on that Account: And at the Request of the Committee, has let
the Company have the Use and Benefit of them; they giving to the said Sir
Humphry Mackworth (after full Trial had thereof) such consideration for the use
of the same as they shall think fit: And upon this Occasion the Committee think
themselves obliged to declare, That the said Sir Humphry Mackworth has upon
this and all other Occasions; dealt very justly and honorably by all the
Partners concerned.

Vthly, Mr. Lydall, Chief Operator to the Company, having viewed all places
convenient for Erecting Smelting-Houses, both in Cardiganshire near to Oar, and
in Glamorganshire near to Coal, (where the Smelting-Houses are appointed to be
built by the Settlement of the Mine-Adventure, to the intent that the same
vessels may carry Coal to Oar, and Oar to Coal) after mature Deliberation had
thereupon, has given a particular Account of the conveniences and
inconveniences of each place, whereby it appears, that till greater quantities
of Oar are raised, Carriage grown difficult, and more, Housing is wanting, that
Neath is the cheapest place of Smelting and Refining all the Oar, whereby the
Duty on Coal is saved, and also the charge of keeping another set of Stewards,
Smelters and Refiners in Cardiganshire: and in the mean while they have more
time to Deliberate in the Choice of, and to Contract for, the most proper place
for Building in that County.

VIthly, As to the Profit of this Undertaking, many Experiments have been made
in large Quantities; of the Richness of the several sorts of Oar in these
Veins, and it thereby appears, That every Tun of Oar (one with another) yields
at this time, over and above all manner of charges, a clear profit of five
pounds per Tun and upwards.

VIIly, The Principal Stock is not really lessened in all this time above Two
thousand three hundred Pounds Twelve Shillings and Four pence; the use of Sir
Humphry Mackworth's Smelting and Refining Furnaces, having for the present
saved the Company a great Expense that way.

VIIIthly, As to the keeping the Accounts they are in exact Form and Method of
Merchants Accounts.

IXthly, The Committee have, by several Letters from the Officers, received an
Account,

First, That a Pit or Shaft was begun on a Vein, five yards South of the great
Vein, where the Miners met with a Spark of Oar (as they Term it) near a Tun
weight, which (they say) showed the Pride of the Vein, being within two Yards
of the Surface of the Ground. That some time after they Sunk to the Oar, for
the raising of which Mr. Waller did set a Bargain to the Miners, at 7 s. 6 d.
per Tun; but before they could raise any Quantity, being so near the Shafts in
the great Vein, the Water from them broke in upon the Workmen, and watered them
out.

Note, Sir Thomas Mackworth (who also confirms the Report above set forth) went
down in this Shaft, and (he says) that he saw the Oar therein above Two Foot
wide, and not above Five or Six Yards deep from the Surface.

Secondly, That in one of the Cross-drifts, the Workmen met with Strings of
rich Copper Oar, that crossed the firm sides, which gave hopes (that the
Copper-Vein, (which is near two Yards wide) would prove quick and gathered to a
rich Body of Oar in that Drift, when once it came up to the Vein.

Thirdly, That in Curtis-Drift the Miners had cut into the Bog-Vein, which is
Four Foot wide betwixt the firm Sides; And that Mr. Waller had set on several
Setts of Workmen to sink Shafts upon that Drift.

Fourthly, That he had Finished those Shafts, and was raising Oar there; and
that the Oar in the said Vein did set well, and widen downwards, as it took
more Ground upon it.

Fifthly, He still expresses his great Opinion of the Mines, and complains of
their being too quick upon him for raising Oar, since in his Essay on the value
of the Mines, he did insist upon a Years time to set the Works in Order, which
will not be ended till the latter end of May next; and since the Rocks have
proved much harder than he expected; but yet by the time proposed he doubts not
but to be raising of Oar in the great Vein; and in the mean time hopes he shall
please them in raising Oar in the Bog-vein above mentioned, as soon as he can
set that place in order, and make room for a number of Men to be employed there.

Sixthly, They continue the Smelting and refining at Neath with great care and
diligence, and for the time have made there a considerable quantity of Silver,
Lead, and Lytharge.

Upon the whole Matter, as the Committee cannot pretend to any absolute
certainty in matters of this Nature, so they have no reason to have a different
Opinion of the Mines from what they had at first; but on the contrary do
believe and hope that they are all engaged in a very Profitable Undertaking.

And as the best Demonstration of the Sincerity of this their Opinion, they
think fit also to declare, That neither his Grace the Duke of Leeds, Sir Tho.
Mackworth, Sir H. Mackworth, Mr. Waller, nor any one of the Committee, have
sold out any part of their Principal Money Adventured, or Shares arising from
the same; but on the contrary many of them have lately Purchased a considerable
Number of Blanks and Shares, which in the whole (amongst them all) amounts to
the Value of 8755 l. in Blanck-Tickets, and also 242 Shares.

By Order of the Committee. Francis Pigot, Sec'


