An Abstract of the Present State OF THE Protestants in France.
HIS Majesty having earnestly recommended the calamitous condition of the
French Protestants, to the Charity of his Subjects; it will be reasonable that
some account should be given of the Persecution and Severities used toward
those unhappy People, which have driven them from their Estates and Country,
and caused them in so great numbers to seek for refuge amongst Strangers.

The aforesaid pressures are of two sorts; one from the iniquity of the Laws,
the other from the violence of Men.

As to the first, Whereas the Protestants of France, as a reward for their
eminent Services to the Government and Crown; were supported by the memorable
Edict of Nantes bearing date April 1598. ratified through the succession of
several Kings, and in particular by him who now reigns: yet of late without any
pretense of forfeiture, or ill demerit on their part, they have been subjected
to many severities directly contrary to the concessions of the said Edict; and
indeed that humanity which is due to all Men, even from Heathen Strangers, and
professed Enemies.

An instance whereof will be first, the Edict of Feb. 28. 1680. whereby, in
imitation of the Egyptians dealing with the Israelites, it is ordered, that
Protestant Women shall not be delivered in Childbirth, but by Midwives and
Surgeons who are Papists; and they are commanded to Baptize the Children new
born, who are thenceforth esteemed to be members of the Church of Rome, and if
when they come to age they shall profess the Protestant Religion, will be
liable to be punished as Apostates, and their Parents obnoxious for perverting
them.

2ly. The Edict of June 17. 1681. whereby it is ordered that the Children of
Protestants shall be admitted to abjure the Religion of their Parents, as soon
as they shall attain the age of seven Years: And it is then put into the choice
of the Children whether they will continue with them, and be there maintained
with large allowances such as the Papist Magistrate shall appoint; or have the
like provision made at the charge of the Parents elsewhere. By which offer of
license the Children are not only encouraged to disobedience and debauchery;
but rendered the Masters, nay Persecutors of their Parents.

3ly. The Edict of Novem. 19. 1680. which ordains that when any Protestant
shall happen to be sick, he shall suffer himself to be visited by the Papist
Officers and Priests; who at their coming remove from him his Friends,
Relations and Attendants, and among themselves interrogate him according to
their pleasure; and his answers are usually interpreted to be a reconciliation
of himself to Popery, and an abjuring of the Protestant Religion: So that if he
die, the Family are esteemed the Children of a Papist Father, and so to be bred
in that Religion: If he survives and continues in the Protestant Religion, he
is to be treated as a relapsed Heretic.

4ly. The Edicts of July 9. and 31. 1681. which restrain the Protestants from
having Schoolmasters to teach their Children who are of their Religion, more
than bearly to Write and Read: and only one is allowed in a whole City: and
besides this they only may teach who are licensed by Papist Officers: whereby
also their Universities are suppressed: which was the very course formerly taken
by Julian the Apostate for the extirpating of Christianity; And was the method
of the Ammonites, to put out the right eyes of the Israelites, as a reproach
upon them.

5ly. The Edicts of Novem. 6. 1679. Jun. 11. Aug. 17. 1680, and June 28. 1681.
which order the turning of Protestants out of civil and military employments,
and the disabling tradesmen from keeping shops or exercising their
Professions. Which is in effect to command them and their families to steal or
be starved.

6ly. The Edict of Nov. 19. 1680. which Grants to all Protestants who change
their Religion, a respit for three years of paying their depts, laying a
prohibition upon their creditors to bring any action against them: Which as it
is a violent temptation to ill men to change their Religion, so it absolutely
ruins the credit of others, who are no longer trusted, the Creditor being
insecure of being paid.

7ly. The Edict of June 1680. which orders that no subject of France of what
quality, condition, age or sex soever, now making profession of the Roman
Religion; may ever forsake it to go over to the Reformed, for what cause,
reason, pretense, or consideration soever: And whosoever shall act to the
contrary shall be condemned to make Amendehonourable, to perpetual banishment,
and confiscation of goods. Likewise all Ministers of the Reformed Religion are
forbid to receive any Proselyte coming to them from Popery, or suffer in their
Churches or Assemblies any such, under penalty that the Minister shall be
deprived from ever exercising his function, and of the suppression of the Place
or Church for ever after. Upon which pretense, and others as unreasonable. (for
how is it possible for any Congregation to provide that no person formerly of
another persuasion, should come among them:) an almost infinite number of
Churches have bin demolished. They are the words of the provincial Assembly of
the province of Papists, held in the months of March and May 1681. alleged as
a testimony of the piety of the King. So that at this present, the Protestants
are fain to go to many places 30. or 40. Miles, to get their Children Baptized,
or perform any public act of religious worship. And if it happen in case of
carrying Children to be Baptized, that the Papist midwife has done that office
before, then the Parent is accused as Sacrilegious; and of rebaptizing a
Catholic Infant into heresy.

8ly. But since mention is made of Amendehonourable, as a part of the
punishment of a Convert to the reformed Religion, it may not be amiss to give
some account of it.

9ly. The person condemned to this punishment is to go into some public place
in his Shirt, with a Torch in his hand, and a Rope about his neck, followed by
the common Hangman; and in this equipage, as if he were the most Infamous
Malefactor, he is to ask pardon of God, the King and Justice for what he has
done. That is for leaving a Religion which he believed to be Heretical, and
Idolatrous; and for embracing the truth, and desiring to save his soul, he is
to be made a spectacle to God, Angels, and Men.

10ly. But over and above all this severity of the Laws; there is added, the
cruelty of Magistrates, and violence of Soldiers. Against a protestant, any
accusation is greedily received, and severely prosecuted; and if after long
vexation, expense and imprisonment, the innocence of the Person accused shall
be so manifest as not to be dissembled, he can hope for no reparation against
the Papist false accuser.

11ly. Nor is the condition of the Protestants in civil causes better than in
criminal. If any Protestant sues a Papist for the Interest of an estate, or
debt: or complains of being over-rated in Taxes; whereas he should be heard in
several parts of France, according to the Edict of Nantes; by Chambres
Miparties, where are Counselors and Judges who are Protestants as well as
Papists; now they are entirely exposed to their mortal and professed enemies, and
what the sucess of such trials is likely to be, twill be needless to declare.

12ly. But as if this hardship were not enough; in those Countries where
Protestants most abound, Soldiers are sent among them to live at free quarter,
called by them discretion, and do that execution and barbarity, which they have
practiced among conquered enemies. Where what they cannot devour, or make
advantage of by sale, they spoil and trample under feet: Beat with cudgels the
men, clap swords and pistols to their breasts; abuse and ravish the women: and
when they have pillagd their houses, tie the Possessors to their horse tails,
and drag them to Mass: where having thrown holy water into their faces, they
say they are Catholics; and if thy disown it, shall be proceeded against as
Relapst.

13ly. When Persons weary of this usage, attempt to fly into foreign parts,
being discoverd they are clapped into prisons and dungeons, there to be starved
to death, or perish by noisome Diseases: And those miserable Persons who unable
to bear these Extremities renounce their Religion, are at the same time forced
to give it under their hands that they have abjured without constraint, and of
their own free choice. And all this usage is still pretended to be, gentle and
innocent means made use of, to bring Heretics to the bosom of the Church,
becoming the bounty and goodness of the King, and conformable to the mind of
the Divine Pastor, who always retains bowels of mercy for these strayed Sheep;
and wills they should be brought back, and not hunted away, because he desires
their Salvation and regrets their loss. Which conduct is very far from the
rigor wherewith the Catholics are treated in the Neighboring Kingdoms which
are infected with Heresy; by which it appears, what difference there is between
Reason and Passion, between the meekness of Truth, and rage of Imposture,
between the Zeal of the House of God, and the fury of Babylon. They are the
words of the Bishop of Claudiopolis, to the King, in the head of the Deputies
of the Clergy of France, and are intended as a reproach to the People of
England and the Government thereof.

And may not now the desolate Church of France take up her Lamentation and say?
Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by, behold and see, if there be any
Sorrow like unto my Sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me, in the day of his fierce Anger. Lam. 1. 12.

But Blessed are the Merciful for they shall obtain Mercy. Matthew. 5. 7.

Let Brotherly love continue. Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers: for
thereby some have entertained Angels unawares. Remember them that are in bonds,
as bound with them, and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves in
the body. Heb. 13. 1, 2, 3.

When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory and all the Holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory. And before him shall be
gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats; and he shall set the Sheep on his
Right Hand, but the Goats on the Left. Then shall the King say unto them on his
Right Hand, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the Foundation of the World. For I was an hungered and ye gave me Meat, I
was thirsty and ye gave me Drink: I was a Stranger and ye took me in: Naked and
ye Clothed me, I was sick and ye visited me, I was in Prison and ye came unto
me, etc. Matthew. 25. 31. etc.

LONDON, Printed for John Whitlock. 1682.


