AN ABSTRACT OF THE Procedure OF FRANCE, Since the PYRENAEAN TREATY: Under
these Heads; I. The Speech of Monsieur Zerowisky, the Emperor's Ambassador to
the King of POLAND. II. A Memorial presented by the said Ambassador to the King
of POLAND. III. A Letter from Monsieur Du Vernay to Count Teckely. IV. A Letter
from Count Teckely to Monsieur Du Vernay. V. A Letter from Monsieur Peter
Jaigel, Governor of Cassovia, to Monsieur Du Vernay.


To which is added, MERCVRIVS PANEGYRICVS.

LONDON, Printed for M. Gilliflower, in Westminster Hall, and J. Partridge,
near Charing Cross. 1684.

A LETTER from Monsieur S. L. a Polish Lord, to Monsieur the Marquess C. L. In
which are manifestly discovered the Practices and secret Intrigues of the
French with the Turks and Hungarian Rebels. With some Letters and Remarks upon
this Subject.
SIR,
YOU have given me sufficient assurances of the continuance of your Friendship
in the Letter I now received from you, and by the earnest desire you express of
being informed by me of what our Sentiments are in Poland, concerning the
present Troubles in Hungary. The common report, you say, accuses the French of
having raised the War with the Turk; and making use of Poland to set its
Engines at Work, and put in execution its pernicious Designs. If you are of the
same Opinion with our Polanders, I shall tell you, with my accustomed freedom,
that you do not wholly wrong them; For it is true that my Countrymen, for some
years past have suffered themselves to be over-reacht by the French, and that
by treating with them too ingenuously, they have insensibly been drawn in to
bear a part with them in their evil Practices; and among others, in favoring
the Malcontents in Hungary. They acknowledge at present, though perhaps too
late, their Error, and begin to fear lest they have purchased to themselves
Enemies, who after they have filled their own Country with Desolation, their
Ambition and Barbarity may make them turn their Arms against Poland. Sir, we
love our selves, and our Friendship cannot consist with those Peoples Maxims.
Their Politiques appear to us so much the more criminal, because there is no
just revenge, but that which obliges us to fight our Enemies with our Arms in
our Hands, and openly; nor any so base, as that which makes us use wicked
Devises, and execrable Treasons as the Instruments of their Ruin. I have a
great esteem for the Sarmatians, because they had this good Quality, that they
never suffered their suspicions to prevail against any Man's credit, and that
they chose always rather to judge of others according to their own
Inclinations, than upon bare conjectures think them capable of Malice. And I
beg of you, Sir, to afford me the same Justice, at such time as at the Diet of
Ratisbonne, you unravel Penelopes weaving, and condemn my Countrimens wicked
Politics. I grant you, that the Hungarians, that by their caballing and
Seditiousness have been banished their Country, have found in Poland both
refuge and Friends to protect them. I easily also acknowledge, that the
original of all the Evils you complain of, has its rise from an abuse of the
Liberty that we have in Germany. You may also reckon up so many Factions and
Parties, whether in Peace or War, as there are little Kings, that in these last
Ages have raised themselves to the Royal Authority, and established their
Throne in the midst of Germany. Now after this, you ought not to be surprised
to see that our Governors have granted the Favor of Hospitality to those that
complained that their Liberty was taken from them in their Country, and that
all Laws were violated to oppress them in the highest degree; since humanity it
self, and the right of Neighborhood could not let them refuse to admit them,
till such time as they were reconciled to the Emperor the Sovereign and
Master. It may yet be presumed that the French protected them, thinking there
was some merit in protecting the Miserable oppressed. I am also of Opinion,
that the Polanders were persuaded to suffer among themselves those that came
from Hungary banished their Country, and deprived of their Goods, upon thoughts
of preserving them to the Empire and Christianity; and to the end that their
Despair might not oblige them to have recourse to the Turk, to obtain his
Protection. If it was the French Design in these last Wars of Germany to draw
more business upon the Emperor, and divide his Forces; it ought to be
remembered that we are not to mind in an Enemy either craft, or violence.
However, I condemn that way of proceeding, which occasioned them to bear an
Enemies Heart in time of Peace; and have a Horror at their fomenting the
troubles of Hungary with their Forces and Counsel. This Management breaks the
most sacred bonds of Friendship and Peace. So have I always, and many others
with me, thought it very ill that Frenchmen should go out of our Country, as it
were out of the Trojan Horse, to go as Spies into Hungary and Transylvania, for
to raise Troubles, and encourage the discontented so much the more by giving
them Money and Arms. All Europe knows how Bohancy, the Head of the Rebels of
Transylvania, with some French of the same Leven, famous for their Crimes
committed in Hungary, run up and down to raise Seditions, and join themselves
to the Rebels. However, the unviolable observance due to so solemn a Treaty of
Peace, made me doubt, whether France did Authorize this Conduct; and I could no
longer fix my Suspicions upon the most Christian King, when I reflected, it has
always been fatal to Sovereigns, by many Examples, to reduce Subjects to
Revolt, or to maintain or protect them when they have rose against their Lawful
Prince. Besides, I was never so bold or rash as to cry down the Glory of Kings
and Sovereigns; and I can say, that if Fortune had been answerable to my
Government, having never offended any Body in my life, I should be very happy.
The most Christian King, by the fortunate Success of his Arms, the greatness of
his Exploits and Victories, has raised his Glory to so high a Pitch, that he
ought only to use it with moderation, and it is needless for him to use
unworthy artifices for to make himself more Glorious. Souls truly Royal and
Magnanimous, have always despised the Conquests they could more easily obtain
by Cunning than by force of Arms. And it was through this sentiment, worthy a
great Heart, that Alexander the Great sharply rebuked his Favorite Parmenio,
who would have put him upon a crafty Design, saying to him, That it was fit
only for Robbers to have recourse to Treachery, as their only means to compass
their Thefts. Nevertheless, because the Ministers of Princes are People more
zealous in their Employments than they should be, and hold that they may
lawfully commit all sorts of Injustice for their Sovereign's interest, provided
at the same time they do their business; I thought it might possibly be the
same in France. The better to assure my self in this belief, I would be
informed by those Gentlemen, that keep the Bank here of the French money (for we
never want some Polanders, who had rather live under the French Slavery, than
be satisfied with the liberty of Poland) what great concerns the French had
with the Duke of Transylvania, Apafi^us, so much constrained to the Turks
Party, what were the Designs and Intentions, and to what end was so much coming
and going of Akakia, Du Vernay Boucauld, and all the other Expresses.

At last, I found they gave no other Reason, but that the French were at
present in Possession, and going through all Countries, that they found every
where Friends and Allies; and that they were at last arrived at the time of
fulfilling the desire they had long had of seeing themselves Masters of all the
World. This is it these French Prophets boast of, founding their hopes and
pretensions upon this ground, that there is no other way of opposing the House
of Austria, which aspires to the entire Monarchy of all Europe, but the French
King's entering into a League with the Turk, and there making an Alliance, and
joining their Forces by virtue of a Treaty, confirmed with an Oath taken upon
the Holy Evangelists; but this you may learn better from the Original; as if it
could ever be justifiable to revenge one injury with another wrong done to all
Christendom, and the Destruction of our Holy Mother the Church.

Having asked these Frenchmen, what Prince of the House of Austria it was that
disturbed France for this Universal Monarchy, they knew not which to name; this
makes me believe, that those who judge of the present by what is past, will
without doubt say that the French and Turks have long ago agreed; and that the
French Ambassador at Constantinople has no greater business with the Ottoman
Port, than to instruct him about the Emperors Negotiations in Hungary, as a
Famous Venetian said before me, and that the secret intention of the French, is
to draw the War into those Provinces of the Kingdom of Hungary, that remain as
yet undivided; to extend, when they shall think fit, their Dominions on the
other side, through the Ruin of Nations, and Destruction of Christians.

However, the French Party every where exclaim, and ask, what advantage can the
loss of Hungary produce to LEWIS THE GREAT? They say on the contrary, the King
endeavors to preserve it in its obedience to the Emperor, and that his
Majesty has given sufficient Testimony of it to the chiefest Princes in Europe;
when Luxemburg, being attacked on all sides, and ready to Surrender, he left
the Conquest of that important Town, to which he has a just Claim, as soon as
he knew that they were informed at Vienna, by an extraordinary Courtier, that
the Turk was bringing all his Forces against the Empire, and had ordered his
Army to March toward Belgrade, with a Design to Invade in this War all
Hungary, and the Neighboring Provinces to Austria. That the most Christian
King had given a signal demonstration of his Piety, in not hindering, as very
advantagiously he could, the Emperor, and the rest whom the same misfortune
threatened, from turning all their force upon the Enemy, and in withdrawing his
Troops that were in Flanders and upon the Rhine. We all admired, and highly
extolled a Conduct so Glorious, so Pious, and so worthy a great Monarch, that
would at so high a Rate purchase the peace and quiet of Christendom; and
without doubt the French that had come afterward, had received sincere
Praises, if the thing had really been, or but always appeared the same they
represented it to us, but, praised be God, the Truth did not always lie hid
under the specious pretenses with which it was covered.

I pass by all examples of past ages, and only say, that after their actions in
these latter times, there is no more doubt to be made of their sinister
dealings. And to be fully satisfied in this point, it is only necessary to hear
those that are best instructed in the causes of this rumor which I spread
abroad. They say, that all their exactness in discovering of News has not been
able to inform them that any accident had happened which should give occasion
to the Turk to make a War either in Asia, or Greece, Thessaly, or any of his
remote Provinces; that nevertheless at the same time they have seen in several
Letters of the French Emissaries, which were dispersed in Constantinople,
Transylvania and Hungary; how that last year, on the 30th of December, the War
was resolved upon and sworn to against the Emperor, in the Palace of
Constantinople, and in the Holy Council, which the Turks call Divan, in which
the Muphti, High Priest of the Mohammedan Religion presided. Which sufficiently
lays open the Authors and Procurers of this War; and clearly shows us that the
French were not ashamed, as if it had been a famous action in them, to take
advice in the Divan, and applaud the success of the Negotiations, as they did
in their Letters writ backwards and forwards to the Rebels, in which they
congratulated with them for having drawn the Turk to succor them. They promise
each other in their Letters all the advantages they can expect, which aim at no
less than to have the Emperor driven out of his best Estates, and the Turk
advance into Christendom, bestowing Crowns on the one side, and rewards on the
other, according as every one shall have labored with him for the freeing of
Hungary.

I lay not the stress of this upon any false rumor that has run among the
People; I have assured and convincing testimonies of it; and the Persons from
whom I take it, deserve we should make it a point of Conscience faithfully to
believe them.

Sir, if you suspended as yet your judgment upon the French, on account of
what I have told you; and if you should as yet persist in your belief, that the
Polanders have had a hand in all this with the French; I would desire you to
examine with that justice, which in you is usual, whether what I have related
unto you is not sufficient to raise all your suspicions.

There is no body but knows that in last years assembly, our illustrious
Hungarians loudly proclaimed, that such of their Countrymen, as have been
forced to retire to other Places, lived only upon such supplies of Money, as
they received from the French; that they would not make their Peace with the
Emperor, whose Clemency extended but just so far as to offer it, and that they
were resolved to prosecute their enterprise, upon assurance of the Promises
that were made them. So afterward Akakia renewed and confirmed more powerfully
than ever the League and Alliance with the Malcontents of Transylvania. We
also saw the French Emissaries without any shame of violating the Law of
Nations, and in Countries of the solemn Treaty of Peace; though they had been
manifestly discovered in a secret Conspiracy, run on afterward more then ever,
with an unparallelled Impudence, as if all things had been lawful to them.

You that know me, may well imagine what a trouble it was to me, to see that
Poland, my Country, should be the Theater where all these Villainies were acted,
and not one Polander to be found who might undeceive the World.

Yet the Emperor, with his ordinary Mercy, suffered the Malcontents of Hungary
to pass the next Water with as much quiet and security as they would desire, to
the end to draw them by this affectionate conduct to lay down Arms, return to
their Duty, and live peaceably in their Country under obedience; and I thought
they would then for ever have left their Rebellion, if the Artifices of the
French had permitted them to take good counsel.

We have been informed, how 100000 Florins were ordered at Paris to foment the
Discontent of the Rebels in Hungary, and quicken the Turks the more; How this
Sum was delivered at Dantzick, the Metropolis of Royal Prussia, and put into
the Hands of a Banker, whose Name is Fromontius, who afterward delivered it to
the French Emissaries, at several payments, the better to hide the business.
Moreover, we knew, how the Sieur du Vernay Boucauld, Count Teckely's real Spy,
caused to be delivered into the hands of the Sieur Valentin Nemessan, 11300
Ducats, to oblige the Malcontents to take Arms again, and attack the Citadel
of Zatmar, after the French fashion, with gilt Arrows, I mean, to endeavor to
gain the Garrison, or Citizens, with money.

You knew, Sir, that in Poland, we highly disapproved of this Conduct, which
was not totally unknown. The Principal Officers of our Court, before the whole
Court, represented to the most Christian King's Ambassador, that we would no
longer allow of such things. We told them, that by order of the whole Senate,
we forbid the French to act, as we understood they lately had done, upon pain
of our King's displeasure. Monsieur de Vitry endeavored to excuse himself, he
produced his Book, assuring us, that we should not find in all his Accounts
that the Malcontents in Hungary had touched the money we spoke of, and which
was all delivered by his Order. Thus it is that Deceit and Craft hide the Truth
under false pretenses.

Notwithstanding you must know, that the French Money went into Hungary, and
men have been employed on purpose to stop it; and even the very Women have not
been ignorant of the Wiles and Practices of the French.

The Princess Radrivilliana, Widow to the Prince of that name, expressly forbid
the suffering any French to pass through her Country of Sacolia, bordering upon
Transylvania, fearing lest they should, as in other places, corrupt the People
with money. Nevertheless the French, whether it was that they would venture all,
or whether they thought they were sufficiently disguised not to be known, took
their Journey through this Princess's hereditary Country, and one that was
taken was carried to her Castle, whom she imprisoned, loaded with Irons, and
afterward caused to be severely punished. The Marquess De Vitri, as well as
all the Court, saw this man run backwards and forwards, being obliged to take
another way. This generous Princess's Example may convince the World that there
were those in Poland, who condemned the abominable practices of the French.

All the world would have thought, that after this the Sieur du Vernay and all
his under Spies would have grown circumspect by the punishment of their
Companion, or that at least they would have learnt to conceal themselves
better. But on the contrary, they made it appear by their new behavior, that
when once a man has gone beyond the bounds of Honor he is fit for any thing.
These Gentlemen, the Masters of Perfidiousness, perceived, that they had no
fairer a convenience for to entertain a commerce with the French Ambassador at
Constantinople, the Turks, and Malcontents in Hungary, than that which they
found on the borders of Poland. They always had correspondence, and had as
often as they could private enterviews with the Sieurs Valentin Nemessan, Peter
Iagel, and other particular Friends and Allies of Teckely. They moreover
endeavored to have still more and more frequent Conferences in Transylvania,
sending first one and then another to Paris, with the necessary Instructions of
all their Proceedings.

So the Emperor's Ambassador at this Court, who had notice of all, desired
our most Serene King of Poland, that his Majesty would be pleased to give
order, that no Frenchman, not being an Ambassador, or bearing some other
Employment, should be allowed to stay in his Dominions. He added to his
Entreaty the humble Remonstrance, that the ancient Treaties so often renewed
between the Empire and Poland, required it for the public Peace, neither did
he omit what he had understood concerning the Behavior of the French in
Hungary and Constantinople. This occasioned that the most Christian King's
Ambassador was advertized by his Majesty of Poland, to order Akakia and Du
Vernay to withdraw. At the same time he received a severe Animadversion about
those Peoples Behavior. The Senate told him, that we were no longer upon terms
of conniving, since we had been informed, that the French more and more stirted
up the Troubles of Hungary, to draw on a War with the Turk; that we knew from
good hands what Money they had given for it, what Cabals they had had, and the
Sieur Du Vernay kept every day. We declared that Man was a Spy, and a turbulent
Person, who had no other business to detain him about Leopol, but only to treat
with the Turks and Malcontents, about the means and entering into a League
together, for to draw the War into Hungary; that therefore we earnestly desired
he would cause him to retire. The Ambassador answered, that he would not do
what we demanded; he loudly declared, that Monsieur Du Vernay was sent with him
into Poland, to manage the Affairs of the most Christian King their Master. He
presumed very confidently to deny, that neither the Sieur Du Vernay, nor he,
had any commerce with the Hungarians, or Turks; on the contrary, he said, that
the French King, in leaving Luxemburg, had sufficiently testified how earnestly
he desired the Peace of Christendom, much less to give an occasion of
suspecting the French of any sinister Design. He promised however, to take
away, as he said, all Suspicions, that the Sieur Du Vernay should go to
Varovia, and that there he should execute his most Christian Majesty's
commands. However, the Sieur Du Vernay, upon the news of all these Accusations,
had retired to a Convent of Schismatic Monks of the order of St. Basil. And
this did not put an end to these Practices, so unworthy the name of
Christianity.

Some time after, the Emperors Ambassador discovered that new sums of Money
were come to Dantzick for the French. This and many other things which he
understood at the same time, obliged him to renew his Prayers to his Majesty of
Poland. He had Audience in the Presence of the Marquess De Vitry, the French
Ambassador, and before the whole Senate. He spoke a long time, and all his
Speech consisted of Complaints against the Sieur Du Vernay. He said, he had
only changed the Place, and not his way of Proceeding, and still daily
continued his Crafts in Poland. He produced a Paper he had received by the last
Post; by which he was given to understand, that the remainder of the Money the
French had engaged for to the Rebels, by the agreement made between them of one
hundred thousand Florins, was lately delivered at Dantzick. He ended,
beseeching his Majesty of Poland, to be pleased now at last to purge his
Dominions of those dangerous and seditious Men, who by all means fomented the
Troubles of Hungary. He said, the Miseries of Hungary would reach Poland, since
the Toleration they had, tended to the Violation of the Treaty of Peace, till
now always inviolably observed. He protested, if we gave not satisfaction to
his demands, he should be obliged to publish in all Princes Courts, and would
make known to all Europe, that the French, by their abominable Methods and
Practices, are the Authors of the Troubles of Hungary and Transylvania, and
cause of the Turkish War. That they have sacrificed to their hatred, and envy
against the House of Austria, the best purchased Provinces of the Empire, in
which they have exercised their Treacheries and Treasons. That they have done
all this to make good their ground in the Provinces they have torn from the
Empire, and which they cannot retain by any other lawful right. In a word, that
their aim in all these Proceedings is only to renew the Treaty of Peace, upon
pretense that we have broke it, to the end they may the better retain their
Usurpations, and have an occasion of seizing what is left of the Empire.

This Speech was convincing, and we could do no less than to press anew the
French Ambassador to oblige the Sieur de Vernay to depart Poland: We told him
from the King and Senate, that we would no longer be satisfied with the vain
pretenses he alleged to detain him. Then Monsieur the Marquis de Vitry
declared, (which he durst not do the last time) that Monsieur Du Vernay
Boucauld, was joint Ambassador with him from the French King. He came thus far
to save him by the quality of Ambassador, sheltering him under the Law of
Nations.

This Declaration stopped our Polander's mouths; they thought no more of
demanding the departure of him that was the real Author of the Rebellion of
Hungary; and they spoke not the least word to put a stop to his licentiousness
by a just advice: On the contrary, they promised the Ambassador, that the
Sieur Du Vernay, his pretended Companion, should have all liberty to act for
his Master.

This soft and complying behavior of the Polanders cannot be better excused,
than by saying, that without doubt they remembered upon this occasion, that the
French of late years, make no greater complaint, than when their Ambassadors
or Agents, that have liberty in all Countries, are touched, though never so
slightly.

(These are the words of Charles Pascal, a Frenchman, in his Treatise he made
of Embassies.) "And they do like the Wolfs, who draw the Sheep far from the
Shepherd, that they may afterward devour them. In fine, it is upon these
frivolous accusations, that the French, to have some pretense for making War,
have at other times so loudly complained, and not long since, against Germany,
saying, They observed not the law of Nations, and broke the most sacred bonds
of Humanity, and the Peace toward their Ambassadors. Yet at the same time,
they passed by and endured, without one word speaking, the horrid injuries and
most barbarous usage their Ambassadors received at the Ottoman Port.

I must needs tell you here, Sir, that if you wonder that we suffer the French
Emissaries in Poland, under the pretended quality of an Ambassador; we have
much more reason to admire in Poland that the French are received in the
principal Courts in Germany with great kindness and satisfaction,
notwithstanding there is so much reason to mistrust their intentions.

This makes me think, dear Sir, that even at this day we might see the
observance of the Laws, the love of your Country, the love and respect due to
the Emperor, in which you were so exact the last age, subsist amongst you, if
the French had not been the first in changing this good order, by conjuring
with the Turks. Then, it is true, a Law made in a Diet was published in Germany;
by which all sort of commerce with the Turks, and the French, their
Confederates, was forbidden through the whole Empire; to hinder the sprouting
of the seeds of Division and Rebellion, which that perfidious Nation casss
wherever it is admitted. Since no French Ambassador was admitted in any one
Court in Germany, so little did they trust the French; and scarce would the
Princes of the Empire receive Letters from that Country. Now things are much
changed, and we may well cry, when we see the present miseries of Germany, O
tempora! O mores!

Yet all the World has not the same opinion of the French. But to convince you,
I will give you an example so much the more to be imitated, because it would be
extremely advantageous to Germany, if the same were done there. It happened in
Poland, The Castellan of Primislau, perceiving that neither his Majesty of
Poland, nor the Senate expelled the French Spies, and moreover that their
designs always succeeded better and better, and that they were going to
destroy, by the Turkish War they were drawing on, a million of innocent
Christians, refused to permit the Sieur Du Vernay to enter his Village of
Nimirovia, and assembled a number of men to oblige him to pass another way; so
much did he fear this man, of whom he had heard so many things.

There wanted not for great complaints. The Marquis de Vitry was highly
incensed, and sought all ways of revenge. And as he is the Most Christian
King's Ambassador, went directly to Court, to lay before his Majesty of
Poland, after his own fashion, the affront and indignity offered, contrary to
the Law of Nations, to his Companion, the Sieur du Vernay; and was so bold as
to demand that the Castellan should be imprisoned for satisfaction. The King
could not endure this confidence, and told him very harshly, That it was to no
purpose to couch the Sieur du Vernay under the quality of Ambassador, that the
Tragedies he acted under the vain pretense of an Embassy were well known; that
all the devices of the French, and their contracts with the Turk were
discovered; that the places where Akakia and du Vernay had Conferences were
named; their resolutions and designs known; that we could exactly tell how much
Money was sent from France to Hungary; and how they had used violence, deceit,
and wicked practices against the Emperor, to the misfortune of Christendom.

The Ambassador would have cleared himself of those things, with which, he
said, we wrongfully charged his Nation. He thought there was no body could
convict the French of their actions in this Country. But the King, who grew
hot, would not hear him. He only told him, he would lay 10000 Pistols with him,
that we would prove undeniably all that he had said:

I tell you nothing here, Sir, but what I have seen and heard, and if you had
been present, you would have thought with me, you had heard Cicero speak in the
Roman Senate, instead of the King of Poland, How long, Catiline, will you abuse
our patience? How long shall your fury sport at us? to what end will your
impudence come? are you ignorant that all your Designs are known to us? don't
you perceive that all my Citizens are convinced of the Conspiracy you carry on
with the Malcontents of Hungary and the Turks?

The Marquess de Vitry pressed no farther for the liberty of the French Agents.
He did not, like Catiline, pray we should not entertain those thoughts of him
and his, which no Body believed; that when Hungary were lost, we should have
need of the French. He looked like one astonished at this blow. He stood
amazed, and his silence sufficiently confirmed the thing. All the other French
that were present, in a consternation, fixed their Eyes upon the ground, and
lifted them not up but to look upon each other, as it were accusing themselves.
So certain it is, that the inward sting of Conscience, and the secret power of
Truth, dashes the most fierce and confident, and by reducing the guilty to a
shameful silence, forces them to make some sort of confession of their Crimes.

Sir, Here you have a very acceptable History to tell such of your Countrymen
as can well praise all the French actions, whether good or bad. Next, you may
ask them, whether they expect a good Peace with the French, because they so
highly extol the advantages and pleasures of Peace.

If the Ghost of the Emperor Tiberius should come from Hell, and appear in you
assembly of the States of the Empire, how justly would he blame you, and say, O
men, born to slavery! will your softness extend so far as not to believe, but
that we only imagine what is done openly in sight of the whole world, which we
see, and even feel. This I say, because I know there are some amongst you, that
sufficiently mistrust the French, to know what they are to think of them,
whether they suspect them for not observing the Peace, or for entering into a
League with the Turks.

But I also believe, which is much better, that there are many Germans, who
will talk boldly of taking away the snares that are laid for them, and
endeavoring to defend the liberty of their Country. I still remember what I
saw in Germany when I traveled in it. At least I doubt not, but that if you
would Unite your selves to re-establish the glory of Germany, and retain the
valor of your Ancestors, you might live at home like Kings, and laugh at those
who have made themselves slaves to France.

But what side must be taken in so great a diversity of Opinions, and among so
many occasions of fear on both sides. My opinion is little to the purpose, but
if you will believe me, you would judge, that you have most reason to fear what
threatens you from the East, than from any other place. For what can you expect
from a War with the Turk but the total ruin of your Goods, and utter
destruction of your Country. There is an end of your Liberty, your Religion,
your Life, and all you can lose in this World.

So that since you have still time to consider what you are to do, imagine
sometimes your Churches, your Houses, your Wives, your Children and your
Country, coming to you and conjuring by all they have deserved from you, that
you will not leave them as a prey to your common Enemies, and to prevent the
Miseries of a cruel slavery that threatens their Liberty.

If you will say that Hercules himself wont encounter two; that therefore you
must treat with the French at any rate. You may still think, if you please,
that the Kingdom of Hungary is of far greater value and consequence, as being
the bulwark of Christendom, than the City of Strasburg. That at present you
must behave your self like a prudent Pilot in a Storm, who chooses rather to
cast his Merchandise into the Sea, than venture losing all, by endeavoring to
preserve all. But I must also tell you, that you have reason to fear, lest
under those beautiful Leaves, a Snake lies hid. You must believe the French
have stirred up the Turks. And these shall no sooner have entered Austria,
besieged Vienna, as without doubt they will besiege it, destroyed all the
Country round it; and finally reduced Germany to the last Extremities; but the
French, invited by your Prayers, will voluntarily come offer you their Service.
But instead of Water to quench the Fire, they will bring Oil to make it the
fiercer.

Sir, I shall not say many other things that I think about this matter. I only
add, that methinks I see a History, almost the same with that we read of a
Roman Emperor, who had a Fancy to set on fire the four corners of Rome for the
Pleasure, as he said, of seeing a Fire equal to that of Troy; and thereby to
have an occasion of doing good to the miserable Citizens, who would come to
complain of their Miseries and Misfortunes. Perhaps Nero, in this cruel Scene,
desired nothing but the Glory of building a new City, and calling it by his own
Name.

If you believe me, endeavor above all things to take away the Snares that are
laid for you. The French King, as all other Christian Princes, is obliged to
defend you against the Turks; and you will have so little trouble in obtaining
of it, that he has already agreed upon it with your Enemy. But what will be the
event? You will infallibly come to complain of one another, because some will
be contented, and others dissatisfied; Whilst you are taken up in these
Disputes, the French will do their Work, and at last you will find your selves
under their Dominion, cast down, conquered and made Slaves without daring to
say so.

Do not then stay to dispute Rights and Interests, till the time when the noise
of Arms and the fury of War will hinder you from hearing the Law. Be the
Horatii, and not the Curatii of your Country. In fine, remember that the
members separated from the Head languish away like Carcasses. Be faithful to
your Sovereign, the Emperor, your lawful Prince: He has ascended the Throne by
a right owned by all the World; he has always upheld himself with Glory; you
are used to obey him, and he always applied himself to your preservation. You
ought to pay him all sorts of respect, if you expect in him a Protector and
Father, and if you fear drawing the wrath of Heaven on your heads. What light
would the Planets have if they darkened the Sun? If you prefer the Moon hid
under the Flowerde-Luces before the Sun at which your Eagle looks; if you had
rather be slaves to the French King, than obey the Emperor, all things will
happen worse and worse to you; and you will draw all the Cruelty of the
Barbarians on you, as a punishment of your Perjury and breach of Faith.

You are not ignorant of the reproach that we cast upon you, viz. that the
Germans are the only people that desire to be subject to a Foreign Government,
and have no love for their Country. That reproach cannot justly be retorted
upon us; and Germany shall ever find in the Polanders all sort of friendship
and service. We foresee the dangers that threaten us, and seeing of it, our
Forefathers example, our promised Faith, and our natural inclination, stir us
up powerfully to the defense of our Country.

Sir, I know, that to make you sensible of all that my Friendship and sincerity
has made me say, I need only represent it to you. It only remains that I desire
you to tell me your Opinion with the same freedom, that I may be delivered from
the disquietness the sight of the present Evils, and the fear of those that
threaten us, has put me into. It is time you should read the pieces I send you.
Farewell.

Given at my Castle September. 1. 82.
FINIS.
The Speech of Monsieur Zerowiski, the Emperor's Ambassador in Poland. Spoken
in the Royal Palace before his Majesty of Poland, and in the Presence of the
Princes, Noblemen, and Ambassadors at that Court; at Tavoravia, the 6th of
October, 1682.
Most Great King,
AMongst other Books, I have hit upon that of the Life and Exploits of Cardinal
Commendon who was sent to this Court by the Pope, with the Quality of
extraordinary Legate, in the Empire of Sigismond, and Reign of Henry de Valois:
I have observed in it, that it was that Cardinal's Maxim, Never to answer but
with an affected Silence and Contempt, to all that his Enemies could do or say
against him. Without doubt, in his time, the state of Affairs, the Customs and
Spirits were very different from what they now are; at least, a long experience
has made me judge them very different; and I know I cannot, without great
disadvantage, conceal or connive at a thing that very much troubles me. I have
understood that the French King's Ministers, published some days ago, certain
Letters, which brought, as it were, assured Testimonies, that His Imperial
Majesty's Envoy's only Business with the Ottoman Court was to endeavor, by all
possible means, to turn the Turkish Armies against Poland.

There is no Body but sees, and your Majesty must needs perceive, how injurious
this is to the Empire; and to what end it is done. They give this out to
disunite Two Kingdoms; both which, at this present Conjuncture of Affairs, have
their chief Interest in being firmly united. But the Letters took not so great
an effect as they expected. The Spirits of this Court, were not so credulous as
to believe them. They are too well satisfied in Poland, of the Piety and
Affection of those of the House of Austria; to think that the Emperor, my
Master, gives his Ambassadors such base and unworthy Commissions. There is no
Body here that can doubt that his Imperial Majesty, would be as sensible of the
loss of Poland as of Hungary, since it is as much his Interest to preserve the
one as the other.

I come not hither, great King, to tell you what through my Aversion, I could
publish upon little Rumors that have been spread among us; I bring your
Majesty those things, which I can beyond all dispute, produce before the whole
World, as the true Originals of Letters and Answers, which the most Christian
King's Ambassador, Monsieur Du Vernay Boucauld, who is here present, has writ
to Count Tekely, the Head of the Malcontents, or received from him. These will
evidently discover to your Majesty, what Affairs Mounsieur Du Vernay has
Treated about, with so much secrecy and circumspection with Count Tekely; and
the reason he had so cautiously to conceal from you the Commission he had in
this Kingdom.

I humbly entreat your Majesty to remember how earnestly I entreated you, to
remove the Sieur Du Vernay from your Court and Dominions, as a man pernicious
to the Empire, and Poland. You would have, Great King, invincible Proofs and
Testimonies of what I related; Here they are, such as you will wish for, and I
am persuaded they will be sufficient to make you judge the speedy departure of
Monsieur Du Vernay, out of your Kingdom, very necessary. But I fear, troubling
your Majesty with a long Discourse; I pass by a thousand things which I could
add; this Memorial is enough, To you I present it with all imaginable respect.

A Memorial presented to the King of Poland, by Monsieur Zerowisky, the
Emperor's Resident.
Which was read in the presence of his Majesty of Poland, and before the
Princes and Ministers of his Court; at Tavoravia, the 6th of October, 1682.
SInce the last Memerial which I had the Honor to present to your Majesty, I
have endeavored, according to the Advice of the Illustrious Lords of the
Senate, to furnish my self with some piece that might evidently show what
Correspondence the French King's Agents have in your Kingdom with Count Tekely,
Head of the Malcontents in Hungary. These wanted also to inform you, what
Bargains and Agreements passed between them, which, as I said, tend to the
breaking off the Peace and Treaties, that are between your Majesty and the
Emperor, my Master. You could not easily be informed of it from any but my
self. I know the French King's Ministers daily assured your Majesty, that they
had a Hand in no such thing; and that we accused them falsely. And the French
would no longer be suspected to have any ill Design against the Empire, after
the Declaration the French King had made, at the raising the Bloccade of
Luxemburg. His most Christian Majesty would inform all Europe, how he behaved
himself in that occasion; and they were careful to carry his Declaration to all
the Courts of the chief Christian Princes. The French King plausibly declares,
that having been informed of the Designs which are carrying on in the Fast
against the Empire, he would put nothing in Execution which might hinder his
Imperial Majesty, and the most August House of Austria, from opposing the Turks
with all their Forces, and providing for the common good of Christendom.

This could by no means allow your Majesty to believe, that the French were in
League with the Maltcontents and Turks; and that they contributed to the taking
and plundering the Towns of Hungary; for that appeared to be quite contrary to
such fair Declarations: But God, the Defender and Revenger of Christians, has
ordered those things to fall into my hands, which I lay at the foot of your
Majesty's Throne; and which I lay before the Eyes of the whole World. These are
the Sieur Da Vernay's Letters, and Correspondence with Count Tekeley; which you
will find diametrically opposite to those Declarations, so worthy the Piety and
Generosity of the most Christian King.

I have made use of no evil practice for the obtaining these Letters: I have
not, though I could have done it, so much as employed any Body to observe the
French. And to tell you all, I got these Letters by the means of the Steward of
the most Illustrious Lord Stadnick's Estate. The Sieur Du Vernay, after having
long importuned the Monks of a Monastery of St. Basil, went also to importune
the Steward, who is Castellan at Premislaw. So much he did, that he stirred up
the Gentleman's Anger against himself, and so consequently he became my Friend,
and has ever since been very favorable to my Intentions. This Castellan, some
days ago, stopped certain Hungarians coming back from Nimiravia, whither they
went to see the Sieur Du Vernay; immediately he ordered them to be brought to
me, with the Letters he sound about them. I presently took care to convey them
to the Emperor, my Master's Territories; sending at the same time the Letters,
to the end that all the World might judge, whether I had not just cause to
suspect, that the Sieur Du Vernay exceeded his Master's orders.

Certainly, this Agent, this Minister, this Spy, this Ambassador, I know not
what to call him, but I mean Monsienr Du Vernay, has committed a great outrage
against all Christendom. Against the Emperor, in fomenting and contriving what
he has against him. Against your Majesty, in entertaining a Commerce so
unworthy, so pernicious, and for so long a time, without your knowledge, and in
your Kingdom, as if he had been at home. I must add, for the Interest of your
Kingdom, that this Conduct has given the World occasion to believe, that the
Polanders were blind enough, not to see the dangers their Neighbors made them
fear, and that they would themselves drive the Poniard to their own Breast, in
permitting the Sieur Du Vernay to live amongst them. His proceeding will,
without doubt, appear very injurious to the French King; for that Posterity may
judge and believe, that the great King, Lewis the XIV, Authorized or commanded,
what the Sieur Du Vernay, his Agent did in his Name.

Your Majesty will not take it ill, that we have discovered to the Assemblies
at Francfort and Ratisbonne, the Famous Exploits of the French, with the Turks
and Rebels of Hungary, in your Kingdom, which for so many Ages has been closely
united with the August-House of Austria; and has always acknowledged its own
Interest, to preserve Hungary to the Empire, thinking it impossible for Peland
to subsist if Hungary shall sall.

It is now a year, that the Sieur Du Vernay travels up and down several Parts
of your Maiestjes Dominions, on the Borders of Hungary. He always pretends his
Masters, as if we could see that Dantzick or Rogioment, which are the Places
the French come through, were not nearer and more proper to receive what Orders
the French King would send. But he stays there to observe the nearer the
Affairs of Hungary: It may be also, to be in a better condition to go give
Count Tekeley joy, and to get the reputation with him, of the Progress the
Turks, by his means, might make in that Country.

I desire your Majesty, that after you have seen the Memorial I present; and
after you are convinced of all the Arts the French have used in this Kingdom,
you will be pleased to order the Sieur Da Vernay to depart your Dominions,
since he abuses his Employments to the prejudice of all Christendom; and
renders himself unworthy the Protection the Law of Nations allows.

You may do it so much the more justly, great King, because the Roman Catholic
Church, your Mother, esteems them as Excommunicated Persons, who side with
Infidels, whether it be carrying them Arms, or treating with them.

The Sieur Du Vernay has drawn this upon his own head, and if he is punished
according to his deserts, the most Christian King will banish him his Kingdom,
for exceeding his Orders, and engaging his Master's Honor and Reputation. In
fine, he has committed his Villainies in the French King's Name, and broke his
Master's word; acting in all things contrary to the observance of it, which if
it should fail in the World, could be no where found but in the Mouth of a King
or Prince.

I doubt not, great King, but all my pressing, reiterated and just instances,
will at last take effect. The Alliances and Treaties that are between this
Kingdom and the Empire, require it from your Majesty. And I also, with a most
profound respect, beg to be admitted to the honor of some part of your
Affections,

A Letter from Monsieur Du Vernay, to Count Emery Tekeley.
My Lord,
I Received with great joy the Letters, you did me the honor to write to me,
from the Camp before Filleck, enclosed in the Pacquets of our Ambassadors at
Constantinople; nevertheless, I was a little surprised, that you should seal
them before he had seen them. I wonder also, you said nothing about the Siege
of Filleck. However, I doubt not but that place, by this time, is in your
power. Monsieur Jaygel, I believe, knows by my last Letters, that I have
several times endeavored to send him what I promised, and let him have what I
have received, but I always wanted an opportunity. When you send any of your
People to me, order them not to come to my House but at Night, to the end we
may do our business without any bodies knowledge. But what I most earnesty
desire is, that above all things, they take care not to follow the Road that
goes directly from Tavoravia to Nimirovia. For here are several Polish
Gentlemen, who, by the most Serene King of Poland's Order, search, visit, and
detain all strangers that pass. The safest way, in my Opinion is, that they
leave Premislaw and Toreslavia on the right hand, and follow the Road that
leads to Sandomiria, lest they be seen to enter Nimirovia, where I am
surrounded with Spies. I recommend the enclosed to you; and desire you to send
them according to their Directions, by the first opportunity. I will take the
same care in all things, you shall be pleased to command me. I am most
cordially,

Sir, Your most zealous Servant, Du Vernay Boucauld.
Nimirovia, Sept. the 22d. 1682.
The Superscription was thus: To the most Illustrious Lord, Count Emery
Tekeley, Lord of Kesmark and Arve, General of the Hungarian Army, that sights
for its Country.
The Audience being ended, His Majesty of Poland said, he was convinced of the
French Correspondence with the Malcontents. He showed himself very angry that
the thing had been concealed from him. Next day some of the chief Officers of
his Court, had Order to go and command the Sieur Du Vernay immediately to
depart the Kingdom. He said, he would obey his Majesty's Order; but that he
earnesty desired those Gentlemen to give him some days, that he might take the
Coach of Transylvania. On the other side, the Emperor's Resident used all
diligence, and with great success; for Monsieur Du Vernay's Letter-carrier,
called, Kelemeschi, returned to Nimirovia before his departure. This Courrier
came with those whom Tekeley sent to the Sicur Du Vernay, with his Letters; and
those of his great Agent and Confident Jaygel. These Courriers were seized, and
the Letters they had intercepted. These Letters were partly writ in Ciphers.
Here you will find them set down word for word.

A Letter from Count Tekeley, to Monsieur Du Vernay.
SIR,
I Doubt not, but you have made much of Monsieur Valentine Nemessani, my Envoy.
He has always been faithful to me, and very true to my Interest. The
Recommendations you gave him touching the Affairs he communicated with you;
will, without doubt, be of great Importance to him, with the Most Christian
King. I am beholding to you for all you have done for him, and shall
acknowledge it, as occasion serves: It is time I should inform you, of the
present state of my Affairs. After I had taken Cassovia, and entered some Forts
about it, I went with the Vizier of Budas Troops, to attack the Famous Fort of
Filleck: The Inhabitants refused, at first, to put themselves under my
Protection; but after a fortnights Siege, they came to beg I would admit them
to Capitulate; I granted them what they asked; which was, that the Garrison,
and what other Prople there was, should go out, carrying with them as much as
they could upon their Backs: Then I raised the Fort, in sight of the Imperial
Army, which was hard by in the Mountains. As I am now informed, it is marched
away: and having sacked the Town of Vieuxsols, and other places, retires very
hastily. I design to follow the Imperialists, and drive them far off, to
restore my Country to its former Liberty. At length the Emperor will be forced
to yield by Force, what we beg as a Favor. Heaven has commiserated my Fortune
indeed somewhat late; but I also hope, it will draw on a greater and more
speedy Vengeance. Sir, I will take care to inform you of all my other Affairs;
however I desire you always to stand my Friend. I am

At the Camp before Filleck, Sept. 18, 1682. SIR, Always ready to serve you,
EMERY TEKELEY.

The Superscription was: To the Most Illustrious Lord, Monsieur Du Vernay
Boucauld Ambassador Extraordinary from the French King.
A Letter from Monsieur Peter Jaigel, Governor of Cassovia: To Monsieur Du
Vernay.
SIR,
LAst Wednesday we took and raised Filleck: where above a thousand Janissaries
were slain. Afterward, the Vizier made all the Hungarians that were present,
and were under the Prince of Transilvania's Dominion, be brought before our
Illustrious Count; then all the Estates of the upper Hungary being assembled,
Monsieur Tekeler was proclaimed King, and confirmed in that Quality by the
Great Turk, who sent him from the Port, a Hat instead of a Crown, with a
Standard, and Scepter. After the Ceremony, the Count very modestly refused the
Title of King: He is satisfied with that of Prince Regent of Hungary: His
Titles are, Emericus Thokolius Princeps, ac partium Regni Hungariae Dominus,
etc. After this Election, the Vizier gave him the best Troops, to pursue at the
Head of the Army, those of the Imperialists. Caprara having deserted the
Mountains, pillaged the Towns, and abandoned the Forts Vigles and Zolian, is at
last retired, and has taken his way toward Threnezin. Sir, we had done
something more, but we have not received what you promised us, and without that
supply, we are forced to proceed gently in our Business. Monsieur Nemessani is
gone to treat of Affairs at the French King's Court. He needs your
Instructions; we have ordered him in all things, to act to your Honor. We will
very suddenly send you an Express; I beg of you for God's sake, make him up as
large a Sum as you can. I always remain, as I ought,

SIR, Your most obliged Servant, PETER JAIGEL.
Cassovia, Sept. 22d. 1682.
The Subscription was: To the most Illustrious Lord, Monsieur Du Vernay
Boucauld, Ambassador Extraordinary from the French King.
After the Emperor's Resident had the second time produced these Letters, and
the days appointed were expired, his Majesty of Poland sent word to the
Marquess de Vitry, the French Ambassador in Poland, to cause the Sieur Du
Vernay, immediately to retire; that he was weary of hearing daily of his new
Designs. Without doubt, he has obeyed this Order of the King of Poland.

It was thought convenient to put in the Letters here, in the same manner as
they were writ, and this to satisfy such Persons as are not content without
the Original.

Literae Ablegati Gallici Du Vernay, ad primarium Rebellium Ductorem Emericum
Thokolium.
ILlustrissime Domine, Domine mihi observandissime.
Scriptas ad me septima hujusce Mensis ab Illustrissima Dominatione Vestra ex
Castris ad Filleck positis Litteras, simul cum ad Portani Ottomannicam Oratoris
nostri inclusis, grato animo accepi. Sed non sine aliquo stupore, quod antequam
ad ejusdem manus pervenissent, resignatae fuerunt. Miror etiam, quod de o, 2 b,
300 si, 147 di. 44 o, 280 ne, 187 Fi, 152 le, 13 c, 20 ki, 9 ja, 42 m, 362 sua,
1 a, 183 esse, 232 in, 313 po-, te, 48 s, 373 ta, 374 te. Ex ultimis meis ad
Dominum 476 Jaigel, intelliget, 333 quo, 375 ti, 164 es, 319 pro, 264 mi, 48 s,
361 so-, ru, 22 m, 187 fi, 146 de, 42 m, liberare; and quidquid 272 ha, 107
be-, o, 316 per, 251 la, 377 tu, 22 m, 391 vo, 255 lu, 5 e, 341 ri, 22 m, 365
sed, 146 de, fu, 9 i, 49 t, 359 fe, 22 m, 311 pe, 47 r, 303 occasio, Aliquos
360 si, 166 ex, fu, 9 i, 48 s,, 218 homin, 164 es, 72 ad, 263 me, 264 mi, 29 t,
374 te, 29 t, non, 146 de, 107 be, 43 n, 49 t, 281 ni, 360 si, no, 3 c, 374 te,
148 do, 266 mu, 22 m, 263 me, 1 a, 22 m, 232 in, 7 g, 340 re-, di, 50 u, 49 t,
232 in, 48 s, 119 ci, 9 i, 48 s, 298 om, 281 ni, 110 bu, 48 s, e, 1 a, 185 fa,
119 ci, 1 a, 277 mus, quae a nobis 262 ma, 204 gi, 48 s, de, 360 si, 146 de,
339 ra, 43 n, 377 tu, 47 r., 117 Ca, 389 ve, 340 re, 46 de, be, 23 n, 49 t, 165
et, 9 i, 57 am, 231 im, 45 p, 341 ri, 264 mi, 48 s, 280 ne, it, 9 i, 280 ne,
341 ri, 359 se, 48 s, 5 e, 126 commit, 373 ta, 23 n, 29 t, 233 quo, ja, 388 va,
342 to, 390 vi, 1 a, 340 re, 3 c, 374 re, 281 Ni, 264 mi, 342 to-, vi, 142 am,
ducitur, 5 e, 44 o, 333 quo, 14 d, 362 su, 43 n, 49 t, 316 per, mu, 41 l, 375
ti, 5 E, 332 qui, 374 te, 48 s, Serenissimi Poloniae ju, 48 f, 362 fu, 166 ex,
45 p, 254 lo, 339 ra, 376 to, 340 re, s, 1 a, 332 qui, 116 bus, 390 vi, 1 a,
376 to, 340 re, 48 s, 298 om, 280 ne, 48 s, per, 48 s, 13 c, 343 ru, 373 ta, 23
n, 377 tu, 47 r, 146 de, 375 ti, 280 ne- 23 n, 377 tu, 47 r, 331 que.. Existimo
246 ita, 331 que, 364 Secur, 9 i, 373 ta-, te, 22 m, 268 major, 261 em, 183
esse, 45 P, 340 re, 264 mi, 48 s, 253 li, 1 a, 22 m, et, 225 Ja, 342 to, 48 s,
251 la, 390 vi, 1 a, 22 m, 72 ad, 4 d, 166 ex, 374 te, 37 r-, am, 340 re, 253
li, 23 n, 330 qua, 43 n, 39 t, 389 ve, 281 ni, 160 en, 374 te, 48 s, ad, 263
me, quasi, 353 Sa, 23 n, 148 do, 264 mi, 341 ri, 1 a, 22 m, 374 te, 280 ne-,
re, 43 n, 49 t, 50 u, 43 n, 146 de, 281 Ni, 264 mi, 342 to, 390 vi, 1 a, 22 m,
in, 7 g, 340 re, 147 di, 390 vi, 146 de, 340 re, 23 n, 377 tu, 37 r, 332 Qui-,
a, 166 ex, 25 p, 254 lo, 339 ra, 376 to, 341 ri, 116 bus, 30 u, 43 n, 147 di,
331 que, ci, 43 n, 13 c, 377 tu, 48 s, 362 su, 22. m Adjunctas Illustritati
Vestrae recommendo, ut prima certe occasion transmittere dignetur. Utar ego
paridiligentia in iis omnibus, quae a me desiderate poterit. Cum toto animo
sum, and maneo,

Illustritati Vestra Paratissimus servus, DU VERNAY BOUCAULD.
Nimiroviae 22 Sept. 1682.
Inscriptio Tituli: Illustrissimo Domino Comiti, Emerico Thokolio: Hereditario
in Kesmark and Arva, Exercitus Hungarici pro Patria militantis, Generali,
Domino, and Amico mihi Confidentissimo, Observandissimo.
Litterae Thekely ad Du Vernay.
Illustrissime Domine, mihi observantissime.
NUllus ambigo, quin Illustriss. Dominatio Vestra Ablegatum meum, Egregium
Valentinum Nemessani, pro sincero ejusdem hactenus semper declarato erga me
affectu and candore, favorabiliter prosecura fit, and negotiorum, medio ipsius
coram declaratorum, cur sui, multum effficaci suae recommendatione, apud
Christianissimum Galliarum Regem pondus addiderit: quo nomine obligatum me ad
reciprocationem paralis dexteritatis Illustriss. Dominationi Vestrae
exhibendae, declaro porro quam rerum faciem progressumque res meae habuerint
hujusque Illustriss. Dominationi Vestrae pro debito necessitudinis mutuae
rescribendum censui. Nempe occupata Cassovia, and Arcibus quamplurimis jugum
subire coactis, Budensi Vizirio copiisque Turcicis auxiliaribus Filekinum
Fortalitium alias famoscum, nolens protectioni meae sese subdere, post
obsidionem spatio duarum hebdomadarum toleratam, ad conditiones pacis
acceptandas, supplicitur provolvi (Praesidiariis and cuncta plebe eo coacta,
cum farcinulis, quas quivis humeris suis sustentare effereque poterat, libere
dimissis) compulsum, and consequenter dirutum est, Germano milite in proximo
circa montanas oberrante, and haec conniventibus oculis intuente, qui impar
viribus ad resistendum, se ex montanis civitatibus (uti rumor est recenter
allatus) proripuit, and expilata civitate vetero-Soliensi, aliisque locis,
regressum praecipitare dicitur, quocum fortunae aleam subire animus est, nec
praetermittitur occasio eundem prorlingandi, Patriamque hanc in tranquillum
statum pristinae libertatis reponendi, ut quae Caesar suppliciter rogatus
remittere noluit, inventus cedere cogatur, Nemesi Divina sortis meae miserata
sero quidem, et eo gravius ultionis poenas repetente. Quid post hac rerum
gerendarum occurrerit genuine Illustriss. Dominationem Vestram informare haud
praetermittam. Me de caetero benevolentiae ejusdem recommendans, maneo.

Illustrissimae Dominationi vestrae, Ad officia paratus,EMERICUS THEKELI.
Dat. ex Castris Hungariris ad Filleck positis die 18. Sept. 1682.
Inscriptio: Illustrissimo Domino Du Vernay Boucauld, Christianissimi Regis
Galliarum Legato Extraordinario, mihi observandissimo.
Litterae Petri Jaigel, Commendantis Cassoviensis ad Du Vernay.
Illustrissime Domine mihi colendissime,
Praeterito die Mercurii, occupato and deleto Fortalitio Filleek, ubi plusquam
mill Jenizzarones perierunt, post hac primum omnibus Hungaris, qui penes
Principem Transylvaniae fuerant, ad Dominum Comitem per Vezirum pulsis, cum
summa solemnitate, praesentibus Comitatibus; and universis Statibus Regni
Hungariae Superioris est in Regem electus, and a Turca confirmatus, elevatusque
Princeps Comes, cui a Porta pileus, loco Coronae oblatus, item Vexillum and
Sceptrum: qui finita electione, recusavit se uti titulo Regis, sed titulo
Principis, cujus titulus est talis: Emericus Thokoli Princeps, ac Partium Regni
Hungariae Dominus, etc. Finitis his, selectam militiam Vezirus dedit Domino
Comiti ut fugientem Exercitum Germanicum prosequeretur Princeps noster. Caprara
depraedatis montanis civitatibus, derelictis Fortalitiis Vigles and Zolian,
disoessit and abiit versus Thraenezin. Illustriss. Domine and majora facere
poruissemus, sed quia videmus Vestrae Illustritatis maxim, 1 a, 319 pro, 264
mi, 48 s, 359 sa, non adimpleri, and hic ea- Nemessani, 1 a, 108 by-, vi, 29 t,
72 ad, 4 Regem, 210 Galliae., Necessum est, ut Vestra honor, 15 e, 438 Illtris
Vrae., Brevi mittemus expressum 72 ad-, Illustr. Vestram, 232 in, 225 Ja, 338
to, 48 s, 21 l, 24 o, Rogo per mi, 29 t, 273 ta, 29 t, 215 ho, 280 ne, 48 s,
373 ta, 22 m.

Illustritatis Vestrae Servus obligantissimus PETRUS JAIGEL, 467
Cassiviae 22. Sept. 1682.
Inscriptio: Illustrissimo Domino Du Vernay Boucauld, Ch^^stianissimi Legis
Galliarum Legato Extraordinario, mihi ^olendissimo.
FIN.

