THE Bloody Almanac For the YEAR, 1666.

AND THE Fiery Trigon; Wherein is set forth, The great Changes and Revolutions,
extraordinary Events and Alterations, that may come to pass, and be acted upon
the Stage of the WORLD, in this [supposed Wonderful] Year. With the Conjunction
and Meeting of the two ponderous Planets Saturn and Jupiter. in the same Sign
as they were Celebrated in Six Years before the Nativity of our Blessed Lord
and Savior. Also, the Four great Eclipses of the SUN and MOON; The sad and
wonderful Earthquakes impending beyond the Seas; The great and Warlike Actions
amongst Foreign Princes; The approaching Ruin of the Hollanders; And a Famous
Monarch to arise from the Islands of Great Britain, who shall both begin and
go forward in that Mighty Work of Conquest and Reformation, throughout France,
Spain, the Netherlands, and other Habitable Places of the WORLD.

Imprinted for William Roberts, M.DC.LXVI.

The Bloody Almanac; for the Year, 1666.
THE great Mutations and Changes, that will appear this Year in many parts of
the World, will exceedingly astonish the Netherlanders, and France will
participate with them in many direful actions, whom England needs not fear
either by Sea or Land. Let the City of Paris (about Abril) beware of a Rod, at
which time Great Britain will have great cause to rejoice; but Sat^rn still
opposes its Ascendant on Holland, who now begins again to write Themselves
Poor Distressed States, peace being hid from their Eyes, at a time when they
might have embraced it, Pride will have a fall: * O Holland Ho^^and Thy people
are treacherous and self-ended in all their actions, but let them know, that as
there has so will there be a time when they shall full dearly pay for all
their Misdemeanors acted in several parts of the World. Happy are that ignoble
People if now they be at peace with Great Britains Monarch, if not, their
ruin cannot be far off, for Saturn opposes their Ascendent.

astrological chart * Toward the middle of August, Woe, woe.



Four times this Year shall the two Luminaries ^e Eclipsed, viz. Twice the Sun,
and twice the M^on, whereof the first of the SUN will only be visible in
England.

astrological chart Sun Eclipsed


Proclus says, that this Eclipse hapn^ng in the watery Sign Cancer, shows the
death of the common and ignoble sort of people, daily motion of Wars and the
destruction of Fish and Fowl, and of such Creatures as live in and upon the
Seat. Let the Netherlanders ( Helland, Zealand, etc.) beware, for they (of all
others) are most like to feel the Fury and malevo^ent influence hereof, in
regard i^ happens in Cancer, the A^cendent of that place. And seeing this fame
as Eclipse happens in Cancer, near the Cuspis of the 12 House, in Opposition to
Saturn near the Cuspis of the 6. and Mars near the angle of the Earth, in
Quartile of the Luminary Eclipsed, the Effects thereof will be violent; and no
doubt but some extraordinary Change and Revolution in in Mundane affairs is at
hand, which I hope, will much tend to the good and welfare of our Gracious
Sovereign and his Dominions, and the final Excitpation of all his Enemies,
which God in his infinite mercy grant, and send us peace, Amen.

The third Eclipse is of the Moon upon the first of December. which is to be seen
in the remotest parts of the Earth, and wholly obscure and darkened.

astrological chart

The fourth is a small Eclipse of the Sun, upon the 15 of December, to be seen
in the Southern parts of the Earth unknown to Us.

* If we diligently consider the position of the Heavens at the Radix of the
annual Revol^tion and from thence look back upon the last Conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter, which happened in October, 1663. in the fiery Sign Sagittary, and
the famous Eclipse of the Sun this Year, with other Planetary Conjunctions and
Configurations concommitant; and with them have due respect to the color,
place, and motions of the Comets hereafter mentioned, that it may incline us to
think some eminent and extraordinary events and alterations will shortly be
made visible and manifest Themselves upon the Theater of the World; yea, so
superlative will the actions of some Men be, in this last but worst age of the
World, that the very Hearts of many (...) for fear of the Things that are [or
at leastwise seem to be] impending and hovering over them. Nation shall rise
against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and there shall be Famines, and
Pestilences, and Earthquakes in diverse places, Matthew. 2^.7. and though we may
now expect (from several parts of the World) to hear of Wars, and Rumors of
Wars, Fightings, B^oud-shed, Bsieging of Cities and Town^, Sickness, Mortality,
and the like, in the East, and South-East parts from Us; yet, Videte ne
turbemini, see that you be not troubled (says our Blessed Savior) for all
these Things must come to pass, but the End is not yet. There will doubtless,
after these grand Revolutions, be a Time of tranquillity and peace, out it
cannot yet be expected; however, great are the Signs portending, that we in
England * -- * shall not so sensibly feel the Effects of War and Calamity, as
some of our Neighbor Na^ions; and that is clearly evinced, from this Figure
and Eclipse, --

astrological chart Moon Eclipsed


So that doubtless, if the most High God be not angry with Us, for our manifold
sins and iniquities, we of the English Nation shall be Victorious both by Sea
and Land. And further it is asserted, that the actions here spoken of, are not
yet come to their maturity and full height: for though this Revolution may
produce many M^tations in sundry parts of the Earth, yet before a few years
more, that Antichrist who has amazed most parts of the World, shall suddenly
decline both in his Armies and Dominions, which (either through the power, or
policy of some Christian Prince, or other Potentate) will fall off, and leave
him. This may be collected from sundry Configurations of the Caelestial Bodies,
though more principally from the Conjunctional Return of Saturn and Jupiter
into the Fiery Trigon, under the Dominion whereof, the Ancients have observed
an Erection of new Monarchies, Empires, and Dominions: after which most
commonly follows great tranquillity, peace, and quietness, which could not be,
but where One has the chief Rule and Dominion. And that it has ever (or at
leastwise for the most part) been so in former Ages, under this Trigon, is
apparent by what has been Recorded in former Times, and to amplify this
Truth, I shall instance in those Conjunctions, that have happened in this Trigon
of later years, viz. Six Years before the Nativity of our Blessed Savior, the
Congresse, or meeting of these two ponderous Planets, was celebrated in the
Fiery Trigon, at which time Augustus Caesar obtained the chief Empire of the
World, and settled all Things in peace and tranquillity. Then also about 800
years after, when the Conjunction of these Planets returned into the same
Constellation and Trigon, Carclus Magnus erected a New Empire. -- * It Is very
probable a Monarch shall arise out of these Northern Islands of Great Britain,
who shall both begin and go forward in that great and mighty Work of Conquest
and Reformation throughout the World: after which, shall follow peaceable days,
wherein the Noise of War shall no more disturb, or affright Us, nor enter
within our Habitations, and then, in process of time may the End come, when
this Globe of Mortality shall be made dessolate

For, the last Years three Comets, or Blazing-Stars denotes great Changes
beyond the Seas; the first, at the beginning of December, being great, and of a
red Color: The second, December. 23. somewhat lesser, and of a white waterish
Color. The 3d upon Easter Day, appearing very terrible all that week, and much
like the first.

But Saturn [the most envious of all the Erratique Stars] being the afflicting
Planet, and Lord of the Year, portends a very great and grievous cold Season,
many Frosts and Snows, and a Cloudy Sky, bringing a general Corruption on the
Complexion of the Air; many Thunderclaps and unwonted Corruscations, with
abundance of prejudicial and un^easonable showers. And as he is the Patron of
Old Age, so he denotes much mi^ery and sorrow to elderly persons, Fathers,
Grandfathers, and the l^^e: Much prejudice and detriment unto persons of
considerable quality and eminency, he having signification of them, as he is
superiorum Alt^ssismus. the highest of a^l the Planets; ^ he presages a
Retrogradat^on among them, if not a Mortality of many of them; he denotes also
many Sto^ms and Tempests, bringing sudden Shipwracks, and imminent danger to
all sorts of Men Trading to Sea. He also signifies many cruel Diseases to
happen among Men, proceeding from a cold and dry Cause: Agues, Consumptions,
and all other Chronical Diseases, will be very rife: He lets loose a Spirit of
Lying among Men, which promotes Strifes, Controversies, and Contentions, and
from thence [many times] an effusion of Blood. Now from the 77 Aphorism of
Hermes, it is more then ordinarily suspicious, that these arguments of
Unhappiness will thereby be mightily exaggerated: For that tells Us, Many
Mischiefs befall the World, when in a Revolution thereof, Saturn and Jupiter
shall be found in their Exaltations: So that I see nothing that can really
enervate those Thunder-Threatning Evils and Dangers, but Prayers and Tears.
Indeed, so cruel and malignant is the sullen Planet Saturn in his
significations toward Mankind, when he has the Regency or Dominion of the
Year, that he not only presages Mortality; but also a great Dearth of Corn,
and Cattle, and strange Diseases to reign among Them;

From which, Good Lord deliver Us, to

THE END.

