An Abstract of the unfortunate and unparallel CASE of Eliz. Wandesford, Weddow
and Relict of Garret Foulkes, Esquire and of her Aged Mother and Children, who are
by the faithful services and sufferings of their Friends, left miserable
Objects of the Care and bounty of this Just and Merciful Assembly.
THE first beginning of their Tragical scene, of Misery above others, was
occasioned by the unfortunate Mr. Foulkes's appearing so early in Arms, in
defense of this Government; for which he and several of his Relations, who were
Persons of Emenency and Note in that Kingdom, were taken Prisoners, and
Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered; upon which sad sentence his
unfortunate Familly, being more filled with the Consideration of the
unhappiness, then thoughts of a remedy; had whilst others were sending their
Families and Effects for England, all their Worldly substance Seaz'd and taken
from them as Traitors Goods, long before King James Landed, or any Person
suffered in that Kingdom; but having in the Prisons of Gallway and Doublin
several Reprieves sent them, was after the breach of the Boyne, released by His
present Majesty: But upon the said Mr. Foulks's recovery of a great fit of
Sickness, occation'd by his long Confinement, he to Signalize his Loyalty and
Zeal farther, went with his Nephew Colonel Foulkes to the Battle of Aghrim,
where he and one of the Petitioners Brothers lost their lives together, which
Compleared the unhappy Number, since and before, of five Brothers and a Husband
with their whole Fortune; Lost in the service besides several other Relations
too Numerous to Mention. That the said Eliz. Wandsford's Aged Mother being
ready to sink under the Oppression of too just a grief for the loss of so many
Sons, had instead of the least Compassion, her Choice reduced to two very sad
Necessesities; whether she should be burnt in the House, or otherwise destroyed
if she came forth; But being no longer able to hold out in the Flames, was
forced to to expose her self and Family to the mercy of the Enemy, and after
being Pillaged and Plundered by them, she and those poor Orphans attempted to
make their escapes to Cork, or where ever else their pittiless Fortune should
lead them; but the Enemy soon pursued their unhappy wandering Lives, and with an
inflixable Cruelty barborously Murdered one of the Petitioners Brothers, but
to him was more mercifully Cruel then to the rest, for her Aged Mother, Sister
and Children, they stripped even of their very Shifts; with the Terror and Cold
of which, her Sister and Child died the same Night in the Fields, and by the
hardships they endured shortened the Lives of several of the Petitioners own
Children also, that the miserable survivers of them lay a considerable time in
a very weak Condition, in a Wast and desolate Part of the Country, having no
friends Left a this side the Grave, that would hassard the bringing them out of
the Enemies Quarters, where during the War: the West being the Seat of It, they
suffered more then Tongue and Pen could Express; that Her Majesty upon the
Lords Justices of Irelands Letters, in behalf of the Petitioners, was therefore
Graciously pleased, in Compassion to their Misfortunes, to Grant them a Pention
of 200 l. per Ann. which was as appears the express words of the Patent, to be
concinu'd to them till their Majesty's could make a Provision more suitable to
their Sufferings for them, as appears by the annexed Certificate, that His
Majesty in Order to make good Her promise, of ever blessed Memory, did upon the
Petitioners surrender of their Pention, Grant them a Custodiam, and last Spring
His Letter for passing a Lease of Ninety nine Years of two hundred Pounds per
Ann. out of the Forfeitures in Ireland. At the passing of which the Petitioners
were in the Valluation of those Lands, to be Reprised and considered for three
Years loss of the Incum of their Pention, which the Governments Report's ready
to be produced sets forth, having received no benefit of the said Custodiam, by
reason of the Encumbrance that after appeared upon those Lands after they
passed Custodiam for them, upon the Solicitation of which, they may justly
Charge their ruin, having with Toil of Body and Mind made eight Voyages too and
from that Kingdom, in obtaining, fixing and exchanging those Grants, which has
not only eaten up the benefit of His Majesty's intended bounty, but run the
Petitioners more in Debt, then the Inheritance of so small a Grant can possible
be worth: That the Petitioners having already smarted under a succession of
trouble and a Afflictions of the heaviest kind, did therefore to avoid the
Charge and Fitague of attendance, not seek for the benefit of Her Majesty's
Gracious promise, of making a more suitable provision then the said two
hundred Pounds per Ann. for so Large and distressed a Family.

That the said Eliz. Wondesford notwithstanding her straight Circumstances,
being not able to see her own human Nature, Pineing and Sterving in the Persons
of such near Relations, did therefore send for her Aged Mother and several
Orphans left by her Brothers, in order to partake of what small Fortune God
Almighty had blessed her with; but her Mother being too Feeble and Aged for
such an undertaking, unfortunately broak her Thigh by a fall lately on her
Journey to this Kingdom, which must render the small remnant of Life very
Miserable; but much more so, if deprived of the Means that supports her, and
the helpless Family of Children, whose whole dependence under God, is upon this
small Estate, tho its the sorrowfullest Bread they ever Eat, that is purchased
with the Lives of their nearest and dearest Relations. The Case therefore being
so very hard, and to Cruel to be Patterned amongst the worst of their
Countries; its therefore humbly hoped, they being both sufferers, and by giving
up their Pention Purchasers, that their Case will not be looked upon as a
Common Case, being in its several Circumstances not to be paralleled in the
whole Kingdom, the Consideration of which together with the particular regard
Her Majesty had to it, as appears by the annexed Certificate of the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, will they humbly hope Incline this Honorable House to
Establish them in their Grant, or give them something equivalent to the said
two hundred per Ann. and the three Years loss of the Incum of their Pention of
two huudr'd a Year, according to His Majesty's derections and Intentions
toward them, otherwise the Aged Grandmother, and helpless Famaly of Children,
whose whole dependence was upon this small Grant; must be exposed to all the
misery Imaginable, and for ever lie wrapped in the Ruins of their Parents fate,
except the Mercy and Goodness of this Honorable House enterposes between them,
and the great Danger that threatens those Lives, which could never by them be
owned with Comfort, since so Miserably reduced and persecuted by fortune.

WE do hereby Certify, that upon Mrs. Foulkes applying her self to Her
Majesty, after the loss of her Husband and five Brothers in Their Majesty's
service; it was Her Majesty's desire and particular Order to Us at our coming
into this Kingdom, that notwithstanding any stop put to other Pentions, hers of
two hundr'd Pounds a Year should be well paid and Continued to her, till Their
Majestys could Conveniently give her something better and more suitable to her
sufferings in Liew of it: In Compliance therefore to Her Majesty's Commands,
and to prevent any scruple or difficulty she should for the future meet with on
that account. We Certify this to be Her Majesty's pleasure and express Commands
to Us at our coming into this Kingdom.

Given at Their Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 30th of June, 1693. Sydney.
The Original to be produced if required.



The CASE of Elizabeth Wandesford, Widow and Relick of Garret Foulkes, Esquire etc.


