THE Christians Testimony AGAINST TITHES, In an Account of the great Spoil and
Rapine committed by the Bishop of Chester's Tythe-Farmer at Cartmell in
Lancashire; upon the People there called Quakers, in the years 1677 and 1678.

ACTING First, As an Informer upon the Act against Conventicles, for which his
Witnesses stand indicted for Perjury. Secondly, By Suits in Inferior Courts
(for Tithes) contrary to Law.


Prove. 1. My Son -- if they say, Let us lurk privily for the Innocent without
Cause -- we shall all find precious Substance, we shall fill our Houses with
Spoil. My Son, walk not thou in the Way with them.

Matthew. 10.32. Whosoever shall confess me before Men, him will I confess also
before my Father which is in Heaven.

Printed in the Year 1678.

Considerate Reader,
AS Persecution has been the Lot of Innocence in all Ages, expect not less in
this our Age, but the like Treatment from its Adversaries. We read not that the
Jews outward had more Reverence for the Lord Jesus Christ and his Followers,
then had the Heathens: It was the Jew inward that followed Christ, when the Jew
outward severely persecuted him and his Disciples. Parallel to the Age we live
in, where the Outside or Legal Christian persecutes the Inward and Real
Christian. And great Care and Industry is taken by Professors with Profane to
secure their Immoralities, whilst they extend their uttermost Endeavors
against all Sobriety, yea, to Ruin their Neighbors, whom they ought to Love,
breaking all Bonds of Law, Equity and Reason, in spoiling them without Mercy.

Its not unknown, that men may live as Debauched and Profanely as they will,
have Drunken Assemblies or Conventicles, and no Informers to prosecute, no
Justice to make out Warrants for suppression thereof, no Constables or other
Officers to spoil them of their Goods; these may live without Panishment to
spend their Estates Luxuriously, whilst their sober Neighbors for Worshipping
of God shall be left without Herd in the Stall, Bed to lie upon, Conveniences
for Food or Life, But we say, for all this our God is gracious, and ought to be
feared and worshipped; he gives, and he take away, blesied be his Name; and it
is in Mercy to his, which endures forever. And of their Adversaries Cruelty
there will be an End in his due time and season, whose Portion from the Lord
will be bitter and miserable, unless they be reconciled by true and timely
Repentance, which is the Desire of the Hearts of the Upright, who truly love
their Enemies, and such who use them despightfully, as was the Doctrine of our
Lord and Master whilst here on Earth.

This small Tract is of the late Sufferings and Persecutions of the People of
God called Quakers in the Parish of Cartmell in Lancashire, partly for Tithes
to the Bishop of Chester, and upon the Act against Conventicles, by Prosecution
of the Bishop's Farmers of his Tithes there; the Manner, Nature and Kind of
which particularly follows.

Farewell.
THE Christians Testimony AGAINST TITHES
THE Bishop of Chester claiming the Tithes of the Parish of Cartmell in the
County of Lancaster (as belonging to the gain of his Quarter) lets the same (as
the Priests do the Cure of Souls to their Sub-Curates) to farm, unto one Thomas
Preston the elder of Holker, within the said Parish of Cartmell. And there
being several of the People of God called Quakers within that Parish, who never
had nor received ought of Spirituals from the said Bishop or his Farmer,
refused to put into their Mouths, so that for several years last past the
Bishops Farmer has presented them in the King's Courts at Westminster and
County Court, whereby many suffered tedious Imprisonments, spoil of their
Goods, and much waste by his Prosecutions.

Thomas Preston the younger of the same place renewing the Lease of the Bishop,
most generally commenced Suits for his Tithes in the Court Barron of Cartmell.
But in or about the 5th month called July, 1677. the said Court proceeding in
the Suits commenced there; and pretending to hold Pleas, and to determine Cases
for Tithes, the Defendents demur'd to the Jurisdiction of the said Court, as
being not capable by Law to hold Pleas, or to determine any such Causes (as in
Truth by Law it is not, nor can) upon which T. Preston being stopped in his
Suits, brake out in great Rage and Wrath against the Defendents, threatening
their Ruin, as after he attempted.

And for some time consulting) what course he should take, advised with John
Armstrong the Parish Priest (who confessed in discourse, that he advised the
said T. Preston to set up Informers, against the said People upon the Act made
for suppressing Conventicles, and to get his Tithes out of the Goods which
might be taken upon that Act, and to put this in Execution.

Upon the 7th day of the 8th Month, 1677. being the first day of the Week, the
said Tho. Preston sent two Informers, viz. one George Rigg his Tithe gatherer,
a man of no good repute, (an Indictment for Perjury being since found and
depending against him) and one Edw. Stones his near Neighbor, to an Assembly
of the said People at Height in the said County there met together to wait upon
God, and Worship him in Spirit and Truth, in a peaceable manner, as their
manner is; and the Informers taking notice of the Persons there, in a short
time came also the said Thomas Preston on Horseback: and the said Assembly
breaking up at their usual time, and as they were peaceably departing, Tho.
Preston called out to the foremost, Where is that Rogue that Preacher? I Will take
a course with him? And where is that Tho. Atkinson that old Rogue of all
Rogues? This and such like was the Language he then used against an ancient
grave Person of Seventy three Years of Age, a Man of good Conversation
esteemed, and serviceable amongst his Neighbors to this very day.

When he had thus expressed himself, he told them further, That his business was
to acquaint them, That in case they would submit to the Jurisdiction of
Cartmell Court, as they had done formerly, and let him recover his Tithes it
should be well; but if not, he would Persecute them so, that he would rout them
out, Root and Branch, Foundation and Generation; and would pull down their
House over their Heads, and trail them in Carts. Thus, with much more of such
inhuman and insulting Expressions vented he, in his fury to the whole Assembly
then come out, and passing from their Meeting place.

These propositions attended with such Threats and Menaceings had so small
effect that he had no answer to his desire. For they being satisfied in
Conscience, that they ought rather to obey God then Men. And knowing Jesus
Christ to be come, who ended that Priesthood that had Commission to take the
Tithes of their Brethren the Jews, which offered Sacrifices for the People, and
for that they had Tithes, having no other portion allotted. But Christ who is
our Teacher, our high Priest and Lawgiver, we cannot deny in maintaining a
Tithe Priest and Hireling, who stands in opposition to him: And also knowing
that such Inferior Courts ought not to try or hold Jurisdiction of any case of
Tithes they refused to comply with him.

Thereupon this Tho. Preston with his two Informers, G. Rigg and E. Stones
Swear the Fact, and procure a Conviction from one Miles Dolding a Justice of
Peace, and Brother in Law to the said T. Preston, who issued out his Warrant
for Distress, dated the 18th of the 8th Mon. 1677.

In which Warrant is said, thirty five Persons duly Convicted, of which four of
them were not at or in the Meeting that day; two whereof being far distant in
another County, the third two Miles distant thence, and the fourth at home with
her young Child, of which she was lately delivered.

And as prejury in general excuses not from other Sin, so the false Swearing of
these Informers no ways prohibited their after Cruelty: But upon the very next
day, viz. the 19th of the same Month came this T. Preston the Tithe Farmer,
Geo. Rigg the Informer accompanied with To. Atkinson chief Constable (and a
Civil person) together with William Askew and Jo. Barwick sub Constables into
the Field where Francis Fleming was at work, and demanding 20 l. for himself as
a Preacher, and 5 s. for his Wife (not withstanding she was absant from the
Meeting that day for which she was Convicted) Distrained, took and drove away
from him his two Cows, which was all he had, they having cost him near 9 l. but
a little before.

Tho. Preston the Master of this work not contented with what he had got,
although all, told the said Francis, that if he had had forty Cows more he
would not leave him one; And said further, That if he would not submit, to let
him recover his Tithes in Cartwell Court, he had a second Information against
him for a Fine of 40 l. for Preaching, and 15 s. for his Wife; and he would
rout him out, and would rout them all out, and make them sell their Land -- and
would bring others into their Land which would pay him his Tithes. The said Fr.
Fleming's Wife standing by and hearing him, said, The Lord forgive thee Thomas
Preston, if thou may be forgiven.

After this they went to Tho. Barrow, and demanding of him 10 s. for himself
and Wife upon the aforesaid Conviction, and by virtue of the same Warrant took
and distrained from him, one Stear worth near 3 l. And after took from him one
other Stear and nine Sheep which in all came to the vallue of 7 l. or
thereabouts.

The said T. Preston accompanied with To. Atkinson and W. Askew, by virtue of
the same Warrant came to T. Atkinson and demanding 5 s. took for the same one
Cow, which he had sold but a few days before for 2 l. 12 s. 6 d. The Cow being
sold before, and the Warrant being but for 5 s. To. Atkinson fetched Goods out
of the House for the same, but T. Preston denied to take them, but with
violence took away the Cow for the 5 s.

This Tho. Preston still pursued his work, and with his Officers took and
distrained from John Barrow for a Fine of 10 s. one small Gelding and several
Household Goods to the vallue of 3 l. or thereabouts.

They also by virtue and color of the same Warrant took aaway and distrained
from George Barrow for a fine of 5 s. one Stirk, Sheep and Household Goods to
the vallue of 1 l. 16 s. or thereabouts.

They also distrained and took away from Richard Britton for a fine of 10 s.
one Stirk and three fat Sheep of the vallue of 1 l. 16 s. or thereabouts.

They also distrained and took away from Robert Dixon for a fine of 5 s. one
Mare and a Bed covering, of the vallue of 4 l.

They also took away from John Garnett (who was not at the Meeting for which he
was Convicted) for a fine of 5 s. one Coat of the vallue of 13 s. 4 d. or
thereabouts.

They also took away from William Pull for a fine of 5 s. Sheep to the vallue
of 1 l. or thereabouts.

They also distrained and took away from Jo. Sharp for the like fine of 5 s.
one Steer of the vallue of forty Shillings, or thereabouts.

The Names of the several Officers who were actve or concerned themselves
herein, were these, viz. Robert Atkinson chief Constable; John Pull, William
Askew, John Barwick, Peter Barrow, Richard Simpson, John Barrow, Tho.
Comperthwhat sub Constables; Row. Harrison, George Dixon, Thomas Hudson, Church
Wardens; Row. Rowlandson, John Barrow, Sam. Dawson, Overseers of the Poor.

And upon the 22th day of the 8th Month, 1677. aforesaid, the Goods then taken
away and distrained as aforesaid, were brought into the Market place at
Cartmell to be sold by the common Crier. And when the Crier was selling them,
the said Tho. Preston came and asked if they were all sold, If not (said he)
they shall be sold, if it be but for two Pence a Beast, and if none will buy
them, I Will make the Officers buy them; and I will rout the Quakers out of
Cartmell.

Francis Fleming being then present, said to the People in the Marketplace, Ye
are many living Witnesses that hear him: Upon which T. Preston called the said
Francis Rogue and Knave. The said Francis replied, Thou accusses me falsely, for
I am neither Rogue nor Knave. And as a Testimony to the Truth of what is here
before related, particularly to the abusive words, Menaces, Threats, and
scurrilous Expressions of the said Tho. Preston, we who are under written are
Witnesses, viz.

James Tailor, Ric. Button, Jos. Sharp, Char. Silkins, Will. Barrow, Francis
Fleming, George Barrow, John Barrow, Christo. Fell, Marg. Dawson, Tho. Barrow,
Tho. Pearson, John Pearson, Rich. Stones, T. Atkinson, Ellen Braithwait, Grace
Barrow, Mable Barrow, Marg. Barrow, Marg. Stones, etc.
Notwithstanding all the former Abuse, Cruelty and Spoil acted by this T.
Preston and his Agents he still remained unsatisfied. And to give the said
People yet further trouble, the 16th day of the 9th Month, 1677. then
following, causes them to be summoned again to the Court Barron at Cartmell,
where one Curwin Nicholls, Justice of Peace, and a Person of Moderation,
sitting as Steward, used some Persuasions to draw the Persons there summoned to
submit to a Trial there, and acknowledging the Court's Jurisdiction; but the
Defendents being advised and satisfied, that by Law they ought not there to be
tried, again demur'd to the Court's Jurisdiction. Upon which the said Tho.
Preston fell into an exceeding Rage, and said, If you Demur to the Court, I
will never leave off prosecuting you as long as you have a Groat; and (said
further) I Vow and Pretest, I Will spend my whole Estate, but I Will rout you out
of your Estates, and bring in others that shall pay my Tithes: And (holding up
the Act against Conventicles in his Hand) I will prosecute this against you
till I leave you not a Groat, unless you will submit to the Court.

After all the Persuasions of the Steward and Threats of the Prosecutor to
preserve their Christian Liberty on the one hand, and Legal Liberty and Right
on the other, they stood to their Demurer, and were dismissed the Court.

But its obseryable all along to see what use this T. Preston makes of the Act
against Conventicles, and to and for what End he applies and puts the same in
execution, viz. To maintain the Usurpation of inferior Courts, to brow-beat
the Law, to enforce the payment of his illegal Demands, a Shoeinghorn for his
Interest, and a means to perjure his Agents. The Act was made against seditious
Conventicles; but the Use (or rather the Abuse thereof) to disturb Religious
Meetings and Peaceable Assemblies, to gratify the Envious, to enrich the
Vagabond, to discourage the Industrous, and to ruin the King's People and
peaceable Subjects.

Besides the former Distresses, there was distreined and taken away of John
Pearson before named, he living at Poolbank, by one John Crosfield Constable,
for Witherslak in Westmoreland, for a fine of 15 s. one Heifer worth 1 l. 10 s.
And from Thomas Pearson of the same place, for a fine of 5 s. two stone of Hemp
worth 6 s. 8 d.

At the Quarter Sessions held at Lancaster the 9th day of the 2d month, called
April, 1678. Robert Atkinson the chief Constable, with four other petty
Constables, paid to one Kennyon, Clark of the Peace, 9 l. for the King's Part,
for all the Goods they took away and sold (as is alleged) at 27 l. and no
more, being much less then the value thereof. And at the same Sessions there
was a Bill of Indictment preferred against Geo. Rigg and Ed. Stones, the
aforesaid Informers, for Perjuring themselves in Swearing against the said
People, by whose false Oaths the aforesaid Convictions were made, and upon
which the aforesaid Distresses were taken, Goods sold, Moneys levied, and
King's part paid into Court) who in due time (if Justice fail not) may have the
Reward of Perjured Persons.

Neither the Perjury of his Witnesses on the one hand, nor the Spoil which he
had made on the other, did yet satisfy the Bishop's Farmer; but this T.
Preston, the 14th of the 3d month, called May, 1678. near Sunset, by John
Bateman his Bailiff, summons several of the said people to appear next morning
at a Wapentake Court, held for the Hundred of Loynesedall in Lancashire, at one
W. Turbuck's, near T. Preston's Dwelling House. At which place they appearing,
one Tho. Lamphigh a Lawyer sat as Steward of the Court; and calling for their
Answer, they desired as their Right to appear by their Attorney, one Edmund
Gibson, who, as formerly, offered a Demurer to the Jurisdiction of that Court,
which the Steward refused to accept (although by Law he ought not to deny it)
-- but the Steward pressing for another Answer, they desired a Copy of the
Plantiff's Declaration in writing, and Time to plead till next Court, both
which Requests although by the Law the Steward could not deny (as he was often
told) yet he arbitrarily against Law, Right and Custom, overruled them,
calling for the Plantiff's Witness, which was G. Rigg, then standing indicted
and having a Bill found against him for Perjury, who Swore That Thomas Atkinson
was indebted 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. That Richard Britton was indebted 1 l. 9 s. 3 d.
That John Barrow was indebted 5 s. 1 d. q. That Thomas Barrow was indebted 1 l.
18 s. 6 d. That Ellen Braithwait was indebted 6 s. 7 d. And that Eliz. and
William Barrow were indebted 18 s.
And that these particular sums were due to the said T. Preston for
Bushel-Tythes, as they call them, which is pretended to be due by virtue of an
Agreement or Composition heretofore made with T. Preston the elder, by several
of the said Parish, to pay during his Life; and although it could not be proved
that any of the said persons had subscribed that Agreement, or agreed to pay
such Bushel-Tythes, or ever consented to that Agreement, yet against all
Justice, Law and Equity the said Court, upon the bare Oath of G. Rigg, without
giving any Copy of the Plantiff's Declaration, or Time to plead, immediately
passed Verdict and Judgment against them for the said respective sums.

And the next day, being the 16th of the 2d month called May, 78. early in the
morning is sent this Geo. Rigg, the Swearer, with his Balliffs, viz. Geo.
Stith, Jo. Bateman, John Fell and Will. Noblett, who by color of the aforesaid
illegal procedure distrein and take from the said people the Goods following,
viz.

From the said Thomas Atkinson for the 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. Brass, Pewter, and a Pan
of the best sort, one Ox Stirk and a Heifer of the full value of 4 l.

From Rich. Britton for the 1 l. 9 s. 3 d. one Gelding worth 3 l. 6 s. 8 d.

From John Barrow, a poor man, that labors hard to maintain his Wife and
Children, for the 5 s. 1 d. q. one Heifer worth 1 l. 10 s.

From Tho. Barrow for the 1 l. 18 s. 6 d. two Cows worth 5 l. 10 s. Ten
Shillings of whose Money the said Rigg the Tythegatherer acknowledged he had
then in his Hands: and driving away the two Cows (when one was more worth then
all the Demand) a Neighbor desired the Bailiff to return one of them back, and
if one was not enough, he would pay the Overplus; which thing the Bailiff
refused, though they sold one for more then the Debt.

From Ellen Braithwait, a poor Widow, for the 6 s. 7 d. (which was much more
then they could by Law demand) had taken from her a little Cow and Calf, that
she had bought about a Week before, which was all she had, and for which she
paid 1 l. 15 s. [So here is the Devourers of Widows Houses.]

From Elizabeth Barrow, Widow, for the 18 s. they took one Cow, which was her
little Daughter's, worth 3 l. 10 s.

So that for the 6 l. 10 s. 8 d. which the Tythe-Farmer's forsworn Swearers
gave Evidence for in Court they distrein 19 l. 11 s 8 d. which said Goods the
Bailiffs took and carried away, without showing any Warrant for Distress, or
Writ to levy the same, and forthwith drove and carried them to Cartmell Town,
and sold them at under rates, out of Market, not of a Marketday, to such who
were willing to partake of the unjust Spoil and Loss of their Neighbors Goods;
the Bailiffs then having no Writ of Venditioni exponas to empower them to sell
the same, as is usual, and as it is said they ought to have.

A Postscript to all People.
MOSES, that Man of God, and who spoke from the Lord, he said, A Prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up, him shall the People hear in all things; and it
shall come to pass, that they that will not hear that Prophet, shall be cut
off, etc. And in the fullness of time that true Prophet Christ Jesus came, and
when he was come he said, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and ye shall find Rest for your Souls. A blessed Invitation to all that can
receive it; this Eternal Rest which the Jews Resting Day was a Figure of,
remains a Rest for the People of God forever; yet the Wise and the Learned, and
the Scribes and the Pharisees among the Jews, they could not believe Christ
Jesus when he was come, but reviled him, and set him at naught, and restless
they were till they had crucified and put him to death; the Scriptures of Truth
declare the same: And Saul, that great Persecutor, for all the wisdom and
learning he had in the first nature thought he did God good Service when he got
Letters from the Chief Priests and Rulers to persecute the Churches of the
Saints and Servants of God wherever he found them, such as feared God and
worshipped him in Spirit and Truth, till it pleased the Lord to smite him with
his Righteous Judgments, and bring down his Pride and Presumption; and when he
was blind, and cast down, then the Lord appeared to him, and let him see the
Evil he had done against the Lord and his harmless People; and so from a
persecuting Saul he became a converted Paul, and a Minister, not of the Letter,
but of the Spirit; then all his Human Learning and Natural Wisdom was by him
denied and set at naught, as may be read at large in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, in the beginning thereof; for its neither Natural Wisdom nor
Natural Learning that can or ever did bring to the True Knowledge of God, it
must come in the Self-denial, and in the revealed Will of God; For none knows
the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him; and as the wise and
prudent of the World, and the chief Priests and Rulers would not come to Christ
for Life and Salvation, but thought to have it in the outward Letter of the
Scriptures, as Christ then told them; so the same dark spirit in people denies
the Teachings of Christ in spirit in this Age; they will not come to the Light
of Christ in themselves, to be taught by that, but set up Hireling Teachers
without them, which tell them, They must continue in Sin for term of Life, and
so are always confessing, that they are miserable Sinners, erring and going
astray, doing that they should not do, and leaving that undone which they
should do; but all such shall know, that it is not they that confess, but they
that forsake that shall find Mercy with the Lord: so that if ever people will
come to the Knowledge of God and Christ they must first come to the Witness of
God in themselves, the Light of Christ in their own Consciences; for as the
Apostle says, when he came to be a Minister of the Spirit, That which may be
known of God is manifested in man for God has showed it to him: this same
Apostle, who had been the great Persecutor, when he came to preach the Cross of
Christ, which is the Power of God, it was to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to
the Greeks Foolishness, and for that Persecution was his Portion from the great
Learned Men, Priests and Rulers, and the baser sort of men joined with; the
Scriptures record the Truth thereof, which I do refer all sober men to try, if
they do not find it to be so; for then the change came from a Persecutor to be
Persecuted, Hated, Whipped and Imprisoned, and at last Death by the Romans: And
besides all this, the Terrors and Judgments of the Lord, as a just Reward for
his Wickedness done against Christ and his Faithful Servants, seized upon him,
that he was forced in the anguish of his spirit to cry out, Oh Wretched Man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death, etc? yet it
pleased the Lord who is full of Mercy to all who truly repent and forsake the
Evil of their doings, to bring him through Judgments, and to remit his Sins,
that he could in the integrity of his heart say, He had obtained Victory
through Christ Jesus that loved him, 1 Cor. 15. and in other of his Epistles to
the several Churches, as may be read at large.

And so let none think strange that a Change be wrought and witnessed in this
Life; for it was the Apostle's Exhortation, To workout your own Salvation with
Fear and Trembling; for it is God that works in you both to will and to do of
his own good Will and Pleasure: For, are not all Mankind by nature Children of
Wrath, we as well as others? it is by Grace that we are redeemed and saved, not
of our selves, it is the Gift of God; and this universal and free Grace has
appeared to all people upon the face of the whole Earth; but all are not taught
by this Grace, and the Reason is in themselves, because they deny it, and so
turn this Grace of God into Wantonness, following the Lust of their own Hearts;
and here lies the whole World, Priest and People, Professors and Profane,
sinning out their days for term of life, their best Actions being Sin; For the
plowing of the wicked is sin, and the prayers of the wicked are abomination to
the Lord; but it is not so with the Godly, for this Grace which has appeared
to all men teached them (the Saints) to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and
to live soberly in this present evil World: This Grace was and is, and forever
will be the Saints Teacher; and as many as are led and guided by this free
Grace (the Spirit of God) they are the Sons of God, and if Sons then Heirs, and
the Heir abides in his Fathers House forever.

Published to the World by THOMAS ATKINSON.


