Imprimatur.

C. Alston.

Jan. 27.

168 5/6.

THE HISTORY OF Hai Eb'n Yockdan, AN Indian Prince: OR, THE Self-Taught
Philosopher.

Written Originally in the Arabic Tongue, by Abi Jaafar Eb'n Tophail, a
Philosopher by Profession, and a Mohammedan by Religion.

Wherein is demonstrated, by what Steps and degrees, humane Reason, improved by
diligent Observation and Experience, may arrive to the knowledge of natural
things, and from thence to the discovery of Supernaturals; more especially of
God, and the Concernments of the other World.

Set forth not long ago in the Original Arabic, with the Latin Version, by
EDW. POCOCK. M. A. and Student of Christ-church, Oxon. 1671.

And now Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, in S. Paul's Churchyard, and William
Thorp Bookseller in Banbury. M DC LXXXVI.

TO THE Right Honorable. PHILIPLd WENMAN, Baron of Kilmaynham, And Viscount
TUAM.
My Lord,
YOU may please to remember, that some while ago I acquainted your Lordship,
with my intention to Translate into English the Life of Hai Eb'n Yockdan, or
The Self-taught Philosopher; which had been set forth some years before, in
Arabic and Latin, by the Care and Pains of our Learned Professor of the
Oriental Tongues in the University of Oxford. At which time you were pleased,
not only to encourage me unto the work, but even to engage me to the
undertaking it. Since that, I have dispatched it at last, after many
Diversions, and amidst as many Interruptions. And upon the Review have ventured
to send it abroad into the World; being willing to hope, that it may not only
please for the rarity of the Subject, but profit also in some measure and
Degree, in regard of its Commodiousness and Seasonableness; among the Men of
this licentious Generation, whereof some are too loose in their Principles, and
others in their Practices; the one living by no Rule, and the other by no
certain one, but giddily following their own Phancies, or other Men's Opinions,
whom they have unadvisedly chosen to themselves for the Guides of their Faith
and Manners. Whereas the Philosopher, whose life is here described, will
instruct them in such principles of Morality and Religion, and such alone, as
the light of Nature discovers, and which must needs be acknowledged for True by
all those, who will judge and act as Men, according to the Dictates of Reason,
and the Conclusions resulting from Experience. And I heartily wish indeed, that
All of us were arrived even thus far, by the guidance of this light, and agreed
in such principles as humane Reason teaches out of the Book of Nature, which
sets forth to our view Gods works of Creation and Providence. For this
foundation being laid, there would be more hopes of agreement about that, which
the Supernatural light of Revelation discovers to our Faith, and superstructs
thereupon. But your Lordship will find the usefulness of this History, in its
Philosophical and Theological discoveries, more amply set down in the Preface,
which comprehends the chief particulars, and acquaints the Reader with the main
of it design. And however my design in publishing this Translation thrive
abroad in the World, yet I have good hope that it will not fail of its end in
obtaining your Lordship's favorable Acceptance, and remain as a Testimonial of
my Gratitude for the many, and long continued favors, received from your
Lordship; which as they do at present, so will always engage me for the future,
to show and approve my self upon all good Opportunities,

My much honored Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble, Faithful, and much Obliged
Servant, Geo. Ashwell.

THE PREFACE.
WE are told by our learned Professor of the Oriental. Tongues in the
University of Oxford, who caused this History to be set forth in the Original
Arabic, and thence translated into Latin; that the Author hereof was Abi
Jaafar Eb'n Tophail, an Arabian Philosopher, and a Mohammedan; otherwise called,
Abubecher. As also, that he was Contemporary with Eb'n Roshd, usually called
Averroes, and somewhat Elder than He. Now this Averroes died, being very Old,
in the year of the Heira 595, which is co-incident with the year of our Lord
1198. So that by this Computation, this Author flourished about 500 years ago.
He wrote this History in the form of an Epistle, and so entitles it; for by
this name the Arabians use to call their shorter Treatises. That both the
Author, and the Book, were of good credit, appears by the Testimony, not only
of the Arabians his Countrymen, but also of the Jews. The said Averroes calls
him, The Honorable Judge Abubeoher Ben Tophail. This History also of His was
of old translated into Hebrew, and well accepted of by the Jews. For Moses
Narbonensis in his Preface thereto, and Comment there upon, commends the
Author. So does also Mardochaeus Comtino, another Jew, more than once. The
Design of the Author in this Book is to show, how far a Person of an excellent
Wit, and towardly Disposition, being destitute of Humane Society, and
consequently without the direction and assistance of any other, may advance
Himself in Knowledge, by improving his own Reason to the utmost Pitch, in the
search of Things both Natural, and above Nature, with the sole help and
exercise of his own Meditation, and Observations upon it. Wherein he discovers
and prescribes a Method unto those, who will apply themselves to such
Contemplations, and delight to make a considerable Progress in them; such a
safe and easy method as may be very serviceable and useful to this present
Age, though so many Ages distant from that of the Author; an Age so much
inclined to Fanaticism, Sadducism, and Atheism. He treads indeed a new unbeaten
Path, wherein by set and orderly Degrees, He brings His Reader at length to the
knowledge of God, and the upper World; beyond which steps, thus by him
discovered and forepassed, no man can proceed any farther, but by the Light and
Guidance of Divine Revelation. For Humane Reason is forced to fly hither, when
dazzled with the excessive light of these heavenly Mysteries; its poreblind
sight not being able to discern Objects so high, and so far off distant; or
rather groaping in the Dark to find them, by reason of its innate Dimness. This
Author therefore justly condemns them, who presume to make an overcurious
search, by natural light only, into such things, as neither Eye has seen, nor
Ear heard, nor are discoverable by the heart of man. To prevent which, our
Author in his Preface admonishes his Reader, what to fly, and what to follow;
and taxes the errors not only of the vulgar, but of some of the more learned
Philosophers.

It must be granted indeed, that some very ingenious and learned Men of this
latter Age, have endeavored to demonstrate the main fundamental Truths of
Religion by the Light of Humane Reason, and the Principles of Natural Theology,
which are generally acknowledged by mankind, although much differing in other
points. And this may seem to render such a Discourse as this, of little or no
use to the World in these Times. Yet I am willing to think otherwise, when I
consider that the Discourses of these learned Men concerning this Subject,
consist, for the general, of such Notions, Grounds, and Proofs, as are too
subtle, sublime, and metaphysical for common understandings: so that they leave
men still in the dark; yea, more perplexed than they were before. Whereas this
Author proceeds by such gentle steps, in an easy and familiar way of
reasoning, which is obvious to every ones apprehension, that He leads his
Reader in sensibly onward, without any toilsom labor, or perplexing of his
Brains, in the search of the Truth, till He have brought him, before he is
aware, unto the end of his journey. Or like the easy ascent of winding Stairs,
which conduct to the top of an high Tower, or Pyramid, such as that in Egypt:
Or rather like the leisurely mounting of Jacob's Ladder, whereon he saw the
Angels ascending, as well as descending; for like the Rounds of that, are the
degrees whereby He conducts his Reader, till He have brought him up to the very
top of the Ladder, where God presents Himself unto his view.

This History then, being thus Englished, and so communicated to the view of
all, whereas before it was locked up to most in an unknown language, may, I
hope, prove not altogether unuseful unto many in this idle, worldly and
voluptuous Age, wherein men generally seek after little else besides the
concerns of this present life, studying, and busying themselves about their
Profit or their Pleasure; either, in heaping up Riches with much Care and Toil,
or spending their Days in Ease and carnal Delights, and making it their study
how they may pass away their time without any Care or Trouble at all. Whereas
this History shows the true and genuine Concerns of humane life, with the means
of obtaining that felicity, which Man was born for; which it makes to consist
in a right and useful Exercise of those faculties which God has bestowed upon
us, and improving them to the best Advantage, by an industrious and continued
experimenting of all Things that come in our way, the knowledge whereof may be
useful to us; and making proper Observations upon them, as this Self-taught
Philosopher is said to have done; and as any other Man is capable of doing in
like manner, who is endued with the same sagacity of mind, and ingenuity of
Disposition. And such as are not, may be his Scholars, and learn with more ease
such lessons as these, by what they find him to have experimented and observed.
For here we find set down by what means, and by what Degrees, in the seven
Septenaries of his Age, (whereinto his Life is divided in this History, and the
Observations He made in each of them) He arrived to a proportionable measure of
knowledge, concerning all the Accommodations of humane Life, in this lower
World; how he came to find them out, and in what manner He managed and improved
them: Then, what he observed, as concerning the brute Creatures, which He found
in the Island, wherein He is said to have been bred; but more especially,
concerning himself, both as to his Body, with its several Parts and faculties;
and to his Soul, with its spiritual and immortal nature, and all the
Excellencies that attend it; how He came to find them out, and what Reasons He
grounded his Observations upon: Then, how He examined the Natures, Properties,
and uses of the Elements; and how He thence ascended to the Contemplation of
the Heavenly Bodies, with their Light, Motions, and Influences. So that we have
here set before us, opened, and exposed to our Eyes, the whole Book of Nature
to read, with the ways and means, whereby almost all Arts and Sciences came to
be invented; namely, Physiology, Anatomy, Astronomy, and Geometry; also,
Logic, and Metaphysics, and the Rules of Morality, which He set to himself,
and whereby He governed his whole Life. But the utmost Height and Perfection of
his Learning, whereunto all the rest tended as so many Steps or Degrees,
consisted in that natural Theology, which He arrived to, from the serious and
attentive Consideration of Gods works, and more particularly of himself; whence
He concluded, that God was the supereminent, the sole and independent Being, of
infinite Greatness and Goodness, Wisdom and Power, Majesty and Glory, whose
all-seeing Eye, and overruling Hand of Providence, extend themselves to all his
Creatures; who is also most Just and Righteous in all his Dealings with, and
toward Mankind, and therefore will one Day call all Men to give an Account of
their lives, when He will sentence, and reward them according to their Works.
Whereupon, He discourses of the Resurrection, and the last Judgment, with the
Felicities and Miseries that attend Men after the Judgment is past, answerably
to the condition and quality of their lives, which they led here on Earth. The
former He makes to consist in the Beatifical Vision of God: But the latter He
describes in such figurative Expressions, which although not altogether
irrational for a mere natural Philosopher to conjecture; yet, I suppose, are
taken out of the Alcoran, the Author of this History being a Mohammedan by
Religion. Yet he brings in his Self taught Philosopher making some Exceptions
against that Book, as it was described to him by his Friend Asal, and taxing it
of Imperfection in several particulars, whereto He makes no particular Reply.

This is the Sum and the main Design of the ensuing History; which possibly
(being thus Englished) may do some good (as I even now said) in this Profane
and Fanatical, as well as lewd and luxurious Age. Let them then who wilfully
shut their Eyes against the light of Revelation, as being too pure and bright
for them, at least suffer themselves to be guided by the less splendid and more
familiar light of natural Reason. Let the Enthusiasts also, who pretend so much
to supernatural Revelations, and are dazzled with their fanciful lights, and
sublime speculations, through the delusion of the Prince of Darkness,
transforming himself into an Angel of Light, learn from hence to know
themselves better, and to be wise unto Sobriety. Let the profane Jesters and
Scoffers who speak slightingly and scornfully of the most serious and sacred
things, and turn all Religion into ridiculous Drollery, learn to speak more
reverently of God, and things Divine, from a mere natural Philosopher, who is
the Subject of this History, and a Mohammedan who is the Author of it. Let them
who are unkind, and unneighbourly to those they live amongst, and so far from
succouring and relieving them in their Dangers and Distresses, that they make
no Conscience of getting what they can from them, either by fraud or force,
whenever it lies in their Power, and they can find an Opportunity, learn of
this Self-Taught Philosopher to be kindly affectioned toward their Neighbors,
whenas they find him so kind toward all his Fellow Creatures, though of a
diverse kind; so ready to supply their wants, and to free them from whatsoever
evils that molested them. Let the Covetous Worldlings, who take so much
pleasure in heaping up unnecessaries, which are Burdens rather than Blessings,
learn of him to rest content with such a competency, as Nature only requires,
and to be satisfied with the just Conveniences of Life. Let, lastly, the rude,
and intemperate, and inordinate livers, who are so ready to run into Excess,
and to forget all the Rules of Order and Decency, learn the contrary virtues of
Temperance, and Modesty, and Regularity, from him who took such an exact care
about his Food and Clothing, that so he might not transgress in any particular,
relating to either of them.

These, and other good Lessons, may be learned from hence. But there are some
few other particulars, which it will not be amiss to advertise the Reader of,
to prevent some exceptions which otherwise might be taken against them.

First, That I have omitted two Discourses in my Translation, which I conceived
little or nothing pertinent to the main Design of the History. The one treats
of the several Sects among the Mahometans, with the Heads of those Sects, and
passes a censure on their Opinions. The other argues the possibility of Man's
Body being formed and produced out of the Earth, as Frogs and Mice, and some
other of the ignobler Animals sometimes are, though more ordinarily bred of
Male and Female. 'An opinion which our Author is said to have received from
Eb'n Sina, commonly known by the name of Avicenna, who held that some Earth may
be so well fitted and prepared through the excellent Temper and Disposition
thereof, as to become a convenient Habitacle for an humane Soul, to be infused
thereinto by God. Such an Original as our Author says, some fancied that Hai
Eb'n Yockdan had. But he determines nothing in the Point, leaving all to report
and the opinion of certain Philosophers. It being all one to his Design,
whether his Self-taught Philosopher had his Body formed out of the Earth, or
were born elsewhere, and thence transported into that desert Island, wherein he
is said to have lived, and learned what he did, by his own Experiments and
Observations.

Secondly, In my Translation, I have not strictly tied my self to the letter of
the Latin, as he did his Latin to the Letter of the Arabic, for a good reason
showed in the Preface. But I, being not alike concerned, have thought fit to
use more liberty, yet so as to keep unto the sense, which I have endeavored to
render more clear and full, hereby intending the greater profit, as well as
pleasure of the Reader.

Thirdly, Whereas the Author brings in his Self-taught Philosopher very much
perplexed about the Original of the World, whether it were made by God in time,
or from all Eternity, and not able to resolve either way, by reason of the
Equipoise of Reasons on both sides, it is not to be wondered at; as well,
because it is a point very hardly, if at all, determinable by mere natural
Reason, which was the only guide this Philosopher is supposed to have had; as
also because the Author of this History, was an Arabian Philosopher, amongst
whom Aristotle's Philosophy is of the chiefest, and almost the only repute. Now
it is generally known, that he held the World to have been from all Eternity.

Fourthly, Whereas he brings in his said Philosopher placing intelligent forms
in the heavenly Bodies, which he calls by the name of Essences, and makes them
to enjoy the Vision of God in a more eminent manner, as being of a most
excellent nature, and placed near to him; it is somewhat less to be wondered at;
not only because Aristotle held the like intelligences to reside in the
Spheres, and move them about; that Plato also, and his followers (as is
confessed) held the Spheres and Stars to be living Bodies, informed by the like
intelligences; but Philo Judaeus too, and Origin among the ancient Doctors of
the Church. S. Jerome is not averse to it, in his Comment on Eccles. 1. 6. S.
Aug. in several places of his works leaves the question undetermined. He also,
and Aquinas tell us, that it was never determined by the Church; whence it is
that he, and other Schoolmen that followed him, speak so doubtfully concerning
it.

Lastly, Whereas we find in this History several passages cited out of the
Alcoran, whether for the confirmation or illustration of some things therein
said, it is least of all to be wondered at, when we consider the Author to have
been a Mohammedan; and though they seem sometimes to disturb the sense, and
interrupt the coherence of the Discourse, yet they pass for elegancies and
ornaments, as well as proofs, among the Mahometans, as Citations out of the Old
Testament or the Talmud, do with the Jews.

THE HISTORY OF HAI EB'N YOCKDAN, AN INDIAN PRINCE: OR THE Self-taught
Philosopher.
WE have received from our pious Indian Islands there lies an uninhabited one,
situated under the Equinoctial, and blessed with a most pleasant and temperate
Air: Also, that not far from this, there lay another Island of a large Compass,
abounding with all the Commodities of Life, and well inhabited; which was then
governed by a Prince of a proud and jealous Disposition. This Prince had a
Sister of an excellent Beauty, whom he held in strict Custody, and restrained
from Marriage, because he could find no one in his Country, whom he thought an
equal Match for her. But he had withal a near Kinsman, named Yockdan, who
privately married her, according to such Matrimonial Rites, as were commonly
known and used by the Inhabitants of that Island. By him she soon afterward
proved with Child, and was delivered of a Son. But she then fearing lest the
Business should be known, and both her Marriage and Child come to be
discovered, after she had suckled the Infant, she put him into a small Chest,
which when she had shut up again, and close fastened, being accompanied with
certain of her Servants, and some faithful Friends of hers, about the beginning
of the Night, she conveys him to the Seashore; where out of an Heart equally
affected with, and divided betwixt Love and Fear, she took her last leave of
him, and recommended him to God in this Prayer; O God, who did create this
poor Infant, when as yet he was nothing; then cherished'st and nourisht him,
whilst he lay confined and imprisoned within the dark Closet of my Womb; and
tookest a special care of him, until his Body grew up to Perfection, and became
entirely furnished with all its Limbs; I now fearing the Displeasure of that
unjust, proud, and perverse Prince my Brother, do anew recommend him to thy
Goodness, hoping that thou will be favorable unto him. Thou who art
supereminent, and excellest all in Mercy, help and assist him; let thy gracious
Providence continually guard, direct, and govern him, and never leave him
destitute of thy Care.

Having said this, she committed a very pleasant place, sheltered from Wind and
Weather, Rain and Sun, which molested it not, either in its receding from it,
or returning to it. But soon after, the Seawater retiring from the Shore, upon
the Ebb, the Chest, wherein the Infant lay, rested in the same place whereinto
the Flood had cast it; and the Sands being afterward heaped together and driven
thitherward by the Winds, stopped the passage to the Grove, so that the Waters
could not enter any farther into it.

Now it happened withal, that when whither as soon as she was come, she strove
to break it open with her Claws, and (the Child in the mean time struggling to
get out) never gave over till a Board which covered the Top of it sprang forth.
Whereupon, getting a sight of the Child, she took pity on it, and being moved
with a tender Affection toward it, gave it her Dug to suck, and having sweetly
satisfied it with her Milk for the present, afterward constantly came thereto,
took care thereof, made much of it, covered and guarded, and kept it from all
harm. And thus the Roe, enjoying a fat Pasture, and having plenty of Milk, bred
up the Child very well, continuing still near him; nor at any time leaving him,
but when of necessity she went forth to graze. The Child also, being accustomed
to its Nurse, could not be contented when she was gone, but, whenever it happened
that she was absent a little longer than ordinary, used to cry aloud, and as
soon as she heard its Voice, she instantly ran back to it. This Happiness
withal the Child had, that there was no ravenous, or hurtful wild Beast
throughout the whole Island, wherein it was thus bred up.

Thus the Infant grew up, being either went forth in the Morning, or returned
in the Evening, the whole Herd of Deer accompanied them, both in their Egress
and Regress, and lodged in the same place together. So that the Child keeping
company always with them, imitated also their Voice, without any considerable
difference to be perceived between them. In like manner, whatsoever other Voice
he used to hear, either of Birds, or what other brute Creatures, he exactly
repeated it, by virtue of that rare apprehensive Faculty wherewith he was
endued. But amongst all the rest, the Voices which he chiefly and most commonly
repeated, were those of the wild Deer, amongst whom he was bred; those namely,
wherewith they cried out for help, or whereby they called to their Fellow-Deer,
that they should draw nearer to them, or get them farther off. For it may be
easily observed, how they have diversity of Notes, fitted to these several ends
and uses. Thus the Child and the wild Deer kept company with each other, they
neither flying from him, nor he from them.

But whenas the Images of such things as he saw, began now to remain fixed in
his Mind, after they were removed out of his Sight, he perceived that he became
diversely affected toward them, having a love and desire for some, an
aversation, and a distaste for others. In the mean time, whilst he looked
about, and took a diligent view of all the wild Beasts, and Birds, that were in
the Island, he observed that every one of them was provided of some natural
Cover, either Wool, or Hair, or diverse kinds of Feathers. He took notice also
of their swiftness, and strength, and what Arms Nature had afforded them,
wherewith to repel, and defend themselves against their Enemies, whenever
they had occasion to contend with them; such as Horns, Hoofs, Teeth, Spurs,
Nails, Claws, and the like. But when he reflected upon himself, he saw that he
was naked, destitute of all such Arms, slow in his motions, and of a feeble
strength, in comparison of them; So that when they chanced to contend with him
at any time, about feeding on the Fruits which grew in the Island, they were
still too hard for him, taking them away from him, and keeping them to
themselves; he contrariwise, being neither able to drive them away from him,
nor to fly away from any of them.

Moreover, he observed, that his voiding of Urine, with Hair, or some such like
thing. Their privy Parts also he observed to be more concealed than his were.

Now the Consideration of all this stead, some whereof he folded together and
plaited upon the other, so that they hung upon his Body in a double Rank. By
which means they hung indeed somewhat longer upon him, but however they
continued for no very long time. After this, he broke off the Bough of a Tree,
the Ends whereof having fitted to his Mind, and smoothed the Body of it, he
made him a Staff, wherewith he began to affright and threaten such wild Beasts
as durst oppose themselves to him, assaulting the weaker of them, and resisting
the stronger, that had the confidence to set upon him. And by this means, he
came in some good measure to understand his own Abilities, and to find by
Experience, that his Hand alone far excelled all those natural Instruments and
Arms, which the Brutes were furnished with; as that which sufficed, and well
enabled him, both to cover his own Nakedness, and to provide him a Staff
wherewith to defend himself against his Adversaries. So that now he saw, that
he had neither need of any Tail to cover the nakedness of his hinderparts, nor
of those natural Arms of the Brute Animals, which he had formerly so much
desired, and been so much trouble for the want thereof.

In the mean time he grew up, and two parts, he hung the one upon his Back, and
the other upon his Belly. The Tail also of the Eagle he placed behind him, and
both the Wings he fitted to his Shoulders. Thus he got wherewith both to cover
his Nakedness, and to keep him warm; wherewith also to strike a Terror into
the wild Beasts, so that now none of them durst contend with him, or make
opposition to him: no nor so much as come near him, except his Nurse the Roe,
which had bred him up, for she never forsook him, no not when she grew feeble
with Age. Neither did he forsake her, but took care to conduct her unto the
best Pasturage he could find, withal, gathering the pleasantest Fruits for
her, and giving her them to eat.

Notwithstanding, leanness and kind of Voice, which when she formerly heard,
she was wont to answer. But though he cried out to her as loud as possibly he
could, he could perceive no motion, or change at all in her. He began therefore
to look into her Ears and Eyes, but could find therein no visible Blemish or
Defect* In like manner, he took a view of all the Parts of her Body, wherein he
could spy nothing amiss. But that which he most earnestly desired, and sought
after, was to find out that place in her Body wherein the Defect lay, that so,
upon discovering thereof, he might remove it from her, and she thereupon return
to her former state of Life and Vigor. But he had nothing at hand, wherewith
to compass his Design, nor knew by what means to bring it about.

Now that which moved him to nothing, till he took them away from thence. In
like manner, when he hard pressed his Nose with his Hand, and closed the
passages of his Nostrils, he had no Sense of any Odor, until he let go his
Hand, and opened those passages. Whence he concluded, that all his Sensations,
and what other natural Actions proceeded from his Body, were liable to certain
Impediments, which hindered them in the exercise of their several Operations;
and that these being removed, those Operations returned to their former Course.
When therefore he had taken a thorough and exact view of all the outward Parts
of the Roe's Carcass, and could find no visible Fault or Defect in any of them;
yet withal perceived that there was a general cessation of Motion in the whole
Body, which could not be attributed to one Part more than to another; at length
this Thought came into his Mind, that the Fault whence all this proceeded, must
needs lie in some other Part, which lay removed from sight, and hidden within
the Body. He judged also, that this Part must needs be of such a nature and
use, as that without its help and constant supply of Spirit and Vigor, none of
the outward Parts could exercise their proper Functions, and therefore, that
some Disease having seized on that Part, the hurt and damage became universal,
as appeared by the ceasing of Motion throughout the whole Body.

He desired therefore, if it might some while ago thoroughly fixed in his Mind,
that seeing all other Parts stood in need of it, it must necessarily follow,
that it had its Seat in the midst of them all. Moreover, when he reflected upon
himself, he was very sensible that he had some such Part in the middle of his
Breast. For when he considered his other Parts, as Hands, Feet, Ears, Nose,
Eyes, he supposed that these might be taken from him, and yet it seemed to him,
that he could subsist without them. But when he considered that Part which he
felt moving in his Breast, he was persuaded that he could not subsist without
it, no not during the twinkling of an Eye. He likewise observed, that when he
chanced to contend with any of the wild Beasts, he still took a great care to
guard his Breast from their Assaults, out of a natural instinct, as he judged,
and an innate sense of the necessity which lay upon him, to defend that Part,
which lay there, against any the least Harm.

Now being thus certainly resolved, in the Breast of the Roe, he determined to
search after it, if so be he could possibly find it out; and when he had
discovered what Ill it was that had befallen it, to remove it thence. But then
he feared too, lest this very Endeavor of his should be more hurtful to the
dead Roe, than that Evil which had befallen it; and that whatsoever he should
do in the prosecution of this Design, would turn to its damage. Then he
considered with himself, whether he had ever seen any of the wild Beasts, or
other of the living Creatures, after they had lain as the dead Roe did, return
to Life. But when he could call to mind no such Instance, he began to despair
of the Roe's return to her former state and condition, in case he let her lie
as she did. Yet he had some hope that she might possibly recover that former
state of hers, if so be he could possibly find out the disaffected Part, and
remove the Disease from it. He resolved therefore to open her Breast, and upon
search to discover what he could find in it. To this purpose he got him broken
pieces of sharp Stones, and Splinters of dry, hard Canes, like to Knives,
wherewith he made an Incision between her Ribs, until at last he came to that
Cover which lay in the inside of her Breast. Which when he found to be a very
strong one, he as strongly conjectured that such a Cover as that belonged to
such a like Part, and persuaded himself, that when he had pierced through it, he
should find that which he sought after. He attempted therefore to cut a way
through it, which he found very difficult for him to do, in that he wanted fit
Instruments, whereof he had none other, than such as were made of Stones and
Canes.

When therefore he had furnished on the one side, and took notice that it
leaned toward one side of the Breast; whereas before he conceived, that the
Part he looked after, could not have his Seat but in the midst of the Body, as
well in regard of Latitude, as Longitude. He left not therefore off to search
farther into the middle of the Breast, until he had found the Heart; which when
he saw to be closed about with a strong Cover, and fastened with very firm
Ligaments, the Lungs also compassing it about on that side, whereby he had
begun to open a passage thereto, he said within himself, If this Part be so
disposed and situated on the other side as it is on this, it is certainly in
the midst of the Body; and therefore doubtless it is that very Part which I
have been seeking after; especially, whenas I here see such a fitness of
Situation, such neatness of Shape, such firmness also and solidity of Flesh,
and all this both fenced and adorned with such a Cover, as I find in no other
Part of the Body. He made search therefore into the opposite side of the
Breast, where whenas he found the same Cover within the Ribs, and the Lungs in
like manner disposed, he concluded with himself, that the Heart was that Part
which he had sought after.

He attempted therefore to remove Pericardium in sunder; which at length, when
he had used his utmost Endeavor, with much trouble and difficulty he effected.
And thus, having laid the Heart bare, when he saw it to be solid on every side,
he diligently looked about, whether he could espy any visible Fault or defect
in it. But when he could find none, he squeezed it together with his Hand, and
thereby it appeared to him that it was hollow within. Whereupon he said to
himself, Perchance the utmost which I seek after lies within this Cavity, and I
have not yet come home to it, and so not attained the end of my Design. Then
upon the opening thereof he found a double Cavity therein, one on the right
side, and the other on the left. That on the right side was filled with clotted
Blood; but that on the left, was empty, and had nothing at all in it.
Wherefore, he said to himself again, It cannot be, but that the Seat of the
thing I search after, must needs be in one of these two Cavities. He said
moreover, As for that on the right side, I can see nothing in it but this
clotted Blood; and doubtless this Blood became not so clotted, till the whole
Body came into that state wherein it now lies. For he had observed, that all
Blood when it issued out of the Body, and was separated therefrom, became
thickened and congealed; and that this clotted Blood, which he found in the
right Ventricle of the Heart, was like unto all other so separated from the
Body. I see also, said he, that the same kind of Blood is found also in other
Parts of the Body, and that it is not appropriated to one Part more than to
another. But that which I seek for is no such thing; for that is somewhat
whereof this place is the peculiar Seat, and such a thing as I am sensible that
I cannot subsist without one Moment. Now that is it which I have been seeking
after all this while. But as for this Blood, as often as I have lost some
considerable quantity of it, when at any time I chanced to be wounded by some
wild Beast that fought with me, yet I found no considerable harm thereby,
seeing it hindered me not from performing any Action of Life, as I formerly
did. Therefore, that which I seek after, is not in this Ventricle. And as sor
the left one, I find it indeed empty, yet I cannot think that it was made
altogether in vain. For I see that every other Part of the Body is designed for
the exercise of some Office or other, and for that operation which is proper to
it. How then can this Ventricle of the Heart, which is of so excellent a Frame,
as I see, serve to no use at all? I cannot then imagine, but that the thing I
seek after, had its Seat herein, but is now departed from it, and left its Seat
empty; and that by this means that Cessation has happened, whereby the whole
Body is now deprived of all Sense and Motion. But then when he saw that it left
that House, wherein it formerly dwelt, before it fell to ruin, and to have
forsaken it, whenas as yet it continued sound, whole, and entire, he thought it
very improbable that it would ever return again to its former Habitation, after
it had been thus torn and mangled, and destroyed by him.

In the mean time, the whole Body that this Nurse of his which had been so kind
and indulgent to him, and fed him with her Milk, was that thing properly which
was now departed; and that from it had proceeded all those Actions, whereby she
showed her Love to him, and Care of him; not from that dull and senseless Body,
which was not able to help it self, but had served only as an Instrument, which
she made use of in performing those Actions; or like that Staff which he had
taken to him, wherewith to fight with the wild Beasts. So that now, his Care
and Study was quite taken off from the Body, and transferred to that which had
moved and governed it.

But whilst his Mind was thus busied the Earth with its Claws, and never ceased
scratching till it had dug up an Hole, wherein it laid the Carcass of its
Adversary, and covered it over. Then said he within himself, How well has this
Raven done in covering the Body of his Fellow-Combatant, though in killing of
him he did ill! How much rather should I have begun to perform this good Office
for my Mother and Nurse? Whereupon he dug a deep Hole in the Ground, and
having put the Body into it, threw Earth upon it. Then he proceeded to meditate
on that thing which had governed the Body, whilst it was alive, but could not
apprehend what kind of thing it was. Only, when he severally beheld all the
other Roes, he saw them all to have the same Figure and Form with his Dam.
Whence his Mind gave him, that every one was moved and governed by somewhat
like unto that which had moved and governed her. He therefore still followed
them, and loved to keep with them, for that Likeness's sake. In this state he
continued for a while, contemplating the diverse kinds of Animals and Plants,
walking round the Shore of the Island, and seeking every where, whether he
could meet with any other Creature like unto himself, as he had observed many
of every other sort of Animals and Plants; yea, every single Individual, to be
like to each other, if it were of the same kind. But when he had thus
considered them in Order, one after another, after all his search he could find
none like himself. And when as he walked this Round, he saw that the Island was
compassed about with the Sea, he supposed that there was no other Land besides.

But upon a time it happened, that in a it touched, and converted it into its own
Nature. Then, to satisfy his Wonder yet farther, and being incited also by
that innate Courage and Boldness, which God had planted in his Nature, he was
induced to put his Hand to it, and had a mind to lay hold thereon. But when he
felt that it burnt his Hand, and that he was not able to lay hold on it, he
attempted to take a Stick from the burning Tree, which the Fire had not as yet
wholly seized upon; and laying hold on that part which was yet untouched, (the
Fire having possessed the other end only) he easily effected what he intended
and desired; and brought the Fire brand in his Hand to the Place of his
Habitation. For he had before retired into a certain Covert, which he had made
choice of for himself, as a fit Lodging, and place of Retirement. And when he
had brought the Fire thither, he ceased not to feed it with Stubble and dry
Sticks, and other combustible Matter. So that partly out of his Admiration at
it, and partly out of the Delight he took in it, he would not suffer it to go
out, nor could endure to be long absent from it. But the chief Reason that
caused him to make so much of it, and frequent it in the Nightime, was this,
that it supplied the Place and Office of the Sun, as well in regard of Light as
Heat; insomuch that he was extremely taken with it, and esteemed it the most
excellent and useful of all those things which he had about him. When he also
observed, that the Flame tended upwards toward the Heavens, he began to be
persuaded that it was of kin to those celestial Bodies which he saw moving and
shining above his Head. He tried also the force and strength thereof upon all
manner of Bodies, by casting them into it, by which Experiment he found that it
prevailed over all of them sooner or later, according to their several Natures
and Dispositions, which rendered them more or less combustible.

And among other Experiments, Appetite was stirred up, and became quickened
thereby, insomuch that he ventured to taste some part thereof; which when he
found acceptable to his Palate, and agreeable to his Stomach, from thence
forward he accustomed himself to eat Flesh; and to that end, used all kind of
Arts he could think on, which might enable him to hunt both by Sea and Land,
and to catch such living Creatures as were fit for him to feed on, until at
length he became to be very expert in them. By this means, his love and regard
for the Fire increased daily, because by the help thereof he provided himself
with various sorts of good Food, which he had never before been acquainted with.

And whenas now his affection to of a like Nature. And he was farther confirmed
in this Opinion, because as well that Heat, which he had observed to be in all
Animals whilst they lived, as that Cold, which seized on them after Death, was,
as he found, constant, and continued without any intermission. And he was the
more confirmed in it upon the observation of that high Degree of Heat which he
felt within his own Breast, near the place which he had cut up in the Roe.
Hereupon, he began to think with himself, that if he could catch some living
Creature, then open its Heart, and look into that Ventricle thereof which he
had found empty, when he opened it in the dead Body of his Dam the Roe, that he
should then see the Heart of such a living Creature full of that Substance,
which had resided in her Heart whilst she lived; and by that means should be
certified, whether or no it were of the same Nature with the Fire, and whether
there could be found any Light or Heat in it. Upon this therefore, having
caught a wild Beast, and tied up the Shoulder, he dissected it in the same
manner as he had the Roe, until he came to its Heart, and then having first
essayed the left Ventricle, he opened it, and discovered it to be full of a
certain airy or thin vaporous Substance, like to a white Cloud, or mist. Then
thrusting his Finger into it, he found it so hot, that it scalded him; and the
wild Beast instantly died. Now upon this experiment he assuredly concluded,
that the moist vapor, which he found there, was the thing that gave life and
motion to the Beast; and consequently, that there was somewhat like it in every
living Creature of what kind soever, upon the departure whereof it died.

Then a very earnest desire arose in in the Heart; whence it has its supplies,
and by what means it comes to pass that its heat does not decay and perish. All
these particulars he diligently searched out, and to that end dissected wild
Beasts, both dead and alive. Neither did he leave off to make an accurate
enquiry into them, until at length he arrived to the highest degree of
knowledge in this kind, which the most learned Secretaries of Nature ever
attained unto.

And now it appeared very clearly was like that of a Man who assaults his Enemy
with all sorts of weapons; or hunteth after any kind of prey, whether by Sea,
or Land, and makes use of such instruments to catch it, as are variously
fitted for the taking of each kind, and most proper for his purpose. Now the
Weapons which a Man makes use of against his Adversaries, are either defensive,
whereby he repels his Blows; or offensive, whereby he assaults him. In like
manner, the instruments of hunting, wherewith he catches his prey, are divided
into those, which are fitted to catch such Creatures as live in the Sea; and
those, which are proper for the taking such as converse upon the Land. So also,
those instruments which himself made use of to cut Wood, or Stone, or what
other materials, were of diverse sorts; some fitted for cleaving, some for
breaking them in pieces, a third sort for boring thorough; and though it were
one, and the same Body, which he had in his hands, yet he handled it in a
different manner, according as his instruments were fitted for it; and with
relation to those ends, the effecting whereof he had proposed to himself.

Upon these considerations, he likewise ceased. He found also that all these
Arteries derive that spirit from the Ventricles of the Brain, and that the
Brain receives it from the Heart; as also, that there is a great quantity
thereof in the Brain, because that is the place wherein he found several
Vessels in which it lay, and whereby it was thence distributed into all parts
of the Body. He also perceived, that if any part of the Body came by any means
whatsoever to be deprived of the Influx of this spirit, the action thereof
immediately ceased; so that it became like to a contemptible Tool or
Instrument, cast aside, as of no use at all. Also, that if this spirit forsook
the Body altogether, or by any means came to be wasted or dissolved, the whole
Body at the same time became deprived of motion, and was reduced to the state
of Death.

These Observations of his, and Meditations viz. to the twenty first year of
his Age. Within the fpace of which time he found out many things of very great
use to him for the conveniences of life. For he clothed himself with the skins
of wild Beasts, when he had cut them out for his use. He also shod his Feet
with them, having made him thread of their Hair, as also of the rind of the
stalks of Althaea, Mallows, Hemp, and the like Plants, which were easy to be
parted asunder, and drawn into Threads. And this he had learned to do out of
his former experience in making use of the Rushes* He made himself also a kind
of (...) or Bodkins, of the strongest Thorns he could get, and of small pieces
of Canes, whetted and sharp pointed with stones. Then for the Art of Building,
he was taught it by what he saw the Swallows did. So he fitted himself with a
Room, wherein to repose and rest himself; and another place for a Larder,
wherein he laid up the remainder of his victuals. He guarded it also with a
door, compacted of Canes joined close together, lest any wild Beast should
chance to enter into it, when he happened to be from home upon any occasion. He
also got into his hands certain Birds of prey, which he made use of for
Hawking; and others of the tamer sort, which he bred up, and then fed upon
their Eggs, and Young ones. He also took to him the Horns of wild Bulls, which
he found lying on the Ground, the sharp tips whereof he affixed to strong
Canes, and to thick Staves made of the wood of the Tree Alzan, and others of
the like kind. And so, partly by the help of Fire, and partly of sharp edged
Stones, he so fitted them, that they served him instead of so many Spears. He
made himself also a Shield of the skins of Beasts, parted into several folds,
and then compacted together. And all these he made him, because he saw himself
distitute of natural Arms.

And when he now saw that his could be more convenient, than to take and tame
one of the swifter sort of the wild Beasts, and so long to breed it up,
nourishing it with food agreeable to its nature, until at length he might get
upon the Back of it, and therewith pursue other kind of wild Beasts. Now there
were in that Island wild Horses, and wild Asses; out of which number having
made choice of some which seemed fittest for his purpose, he made them by
degrees so gentle and tractable, that at length by their help and service he
became master of his wishes. And when he had made for them out of Thongs and
Skins somewhat that competently served him instead of Bridles, and Saddles, it
was no hard matter for him to compass his ends in catching those wild Beasts,
which he very hardly, if at all, could have taken any other way. All these Arts
and Devices he found out, whilst he was otherwise busied in dissecting of
Bodies, and studiously searching after the Properties of the several Parts of
Animals, and wherein they differed from each other. And all this he did in that
space of time, which even now we assigned, viz. within the compass of one and
twenty years.

But after this, he began to expatiate manifold, that they were past numbering;
and that nature diffused it self so far and wide, that it was wholly impossible
to comprehend it. Yea, his own nature seemed also to be manifold unto him,
whilst he considered the diversity of parts whereof his Body was made up, and
each of them distinguished from the rest by some Action or Property which was
peculiar to it. Yea, when he beheld every single part, he observed it to be yet
farther divisible into more parts, whence he concluded, that the nature of his
Body was manifold in respect of its parts; and, in like manner, the nature of
every other thing.

Then, applying himself to another nature whereof he had before searched into,
and found out; and that this Spirit was one and the same in its Nature; and
withal, the Cause, and very substance of his Being, seeing all the other
parts, which belonged to its Body, served only as so many instruments, whereby
it performed all its operations. So that in this respect also his Essence was
but one.

After this, turning his Eye hence, several Hearts; insomuch that if it were
possible to recollect all that Spirit which was dispersed into so many Hearts,
and gather it together into one Vessel, the whole thereof would be but one
thing; even as Water, or some other Liquour, which being first dispersed into
several Vessels, and afterward gathered into one, is one and the same thing in
both states, as well that of dispersion, as that of recollection; seeing that
the multiplying thereof was only accidental, in regard of the distribution into
several Vessels. Now, by this way of Contemplation, he saw, that the whole kind
or Species of Animals was but one. Whence he concluded, that the multiplicity
of Individuals in every kind, was but like the multiplicity of parts in the
Body of one and the same Person, which indeed are not many

After this, having presented to the pleased; which actions he well knew were
the proper effects of the Animal Spirit. And as to the others wherein they
differed, they were not very proper thereunto. Upon which consideration it
appeared to him, that the Animal Spirit, so communicated to the generality of
living Creatures, was in very truth but one, though it admitted of some small
difference whereby the Properties of those Animals became distinguished from
each other; even as Spring Water, which originally had the same cool Nature,
being poured into several Vessels, may have one part hotter, and another
cooler, according as the one was heated, and the other left to its natural
coolness. So likewise may the Animal Spirit differ in regard of some Qualities
or Proprieties, according to the variety of Constitutions in several Animals,
notwithstanding that it may be esteemed but one and the same, as that
Spring Water is, although in some respects it be thus diversified. And so,
under this notion, he looked on the whole kind of living Creatures, as one.

Then afterward, upon contemplating viz. in their Nourishment and Growth.

After this, he comprehended the observed withal that there was somewhat in
Plants which resembled the sense of Animals; as that Flowers turned themselves
toward the Sun and that the roots of Plants spread themselves toward that part
of the Earth which afforded them nourishment; and some other operations like to
these. Whence it appeared to him, that both Plants and Animals were but one in
respect of that one and the same thing, which was common to them both; although
in the one, it were perfect and complete; in the other, more limited, and
restrained by some impediment; like Water distributed into two portions,
whereof the one is bound up and congealed into Ice; the other loose and fluid.
Thus far then he concluded, that Plants and Animals were one kind of thing.

Then he contemplated those Bodies, one another, but that some were colored,
others not; some hot and others cold; and the like differences. He observed
also, that the hot Bodies waxed cold, and that the cold waxed hot. He saw too,
that the Water rarefied into Vapors, and that the Vapors thickened again, and
turned into Water. Withal he observed that the Bodies which were burnt, turned
into Coals, Ashes, Flame, and Smoke; and that the Smoke when it met in its way
with an Arch of Stone, as it mounted upwards, thickened there into Soot, and
became like other earthy Substances. Whence he resolved with himself, that they
were all indeed but one thing, after the same manner that the Animals and
Plants were, although in some respect multiplied and diversified.

Then considering with himself that but that it differed from them in such
Actions as proceeded from it, in regard of the Organical Parts, which belong to
Plants and Animals, but not otherwise. And perhaps, such Actions were not
essential to that Body, but derived to it from some other Cause, that was
extrinsecal thereto; so that, if they were in like manner communicated to other
Bodies, they would be like unto this. When he therefore considered that Body in
its Essence, as stripped naked of all these Operations, which at the first sight
seemed to proceed from thence, he saw that it was no other thing, than a Body
of the same kind with these. Upon which Contemplation it appeared unto him,
that all Bodies taken in general were but one, as well those which had life, as
those which had none; as well those which moved, as those which rested in their
natural places. Only it appeared, that actions proceeded from some of them, by
means of their organical Parts, concerning which he as yet knew not, whether
they were Essential to them, or derived to them from without. Now, whilst he
was in this state of Mind, he extended not his Thoughts beyond bodily
Substances; and thereby he saw, that the whole Frame of the Creatures was but
one Thing, which formerly he had looked upon, and esteemed as many, without
number, or end.

In this Opinion, and state of Mind, viz. upward, or downward; upward, as in
Smoke, Flame, and Air, when detained under Water: downward, as in Water, Earth
and its Parts, all Earthy Bodies, with the Parts of Animals and Plants. Also,
that not one of all these Bodies was void of both these Motions, neither ever
rested, but when some other Body came it its way, and interrupted its motion;
as when a Stone in its descension meets with the solid Surface of the Earth,
which it cannot pierce through; whereas if it could, it would move downwards
still, as every Body knows. And therefore, if one do but lift it up from the
Earth, he will find it to resist that motion* by pressing down his Hand, out of
a propension it has to descend again unto the same place. In like manner,
Smoke in its mounting upward is not beat back again, unless it meet by the way
with some solid arched Body, which stops it in its Course; and then it will
turn aside to the right Hand or to the left; but as soon as it has got out,
and freed it self from that Body which hindered its motion, it mounts up again,
and makes its way through the Air, without any interruption. He observed also,
that if a Leather Bag be filled with Air, then tied hard together, and plunged
into the Water, it will strive to get upward, and struggle under the Water that
detains it, nor ever cease to do so, until it has got forth, and returned unto
the Air; but then it is quiet, all that reluctance, and strong inclination to
move upwards, which it had before, ceasing altogether.

He also made a diligent search, to both these motions, or a propension to
them; but he could find none such among all those Bodies, which he had at hand
to view. And this be sought after, out of a desire he had to find out what was
the Nature of a Body in general, and abstractedly considered, without any of
those Qualities, which cause a multiplicity, and diversity of Kinds. But when
he found this too difficult a Task for him; and that having considered all
those Bodies, which among the rest were least subject to these qualities, yet
could he see none of them in any wise void of one of the two, viz. either of
Heaviness or Lightness; he farther considered with himself, whether these two
qualities belonged to the Body, as it was a Body, or to some other Notion
superadded to the Body. Now upon this Consideration, it seemed to him, that
they agreed to some Notion superadded unto the Body, because that if they
belonged to the Body, as it was a Body, no one Body could be found wherein both
of them were not, whereas we find some heavy Bodies which are void of all
Lightness, and some light Bodies which are void of all Heaviness; and these two
are doubtless two distinct Bodies, to either of which belongs some Notion
superadded to its bodily Nature, whereby it is distinguished from the other;
which Notion is that, whereby the one of them becomes diverse from the other;
seeing if this were away, they both would be the same thing in every Respect.
It appeared therefore very plainly to him, that the Nature, or Essence of both
these Bodies was compounded of two Notions; the one, wherein they both agreed,
and this was the Notion of Corporeity* or bodily Substance: the other, whereby
the Essence of the one was diversified from the Essence of the other; and this
was the Notion of Heaviness in the one, and of Lightness in the other; whereby
the one moved upwards, and the other downwards; both which were adjoined and
superadded to the Notion of Corporeity, or bodily Substance.

In like manner, he contemplated the Essence of every one of them consisted in
this, that they were all compounded of a double Notion, namely, that of
Corporeity, and of some other thing superadded thereto, whether the thing were
one, or manifold. And thus the Forms of Bodies came to be known unto him,
according to their diversity; which were the first Notions that he had relating
to the Spiritual World, to wit, the Notions of these Forms, which are not
perceiveable by Sense, but apprehended only after a certain manner of
intellectual Speculation. And among the rest of this kind, which were thus made
known unto him, it appeared also to him, that his own Animal Spirit, which was
seated in his Heart (as has been before declared) must needs superadd another
distinct Notion to his Corporeity, as that whereby he was enabled to perform
such wonderful Operations, as appeared in the various manners of Sensation, and
ways of Apprehension, with the diversity of Motions which it caused in the
Body; as also, that this Notion was his proper Form or Difference, whereby he
was distinguished from other Bodies; viz. the same, which the Philosophers call
the Animal, that is, the Sensitive Soul. So likewise, that the Principle which
in Plants supplies the place of that Radical Heat which is in Animals, is
somewhat that is proper to them, and is their Form, namely, That which
Philosophers call the Vegetative Soul. So also in all Inanimate Bodies (which,
besides Animals and Plants, are found in this lower World of Bodies, and are
liable to Generation and Corruption) there is somewhat proper to them, by
virtue whereof every one of them performs such Actions as are peculiar to it,
namely, various ways of Motion, and kinds of sensible Qualities; and that the
same thing is their Form, the same which Philosophers express by the name of
Nature.

Now whenas, upon this Contemplation, to him with other Bodies, but that the
other, which was adjoined thereto, was peculiar to himself; the Notion of
Corporeity appeared vile to him, and of no account, so that he utterly cast it
off, and his Mind wholly fixed it self upon that second Notion, which is called
by the Name of the Soul, the true nature and state whereof he earnestly desired
to understand: Upon that therefore he fixed his Thoughts, and began his
Contemplation, with considering all Bodies, not as Bodies, but as having Forms,
whence necessarily flow certain Properties, whereby they are distinguished from
one another.

And upon his instant prosecuting was another Classis or Order of Bodies, which
although they agreed with this Part in the first and second Forms, yet were
distinguished from them by a third, which was superadded unto the two former,
and from whence also certain Actions issued. As for Example, all Terrestrial
Bodies, as Earth, Stones, Minerals, Plants, Animals, and whatsoever other heavy
Bodies, do make up one number, which agree in the same Form, namely that whence
descensive Motion proceeds, whilst there is nothing to hinder their descent; so
that whenever they are forced to move upwards at any time, and after left
unto themselves, they move downwards of their own accord, by virtue of that
their Form. Again, some part of the same number of heavy Bodies ( viz. Plants
and Animals) though they agree with the former in the same Form, which is
common to them all, yet they have another Form besides, from which proceed
Nutrition and Augmentation. Now Nutrition is performed, when the Body nourished
does substitute into the place of that which was consumed, somewhat of the like
kind, which it draws to it self, and then converts into its own Substance But
Augmentation is a Motion tending to the threefold Dimension of Length, Breadth,
and Thickness, according to the just proportion of the Body augmented. These
two Actions therefore, being common to Plants and Animals, doubtless arise from
a Form which is common to both, to wit, That which is called the Vegetative
Soul. But some also of this sort of Bodies, (and particularly Animals) although
they have the first and second Forms common to them with the former, yet they
have a third also superadded, whence proceed Sensation and local Motion. He saw
likewise, that every peculiar kind of Animals had some certain Property whereby
it was diversified, and distinguished from all the rest. He knew also, that
every such Diversity proceeded from that Form which was proper to it; that
namely, which was superadded to the former, and which was common to it with
other Animals. And the like he saw happened to the several kinds of Plants.

It was also evident to him, that compounded, as he judged by the fewness of
those Actions which proceeded from its Form. The same he also observed in the
Fire, and Air.

Withal, he had before observed, had. He considered therefore with himself,
whether he could find out any one Adjunct which was common to all Bodies, as
well Animate, as Inanimate. But he could find none which agreed to all of them,
besides the Notion of Extension toward those three Dimensions which are found
in all of them, viz. Length, Breadth, and Thickness. Whence he gathered, that
this Notion belongs to the Body, as it is a Body. However, his Sense could not
represent to him any Body existent in Nature, which had this only Adjunct, and
was void of all other Forms: For he saw, that every one of them had some other
Notion superadded to the said Extension.

After this, he considered with himself, was extended could exist of it self
alone, without Extension. Then he farther considered the Nature of this
Extension, in some of those sensible Bodies which were endued with Forms; as
for Example, in Clay; and he observed, that when it was molded into any Figure
(as for Instance, a Globous one) it had Length, Breadth, and Thickness,
according to a certain Proportion. Then, if afterward this Globous Body of
Clay were changed into a apiece or oval Figure, that the Length, Breadth,
and Thickness were changed, and had another Proportion than before they had;
but that the Clay was the same still, and remained unchanged; only, it had that
which it must necessarily have, Length, Breadth, and Thickness, in some
Proportion or other, seeing it could not be wholly deprived of them.

Then he farther discerned, by this appeared to him that they belonged to its
Essence. And from this Contemplation it was apparent to him, that a Body,
considered as a Body, was indeed compounded of two Notions. As for Example, the
Body of the Clay, as considered under a Globous Figure; and the same considered
as having only the threefold Extension of Length, Breadth, and Thickness,
whether in a Globous, or a Square, or any other Figure. He saw also, that it
was impossible to conceive any Body, which was not made up of these two
Notions; and that the one of them could not possibly subsist without the other.
Withal he saw, that the one Notion, (namely, that of Extension) which could be
changed and successively put on diversity of Figures, did represent the Form in
all those Bodies, which were endued with Forms or Figures; but that the other,
which still abode in the same state, (as for Example, the substantial Body of
the Clay) did represent the Notion of Corporeity which belonged to all Bodies
of what Forms soever. Now, that which we call Clay in the precedent instance is
the same which the Philosophers call materia prima [the first matter] and
(...), which is wholly void of all sort of forms.

Now, when his Contemplation a sensible Cold, and a propension to move
downwards; but that when it was heated by the Fire, or the warm Beams of the
Sun, the Cold first withdrew it self, and departed, the Propension to move
downwards still remaining; but that afterward, when it became more vehemently
heated, its Propension to move downwards then likewise forsook it, so that it
strove to move upwards, and evaporated into the Air; so that both of these
qualities wholly left it, which before had always issued from its Nature and
Form. Neither knew he any thing farther concerning its Form, but that these two
actions proceeded thence, and that when they both forsook it, the Nature or
State of the form was wholly taken away, so that the watery form departed out
of that Body; seeing that actions proceeded therefrom which properly belonged
to another form; and that another form in its place arose, which before was not
in the Water, seeing that actions proceeded from it, which could not naturally
proceed thence, whilst it retained its former form.

Now he well knew, that when any thing was anew produced, it must needs have
some Producer. And from this Contemplation there was wrought in his mind a kind
of a general and confused impression of the Effector of that form. Then he
farther directed his speculation to the considering of those forms, to the
knowledge whereof he had before attained, contemplating them one after another.
Whereupon he saw, that they all had their Existence anew, and so necessarily
required some efficient Cause. Then he examined and diligently considered the
Essences of forms, and saw that they were nothing else but such or such a
disposition of the Body, from which those actions proceeded. For instance, in
water when that is vehemently heated, it is disposed to move upwards, and made
apt thereto; and that disposition is its form; seeing there is nothing present
in this motion but the Body of the Water, and some accidents proceeding thence,
which existed not before, and are the objects of Sense (such as qualities and
motion) and the Efficient which produced them; whereas those accidents had no
Existence before; so that the aptitude of the Body to some motions before
others is its disposition and form. And the same truth appeared to him, as to
all other forms. He also clearly saw, that the actions which proceeded from
these Bodies were not properly theirs, but belonged to that Efficient, which by
those actions, produced those Attributes that are ascribed to them. And this
notion which thus appeared to him is the same thing which was said by the
messenger of God ( viz. Mahomet) [I am his hearing whereby he hears, and his
sight whereby he sees. And in the Text of the Alcoran, Cap. Al Anphali. [You
have not slain them, but God has slain them. And, thou have not cast them
away, but God has cast them away.]

Now, whenas he was certainly things sensible; neither as yet knew he, whether
it were one Agent, or many. Wherefore he took a view of all the Bodies that
were near him, those namely, which his thoughts had been continually fixed
upon; all which he saw were successively liable to Generation and Corruption,
if not in the whole, at least in their parts. As for example, he saw that the
parts both of Water and Earth were corrupted by Fire. He saw likewise, that the
Air was so far corrupted by a sharp Cold that it was turned into Snow, and that
Snow melted again into Water. Also, as for other Bodies which he had near him,
he could see none of them which had not its Existence anew, and required some
voluntary Agent to give it a Being. Wherefore, he rejected all these sublunary
Bodies, and transferred his thoughts to the heavenly ones which were above his
head. And thus far he reached in his Contemplations about the end of the fourth
Septenary of his Age, viz. when he was now Twenty and Eight years old.

Now, he knew that the Heavens

Yet at length, by the quickness of to my sense, seeing I perceive so much by
my Eye. Then likewise, as to that part which is opposite to this, and
concerning which this doubt arises in my mind, I know also that it must needs
be impossible it should be extended infinitely. For if I conceive two Lines
beginning at that part which is bounded, and thence passing through the
thickness of this heavenly Body, extend themselves unto an infinite distance;
and then suppose a great part to be cut off from one of these Lines where its
extremity is bounded; and the extremity of the remainder of that Line which had
part cut off applied to the extremity of that other, which had nothing cut off
from it; and then that Line, which had some part thereof cut off, placed
parallel to that other Line which had nothing cut off, the understanding going
still along with both Lines to that farther part of each which is said to be
infinite; either you will find these two Lines to be continuedly extended,
without coming to any end, so that neither will be shorter than the other; and
consequently, the Line which had somewhat cut off from it, will be equal to the
other which had nothing cut off, which is absurd: Or, in case it go not
continuedly along with it, but have its progress interrupted, and so fail of
its being extended together with it, throughout that infinite space, it will be
finite; and when that part shall be added anew to it, which was before cut
off, and therefore must needs be finite, the whole Line too will be necessarily
finite, as consisting of two finite parts. Moreover, when it is thus made up
again, and become entire in it self, it will be neither shorter than the Line
which had nothing cut off from it, nor exceed it in length, but precisely equal
to it. Seeing therefore this Line is finite, that also must be finite likewise;
and consequently, that Body wherein both those Lines are supposed to be, and
are thus mathematically designed, must needs be finite too: For every Body,
wherein such Lines may be designed, is finite; and there is no Body wherein
they may not be designed. Therefore, if we determine any Body to be infinite,
we determine that which is absurd and impossible.

Now when he was thus assured by Sohail [that is, Canopus] which was nearest
the Southern Pole; and the Circle Alpharkadain, which was next the Northern.
And whereas he dwelt in an Island situated near the Equinoctial (as we before
showed) all these Circles were straight toward the Surface of the Horizon, and
had alike reference to the North and South, seeing both the Poles appeared to
him at once. Withal he observed, that when one Star arose in a larger Circle,
and another in a less, so that they arose both together, that both of them also
set at the same time. And this he observed to be alike true and the same in all
sorts of Stars, and at all times. And from hence it was evident to him, that
the Heaven was of a Spherical Figure. Which Truth was also farther confirmed
unto him from what he saw of the Return of the Sun, Moon, and the other Stars,
to the East, after their setting in the West; as also, in that they all
appeared to his Eyes in the same proportion of Magnitude, both when they arose,
and when they set; as also, when they were got up to the height and midst of
the Heavens. For if their Motion had been any other than Circular, they must
needs at some times have been nearer to his sight, than at other times: and if
so, their Dimensions and Magnitudes would not always have appeared the same,
but various; seeing that they would have appeared bigger when they were nearer
to him, than when they were farther off. But whenas he saw no such diversity in
their appearance, he was well assured that the Figure of Heaven was Spherical.
Then he proceeded onwards to observe the Motion of the Moon, and saw that it
was carried from the East toward the West [or perchance from the West to the
East] as the other Planets were in like manner. So that at length a great Part
of Astronomy became known to him. It appeared also to him, that the Motions of
the Planets were in different Spheres, all which were comprehended in another
that was above them all, and which turned about all the rest in the space of a
Day and a Night. But it were too long to set down the manner and degrees of
that Progress which he made in this Science; and besides it is published in
many Books. Neither is it requisite, as to our present Design, to say any more
thereof, than what we have already discoursed.

Now when he had proceeded thus often generated, as they are in the greater
World.

Now, whenas he was thus well viz. to produce, settle, and order it] and that
its manifold Parts appeared to him to be but one thing, in like manner as the
Bodies in this lower World, which is subject to Generation and Corruption,
seemed but one; he proposed to his Consideration the World in general; and
debated with himself, whether it were a thing which arose anew, whereas before
it had not a Being, and so came forth of nothing, to obtain an Existence: or
whether it were a thing which had always existed, and never wanted a Being.
Concerning this matter he had very many and great Doubts within himself, so
that neither of these two Opinions did oversway the probability of the other.
For when he proposed to himself the belief of Eternity, many Objections came in
his way touching the impossibility of an infinite Being, in like manner as the
Existence of an infinite Body had seemed impossible to him. He saw likewise,
that whatsoever Substance was not void of Accidents anew produced, but always
endued with them, must also necessarily be produced together with them, because
it cannot be said to be produced before them. Seeing then such a Substance
cannot be said to be existent before such Accidents produced anew, it must
also be said to have its existence anew. On the other side, when he proposed
to himself the belief of its being produced anew, some other Objections
thwarted him: Especially this, that the Notion of its production anew after
non existence, could not be understood, unless some time were supposed which
was precedent to its Existence; whereas Time was in the number of those things
which belonged to the World, and was inseparable from it, so that it could not
be said to be later than time, or to have its Being after it. He also thus
reasoned with himself, If the World were produced anew, it must needs have
some Cause that produced it. And if so, why did that Cause produce it now, and
not before? Was it because some Motive supervened, which it had not before? But
it is supposed, that there was nothing then existent besides the Cause it self.
Was it then by reason of some change which befell the Effence of this Cause. If
so, what caused this change? Thus he ceased not for some Years to ponder these
things in his Mind, and to argue with himself Pro and Con. For many Arguments
offered themselves to him on either side, so that neither of these two Opinions
in his Judgment overpoized the other.

Whereas therefore this seemed to could not be apprehended by any of the
Senses; for then it would be a bodily Substance; which if it were, it would be
one of those things that belong to the World, and so would have had its
existence anew; and withal, would have stood in need of some other Cause
which should have produced it anew. And if this second Efficient also were a
Body, it would have needed a third to produce it, and that a fourth, and so
there would have been a Progress in infinitum, without fixing in any first
Cause; which to suppose is absurd and irrational. The World therefore must
necessarily have such an efficient Cause, which is not a bodily Substance; and
seeing it is not a Body, there is no reason that it should be apprehended by
any of the Senses. (for the five Senses apprehend nothing but Bodies, or such
Accidents as adhere to Bodies) And seeing it cannot be apprehended by Sense,
neither can it be comprehended by the Imagination. For the Imagination is
nothing else but the Representation of the Forms or Images of those things,
(which were apprehended by Sense) when the bodily Objects themselves are
removed. Seeing then that it is not a Body, neither can any Properties of the
Body be attributed ot it. Now the first and chief Property of a Body is the
threefold Extension, viz. toward Length, Breadth, and Thickness. Wherefore he
is far from having any such Extension, or any Accidents of Bodies which are
consequent to this Property. And seeing that he is the maker of the World,
doubtless he knows what it is, and whatsoever is in it, and withal has the
Sovereign Command and Ordering thereof. [Shall not he know it, who created it?
For he is most eminent in Knowledge, and omniscient.]

He saw also, that if he believed or Cause of Motion. And that must be either
some Power diffused in a certain Body, viz. either in the Body of the thing
which is moved, or in some other Body which is without it, or else, it is some
Power which is not diffused and spread throughout any certain Body. Now, every
Power which is diffused in any certain Body, and dispersed throughout it is
also divided together with that Body, and multiplied with it. As for Example,
Heaviness in a Stone, which causes it to move downwards. For if the Stone be
divided into two Parts, so will the Heaviness also; and if some other Stone of
an equal Weight be added thereto, another like Heaviness will be likewise
added. And if it were possible that the Stone should grow still bigger, till it
reached to an infinite Extension, the weightiness would increase also in the
same Proportion. And on the other side, if the Stone should attain to a certain
size of bigness, and there stop, the weightiness also thereof would arise unto
the same Bound, and increase no farther. But it has been already demonstrated
that every Body must needs be finite, and therefore every Power which is
inherent in that Body, must needs be finite too. On the other side, if we meet
with any Power which produces an infinite Effect, it must needs be such a
Power as is not inherent in any Body. Now we find that the Heaven is moved
about with a perpetual Motion, without any set Bound or End, or Cessation at
all. Therefore, if we affirm that its Motion had no Beginning, it will
necessarily follow from thence, that the Power which moves it, is neither
inherent in the Body of the Heaven so moved, nor in any other Body that is
without it; and therefore it must be somewhat which is abstracted, separate,
and wholly diverse from all Bodies; such a thing also, which cannot be
described, nor have its Nature set forth by any corporeal Adjuncts. Besides, it
was evident to him, from his former Contemplation of this lower World which is
liable to Generation and Corruption, that the true Notion of the Existence of
any Body agrees to it in respect of its Form, the Nature whereof consists in a
Disposition to variety of Motions; but as for that Existence which it has in
respect of its Matter, it is very poor, weak, and worthless, and such as can
hardly be conceived. Therefore the Existence of the whole World consists in
respect to its disposition to the Motion effected by this first mover, who is
void of all Matter, and of all Adjuncts belonging to the Body, abstracted and
separate from every thing which Sense can apprehend, or which our Imagination
can find a way to approach unto. And seeing that he is the efficient Cause of
the Heavenly Motions (though there be diverse kinds of them) which considered
singly are free from any difference or deformity, alteration or cessation,
doubtless he has Power over them all, and a perfect knowledge of them.

By this means, his Speculation were true, this was evident to him, that the
Maker of the World had an incorporeal Existence, not conjoined with any Body,
nor separated from any Body, as being neither within such, nor without it. For
Conjunction and Separation, to be within and without, are the Adjuncts of
Bodies, from all which the Maker of the World is free. And because the Matter
of every Body stands in need of some Form, seeing it cannot subsist but by
that, nor indeed exist without it; and that the Form has really no Existence,
but from this voluntary Agent; it appeared to him, that all things which had a
Being in Nature, stood in need of this Agent for their Existence, and that none
of them could subsist without it; and that therefore this Agent was the Cause
of them all, and they all made by it, whether they had received their Existence
anew, and came out of nothing, or else had no Beginning in respect of Time,
without any Privation foregoing it: For upon either of these two Supposals, it
would follow that their Being was caused, and consequently that they
necessarily required some efficient Cause, from which they depended for their
Being; insomuch that they could neither continue, unless that continued, nor
exist unless that existed, nor have their Being from Eternity unless that were
eternal. But as for the efficient Cause it self, it stood not in need of any of
them, nor any way depended upon them. For how could it be otherwise? seeing it
has been demonstrated, that its Virtue and Power is infinite, whereas all
Bodies are finite and bounded; and therefore, that the whole World, and
whatsoever is in it, whether Heaven, or Earth, or Stars, and whatsoever belongs
to them, either above or beneath, is his Work and Creation, and consequently
posteriour to him in Nature, although not in Time. As if thou hold any Body in
thine Hand, and then move thine Hand with it, that Body also must be
necessarily moved, consequently to the motion of thy Hand, viz. with a motion
which is in Nature posteriour to the motion of thy Hand, though not in Time,
seeing both Motions begin together. In like manner, the whole World is made and
created by this Efficient, without time; whose command it is, when he would
have any thing made or done, that he say to it, Let it be, and it is. Alc. c.
Gapher.

Now, when he saw that all things

Then he considered all the kinds much the greater, more perfect, and more
absolute, more beautiful, illustrious, and more lasting; and that there was no
proportion between those excellencies which were in him, and those which were
found in the Creatures. Neither did he cease to prosecute this search, till he
had gone through all the kinds of Perfection, and seen that they were all in
him, and proceeded from him, and that he was most worthy to have them all
ascribed to him, above all the Creatures which were entitled to them.

He also searched into all sorts of He alone is Existence (as who alone has it
of Himself) he is Absoluteness he is Perfection, he is Beauty, he is
Brightness, he is Power, he is Knowledge; He lastly, is that He who is the only
He, and all besides him are subject to Perishing. Alc. c. Alkesas.]

Thus far his knowledge had brought now withdrawn from thinking on, or minding
this inferior World, which contains the Objects of Sense, became wholly
addicted, and altogether applied it self to the Contemplation of the upper,
intellectual World.

Now, when he had attained to the viz. Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, and
Touching; and saw that all these apprehended nothing but what was Bodily, or
inherent in a Body. For Hearing apprehends nothing but Sounds, which arise from
the agitation of the Air, when Bodies are dashed one against another. Sight
apprehends Colors. The Smelling, Odours. The Taste, Savours; and the Touch,
the Temperatures or Dispositions of the Body; such as, Hardness and Softness,
Roughness and Smoothness. In like manner, the Fancy apprehends nothing, but as
it has Length, Breadth, and Thickness. Now the things which are thus
apprehended are all of them the Adjuncts of Bodies, and our Senses apprehend
nothing else, inasmuch as they are faculties diffused throughout our Bodies,
and divisible, according as they are divided. Whence it follows, that these
Senses of ours can apprehend nothing besides a Body, which is liable to
division For this faculty, seeing it is diffused through a divisible Body, as
often as it apprehends any thing, must needs be divided answerably to the
divisions of that Body wherein it is. Whence we may conclude, that every
faculty which is seated in the Body, can apprehend nothing except a Body, or
what is inherent in a Body. Now, it has been already made evident, that this
supreme Being which has a necessary Existence, is in every respect free from
all things whatsoever belong to a Body; and that therefore there is no other
way or means of apprehending it, but by somewhat that is not a Body, nor a
faculty inherent in the Body, or any other way depending upon it; by somewhat
that is neither within nor without the Body; neither joined to it, nor
separated from it. It appeared also now unto him, that he apprehended this
supreme Being by that which was his Essence, and that he had a firm knowledge
of this Being. Whence it was clear to him, that his Essence, whereby he
apprehended it, was somewhat Incorporeal, which had no Adjunct of a Body
agreeing to it; and that whatsoever Bodily thing he apprehended by his outward
Part [that is, by his Bodily Senses] was not the true State or Nature of his
Essence; but that some other thing it was, of an Incorporeal Substance, whereby
he apprehended that absolute, perfect, and independent Being, which is
necessarily, and of it self existent.

Thus when he came to know that he apprehended that Super-excellent Being,
which necessarily existed. Then by virtue of that same Noble Essence of his, he
considered with himself whether it could perish, be corrupted, and vanish away;
or, on the other side, were of perpetual duration. Whereupon he saw that
Corruption and Dissolution belonged to the Adjuncts of Bodies, and consisted in
putting off one form, and putting on another; as for instance, when Water is
turned into Air by Rarefaction, and Air turned into Water by Condensation; when
Bodies also are reduced into Earth, or Ashes; or, when the moisture and vigor
of the Earth is changed into the substance of various sorts of Plants, which
grow. out of it, and are nourished by it. For this is the true notion of
Corruption. So then we cannot any way suppose that to be liable unto
Corruption, which is neither a Body, nor needs a Body for its subsistence, but
is wholly diverse and separated from all Bodily things.

Now, when he was thus well assured, viz. his Soul] was incorruptible, he
desired to know what would be the condition thereof, when it left the Body, and
was separated therefrom. Upon which consideration it appeared to him, that it
took not its farewell of the Body until it became an instrument wholly unfit
for its use. So then, as he weighed in his mind all his apprehensive faculties,
he saw that every one of them apprehended its Object, sometimes potentially,
and sometimes actually; as when the Eye winketh, or turns it self away from the
visible Object, it is potentially apprehensive; that is, though it do not
actually apprehend it at present, yet it is able to apprehend it, and can do it
for the time to come; but when the Eye opens it self, and turns to the
visible Object, it is actually apprehensive, that is, it apprehends it at
present. And the same is true of all the other Faculties. Moreover, he saw that
if any of these Faculties never actually apprehended its proper Object, yet as
long as it is potentially apprehensive, and no more, it has no inclination to
apprehend any particular Object, because as yet it has no knowledge thereof,
as it is seen in him who is born blind. But if at any time before it has
actually apprehended its Object, and becomes afterward potentially only
apprehensive, as long as it so continues, it is inclinable to apprehend its
Object actually, because it has been already acquainted with it, is attent
upon it, and has a propension toward it; as when one who has before enjoyed
his Sight, afterward becomes blind. For such an one does not cease to long
after visible Objects; and by how much that which has been thereby
apprehended, and is still apprehensible, is more Perfect, Bright, and
Beautiful, his desire thereof will be still the greater, and his grief the
greater for the want of enjoying it, arising from that desire. Hence it is,
that his grief who is deprived of that Sight which he once had, must needs be
greater than his who is deprived of his Smelling, because those things which
the Sight apprehends, are more Perfect and Beautiful, than those things which
the Smelling apprehends. So then, if we can find out any thing which has an
unlimited Perfection, and which has no bounds set to its Beautifulness,
Comeliness and Brightness, but far exceeds them all, insomuch that there is no
Perfection, Beauty, Brightness, or Comeliness, which does not proceed and flow
from it, he who is deprived of the apprehension thereof, after he has once
known it, must doubtless be afflicted with an unexpressible grief, as long as
he remains destitute of it. As on the contrary, whosoever has it always
present to him, and fixes his mind continually on it, must needs be made
partaker of an uninterrupted Pleasure and perpetual Felicity, with the
possession of an infinite Joy and Gladness.

Now, it had been already made thereto. He was certain withal, that the faculty
whereby he came to the apprehension of this self existent Being, was somewhat
not like unto Bodies, and such as was not corrupted together with them. And
hence it was apparent to him, that the Person who was endued with that faculty,
which was meet and proper for such an apprehension, when he put off the Body at
the time of his Death, was either, first such an one, who whilst he lived in
the Body, and made use of its service, never knew this necessarily existent
Being, nor had any society with him, nor had heard any thing of him; and that
such a Man when he departed out of the Body, was neither conjoined to that
Being, nor was any way afflicted with the desire of enjoying it, whilst it was
absent; (for he well knew that all the bodily faculties ceased to work when the
Body dies, neither desire their proper Objects, nor have any inclination
toward them, nor are in any trouble or pain for their absence; which is the
state and condition of all Brutes, whatsoever shape or form they be of) or
Secondly, such an one, who whilst he continued in the Body, and made use of it,
knew this self-existent Being, of how excellent Perfection, Greatness,
Dominion, and Power it was, but that he turned himself from it, and followed
the vain fancies, and vicious affections of his own mind, until at length death
seized upon him, whilst he was in this state; so that he then came to be
deprived of that Vision, yet so as to be afflicted with a longing after it, and
thereupon tormented with a most tedious pain, and unspeakable grief; whether he
be to be freed therefrom after a long and wearisome suffering, and so come to
that vision which he before desired; or, everlastingly to abide in the same
Torments, according as he was fitted and disposed for either of these two,
whilst he lived, and continued in the Body: or lastly, were such an one, who
well knew this necessarily existent Being before he put off his Body, and with
his utmost power applied himself thereto, and had all his thoughts continually
bent and fixed upon his Glory, Beauty, and Brightness, nor ever turned away
from him, until he was seized upon by death, whilst he continued in this state
of contemplating him, and liaving the Eye of his mind fixed upon him. Now as
for this Man, it appeared unto him, that when he took his leave of the Body, he
abode in perpetual Pleasure, and constant Felicity, Joy, and Gladness, by
reason of the uninterrupted vision of that self existent Being, and the entire
freedom thereof from all impurity and mixture; and that all those sensible
Objects would be then removed from him, upon which all his bodily faculties had
been formerly intent and busied about; and which indeed, in regard of his
present blessed State, were no better than afflictive Evils, Impediments and
Torments.

Thus when he came to be assured, that so Death may seize upon him whilst he is
in this state of actual Vision, by which means his joy would be still
continued, without the interruption of any grief to molest or disturb it;
(which was the same that Al-Jonaid, that eminent Doctor and Prince of the
Suphii, pointed to, when he was now ready to die, saying to his friends about
him, This is the time, when Men should begin to say, God is the most great, and
which minds us to be most attentive unto our Prayers.) Then he began to
consider in his mind, how this actual Vision might be continued, so that he
might not at any time, or by any means, be diverted from it. And for a little
while he fixed his thoughts on this divine Object. But he could not persist
long in this Contemplation, before some sensible Object offered it self to his
sight, or the voice of some living Creature pierced his Ears, or some
extravagant fancy interposed it self, or some Pain in one of his Limbs seized
upon him, or that either Hunger or Thirst afflicted him, Cold or Heat
discomposed him, or he had need to rise for the easing Nature of her
Excrementitious Burdens: So that his meditations were ever and anon
interrupted, and he himself was forced to retire from the enjoyment of that
state of mind, wherein he was so exceedingly delighted, and so fully satisfied;
forasmuch as he could not but very hardly, and after a difficult struggling with
himself, return to that state of Vision, wherein he was before engaged.
Whereupon he feared, lest being prevented by sudden Death, whilst he was in
that state of Aversion, he should fall unawares into Eternal Misery, and the
grief of being everlastingly separated from the Beatifical sight of that
Object, wherein he solely delighted.

Whenas therefore he was thus afflicted tendency thereto, that so he might
learn of them what was the true cause and means of that happiness which he
sought after. But he soon perceived, that they were employed in getting their
food, and in satisfying their desires of Meat, Drink, and propagating their
Kind; that they betook themselves to the shade in hot scorching Weather, and
took care to keep themselves warm in the cold of Winter, and the Night season;
and that they diligently applied themselves to these employments both Night and
Day, until the very time of their Death, and departure out of this Life.
Neither saw he any one of them which diverted its course of living from this
ordinary way, or was at any time solicitous in the pursuit of any other design.
Whence it clearly appeared to him, that these brute Creatures understood not
any thing of the supreme Being, nor were affected with any desire of him, nor
were in the way, or in any manner of capacity, of obtaining the knowledge of
him; but that on the contrary, they all tended to nothing, or to a state near
of kin thereunto. And whenas he had concluded thus far concerning brute
Animals, he quickly saw that it was more rational to judge the same of Plants
and Vegetables, which had but few of those sensible apprehensions or operations
that brute Animals had. For seeing those Creatures, which were of a more
perfect apprehension, could not arrive to this knowledge, much less could they
obtain it, whose faculties were less perfect; when he saw withal, that all the
operations of Plants extended not beyond nourishment, and the propagation of
kind.

After this, he considered with himself For how should these heavenly Bodies
want such forms or Essences as are free from any bodily mixture, whenas he had
the like, who notwithstanding was so weak and frail, and stood in need of so
many sensible and bodily things to maintain his life? For seeing he who was
ranked in the number of corruptible Bodies, yet notwithstanding all his
defects, was not thereby hindered from having such an Essence within him as was
incorporeal and incorruptible; much more then concluded he the same of the
heavenly Bodies, and thereby assured himself that they knew that necessarily
existent Being, and enjoyed a perpetual Vision thereof, because there* was no
obstacle found in, or about them, arising from sensible Objects, which could
hinder them from the continual enjoyment of this Vision, as they ever and anon
interrupted him.

Then he began to consult with resemble the heavenly Bodies. For it had been
manifestly made appear to him before, what was the nature and condition of the
Elements, and that some of them were changed into others; that whatsoever was
found upon the surface of the Earth, did in no wise continue in the same form,
but that Generation and Corruption perpetually succeeded each other; as also,
that most of these Bodies were mixed, and compounded of contrary ingredients,
and therefore tended to Corruption; that there was nothing to be found amongst
them which was absolutely pure; but that which was nearest to Purity and
Simplicity, and farthest removed from mixture among these earthly Bodies, was
also farthest removed from Corruption, as the Body of the Gold, and of the
Hyacinth. But as for the heavenly Bodies, they were Simple and Pure, and for
that cause farther distant from Corruption; so that they were not liable to any
succession of Forms. Here also it appeared to him, that as to the Bodies which
are found in this lower World, and are subject to Generation and Corruption,
some of them were such whose Essence consisted of one Form alone, superadded to
their Corporeity, as the four Elements; others, whose Essential State, or
Nature, consisted of more than one, as Plants and Animals. It appeared also to
him, that the nature of those Bodies which consisted of fewer forms, had fewer
operations, and were farther distant from Life; and that if there were any Body
to be found which was destitute of a Form, it had no Capacity of obtaining
Life, or exercising vital actions, but was in a state like to privation, or
nothing; but that the Body, whose Essential subsistence consisted of more
Forms, withal exercised more Actions, and had a more easy and ready entrance
to the state of Life; and if the Form were so disposed, that there was no way
of separating it from the matter whereto it properly belonged, then was the
Life thereof very manifest, firm, and vigorous; but on the contrary, whatsoever
Body was wholly destitute of a Form, was nothing else but (...) or matter,
having no Life at all in it; so that it was near of kin to nothing.
Furthermore, he saw that the Bodies which subsisted in one Form, were the four
Elements, which had the first and lowest degree of Existence in this lower
World, which is subject to Generation and Corruption; and that all other
Bodies, which had more Forms, were compounded of these; but that these Elements
had a very weak kind of Life, or Principle of Action, seeing they were moved
but one kind of way, and every one of them had some contrary which manifestly
opposed it, resisting it in that whereunto its Nature tended, and endeavoring
to deprive it of its Form; so that both its Existence, and its Life must needs
be very infirm; but that Plants had a stronger Life; and Animals, a Life more
manifest than the Plants. The reason whereof is, because if there be found any
Body among the compound ones, wherein the Nature of any one of the Elements
prevails above the rest, That, as far as it is able, will conquer the Nature of
the other Elements, and make void their Activity, so that the whole compound
will lie under the Power of the prevailing Element; whence it will follow, that
such a Compound will be in a capacity to exercise but a very small Portion of
Life, according as that domineering Element is disposed to exercise it.

But if among these Compounds farther is it distant from having any contrary to
it, and its Life is the more perfect. Seeing then that the Animal Spirit, the
Seat whereof is the Heart, is of a most equal Temper (for it is more pure and
subtle than Earth and Water, as it is more gross and thick than Fire and Air)
so that it obtains the nature of such a Mean, as is contrary to none of the
Elements, in any evident kind of Contrariety, by this means it is disposed to
become that Form which constitutes an Animal. From whence he saw this would
follow, that the most equal in Temper amongst the Animal Spirits was disposed
to exercise the most perfect Life in this inferior World, which is subject to
Generation and Corruption; and that we may well-nigh affirm of such a Spirit
that there is nothing contrary to its Form; and that upon this Account, it
resembles those Heavenly Bodies which in like manner have nothing contrary unto
theirs; and that therefore it becomes the Spirit of that living Creature, which
has the most perfect Life, because it is indeed placed in the middle of the
Elements, not being at all moved either upward or downward. And if it could be
placed in the midst of that space which lies between the Center, and the
highest place whereto the Fire reaches, and that no Corruption at all seized
on it, it would fix it self there, nor would have any propension to move either
upward or downward; but if it should be locally moved, it would move in a
Round, as the heavenly Bodies are moved; and if it were moved in its place, it
would be moved about its own Center, and be of a Spherical Figure, seeing it
could not be otherwise, and therefore would become very like to the heavenly
Bodies.

And when he considered the Properties he was of a diverse kind from all other
sorts of Animals, created to another end, and destined to the obtaining of some
great Perfection and Happiness, whereunto no other Animal was appointed. And it
was enough to show the nobleness of his Nature and Condition, that the most
vile part of him, viz. the bodily one, was most like of all to the heavenly
Substances, which are removed from this lower World, (that is liable to
Generation and Corruption) and free from all Accidents which relate to
Deficiency, Change, and Alteration: and that the best part of him was that
thing whereby he knew the necessarily existent Being; that also his intelligent
Form was somewhat Heroical and Divine, such as was not changeable, nor liable
unto corruption; such as nothing was to be attributed unto, that properly
belonged unto Bodies; such a thing, lastly, as could not be apprehended by any
of the Senses, nor by the Imagination; and the knowledge thereof could not be
obtained by any other Instrument, but by its own Faculty alone. So that it was
all in one, namely, the Essence of Man, or thing which knew, the thing known,
and the Knowledge it self. Neither was there any diversity in any of these,
seeing that Diversity and Separation are the Attributes and Adjuncts of Bodies,
whereas here there was neither any Body, nor any Attribute of a Body, nor any
thing adherent or belonging to it.

And whenas the way now manifestly Qualities, and imitate his Actions; to be
diligent also and careful in promoting his Will, to commit all his Affairs unto
him, and heartily to acquiesce in all those Decrees of his, which concerned
him, either from without, or within; so that he rejoiced, and pleased himself
in him, although he should afflict his Body with Pain, and do him harm; yea,
though he should altogether destroy his Body and kill him.

He saw also that he resembled the viz. this dark, dull, and gross Body, which
necessarily required of him, for its maintenance and preservation, several
sorts of sensible things, such as meat, Drink, and Clothing, besides
propagation of Kind, which he observed in the brute Animals, as necessary for
the continuing of each Species, by supplying the Mortality of Individuals.
Withal he saw, that his Body was not made him for nothing, nor conjoined to
his better Part for no good End or Purpose; and that therefore it behoved him
to take care of it, and have a due regard of its preservation; which care he
could not show, and make good as he ought, but by performing such Actions which
were correspondent to the Actions of other Animals. Now, the Actions which
seemed necessary for him to perform, had a threefold Respect; being either
such, whereby he resembled, and acted alike to the brute Animals; or such,
wherein he resembled the heavenly Bodies; or such, wherein he resembled the
necessarily existent Being. The first sort of Actions were necessary for him in
regard of his dark, vile, and gross Body, consisting of distinct Members,
endued with several Faculties, and acted with diverse kinds of Motion. The
second Resemblance was necessary for him in regard of the Animal Spirit, the
Seat whereof was his Heart, which was the prime Part of the whole Body, and the
Fountain whence all its Faculties, and their Operations issued. Lastly, his
third Resemblance was necessary for him, as he was himself, that is, as he was
that Being, whereby he knew the necessarily existent Being. And before this, he
was well assured, that his Felicity, and freedom from Misery, consisted in the
perpetual Vision of that necessarily existent Being, whereby he should be
placed, and continued in that state, wherein he might not divert the Eye of his
Mind from beholding him, no not for a Moment.

Then he considered those ways and acquired; and that in this regard he had
need of it, although it was not wholly void of Hurt and Damage. But as to the
second Conformity, he saw indeed, that an ample Portiou of that continued
Vision was thereby acquired, but such a Vision withal as had some mixture in
it, seeing that whosoever contemplates the Vision after this manner, together
with it contemplates his own Essence, and casts a look upon it, as shall be
shown hereafter. But then, as for the third Conformity, he saw that an entire
Vision of the self-existent Being was thereby acquired, and such a sincere
Attention thereto, as had no way any Respect to any other Object, but that
alone; so that whosoever thus contemplated it, was wholly abstracted even from
his own Essence, which then quite vanished out of his Sight, and became as
nothing; as all other Beings in like manner, whether more or fewer, except the
Essence of the one, true, necessarily Existent, great, high, and powerful Being.

Now when he was thus manifestly third Conformity; and that this could not be
acquired but after the exercise of, and long applying of himself to the second
Conformity; and that he could not continue in applying himself thereto, but by
a precedent attending of the first Conformity, (which, although it was
necessary, yet he knew was an Impediment in it self, though an Help by
Accident) he so restrained his Mind, and bridled his Appetite, that he allowed
it no part of that first Conformity, but such as Necessity required; and that
was such a Proportion, as less than it could not suffice to the Conservation of
his Animal Spirit. He saw also, that there were two things necessarily required
to the Conservation of this Spirit; the one, to continue it within the Body,
and make a constant supply of that Nourishment which continually wasted; the
other, to preserve it from without, and to repel the various kinds of
Adversaries, which were still at hand to hurt and indamage it, as Cold, Heat,
Rain, the scorching of the Sun, harmful Beasts, and the like. He saw also, that
if he took of that which was necessary unadvisedly, and at adventure, it might
so happen that he fell into excess, by taking more of it than was expedient for
him; and so, by his rash endeavor after Self-preservation, might before he was
well aware, prejudice his Health. He conceived therefore that he should act
most advisedly, if he set such Bounds to himself, as he would not in any wise
transgress; and certain Measures, which he would not exceed. And it appeared
very clearly to him, that he ought to set this Rule to himself concerning the
kinds of Meat which he was to feed on, both in regard of their Quality and
Quantity, and the set times of feeding on them.

And first of all, he considered the viz. either Plants that were not full
ripe, nor had yet attained to their highest perfection; such as were the
several kinds of new-sprung green Herbs, and fit for Food: or the Fruits of
such Plants which were grown to perfection, and ripe, and had brought forth
their Seed, whence others of the same kind might be produced: and such were the
kinds of Fruits that were newly gathered, and dry: or some Animal that was fit
for Food, whether living on Land, or in the Sea. Now, he was well assured
within himself, that all these Creatures were made by the necessarily existent
Being, in drawing near to which he saw that his Felicity consisted, and to whom
therefore he desired to be made like. He was certain too, that his feeding on
these Creatures did hinder them from attaining their Perfection, and interposed
it self between them, and that end which they naturally aimed at, and
endeavored to obtain; in doing whereof he should by that means oppose himself
to, and resist the Work and Design of the supreme Agent; which Opposition would
be contrary to that nearness and Conformity thereto, which he so earnestly
sought after. He thought therefore that it would be best for him, in case it
were possible, to abstain wholly from all manner of Food. But seeing this could
not be done, and that he saw that a total abstinence from Food manifestly
tended to the destruction of his Body, which would be a greater Repugnancy to
his Creator than the Former, seeing he was a nobler Creature than any or all of
those, whose destruction was the Cause of preserving his Life, he judged it
best of two Evils to choose the least, and to allow himself the lesser of the
two Repugnancies.

It seemed good therefore to him, in them to spring up and grow in, such as
smooth and hard Stones, salt Earth, and the like. But if he could not meet with
such Fruits as had a Pulp fit for Nourishment, as Apples, Pears, Plums, and the
like, then he would take his Food out of such Fruits which had nothing in them
fit for Nourishment besides the Seed it self, such as Walnuts and Chestnuts
were; or of such Herbs, as had not yet attained to their full Ripeness; yet so,
that of both kinds he took those only to feed on, whereof there was the greater
plenty, and which had a Faculty to produce others of the like kind. Withal, he
took care, neither to pluck them up by the Roots, nor to destroy their Seeds.
But in case these also were wanting, then he thought fit to take his Food of
the brute Animals, or of their Eggs: yet so, that he took his Food of those
which were most in number, that so he might not wholly destroy any one Kind of
them.

These were the Rules which he set to be observed which sufficed to satisfy
his Hunger, so that he ought not to exceed that proportion. And for the
distance to be observed between his Meals, he judged it best, that when he had
taken so much Food as at present sufficed him, he should abide contented
therewith, nor seek after any more, until he found some disability in himself,
which hindered him from exercising any one of those Actions that belonged to the
second Conformity; those namely, which I shall by and by mention. But as for
those things, which necessity required of him toward the conservation of his
Animal Spirit, in regard of defending it from external Injuries, he found no
great difficulty therein, seeing he was well clothed with Skins, and had a
convenient place to Lodge in, which was shelter enough for him, and guarded him
sufficiently from all harms that might betide him from without. These therefore
he thought enough for him, and judged it superfluous to take any farther care
about them. Then, as to his Diet, he observed those Rules which he had
prescribed to himself, namely those which we even now set down.

After this, he applied himself to viz. such as Heat, which they imparted to
them of their own Nature (as Cold by accident) Light, Rarefaction and
Condensation, together with other effects which they work in them, whereby they
are qualified and disposed for the receiving into themselves the influences of
those spiritual forms from the supreme Cause the necessarily existent Agent.
The second kind of Attributes were such, as agreed to them in regard of their
own Nature, as it is considered in it self; as that they were clear, bright,
and lightsome Bodies, pure, and far removed from all feculent matter, and
whatsoever kinds of Impurity. Also, that they were moved circularly, some of
them about their own Center, and some about the Centers of other Planets. The
third kind of Attributes was that, which they had in relation to the
necessarily existent Being; as that they always beheld him, nor at any time
turned away their Eye from him; that they were also employed in that which he
appointed them to do, and performed his will with a most ready, constant, and
exact Obedience; neither were ever moved but according to his Will, and by his
Power. He therefore endeavored with all his might to resemble and imitate them
in every one of these three kinds.

As to the first kind of Conformity, viz. That he were so disposed and
affected, as to see no brute Animal or Plant, which wanted any thing, or which
suffered any hurt or loss, or was molested with any impediment, which he was
able to remove from it, but he should remove it; and that when he chanced to
see any Plant which was deprived of the benefit of the Sun, through the
interposal of another Body, or whereto some harmful weed stuck close, or was
dry, and withering, and even ready to Die, he should remove that which so
interposed it self, if it could be removed, and separate that hurtful weed from
it, which hindered its Growth and Thriving; yet in such a way, as not to hurt
that which hurt that other. He thought it also behoved him, to water that Plant
which he found dry and thirsty, as far as it lay in his power. And when he
chanced to see any brute Animal which some wild Beast pursued, or was entangled
in a Snare, or molested with any Thorn or Brier that laid hold on it, or stuck
to it, or had some hurtful thing fallen into its Eyes or Ears, or which was
afflicted with Hunger or Thirst, he endeavored to his utmost power to remove
all such Evils from them, and to give them Meat and Drink. Also, when he saw
any water, which conveniently flowed for affording Moisture to any Plant, or
Drink to any brute Animal, in case he observed any impediment which interrupted
its free Course, whether it were some Stone which chanced to fall thereinto, or
whatsoever other thing brought down by the Stream, he took care to remove it
out of the way. Neither ceased he to go on still in this kind of Conformity,
until that he had therein attained to the very height of perfection.

As to the second kind of Conformity, to several kinds of circular motion,
sometimes compassing the Island wherein he lived, walking about the Seashore,
and going round the utmost Bounds thereof; otherwhiles, going round his House,
or whirling about a Stone many times together whilst he walked, or ran, and
sometimes turning himself round, till he became giddy.

Lastly, As to the third kind of ordinary, all sensible Objects presently
vanished; his Fancy, and the other Faculties, which he had necessary use of as
corporeal Instruments, waxed feeble and lifeless; and on the other side, the
operation of his Form (that is, his rational Soul) which depended not on the
Body, grew strong and vigorous; insomuch that sometimes his Meditation was pure
and free from any bodily mixture, so that he could thereby apprehend the
necessarily existent Being. But then his bodily Faculties, not long after
returning to their former actings, interrupted this state of his, and brought
him back to the lowest degree, so that he returned to his former condition. But
if any weakness or indisposition of Body, which diverted him from his intended
Course, seized on him at any time, he took some kind of meat according to the
forementioned Laws which he had prescribed to himself, and afterward returned
to that state wherein he was assimulated to the heavenly Bodies, in the three
kinds which I have before spoken of. And hereto he continued very attent for a
while, and opposed himself to the bodily Faculties, whilst they also on the
contrary opposed him, thus mutually struggling with each other. And at such
times as he got the better of them, he kept his thoughts pure from mixture, so
that there appeared to him somewhat of the state of those who had attained to
the third Assimilation.

Then he began to make enquiry into viz. Affirmative, and Negative;
Affirmative, as Knowledge, Power, and Wisdom; Negative, in being free, and
separate from any thing of Corporeity, and from those things which are
confequent thereto, and depend thereon, at whatsoever distance it be. Yea, even
in the Affirmative Attributes, he thought that the same immunity was requisite,
so that none of the Corporeal Attributes could agree to them, of which number
Multiplicity was one; and that therefore the Essence of the supreme Being was
not multiplied by these Affirmative Attributes, but that all of them returned
to, and met in one Notion, viz. the Truth of the Essence it self. Whereupon, he
set and addressed himself to consider, how he might become like the supreme
Being in both these kinds of Attributes. As for the Affirmative ones, whereas
he knew that they all returned to, and were the same with the Truth of the
Essence it self, and had in them no multiplicity at all; (seeing that
multiplicity belongs to the Corporeal Attributes) and whereas he knew that the
knowledge of his own Essence was not a Notion superadded to his Essence, but
that his very Essence it self was the knowledge of his Essence, and that his
knowledge of his own Essence was his very Essence; it appeared very plainly to
him, that although he himself was not able to know his own Essence, yet that
knowledge, whereby he was to know it, would not be a Notion superadded
thereunto, but the very same with it. Moreover, it seemed to him, that his
Assimilation to the supreme Being in any affirmative Attribute consisted in
this, that he knew him alone, admitting nothing together with him of the
Corporeal Attributes into his mind. So then he had his mind attentive upon this
Object.

But as to the Negative Attributes, because he had neither at first taken
notice of them, but by means of a bodily Faculty, nor actually applied himself
to those helps and assistances, but by the like faculties. Wherefore he
attempted to remove all these things out of his way, seeing they were all such
as did not conduce to the acquiring of that state of mind which he sought
after. Neither did he cease to go on in this search and attempt, till he had
conquered himself so far, as to sit mute and solitary in the Bottom of his
Cave, with his Head bent down, and his Eyes fixed on the ground, thus
alienating himself from all sensible things, and corporeal faculties; his Mind
and thoughts being wholly intent on that one necessarily existent Being,
without admitting any other Object of Contemplation* together with him. And
when ever it happened, that any other Object presented it self to his Fancy, he
repel'd it thence with his utmost force, and straightway rejected it. Withal,
he so long exercised himself in this Study, and constantly persisted to go on
therewith, that sometimes many days passed over him wherein he took no Food,
nor so much as moved out of his Place. Yea, whilst this earnest Study wholly
possessed him, and took up all his thoughts, all Beings, besides his own, slipped
out of his memory, and were altogether banished from his mind.

But he found by experience, that that self*existent Being, were removed out of
his Memory and Thoughts, together with his own Essence also amongst the rest;
so that all things seemed to vanish away, to be reduced to nothing, and to
become like so many Atoms severed from each other, and scattered here and
there, whilst nothing remained with him besides that Being, which is the only
one, and the True one, and of a permanent Existence. And thus he spoke in that
saying of his, (which is not a Notion superadded to his Essence) [To whom now
belongs the Kingdom? To the one, Almighty God] Alc. c. Gapher.] which words of
his he understood, and heard his voice; so that neither the ignorance of the
Language, nor his own inability to speak, hindered him from understanding what
he said. Wherefore he deeply immerst himself into this State, and saw that
which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, neither ever yet entered into
the heart of Man to conceive.

Do not fix thy thoughts therefore by the Heart of Man. For many of those
things which are conceived by the Heart of Man are hard to express. How much
more hard then is that, which we can find no way to conceive with our heart, as
being not any thing of this World, nor contained within its Bounds? Now by
Heart I do not understand the bodily substance of the Heart, nor the Spirit
which is in the Cavity thereof, but I understand thereby the Form of that
Spirit, which by its faculties diffuseth it self in the Body of Man. For every
one of these three is called by the name of the Heart. Now there is no way or
means, whereby this thing may be conceived by any of these three, neither can
we express any thing by words, which is not first conceived in the Heart. So
then, whosoever desires me to set forth, and describe that State, asks that
which is impossible to be done; and is like unto him, who would taste painted
Colors, as they are Colors, and desires that the Black be either sweet, or
sour. Yet notwithstanding this, we will not send thee away without some marks
and signs of Discovery, whereby we may paint out at a distance that which he
saw, by way of similitude, concerning the wonders of that Station, though not
so far as to knock at the doors of the Truth; seeing there is no way that lies
open to the certain knowledge of what is to be seen in that Place, but by
coming thither. Hear then with the Ears of thy Heart, and discern with the Eyes
of thy Understanding, that which I shall now show thee; and it may be thou will
find such a direction as may lead thee unto the right way; so that thou observe
the condition which I now ask of thee, that thou require not of me at present
any farther explication, by interrogating of me Face to Face, than what I
deliver to thee in these Papers. For the field of Discourse concerning it is of
a narrow compass, and it is an hazardous Adventure to determine in words
touching that thing, the Nature of which is not such that it can be expressed by
words.

I say then, that when he was abstracted, Essence, and all other Essences
together with it, so that he beheld nothing in Nature besides that one, living,
and permanent Being; and that after he had seen that which he saw, he returned
to the beholding of other things diverse from it, and from one another; when he
came to himself again out of that State of his (which was a kind of spiritual
Drunkenness) he conceived that he had no Essence, whereby he differed from the
Essence of that True Being, the most high; but that the True Nature of his
Essence was the Essence of that true one, and that what he formerly thought to
be his own Essence distinct from the Essence of that true one, was nothing else
indeed but his Essence; and that in this he resembled the light of the Sun
which falls upon solid Bodies, and which we see to appear in them; for although
that be attributed to the Body wherein it so appears, and which thereupon is
called a lightsome Body, yet in reality is nothing else but the light of the
Sun; for when that Body is removed out of the Sun, the light thereof is removed
with it, and the light of the Sun alone remains, which is neither diminished by
the presence of that Body whereon it shines, nor augmented by its absence when
it is removed out of the light. But when it happens that the said Body is fitly
disposed to receive the light of the Sun, it actually receives it; and when it
is removed out of the Sun, the Reception of the Suns light is removed too, and
comes to nothing.

Now this Opinion prevailed with so present. In like manner, all the Essences
that are separated from matter, and which have the knowledge of that True
Essence, though he had before looked on them as many, yet according to this
Opinion of his seemed but one to him. And this misgrounded conceit had
thoroughly and very deeply fixed it self in his Mind, unless God had pursued
him with his mercy, and prevented his farther Progress therein by his gracious
guidance; by which means he knew at length, that this conceit arose within him
from the Relics of that obscurity which is natural to Bodies, and the
Corruption which adheres to the Objects of Sense; for many, and few, Unity and
Multiplicity, the Collection of many into one, and their separation from each
other, are in the number of Corporeal Attributes. But as for those separate
Essences which have the knowledge of that Being, who is the True One, the
Powerful, and the Glorious, seeing they are wholly separate from matter, it
ought not to be said of them that they are either many, or one, because
Multiplicity implies the distinction of some Essences from others, and Unity
cannot be effected but by conjunction; whereas nothing of all this can be
understood but in compound Notions, which are mixed with Matter. Besides, the
Explication of things relating to this Place and State is very straight and
difficult; because if one express that which belongs unto these separate
Essences by the Term of Multitude, according to the use of our common Speech,
it would seem to denote the Notion of Multiplicity in them, whereas they are
free from it: and if one express that which belongs to them, by the Term of
Separation, it would seem to signify the Notion of Unity, which neither can
agree to them.

And now methinks I see one standing things; seeing among those things which
are determined and resolved on by the Understanding, this is one, that every
thing in Nature is either one, or manifold. But let not such an one make too
much haste, let him also abate somewhat of the harshness of his Censure,
suspect his own Judgment, and weigh those things which are to be seen in this
vile, despicable World, made up of sensible Objects, (wherein himself also is
contained) after the same manner that Hai Eb'n Yockdan weighed and considered
them, when contemplating them one kind of way, he saw them to be many in that
kind of Multiplicity, which could not be comprehended nor contained within any
bounds; then again, considering them another way, he saw them all to be but one
thing: so that he stood in doubt what to think, and was not able to determine
either way. So it was with him, and so he thought, although this lower World,
made up of the Objects of Sense, be the proper place of Multiplicity and
Singularity, and that their true Nature is understood there, and that therein
are found Separation and Union, severing into Parts and Distinction,
Agreeableness, and Difference. What therefore should he, or any other, think of
the Divine World, in or concerning which we cannot justly say, All, or Some,
neither can we utter any thing concerning what belongs to it, whereto our Ears
are accustomed. But contrariwise, we are apt to conjecture somewhat concerning
it, otherwise than the Truth is; forasmuch as it is such a World, which no one
certainly knows besides him who has seen it; the true nature and state thereof
being also such, as is not conceivable by any one, who has not reached so far,
and attained thereunto.

But as for that which he says, that rational Faculty which contemplates the
Singulars or Individuals among the Objects of Sense, and thence fetches out
upon a diligent search, universal Notions; and the intelligent Men, whom he
means, are those, who use the same kind of Speculation; whereas that kind of
Speculation, whereof we speak, is above all these things. Wherefore let him
stop his Ears against it, whosoever understands nothing beyond these sensible
Objects, and the Universals collected from them; and let him return to his own
Company, to wit, the Society of those, who enquire after, and understand the
visible things of this World, being very little, or not at all solicitous for
the other. But if thou be one of the number of those, who are satisfied with
this kind of Marks and Characters, whereby we describe that Divine World;
neither do fasten any other Interpretation upon our words, than what is
commonly put upon them [or rather, neither fastnest that Interpretation upon
our words, which is commonly put upon them] then we will farther declare
something to thee concerning that, which Hai Eb'n Yockdan saw in the place and
state of those, who are capable of the Truth, whom we mentioned before. And it
was this.

After he had been wholly immerst Letters made up of black, inky Characters. He
saw also, that this supreme Sphere was placed and settled in the highest Degree
of Delight and Joy, Exultation and Gladness, by reason of the Vision of that
true and glorious Being.

He saw also, that the Essence of Saturn, was separate from Matter, and that it
was none of those Essences which he had before seen, nor yet somewhat diverse
from them, but that it was like the Image of the Sun which appears in a
Looking-Glass, upon which the Image of the Sun was reflected from another
Looking-Glass, set opposite to the Body of the Sun. Withal he saw, that it had
the same Brightness, and the same Delight, which that other Sphere of the fixed
Stars had. And thus he went on, till he saw that every Sphere had its separate
Essence free from all Matter; such an one, as was not any of the forementioned
Essences, nor yet diverse from them, but like to the Image of the Sun reflected
from one Looking-Glass to another, ranked in a set Order according to the
placing of the Spheres. Moreover he saw, that every one of these Essences had
that Beauty and Brightness, that Pleasure and Gladness, which neither Eye has
seen, nor Ear has heard, and which never came into the Heart of Man to
conceive; until he came at length to this lower World, subject to Generation
and Corruption, which comprehends all that, which is contained within the
Sphere of the Moon.

He saw also, that the Essence of except this Essence had been produced anew
out of the state of Nothing, we might say were the very same with it; and
except it had been so made, that it properly belonged to his Body, and to it
alone, as soon as it existed anew, we might say that it had been hardly
produced anew. And in this Order he saw other Essences also, like unto his,
which had necessarily been heretofore, then were dissolved, and afterward
necessarily existed together with himself: and that they were so many as could
not be numbered, if we might call them many; yet that all of them were but one
thing, if we might call them one. He saw also, that his own Essence, and those
other, which were in the same Degree with himself, had infinite Beauty,
Brightness, and Pleasure, such as neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard,
nor ever entered into the Heart of Man; such as they cannot describe who
describe other things, and none can understand, but they who know it by having
first attained to it.

Moreover, he saw many Essences which resembled rusty Looking-Glasses, covered
over with Filth, which also turned their Backs upon, and had their Faces
averted from those smooth and fairly polished Looking-Glasses, that had the
Image of the Sun imprinted upon them. And he saw that these Essences had much
filthiness adhering to them, and manifold Defects; such, and so many, as he
could not have conceived. He saw them also to be afflicted with infinite Pains
and Griefs, which caused incessant Sighs and Groans; to be compassed about with
Torments, as those who lie in Bed are with Curtains; to be scorched with the
fiery Vail of Separation; and to be cut asunder as it were with Saws, between
the thrusting back, and drawing unto them, the punishments which they suffered.
Here also he saw other Essences besides these, that were in Torments, which now
appeared, and anon vanished away; which were sometimes joined together, and
soon after parted asunder.

But here he stopped himself; and having busy, and an earnest Employment still
going on; a smoothing and levelling of such as were rough or overswollen, and a
blowing up of those who were too low, and cast down; a production of some, and
a destruction of others. But after a very little while, his Senses returned to
him again, and he awaked out of this State of Mind, as out of an Ecstasie; and
his Feet as it were insensibly sliding away out of this place, the sensible
World appeared to him as before, and this divine World departed from him. For
this, and that other, wherein we now live, are like two Wives belonging to one
Husband, the one whereof if you seek to please, you will provoke the other unto
Anger.

Now if you chance to say, It seems by and be reduced to nothing, according to
the Similitude you proposed of reflecting Looking-Glasses. For the Image so
reflected has no duration of itself, but what depends on the duration of the
Looking-Glass; so that whenever the Looking-Glass is broken, or otherwise
defaced, the Image is withal most certainly destroyed, and vanishes out of
sight. If any one thus object, I have this to reply: That you have soon forgot
the Agreement made between us, and transgressed those Bounds that were fixed by
mutual Consent. For did not I tell you before, that the Path which we tread in,
in passing to the Explication of this Divine Subject, is here very strait and
narrow; and that the Words which we use on either side, to express our meaning
by, occasion Men to think otherwise thereof than indeed it is? So that the
Opinion which thou hold concerning this Matter, has caused thee to pitch
upon this Determination, that the thing whereto another is compared, and that
which is compared with it, are in every Particular of the same Nature, and
Condition; whereas this ought not to be taken for granted, not so much as in
any kind of our common Discourse; much less in this place, where* on we even
now discoursed; where the Sun and its Light, its Image and Representation, the
Looking Glasses and reflected Figures of Bodies conspicuous in them are all
such things as be not separated from Bodies, neither have any Subsistence but
by them, and in them; and therefore need them, as requisite to their Existence,
and cease to be upon their being taken away.

But as for the Divine Essences, and also and Cause, which makes them to exist,
gives them the Duration of their Being, and supplies them with the Continuation
and Perpetuity thereof. Neither need they any Bodies to subsist in, but the
Bodies need them to subsist by. For if it were possible that they should be
taken away, their Bodies also would be taken away with them, seeing that these
Essences are the Principles of those Bodies. In like manner, as if it could be
supposed, that the Essence of the one, True, most High, and Holy One, and far
removed from any Body [There is no God, besides him] might be taken away, all
these Essences would be removed together with him, and their Bodies with them;
whereupon this whole sensible World would vanish away, neither would any part
thereof remain, seeing all of them have a mutual Connection with each other.

Yet although this sensible World it is absurd to suppose, that it will or can
be taken quite away, because it so follows the Divine World; but the Corruption
thereof consists in this, that it be changed, not utterly annihilated. [And
that precious Book spoke of this, where this Notion happened to be mentioned
concerning the moving of the Mountains, so that they became like Wool, and Men
like Fire flies; also concerning the darkning of the Sun and Moon, and the
breaking forth of the Seas in the day, when the Earth shall be changed into
another form, and the Heavens likewise.] Alc. c. Altacwir. etc. Akareah.] And
this is the sum of what at present I can relate unto thee, concerning that
which Hai Eb'n Yockdan saw in that illustrious state of his; neither ask of me,
that I should any farther use more words to express it, for that is even
impossible to be done.

But that we may finish his History, loath, and to be weary of this mortal Life
here on Earth, and to be afflicted with a most eager and earnest desire after
the life to come. Whereupon he endeavored a return to that former place and
state of speculation, that he might enjoy it in the same manner as he had done
before. And he persisted in this studious endeavor of his, until he had
attained it; and that, with less labor than he had done formerly; withal, this
second time he continued longer in the same state, than he had done before.
Then he returned again to this sensible World, and afterward the third time
betook himself to enter into his former Place and State of speculation, which
he found somewhat easier to him, than it had been the first and second time;
and his abiding therein continued longer too than formerly. Neither did the way
of attaining that noble State cease to be still more easy to him, and his
continuance in it longer, until at length he had made a Progress so far in this
way, upon his often returning to it, that he thereunto attained as often as he
pleased, nor departed therefrom but when he pleased. Wherefore he kept constant
to this Place and State of speculation, nor withdrew himself at any time from
it, but when his Bodily necessities required it at his Hands; which necessities
he had restrained within such narrow Bounds, as narrower could hardly be found,
or allowed unto him. And whilst he was thus exercised, he often wished that the
Almighty and most glorious God would free and deliver him altogether from this
Body of his, which detained him from entering into that Place, that so he might
entirely and without intermission enjoy the pleasure thereof, and be freed of
that pain and grief wherewith he was afflicted, as often as he was forced to
avert his mind from that State, by attending on his Bodily necessities. Now, he
continued in this State until he had passed the seventh Septenary of his Age,
that is, till he was fifty years Old. And then it happened that he obtained the
society of Asal; the Narrative of which meeting of theirs is that, which by
Gods leave we shall now set down.

They report, that there is an Hai Eb'n Yockdan was born, whither a certain
Sect betook it self to dwell, of the number of those good and virtuous ones,
which had some one of the ancient Prophets of pious memory for its Author. A
Sect which expressed and made known all things, which had a real Existence in
Nature, by similitudes aptly framed, and fitted to those things; thus
representing their Images to the fancy, and fixing their impressions in the
minds of Men, as is commonly used in our vulgar Discourses. Neither ceased this
Sect to spread it self, and prevail, and wax famous in that Island, till at
length the King himself embraced it, and constrained others also to adhere unto
it.

Now, there were two Excellent Asal, and of the other, Salaman) who meeting
with this Sect, embraced it after the best and most perfectmanner, addressing
themselves to observe all its precepts, and being continually conversant in the
works thereby required; and to this end, they entered into a League of
Friendship with each other. Now, among other passages contained in the Law of
that Sect, they sometimes made enquiry into those Words wherein it treats of
the Description of the Most High, and most Glorious God, and of his Angels;
also, of the Resurrection, and of the Rewards and Punishments after the end of
this Life. And whilst they were busied in these enquiries, Asal began to search
farther into the inmost Natures of things, was more inclined to search into the
mystical Senses of Words, and diligently employed himself about interpreting
them. But Salaman, his Friend and fellow-student, chiefly observed the outside,
and visible surface of the Law, which appeared to him at first sight;
restrained himself more from interpretations, and abstained from all curious
examining and speculation of things. Notwithstanding, both of them in the mean
time, were very careful and diligent in performing all such outward Works as
their Law enjoined, in recalling themselves to the rule of Reason whereby to
guide their Actions, and maintaining a constant fight, in contending against
their unruly Passions, and inordinate Affections.

But whereas there were contained Asal addicted his mind to seek after
solitude, and preferred those Sayings of his Law which tended thitherward,
seeing that by nature he was much given to uncessant Contemplation, and to seek
after the unfolding of things, and searching into the signification of Words;
for he had great hopes of attaining to his ends by this study, through the
Advantages which a solitary Life afforded him. But Salaman, on the other side
applied himself to humane Society, and mutual Commerce, chiefly valuing those
Sayings of the Law which tended that way, because that by Nature he was
inclined to a dread of Contemplation, and the more subtle examining of things;
and therefore loved humane Society, because it drove away evil Thoughts, and
banished that diversity of Opinions, which intruded themselves into his Mind;
and withal withdrew him from harkening to, or attending the motions and
solicitations of evil Spirits. And the difference of their Opinions concerning
this one thing waxed so great, that it caused them at length to take their
leave of each other.

Now Asal had heard of that Island, Hai Eb'n Yockdan had his Breeding. He knew
also the Fertility and conveniences thereof, and the healthful temper of its
Air; so that it would afford him such a commodious retirement as he had in his
wishes. He resolved therefore to go thither, and withdraw himself from humane
Society for the remainder of his Life. So then, having gathered together all
his Goods, with part thereof he hired a Ship to convey him into that Island,
and distributed the rest unto the Poor; and having taken his farewell of his
friend Salaman, he committed himself unto the Sea. And the Mariners
transporting him into the Island in a short space of time, as soon as they had
set him on Shore, departed from him. Thus Asal abode in that Island, serving
the Almighty and most Glorious God, magnifying him, and meditating upon his
glorious Names, and noble Attributes. Neither was his Mind interrupted, or his
Thoughts disturbed, whilst he was busied in these Meditations. But when he had
any need of Food, he took of the Fruits of the Island, or of what he got by
hunting, as much as satisfied his Hunger. And in this State he continued for a
while, in the mean time enjoying the greatest pleasure imaginable, and the most
entire Tranquillity of mind, arising from the Converse and Communication which
he had with his Lord; whereby he saw, through the daily experience he had of
his Favors, and most precious Gifts, and that he readily presented him with
those things which he sought for, to wit, the necessaries of Life; he saw, I
say, that which confirmed the certainty of his Faith in him, and afforded him
no small comfort.

Now whilst he was thus exercised, Hai Eb'n Yockdan was wholly taken up with
his high and heavenly speculations, neither came he forth of his Cell above
once in a Week, to the end that he might get him some Food, which he could hap
to meet with. And this was the reason, why Asal at his first coming into the
Island, did not so soon light upon him, as otherwise he might. For as he walked
round about the Shore, and compassed the utmost Bounds of the Island on every
side, he neither saw any Man, nor could perceive the footsteps of any one; from
whence his joy was much increased and heightened, and his mind exceedingly
pleased, in regard of his compassing that Design which he had set to himself,
and so earnestly sought after, to wit, Solitariness and Retirement.

But at last it fell out, that Hai Eb'n Yockdan coming forth of his Cell to get
him some Food, at the same time wherein Asal also was come near the place, that
each of them cast their eyes upon the other. Now as for Asal, he doubted not
but that the Man he saw was one of those religious Persons, who had devoted
themselves to solitude, and therefore had betook himself to that Island, that
he might withdraw himself from humane Converse, as he in like manner had
retired himself thither for the same end: he was afraid therefore, lest in case
he met him, and made himself known unto him, he should disturb that state and
condition of Life, wherein he saw him engaged; and by that means, become an
Impediment to him in compassing his Hopes, and accomplishing his Desires. But
as for Hai Eb'n Yockdan, he knew not what to make of that Sight; for he soon
perceived that he was like in Shape to none of those living Creatures which he
had seen before. And whereas he saw him Clothed with a black Coat, made up of
Hair and Wool, which he took for a certain natural kind of Covering, he stood
a long while wondering at it. Whereupon Asal turning his Back, fled from him,
fearing lest he should divert him from attending that, wherein he was so
intentively busied. But Hai Eb'n Yockdan followed him, out of an innate desire
he had to know the truth of things. Yet when he saw that he ran away from him,
as fast as possible he could, he stopped, and withdrew, and hid himself from him;
so that Asal thought he was returned, and gone far away from that place where
he had seen him. Hereupon, he began to apply himself, as his Custom was, to his
Prayers and Reading, to Invocation and Weeping, to Supplication and Complaints,
until these Exercises had wholly averted him from minding any other thing.

In the mean time, Hai Eb'n Yockdan Asal not at all perceiving it, until at
length he came so nigh as to overhear his Reading, and the Praises which he
uttered; to take notice also of his humble Gesture, and the knocking of his
Breast, whence he heard a voice to proceed which was very pleasing to him,
consisting of Letters digested into Order, the like whereto he had never
observed before in any kind of Animals. When he also took notice of the Form
and Lineaments of his Body, he saw that he was one of the same Shape with
himself; and it appeared to him, that the Coat which he wore was not his own
natural Skin, but an Habit borrowed elsewhere, like to his own Garment which he
had on. And when he observed the Comeliness of his submiss, and lowly Gesture,
accompanied with his Supplication, and Weeping, he doubted not but he was one
of those Essences, which had the knowledge of the True One, and therefore had a
great desire to be acquainted with him, coveting to see what was the matter
with him, with the cause of his Weeping and Supplication. Whereupon he drew
nearer to him, until Asal perceiving it, betook himself again to his Heels; and
Hai Eb'n Yockdan likewise (answerably to that vigor and power, both of
Knowledge and Body which God had bestowed upon him) pursued him with all his
might, until he had overtaken him, then seized on him, and held him fast, so
that he could not make his escape from him.

Now, when Asal beheld him Clothed Hai Eb'n Yockdan did not understand, nor
knew what they meant. Only he observed signs of fear in him. He therefore did
what he could to allay that fear of his, by such kinds of Voices as he had
learned of certain brute Creatures. He also gently stroaked his Head, and both
sides of his Neck, with his Hand, entertained him with very kind Looks and
Gestures, and made show of much Joy and Gladness, till Asal's fear was assuaged
at last, and he perceived that no harm was meant to him.

Now Asal long before, out of his Hai Eb'n Yockdan, and to interrogate him
concerning his Condition, in every Tongue that he knew, and endeavored, what
he could, to make him understand what he said. But he could not effect what he
intended. On the other side, Hai Eb'n Yockdan, taking notice of all this,
wondered at that which he heard, as being ignorant of what it meant. He observed
only the ferenity of Asal's Countenance, and manifest signs of the good will he
bare him. Thus each of them wondered at the condition of the other.

Afterward, Asal having kept still Hai Eb'n Yockdan; but he knew not what it
was, as having never seen any such Food before. Asal therefore, as he was
eating some of it, made signs to him that he also should eat of the same with
him. But Hai Eb'n Yockdan, considering those Laws whereto he had tied himself
concerning the taking of his Food, and seeing he knew not what was the nature
of that Food which was set before him, and so whether or no it was lawful for
him to take ought of it, restrained himself from eating Whereupon, Asal ceased
not to entreat him and kindly to invite him thereunto. So that Hai Eb'n
Yockdan, being very much taken with his Company, and fearing that if he still
persisted to deny him, he should alienate his affection from him, and lose his
acquaintance, at length was persuaded to take part of that meat, and to eat of
it. But as soon as he had tasted it, and found it very pleasant, it seemed to
him that he had done ill, in that he had broken his Contract, and the
Resolution he had made to himself touching the Conditions about taking his
Food. He repented him therefore of what he had done, and had a mind to withdraw
himself from Asal, and betake himself to his former State of Life, by
endeavoring to return unto his former exercise of Divine Speculation.

But when he saw, that this his intellectual Asal in this sensible World, until
he might be certified of the truth of his Condition; so that after this, there
might remain no farther inclination toward him, and then he might return to
his former Place and State, without any diversion from without, or distraction
from within. Wherefore he applied himself to the society of Asal, who seeing
that he was not able to speak, was well assured, that no damage could arise to
his Religion by keeping company with him; but contrariwise, he hoped that he
might teach him Speech, Knowledge and Religion, whence he should obtain a very
great Reward, and a nearer approach unto God. He began therefore to teach him
how to speak: first, by showing to him the particular things which he was to
name, then by uttering their names, which after he had repeated to him again
and again, he moved him also to pronounce them as himself had done; which he
accordingly did, applying each word to the thing thereby signified, until at
length he had taught him the Names of them all. And thus by set Degrees he
leisurely advanced him so far, that in a short time he was able to speak his
Mind.

Then Asal began to interrogate him Hai Eb'n Yockdan, in his Reply, told him,
that he knew not what Original he had, nor who was his Father, nor any Mother
that he had besides the Female Roe, which had bred him up. Then he declared to
him his whole State and Condition of Life, and what Progress he had made in
Knowledge, until at length he had attained unto that degree of Conjunction with
God. When therefore Asal had heard from him the Declaration of those Truths
which he related, of those Essences which are separated from the sensible
World, and which have the knowledge of the Essence, of that True, most Potent,
and Glorious One; and when he had heard him describe the Essence of him, who is
the Supreme, the most Mighty, True and Glorious One, with all his glorious
Attributes; and had explained to him, as much as he could explain of that,
which he had seen upon his attaining to that Conjunction, and Converse which he
had with God, concerning the Joys of those who are near united unto God, and
the sad Griefs of those who are separated from him; he doubted not, but that
all those things which were delivered in his Law, touching the Mandate of the
mighty and glorious God, as also of his Angels and Books, of his Messengers and
the last Day, of his Paradise, lastly, and Fire, were Similitudes or
Representations of those things, which Hai Eb'n Yockdan had seen; so that the
Eyes of his Heart were opened, and his Mind illuminated, whenas he saw, that
the same which was apprehended and discerned by Reason, and that which he had
received by Tradition, agreed so well together. For the ways of Interpretation
now became easy to him, neither remained any thing dark or difficult in those
Precepts which he had received, that was not now plain and perspicuous; nor
shut up, that was not opened; nor deep and profound, which was not now made
manifest and apparent to him. By this means his Intellectual Faculty grew
strong and vigorous, and for that Reason he had Hai Eb'n Yockdan in so great
Honor and Admiration, that he exceedingly magnified and reverenced him, and
assured himself that he was one of the Saints of God, such as were not molested
with any terrifying Fear at present, nor should hereafter be afflicted with any
kind of Grief or Pain. Whereupon he addressed himself to wait upon him, to
imitate him, and to follow his Counsels in the performance of such Works as he
had occasion to make use of, namely, those legal ones, which he had formerly
learned in the Books of his Religion.

Then Hai Eb'n Yockdan began to interrogate him also concerning his Affairs,
and the Condition of his Life, entreating him that he would declare them to
him. Asal accordingly began to describe unto him the State of that Island
wherein he had lived, and from whence he came; what kind of Men inhabited it,
and what kind of Life they led before that Religious Sect came thither; in what
State also the Island was, after its coming thereinto. He explained to him also
all those things, that were delivered in the Law, concerning the Description of
the Divine World, of Paradise and the Fire of Gehenna, of the awakening and
resurrection of Mankind; of their gathering together unto Judgment, and the
Account then to be given up; of the Balances wherein Men's Actions were to be
weighed, and the way through which they must pass. Now Hai Eb'n Yockdan
understood all these things, neither judged he any of them disagreeable to that
which he had seen in his sublime place or state of Contemplation. And from
hence he knew that he who had thus declared these things, and delivered them
unto Men, had thereby delivered the Truth in so declaring them, and that in
these his Sayings he was a true and faithful Messenger sent from his Lord.
Whereupon, he believed him, and acknowledged the Truth of what he said, and
gave Testimony to his Mission.

Then he began to ask him concerning Asal therefore declared them to him,
namely, Prayer, Alms, Fasting, Pilgrimage, and the like external Works; which
Hai Eb'n Yockdan thereupon received, and embraced, and took upon him to perform
them, in obedience to the Command of the Lawgiver, as being assured of the
Truth and Fidelity of him who delivered the same. Notwithstanding two things
yet stuck in his Mind, neither could he perceive any manner or kind of Reason
in them. The one was, why the Messenger of God, in describing most things which
relate to the Divine World, used to express them unto Men by Parables or
Similitudes, and waved a perspicuous Explication of them; by which means a
great Part of Mankind were made apt to fall into that Error of asserting a
Corporeity in God, and so believing somewhat concerning the Essence of that
true one, which is far from it, and from which it is absolutely free; and in
like manner, concerning those things which relate to the Rewards and
Punishments of the other World. The other was, that he proceeded no farther
than those Precepts, and the Rites of Worship, permitting Men to study and seek
after the getting of Wealth, and to enjoy their Liberty as to matter of Food;
by which means they vainly employed themselves about vain things, and turned
away from the Truth. Whereas his Judgment was, that no more nor any other kind
of Food, ought to be taken by any one, but such, and so much, as wherewith he
may sustain the Remainder of his Life. And as for Riches, he judged them of no
value at all. When he therefore took notice of what was set down and prescribed
in the Law, concerning what belonged to the use and employment of Riches,
namely, in the bestowing of Alms, in the distribution of them, and trading with
them; also, concerning Usury, Mulcts, and Punishments; all these seemed strange
and uncouth unto him. For he judged them all to be superfluous, saying, That if
Men would judge of the Matter according to Truth, they would certainly withdraw
themselves from those vain things, and follow the Truth; which if they did, all
that was written in the Law concerning them, would become superfluous; neither
would any Man challenge the Propriety in Riches, as to exact his Debts, or to
cause his Hand to be cut off who privily stole them; or their Lives to be taken
away who openly robbed him of them.

Thus he thought, and that which how ill advised, and how inconstant in their
Resolutions; insomuch that they were wholly like unto Brutes, yea more apt than
they to wander out of the way, wherein they are directed to walk by the Law of
Nature. Seeing then he was affected with a great deal of Pity toward Mankind,
and had an earnest Desire that the procurement of their Good and Welfare might
be wrought by his means, a Resolution came into his Mind of going over to them,
that so he might put himself in a Capacity of unfolding and declaring to them
the Truth of things. This therefore he made known to his Companion Asal, and
asked him whether he could find out any way, whereby he might come to the
speech of them, and discourse with them.

Asal contrariwise signified to him Asal also very much desired, that God by
his means would direct in the right way some of his late Companions and
Acquaintance, whom he had left behind him in the Island whence he came; such
namely, as were more docile and plyant, and willing to follow a good Guide,
being not so far distant from Sincerity as others. So then, he was ready to
further this Design and Endeavor of Hai Eb'n Yockdan. Whereupon, it seemed
good unto them both, to betake themselves unto the Seashore, nor to depart
thence either by Day or Night, till God should please to afford them an
opportunity of crossing the Sea. And all the while they were intent upon this,
they made their Prayers and Supplications unto the most High God, that he would
please to direct them in this their Business, and bring it to an happy Issue.

Now it came to pass by the Appointment Land, they who were in it seeing two
Men upon the Shore, made toward them. Then Asal calling to them, desired them
to carry him, and his Companion along in the Ship with them; who when they had
yielded to this Request, and taken them both into the Ship, God granted them a
ready Wind, which in a very short space of time conveyed them to the Isle which
they desired; where being arrived, they went forth of the Ship, and landed, and
soon after entered into the City. Whither as soon as they were come, Asal's
Friends came about him, to whom he made known the State and Condition of Hai
Eb'n Yockdan. Whereupon, they flocked together, very earnestly desiring to see
and talk with him, as having a great Opinion of him; so that gathering about
him, they highly magnified and reverenced him. Then Asal told him, that these
Islanders were of that Sect of Men which excelled all others in Understanding
and sharpness of Apprehension; so that if he were not able to instruct them in
the Truth, and make them learn the Lessons which he should teach them, much
less would he be able to teach the vulgar sort of Men.

Now the Prince, and Sovereign of Salaman, the Friend of Asal, who had thought
it best to apply himself unto humane Society, and judged it unlawful to give
himself over unto Solitude. Wherefore Hai Eb'n Yockdan began to instruct them,
and to unfold unto them the Mysteries of Wisdom. But when he began, in the
Progress of his Discourse, to proceed but a little beyond that, which was plain
and obvious to them; and to inculcate that, the contrary whereto had been
settled, and deeply rooted in their Minds, They began to withdraw themselves
from him, and their Minds had an abhorrence for what he spoke; so that inwardly
in their Hearts they were angry with him, though in his presence they made show
of good Will toward him, and paid him Honor, in regard he was a Stranger
amongst them; and out of the Observance which they thought due to his Friend
Asal. Yet Hai Eb'n Yockdan ceased not Day and Night to deal gently with them,
and to clear the Truth to them, both publicly and privately. But this had no
other effect than to increase their Enmity and ill Will toward him, and to
cause them to fly off, and remove farther from him, though otherwise they were
lovers of that which was good, and desirous of the Truth. Howbeit through the
fault and corruption of their Nature, they sought not the Truth in the right
way, neither understood it as the nature of it required, nor searched out the
way leading thereto, with that diligence and constancy, as was requisite to
find the Truth out at length, but sought the knowledge thereof only after the
vulgar Fashion, as ordinary Men do; insomuch that he despaired of their
Amendment, and the correcting of their Errors, and all Hope failed him of
reducing them to a better Condition, because he perceived that what he spoke
was not acceptable to them.

And afterward, when he looked round about him, and diligently considered the
various Ranks and Orders, Conditions and Degrees of Men, he saw that every Sort
and Society of them pleased themselves, and rejoiced in that which they had and
possessed at present; and made choice of their Lusts for their God, which they
assumed to themselves for the Object of their Worship. Withal, that they lost
and destroyed themselves in seeking after, and gathering together the empty,
worthless, trifling Vanities of the World; the eager desire of getting them
into their Hands, still blinding their Eyes, and captivating them by means of
their delusive Fancies, even until they came to their Graves: and that, on the
contrary, no sound advice would prevail with them, nor good Words move them,
nor Reproof work any other effect upon them, unless to cause them to go on the
more obstinately in their former ways, which they had chosen to walk in; but
that, as for Wisdom, they found no way or access to it, neither did any Portion
thereof belong to them, [Folly has wholly overwhelmed and covered them, and
that which they so eagerly sought after, has seized on their Hearts like rust;
God has sealed up their Hearts and Ears, a thick mist is before their Eyes,
and a grievous Punishment abides them. Alc. c. 83. sc. Altafif. etc. 2.]

Whenas therefore he saw them apparent to him, and he held it for certain, that
it was impossible for him to speak unto them to any purpose, after the way of a
plain, free, and open Proposal; neither that it was expedient, any works should
be enjoined them beyond this measure, and that the benefit which accrued to the
common sort of Men by the Law, was wholly placed in relation to their Life in
this World; to wit, that the Course and manner of their Life, whilst they
continued here, should proceed on in good Order, so that none of them should be
injurious to another in respect of those things which he could properly call
his own: But that none of them obtained the felicity of the other World, except
a very few; Those namely, who make themselves ready for it, and rightly
endeavor the obtaining of it, that is, such an one, who believes and follows
the Truth. But as for him who errs from the way of Truth, and prefers a worldly
Life before it, Hell shall be his place of Habitation. And what sorer labor,
or more grievous misery than his, whose works if thou well consider, from the
time that he wakeneth out of sleep, till he return again to it, there will not
be found so much as one amongst them, whereby he studies not, and imploies his
endeavor, for the obtaining of some end of his, arising out of these sensible
things that are of no value; namely, either out of Riches, to heap them up; or
Pleasure, which he may take; or Lust, which he may satisfy; or Wrath and
Revenge whereby he may pacify his mind; or Power, whereby he may defend
himself; or some outward work commanded by the Law, whereof he may make a
vainglorious show; or whereby he may save his own Neck. [Now all these things
are Darkness upon Darkness in the depth of the Sea, neither is there any of you
who does not enter in thither, for such is the unchangeable Decree of the Lord.
l. Alc. c. Al. Nur. etc. Miriam.]

Whenas therefore he understood irrational Creatures, he knew that all Wisdom
and Direction of Life, and Correction of Errors, was grounded on, and consisted
in that, which the messengers of God spoke, and the Law had delivered unto
them; and that no other Rule could be possibly attained, or any thing added
thereunto; also, that Men were destined to every work which they undertook, and
that every Man was more especially capable of that whereunto he was disposed by
Nature; and that those, who long ago departed, were not destitute of the Law of
God, neither has there been any change at any time found in that Law.
Whereupon, returning to Salaman, and those that were of his way, he craved
pardon for those things which he had said unto them, and entreated them to
excuse him, seeing that he was of the same Opinion with them, and approved of
the same way wherein they walked; withal exhorting them to stick to their
Resolution, and avowed Custom, concerning the ends of the Law*, and the
observing of outward Works, without intruding themselves into, or intermedling
with that which belonged not to them; and that in doubtful things they would
give credit, and yield a ready assent to those Rules and Lessons which they had
of old received; that they would shun and detest new Opinions, and alienate
themselves from all corrupt affections; that they would follow the Steps of
their pious Ancestors, and forsake Novelties. He gave them also in Charge, that
they would avoid that neglect of the Laws, which is seen in the vulgar sort of
Men, and the love of the World; and this he chiefly bad them take heed of. For
he, and his Friend Asal well knew, that as for this ductile and obsequious, but
weak and defective sort of Men, they could not otherwise obtain Salvation and
Happiness, than by this means; and that if they were forced away and taken off
from hence, to make a curious search into, and examination of high Matters,
their Condition would be much worse, insomuch that it were impossible for them
to obtain the State and Degree of the Blessed; but that they would be still
wavering and uncertain in their motions, and tossed up and down, so that at
last they would meet with a bad end. But on the contrary, if they continued in
that State wherein they were at present, until Death seized on them, they would
at length obtain Salvation, and be placed amongst those who stand at the right
Hand. But as for those that forepassed, and outwent them, they took place
withal of them; yet these came next after, and approached near to them.

Thus he and Asal, after these admonitions, Salaman and his Islanders, took
their leave of them, and waited for an opportunity of returning unto that
desert Island from whence they both lately came; until at length the Most
Mighty and Glorious God was pleased to afford them a convenient passage
thither. Whither when they were come, Hai Eb'n Yockdan sought to return unto
his former sublime State of speculation, in the same way and by the same means,
whereby he had heretofore attained to it, until within a while he recovered it.
And Asal followed his example, until he had well nigh attained thereunto, or at
least came but very little short of it. And thus they worshipped God in that
Island, until Death at last seized upon them.

And this is that (God assist thee, Hai Eb'n Yockdan, of Asal also and Salaman;
in setting down whereof we have made choice of such kind of Words, as are found
in no other Book, nor are accustomed to be heard in our vulgar Speech: and it
is a part of that hidden knowledge, which no one receives, but he that knows
God; nor any one is ignorant of, but he who has not the right knowledge of
God. We indeed, in handling this Subject, have gone in a different way from
that of our pious Ancestors, as to the silencing of these things, and
forbearing to divulge them. But that which easily persuaded us to the
publishing of this Secret, and the breaking through this Vail, was the
multiplicity and diversity of those corrupt and perverse Opinions, which have
arose in this our time, being devised by some Bastard Philosophers of this Age,
and divulged among the People; insomuch that they are now spread abroad into
several Countries, and the mischief proceeding from thence is grown too common;
so that we are solicitous in behalf of the weak (who have rejected that which
they had received by Tradition from the Prophets of pious memory, and made
choice of that, which has been delivered by foolish Men) lest they should
think those Opinions to be a Secret, that ought to be withheld from them, who
are not capable of it; and lest this conceit should heighten and increase their
favor toward them, and by that means they would have a more eager appetite
after them. We thought good therefore to present them with a slight view of
this Secret of Secrets, whereby we may lead them into the way of Truth, and
avert them from that wrong Path. Nevertheless we have not committed the said
mysteries to these few Leaves, without a thin vail for a Covering, which will
easily be disclosed by those who are capable of understanding them; but thick
and gross to every one, who is unworthy and unfit to proceed farther, so that
it will be impossible for him to pierce through it with his Eyes.

But now I crave Pardon of as many of his Favors. Peace be to thee, my
Brother, whose Promotion is decreed, and the Mercy and Blessing of God come
upon thee.

THE END. Let Praise be given to God alone.
THEOLOGIA RURIS, SIVE Schola and Scala Naturae: OR, THE BOOK OF NATURE,
Leading us, by certain Degrees, to the Knowledge and Worship of the God of
NATURE.

THEOLOGIA RURIS, SIVE Schola and Scala Naturae: OR, THE BOOK OF NATURE,
Leading us, by certain Degrees, to the Knowledge and Worship of the God of
Nature.
HOW hardly and unwillingly am I forced from you, O ye pleasant Fields, ye
Hospitable Shades, ye green grassy Hills, ye clear running Brooks, and most
pure, gentle Air! I have spent the Day, as innocently, as delightfully, amongst
you. I have sucked in, and then breathed forth, in alternate motions, the fresh
Air of the Spring, with equal pleasure; and whilst my Eyes wandered up and down
to contemplate, on every side, this delightful variety, I was of a sudden in a
manner enchanted, and besides my self; so that forgetting where I was, I could
not stir from the place, but stood fixed in a rapture of Joy and Admiration,
upon the Contemplation of this earthly Paradise. But God grant, that I may so
fix my Eyes here, and gratify my Senses, as not to neglect the improvement of
my Mind, which consists in making good use of the pleasures you afford me, and
all the rest of mankind; and so following your Conduct, as to make my way unto
him, to whom you conduct me. O thou, who art the Original and End of Nature,
from whom all this beautiful variety of Creatures proceeded, and to whom they
tend, make all these pleasures advantageous, and saving to me. Oh, what else
mean these allurements of wantonizing Nature, this youthfulness of our Mother
Earth in her old Age, neat, and trim, and decking her self with flowery
Garlands, like a young sprightly Bird? is she at all this cost and pains, to
please the fancy of Fools, who are wholly led by Sense, and can see no farther
than their bodily Eyes discover?

No sure. Know therefore, O Man, that Nature, in this gay and most delightful
spectacle, opens a large Book unto thee; a Book as profitable, as it is
pleasant; a Book, which if thou attentively look upon, and constantly
studiest, thou will find therein as many Letters, as there be Flowers of the
Spring, Piles of Grass, or drops of Dew. These Letters of single Creatures,
when they are fitly joined together, (as by Divine Providence, so by humane
Meditation) meet as it were in words; and those words, through the vicissitudes
of certain Seasons, close in set Periods. Yea more: There is an entire Sense in
every Letter. For do thou not see, how perfect and complete the several
Creatures are, when taken apart, and single; how self-sufficient; how fairly
provided, and well furnished, with what is requisite for their preservation, and
well-being? sufficient also for thee, if thou bring a clear, and well-purged
mind to the Contemplation and use of them? Thou beholdest this ample furniture
of Nature, the variety of Utensils and Ornaments in this great House of the
World, which is the Palace and Temple of the great God; and thou judge, that
it is all thine, because it serves to thy use. Be it so. But then consider too,
whose thy self art; and learn what thou owe unto him, by what thou have
received from him. For do thou think, that thou art so highly valuable, as
that for thy sake alone, and the concerns of this mortal Life, the Heavens
above thy Head should whirle perpetually round, and observe their set laws of
Motion? That the Sun, Moon, and Stars should send down their light, and Heat,
and variety of Influences? And withal, that the Plants, and brute Creatures
here below, should serve thy uses only, and maintain thy Life by their own
Death and Destruction? Does the great Sun, think thou, that High Steward,
and universal dispenser of golden Light, and lifepreserving Heat, manage the
set courses of Day and Night, of Summer and Winter, and order the alternate
motions of the vapors in their Ascents and Descents, and their removes hither
and thither toward the several quarters of the Heavens, merely to wait upon
thee, or to applaud himself at thy approbation? Sure thou can not think so.
For thou art not the utmost end of the Creation, but the means or instrument,
whereby the rest of the inferior Creatures make their recourse unto that God,
from whom they originally proceeded. And (as it is usually seen in the Feasts
of great Princes) God calls thee into this richly furnished Palace of his, not
to be a judge but a witness of his munificence; neither furnishes he his large
spread Table with such variety of Dishes, for the pampering of the Guests, but
for the praise of himself the Entertainer, who is the Sovereign Lord and Father
of the whole Family. Thou then have not the absolute command, but the sole use
of Nature. But what use? That by the Guidance thereof, thou may be directed
to walk onwards toward God, to ascend still higher toward him by set steps,
and insensible degrees, and so acknowledge the Author of Nature to be thy
Father, to praise his Bounty, admire his Wisdom, and embrace his Love.

Neither does Nature lead thee toward God by a far-fetched and winding
compass, but in a short and straight Line. The Sun waits upon the Rain, and
Dew; the Rain and Dew, upon the Grass; the Grass serves the Cattle; the Cattle
serve thee; and if thou serve God, then thou make good the highest link in
that golden Chain, whereby Heaven is joined unto Earth. Then thou stand
where thou ought to stand, in the uppermost Round of that divine Ladder,
next to the Most High. Then thou show and approvest thy self to be indeed,
what thou were designed by God to be, the High Priest and Orator of the
Universe, because thou alone, amongst all the Creatures here below, art endued
with understanding to know him, and speech to express thy knowledge of him, by
thy Praises of him, and Prayers unto him. So that all the rest of the Creation,
by the Ministry and Mediation of thy Mouth, pay the just Tribute of Laud and
Thanks to the great Creator; and are all joined according to their several
distances and degrees, unto the most wise Maker and Governor of the World, by
the interposition of thy mind, which alone understands both, and considers
their Relation to each other. But if thou never observest the Sky with thine
Eyes, but to guess at Rain, and fair weather: If thy looking up to Heaven be
bounded with the Starry Firmament: Or if, like the vapors which arise out of
the Earth, thou never mountest upwards but to fall down more gross and thick,
as they do in Mists and Rain, in Snow and Frost: Thou have then that in thy
Station which bears thee downwards, and causes thee to lie grovelling on the
Earth. Indeed, if thou removest from thee the Love and Honor of God, and the
Contemplation of him who dwells in the Heavens, thou have no just cause to
raise thy self above the Brutes, thy fellow Inhabitants of this lower World.
For the Sun arises, and the Rain falls, as well for them, as for thee. The
Earth for their use waxes green, and flourishes, and brings forth abundance
of Provisions in all variety of Plenty. And all this it yields to them,
neither wounded by the Plough, nor watered by the sweat of the Tiller. Yea
Nature, in these things, is a more indulgent Nurse and Mother unto them, than
unto thee, by imparting to them more strong native Abilities, an healthfuller
Body, a securer Ease and Rest, and a natural sort of Clothing, which never
grows old, or threadbare. Whereas beggarly Thou art fain to rob and strip
these brute Creatures, that thou may be clothed with their spoils; and all
thy bravery is at best but borrowed. In this alone thou excellest the Brutes,
that thou know God, and art enabled to contemplate his Perfections; and, by
virtue of that Contemplation, to love and serve him, who is the Maker of all;
whereas, in other respects, thou art inferior to the meanest of them, and
below the very lowest.

Therefore raise up thy self still higher toward God, in thy Meditations and
Affections; for thou may do this, even whilst thou look downwards. Thou
may behold the Wisdom and Power, and Goodness of Heaven, even when thou
look upon the Earth under thy feet; and contemplate the Image of God with
steady Eyes in these inferior LookingGlasses of his Works, at whose
Brightness, as he is seen in his heavenly Majesty, the Eyes of the most
Eagleeyed beholders are dazzled; insomuch that the Seraphims themselves are fain
to cover their Faces with their Wings.

This then God requires at thy hands; or, if it be meet to say so, desires of
thee. And withal, it is a duty, which all his other works call aloud upon thee
to perform, as themselves go before thee in performing the like, according to
their several kinds; and thereby both encourage, and oblige thee thereunto,
through their example. God would be seen by thee in all of them, but with clear
sighted, and well purged Eyes; such Eyes, which attentively consider, and
considering duly value his Divine Wisdom, Greatness, and Goodness, without
having respect to thine own interest and advantage. If therefore thou lightest
upon Snails or Caterpillars, which gnaw thy fruits, and deface the Glory of thy
Orchards, and Gardens; thou ought not to fix thy Eyes so much upon the loss
thou fustainest by them, as upon the wit, and artifice, and industry of Nature,
which plays and sports as it were in the Skins and Shells of these contemptible
Creatures, by adorning them so beautifully, and painting them over with such
delightful variety of unimitable Checker-works, and embroideries; so that thou
may justly admire that which thou treadest upon, in the curious Workmanship
bestowed upon the vilest Insects; and can not choose but highly commend the
excellent Contrivance of all, even the most despicable Creatures, by the wisdom
of Divine Providence, which so frames and orders them, that even that, which
indamageth thee, cannot but delight thee.

When thou likewise take a view of thy Flocks and Herds, thou have not
sufficiently perfected thy Meditations on them, and discharged thy Duty in that
work, if thou only computest how much Wool thou shall have this June, how many
Lambs this Year, how many young Colts are growing up for thy Plough or Saddle,
how many fat Bullocks for the Stall, and at what price to be sold the next
Fair. Neither is it enough for thee to survey thy arable Lands, only to guess
how many Bushels of Grain such a quantity of Acres will yield thee. It is far
more worthy of thee, and proper for thee, thus to reckon, and reason with thy
self: All these I am richly supplied with by the liberal hand of God; and they
all perform that service for my use and advantage, which they owe not unto me.
Shall I then either deny, or neglect that service, which is due unto my God,
who has so freely and undeservedly bestowed them all upon me? Shall I cause
that Chain of God's works, wherein and whereby they are so orderly linked unto
him, the Maker and Sovereign Disposer of all, to be broken off through my
default? Shall I who am a Debtor to God for all these, repay nothing to him?
But what shall I return unto God? My duties and services reach not him, neither
can any thing properly be repayed to him, who is the Owner of all things. But
though thou can give back nothing to him by way of repaiment, yet thou may
humbly and dutifully receive his Gifts, return hearty and constant Thanks to
him for the Receipt, use them soberly and cheerfully, and so approve thy self a
meet Receiver, a candid Accepter, and a prudent Manager of the Divine Bounty.

Whenever also thou walk forth to recreate thy self, as thou walk
amidst the pleasant Fields, the flowery Meadows, the cool Groves, and shady
Woods, delightfully varied, and interlaced with clear running Brooks, and
winding Rivulets; think not that these delicious Tempe's, and terrestrial
Paradises, which thou beholdest here below, are to be looked upon only as
pleasant Walks, wherewith to divert thy Mind, when it is overburd'ned with
Cares, or tired with Business; and to refresh thy Senses with a pleasing
variety of new Objects, on every side offering themselves to delight thee, as
thou passest along amidst them. No; there is far more to be gained from them,
and which the God of Nature expects from thee. For that which thou so
pleasingly beholdest in all this variety, which surroundeth thee on all sides,
and exposes it self unto thy view, thou ought to look upon as Man's School,
and God's Temple. Thou please thy self with the pretty purling noise of that
clear small Rivulet, which runs with a trembling motion, among the pure
party-colored Pebbles. But thou should consider, that this soft gentle
Murmur yields thee not this Pleasure, merely to invite thee unto Sleep, as thou
lie down carelessly on the Bank of the Rivulet. No; it teaches thee a Lesson
far more excellent, than this harmonious Music of the purling Stream. For this
continued course of the Water, which passing through several Turnings, winding
Circuits, and interrupting By-falls, by reason of rough, uneven places, which
it meets with in its Channel, yet never loses its way, nor stops its Current,
nor is ever weary of running, till it find its way home again into the Ocean
Sea, from whence it had its Original: This continued course, I say, of the
Stream teaches thee this useful Lesson, That thou never make a stop in thy
course of Piety and Virtue, nor ever rest in making thy way forward still, till
thou arrive at that boundless Ocean of the Deity, whence thou, with all the
rest of the Creatures, originally proceededst, and so at length be swallowed up
in that Abyss of Felicity. Thou art also hereby admonished to take care in the
mean time, whilst thou art passing through this World, that neither the manifold
Turnings, and winding Meanders of humane Life, nor the various Impediments
which constantly attend all Secular Affairs, hinder thee in thy Passage; nor
the sudden Down-falls, occasioned by unexpected Evils, and Mischances, that we
meet with in our Travel, which also deject and precipitate so many, as they are
journeying onwards, interrupt thy course thitherward, and so stop thy farther
Progress in the way to Heaven. And as the clear, bright Face of the Heavens is
not discerned but in clear and calm Waters, so clear and calm Souls only
reflect the splendid Image of the God of Heaven, not such as are troubled and
disturbed with furious Lusts and Passions, as with so many tempestuous Winds;
or muddied with gross, earthly Affections, and the foul vicious Habits of Sin.

Moreover, when at any time thou risest early, and go forth in the Morning,
the very first Sight which thou beholdest is a ready Reward of thy Diligence;
the Sun, I mean, which arises amidst a most pleasing diversity of variously
colored Clouds; and shedding its orient Beams of Light upon the small round
Drops of Dew, which hang upon the tops of Flowers, the Leaves of the lower
Shrubs, and Spires of the verdant Grass, reflects its bright Face in them as in
so many small broken Mirrours, shines and sparkles in each of them, creates an
Infinity of new Stars, and thereby represents unto thine Eyes a kind of another
Heaven in this lower Orb of the earthly World. And when thou seriously
contemplatest the pleasing variety of Shapes and Colors in the Clouds above,
and the Flowers below, especially when adorned with, and shining in their
starry Mantles, thick set and interlaced, and as it were imbroidered with the
pearly drops of Dew, as with so many rich Jewels, do thou not begin to
undervalue, and despise all the artificial Pomp of the Court, and those costly
Vanities of the Court Ladies, who so much pride themselves, whilst they shine
and glitter in their borrowed Glories; yea, are fain to rob and plunder both
the Indies, that they may make themselves brave? For how slight and worthless
may we justly deem this stolen and counterfeit, and far-setcht Glory,
wherewith poor, beggarly Art, with so much Cost and Labor, clotheth the
greatest Princes, and their gorgeous Train of Attendants, in comparison of that
true and genuine one, which Nature produces, and makes show of; and that, not
only unforced, and of her own accord, but of a sudden too, and in a surprising
Variety. For every day almost we see new Creations, according to the
vicissitude of Seasons. Of how little value then is all that, which we are so
apt to admire in the affected Glories of fanciful Mankind, whilst we take
little or no notice of those things, which the God of Nature every day presents
and recommends to our Observation, and such as indeed are the proper and
deserved Object of our just Admiration.

But why should I go any farther in the prosecution of all Particulars; which
would be a Task as needless, as endless? in a word then: In and by all these
things which thou meetest with here below, if so be thou will approve thy self
an attentive Student, thou may learn the knowledge both of God, and thy
self; and withal, be minded of some Duty, which the Sight and Observation
thereof prompts unto thy Thoughts. If so be then that thou entrest a shady
Grove, let that venerable Horror, which the sight thereof strikes into thee,
present a Deity to thy Mind, and affect it with a through Sense of his Fear. If
thou walk in a green flowery Meadow, bethink thy self how many Vegetables
thou treadest under-foot in thy Walk, whose Virtues and Properties thou can
not reach unto with thy Mind, as high as it mounts in its soaring Flights, and
as large a Compass as it takes in its vast Comprehensions. When thou hear
the small singing Birds warbling forth their shrill Notes in variety of Tunes,
think them to be so many Hymns, which these feathered Sons of Music, like the
Children of Asaph, sing to the great Creator in this August Temple of the
World. And if thou lightest upon one of their Nests, thou may be both
ashamed of thy own dullness and blockishness, and contemplate with wonder that
natural Wit and Industry in a small silly Bird, which we Men, who esteem our
selves the only wise, and the Masters of all Arts, can neither equal with our
best Skill in framing the like, nor so much as find out with all our Wit, how
they are made. Let the Tulips, and other gay Flowers, which are so gorgeously
arrayed in variety of the most rich and beautiful Colors; * and yet neither
spin, nor weave: Let the Beasts of the Field and Forest, with the Fowls of the
Air, which never provide for, nor trouble their thoughts with care of the
future, yet always find their Food ready and prepared, and as it were a large
Table always spread for their use, serve to correct thy Covetousness and
Carking, and daily read new Lessons to thy Mind, Lessons of Calmness,
Contentedness, and Confidence, when thou find it at any time over-solicitous
for the future; as indeed it is too often in the best of us, doubtful and
distrustful of the Love and fatherly Care of God, though still watching over us
for our good, and giving us all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17.

Lastly, Thus meditate with thy self. All these Delights of the Garden, and the
Field, which the Country affords me; this flowery Tapistry of Nature; this fresh
and pleasant Greenness of the Earth, which now so fairly flourishes, and
flattereth our Eyes, within some few Months will fade and vanish, and perish
altogether, by the cold and killing Breath of Winter; and then lie buried under
the Covert of that Earth, the Face whereof they now so beautifully adorn. So
likewise, this mortal Life of ours, with all its Flourish; this Strength and
Vigor of ours, with all its Helps and Supports; this flattering Air of
Fortune, with all its warm Breathings, and delicious Gales, will sooner or
later pass away, consume, and come to nothing; either wearing away, and
spending themselves by insensible degrees, or be impaired and wasted by some
malignant Causes from without; namely, either through the manifold ill
Casualties and Miseries, constantly attending our humane Life; or, the Diseases
and Infirmities, that old Age brings along with it: until at length, we be all
cut off by the fatal Hand of Death, and then cast into the dark Prisons of our
Graves, there to remain till Time shall be no more; and the Day of Eternity
begin, wihch never shall have an End.

Now, this Prospect of our latter End, so certain in it self, and so uncertain
for the time of its coming, should in all Reason awaken us to consider where we
are, in what State and Condition, and whither we are going; and consequently
mind us to make the best use of the present Season; not to neglect our
Seed-time, or our Harvest; nor to spend those Days idly, which when they are
once past away, can never be redeemed. Let us then take care to sow as much
good seed as we can in the Springtime of our Age, that so we may reap a
plentiful Harvest in the Autumn. And when that comes, let us take care to reap
our Grain, and to gather in our Fruits, and then lay them up in safe
Repositories, before the Winter over-take us, wherein no man can work; when the
Sun withdraws its Light and Heat, when the Rain chokes the Earth with a
Surplusage of moisture; or the Frost imprisons it, and binds it up in close
Fetters. And this if we take care to do, we shall not fail to enjoy the Fruits
of all those good Works, which in this short Season of our frail mortal Life,
we have taken pains to sow and reap, and lay up in our Storehouses. These
Storehouses are the several Mansions prepared for us in Heaven; the most
secure Repositories, where no Vermin consumes what is once laid up there, no
Thief breaks in to carry it away, no Fire devours, nor Age consumes the Mansion.

To conclude; If we mind Heaven whilst we live here upon Earth, this Earth will
serve to conduct us unto Heaven, through the Merits and Mediation of the Son of
God, who was made the Son of Man, and came thence on purpose into this lower
World, to convey us up thither; fitly therefore represented and foresignified
by that Ladder seen of Jacob, in his nighly Vision at Bethel, which was set
indeed on the Earth, but the Top of it reached unto Heaven Genesis 28. 12.

FINIS.
Books sold by Richard Chiswell and William Thorp.
1. OF the Principles and Duty of Natural Religion, two Books. By Dr. John
Wilkins, Lord Bishop of Chester. 8o. 2. Several Sermons Preached by the same
Author. 8o. 3. A Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature,
and of the Christian Religion. By Dr. Samuel Parker, Archdeacon of Canterbury.
4o. 4. Several Discourses, of ^urity, Charity, Repentance, Inordinate Desire,
loving our Enemies, Hospitality, Quietness, Redeeming Time, Understanding the
Will of God, Exact Walking, Doing good to all Men, Education, and the
Advantages of Christianity, in two Volumes 8o. By Hez. Burton. D. D. 5. A
Disswasive from Revenge. By Nic. Stratford, D. D. Dean of St. Asa^h. 8o. 6.
Primitive Christianity, or the Religion of the Ancient Christians. By William
Cave. D. D.

