ESSAYS of NATURAL EXPERIMENTS Made in the Academy Del Cimento Under the
Protection of the most seren Prince Leopold of Tuscany Englished by Ric. Waller
S.R.S.

LONDON Printed for Benj: Alsop at the Angel and Bible in the Poultry. 1684.



ESSAYS O F Natural Experiments Made in the ACADEMIE DEL CIMENTO, Under the
Protection of the Most SERENE PRINCE LEOPOLD of TVSCANY.

Written in Italian by the Secretary of that ACADEMY.

Englished by RICHARD WALLER, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Alsop at the Angel and Bible in the Poultrey,
over against the Church. 1634.

To Sir John Hoskyns Knight and Baronet, President of the Royal Society, etc.
SIR,
AS your Commands gave the first being to this Attempt, so it is but Justice to
offer it to your Self; and 'twas but necessary to crave so advantageous a
Protection, to defend it against the Difficulties, things of this Nature meet
with, in this Censorious Age.

I shall wave, as less grateful to you, a large Description of the Happiness
the Royal Society enjoys under such a President, whose perspicacious Judgment
is actuated by a true desire of promoting real Knowledge; and shall rather give
some account of the Work it self: It was presented in a Public Meeting of the
Royal Society, March 12. 166 by Sigr. Lorenzo Magalotti, and Sigr. Paulo
Falconieri, from the Most Serene Prince Leopold, Brother to Ferdinand the
Second, Great Duke of Tuscany; and has ever since layn in our Library expecting
a more skilful Pen, to perform what I have here aimed at. The Experiments are
many, and curious, made under the favor of that Prince, by the Members of the
Academy Del Cimento, men of great ingenuity; and related with much sincerity by
the Secretary of that Academy; which Society (I hear) is now scattered, and the
Hopes of those Benefits the Learned World might justly expect from them,
frustrated. Many indeed of these Experiments have been made, and shown in
several Meetings of the Royal Society (before, and since the Publication of
this in the Italian, in the Year 1667) by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire and
other worthy Members thereof; but for all this, I hope it may not prove
unacceptable to find the Ingenious in other Parts of the World, have not
thought their time misspent in these Endeavors, what contrary Sentiments soever
some may have; nor will the agreement between the success of Experiments made
there, and what has been attempted here (often with a differing Apparatus) be
less pleasing* very many, I dare undertake, are New to most Persons, except
your self, and upon that account will prove more diverting. I need not add the
great Expense of Care, and Charge, and Fatigues of the Academy in this Work;
nor the scarcity of this Piece in the Original, no small Motive to this
Undertaking (that it might be obtained with more Ease, and at a cheaper Rate;)
which how performed, I submit to your Self, and the worthy Members of the most
Illustrious Royal Society; begging Pardon for this Presumption; desiring only
to subscribe my self,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Richard Waller.

To the Most SERENE Ferdinand II. GRAND DUKE of TVSCANY.
Most SERENE PRINCE,
THE Publishing of these First Essays of Natural Experiments, which for many
Years have been made in our Academy, under the Protection, and with the
Indefatigable Assistance of the most Serene Prince Leopold your Highness's
Brother, will prove the happy occasion of giving fresh Testimonies (of your
Highness's great Liberality) to all those parts of the World where Virtue is
adorned with its deserved Luster; and will create a new sense of Gratitude and
Respect in all true Lovers of the more curious Arts, and Nobler Sciences.
Especially we ought to frame our thoughts to a more humble Acknowledgment, as
we are more nearly concerned and warmed by the cherishing Rays, and
invigorating Influence of your Highness's bounty. Which with the favor of your
Patronage, the encouraging invitation of your Mind, and proper Genius that way;
but above all, with the Honor of your Presence, sometimes stooping to our
Academy, sometimes commanding us to your Royal Apartments, has bestowed upon it
an Immortal Name; Kindled Active Desires in our Breasts, and given an happy
increase to our Studies. These considerations easily demonstrate, with what
duty we are engaged to Consecrate the first Fruits of our Labors to your
Highness's most Illustrious Name; since nothing can proceed from us, wherein
you can have a greater share, and by consequence more due to you; nor any thing
that may make fairer approaches to merit the happy Fate of your generous
Acceptance. It Is certain, that through the Excess of so large and signal
Favors, we can be sensible of no greater Resentments than to find our selves
so much obliged to your Highness: not that we refuse to bear the Weight of so
endearing and inestimable an Obligation; but only because we would wish to be
able to offer something not purely your own; whence we might at least flatter
our selves, That we had made some small return which your Highness might impute
in some degree to our choice, and not wholly redewable to your Highness Self, or
Necessity^ But we must rest satisfied with the bare desire of so just and
deserved a Passion; since these new Philosophical Speculations are so deeply
Radicated in your Highness's Protection, that not only what is now produced by
our Academy, but what ever shall be brought to Maturity in the most Famous
Schools of Europe, or After Ages raise up, shall be likewise due to your
Highness, as the gift of your Beneficence: since as long as the Sun, Planets,
and Stars retain their glory, and Heaven endures, there will remain a glorious
Memory of one that contributes so much with his auspicious Influence to such
new and strange Discoveries; opening an unbeaten Path for the least fallacious
Method of search after Truth. Yet in so great a scarcity of Tributes, some
little thing presents it self to manifest our grateful observance; which is the
only joy wherewith we support our Deficiency, while all redounds in more
resplendant Glory to your Highness, who having already acted your full
Proportion of what ever new, good, and great, is at any time to be found in the
Repository of Sciences, has enervated and discouraged all thoughts of emulation
in others. This, and this alone are we able to lay at your Highness Feet, whose
continual Protection we crave with Respect and Reverence, begging from Heaven
the height of Prosperity and Grandeur to your Highness.

Your most Serene Highness's Most humble Servants Of the Academy Del Cimento.
Il Saggiato Segretario.
Florence July 14 th. 1667.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AMong all the Creatures of Divine Wisdom, the Birthright doubtless belongs to
the Idea of Truth, which the Eternal Artificer so exactly followed in the
Universal Fabric of Nature, That no Being was made with the least irregular
Bias of falsehood: But Man afterward, (in the Contemplation of so high and
perfect a Structure, through an extravagant desire of Comprehending the
admirable Design, and finding out all the Measures and Proportions of so
Beautiful an Order) when he aims to penetrate too deep into the Truth, frames
to himself an indefinite number of falsities, which proceeds from no other
cause but his Ambition to take those Wings Nature never designed (perchance
fearing to be some time or other discovered by him unwillingly in the
preparation of her greater Works;) yet upon these he begins to raise himself,
and tho charged with the weight of a Material Body, stretches forth these
Pinions to soar higher than the Scale of Sense leads, and fixes himself upon
that Light, whose Rays, too powerful for his Eyes dazzle, and blind him. Thus we
see from Man's Rashness, the first Seeds of false Notions came; from which yet
it happens, not that the bright Splendour of Gods Excellent Creatures is at all
shaded, or by their Commerce with them in the least vitiated: since all these
Imperfections are to be Attributed to Man's Ignorance, vitiated whence they had
their Beginnings; when improperly applying the Causes to the Effects, he takes
not from either the verity of their Beings, but only delineates in his own
mind a false Conception of their Relation to each other, and agreement; not
that the sovereign Beneficence of God when he Creates our Souls, denies them to
pry, as we may say for a Moment into the Immense Treasure of his Eternal
Wisdom; adorning them as with the most precious Jewels, with some first Sparks
of Truth, sufficiently evident from their retaining Notions not to be acquired
here, whence we must conclude, They received them from some other Place.

But it happens through our Misfortune, that these rare Gems, as they are but
loofly set in the Mind, yet too tender when she first falls into her Earthly
Habitation, and wraps her self in this Clay; so for a time they fall out of
their Collets, are sullyed, and worth nothing till by assiduous and careful
Study, they are again reset in their proper places. This is what the Mind
attempts in the search of Nature; wherefore we must Confess, we have no better
means then Geometry, which at first Essay hits the Truth, and frees at once
from all doubts, and wearying Researches. And indeed she leads into the way of
Philosophical Speculations, but at last leaves us; not that Geometry has not a
large Field to expatiate in, and Travels not over all Natures Works; as they
all submit to those Mathematick Laws, by which the Eternal Decree freely Rules,
and Commands them; but because we hitherto are unable to follow her in so long,
and wide a Path only a few steps. Now where we may not trust our selves to go
farther, we can rely on nothing with greater Assurance than the faith of
Experience, which (like one that having several loose and scattered Gems,
endeavors to fix each in its proper Collet) by Adapting the Effects to the
Causes; and again the Causes to the Effects if not at first Essay, as Geometry
yet at last succeeds so happily, Provando. e Riprovand^.
that by frequent Trying, and Rejecting, she hits the Mark. We ought then to
proceed with much Circumspection, lest too great a relyance and trust in
Experience, turn us out of the way, and impose upon us; since it sometimes
falls out, that before the clear Truth appears to us, when the first more open
Vailes of Deceit are taken off, we discover some cheating Appearances that
indeed have some likeness, and Resemblance of Truth: and these are the
imperfect Lineaments that are seen through the last coverings that more nearly
vail the lovely face of Truth; through the fine Web whereof she sometimes seems
so plain and lively, that some might conclude, She was Nakedly Discovered.

Here then we ought to carry our selves as Master-workmen, to discern between
Truth and Error, and the utmost perspicacy of Judgment is but requisite, to see
well what really is, from what is not; And to be the better able to perform
this Task, doubtless it is necessary to have at some time or other seen Truth
unvailed; an Advantage they only have; who have had some taste of the studies
of Geometry.

Nor is it of less use to search among Experiments already made, than to
attempt New ones, if happily any may be found, that have at all disguised the
simple Face of Truth: wherefore it is aimed at in our Academy, besides what has
been Invented by us, to try also (either for Curiosity, or as we light upon
them by chance) those things which have been already done, or wrote off by
others: observing too well, That under this Name of Experiments, frequent
Errors have crept in, and been entertained.

This was the first Motive to the perspicacious and indefatigable Mind of the
most Serene Prince Leopold of Tuscany; who in the Recess of those daily
Negotiations, and solicitous Cares that attend his High Quality, diverted into
the rough Path of the Noblest Sciences. But his Highness's discerning Judgment
easily foreseeing that the Reputation of great Authors proves too often hurtful
to the Studious, who through too much Confidence, and Veneration of their
Names, fear to call in question what is delivered upon their Authority;
wherefore he judges it an Undertaking worthy of his great Mind to confront with
the most Acurate, and sensible Experiments, the force of their Assertions, and
with the due rejection of Errors, and Embraceing of Realities, to make so
desirable, and inestimable a Present to those that earnestly wish for the
discovery of Truth. These prudent Instructions of our most Serene Patron,
received with due Reverence and Respect by our Academy, has not moved us to be
indiscreet Censurers of the Learned Pains of others, nor made us bold Obtruders
of our own Sentiments for Truths, and discoveries of Abuses: but it is our
Principal Intent to incite others also to repeat with the greatest severity,
and niceness, the same Experiments; as we have now adventured to do with those
of any other Person: Tho in Publishing these first Essays, we have, what we
could abstained therefrom, that we might by this due respect, gain upon the
Adversary to believe the sincerity of our Impartial, and Respectful Thoughts.
And to the full completing of so generous and useful an Undertaking, we desire
only a free Correspondence with those several Societies that are disperced
throughout the more Illustrious, and Noted Parts of Europe: That with the same
design of attaining such high Ends, so profitable a Commerce being in all parts
round about promoted, we may all go on with equal freedom, enquiring as much as
possible, and participating of the Truth: and for our parts, we will concur to
this Work with the greatest simplicity, and ingenuity; whereof it is no small
Argument, That when we have related the Experiments of others, we have still
mentioned the Authors Name, when known to us; and that we have often freely
confessed, that supposition concerning some Experiments, which when put in
practice we were never so successful as to bring to Perfection. But above all,
to prove clearly the unfeigned sincerity of our Proceedure, let that Freedom
suffice, wherewith we have still communicated the Essays and Experiments
themselves to any that, Traveling by our Country, showed any desire, or relish
of such Sciences, moved either by a gentile Humor, Esteem of Learning, or Spur
of Curiosity; and that from the first time our Academy was Founded in the Year
1657, when the greatest part, if not all the Experiments were invented, whereof
these Essays are now Published. If it shall happen, that among them there shall
be any found, thought of before, or after the time they were made here by other
Persons, and made Public, let us not be blamed for it, since we could neither
know, nor see all things; so that no man ought to wonder at the lucky Accord of
our Minds, and Inventions with other Men's; nor indeed will we, if we find those
of other Men agree with ours.

Lastly, We are unwilling any should imagine, That we pretend in this
Publication, a Perfect Work; or in the least, an Exact Module of a large
Experimental History; conscious to our selves, that more Time, and greater
Abilities are necessary to so vast a Design; as may be seen by the very Title
we have prefixed, only of Essays, which we had never put forth, had we not
been much urged thereto by Persons Meriting from us, by their dear
importunities, the Sacrifice of a Blush, for exposing such imperfect Embrio's.

And now we will close all with a Protestation, That we never desire to
entertain Controversy with any, or engage in any Nice Disputation, or heat of
Contradiction; and if sometimes, as a Transition from one Experiment to
another, or upon what occasion soever, there shall be inserted any hints of
Speculation, we Request they may be taken always for the thoughts, and
particular sense of some one of the Members, but not imputed to the whole
Academy, whose sole Design is to make Experiments, and Relate them. For such
was our first Proposal, and the Intent of that great Personage, who with his
Particular Protection, and far-reaching Judgment, caused us to take that
Method; to which Sage, and Prudent Advice we have still punctually, and
regularly conformed.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Description of some Instruments to discover the alteration of the Air.
page 1 The Description of Instruments to measure time 10 Experiments
appertaining to the Natural Pressure of the Air 13 That the Pressure of the Air
sustains the Quicksilver in the Tube 14 Mr. Roberval's Exper. of the Airs
Pressure repeated 17 Experiments against the Airs Pressure Answered 19 Whether
the Air gravitates, and of its Expansion 22 When the Pressure is taken off,
that the Mercury falls, with other Experiments relating thereto 24 etc. The
Efficacy of another Fluid joined to the Airs Pressure 30 Several Experiments
about the Airs Pressure to 34
The Description of Instruments, showing the Alterations happening in the State
of the Natural Compression of the Air 35 Various Experiments made in Vacuo 40
Of the Spherical Figure of small Drops in Vacuo ib. Of Heat and Cold applied
outwardly to the Vacuum 41 Whether the Air Reflects the second Image visible in
a Lens 42 Of Amber in Vacuo 43 Of the Effluvia of Fire in Vacuo 46 Of the
Motion of Smoke in Vacuo 48 Of Sounds in Vacuo 50 Of the Magnet in Vacuo 53 Of
hollow Canes in Vacuo ib. Of the boiling of Water in Vacuo. 57 Of Snow in Vacuo
58 Of the Dissolution of Pearl and Coral in Vacuo. 59 Of several Animals
included in Vacuo 61 etc. Of Bladders of small Fish in Vacuo 66
Experiments of Artificial Freezing 69 Of the Dilatation of Water in Freezing
71 Of the Measure of the force of Rarifaction in freezing Water 77 To measure
the utmost Expansion in freezing Water 79 Of the Procedure of Artificial
Freezings 77
Tables of several Fluids Freezing. 83 etc. Experiments of Natural Freezing 95
Of Common Water in Air ib. Of the same in Vacuo. 98 Of stilled Water 99 Of Sea
Water ib. Of the Power of Sal Ammoniac, etc. in Freezings 100 Of the Metals
that keep Ice best 101 Of Freezing a pieee of Ice to a Table ib. Of Freezing
the Dew upon the outsides of Glasses 102 Of Reflected Cold 103
Experiments about the alteration of the size of Vessels, etc. by heat and
cold, 104 That the Vessel alters before the Liquor contained 105 Of the
Alteration of a Brass Ring by heating in the fire 107 Of Bodies dilated by
imbibing Moisture 108 Of the Dilating and Contracting of Glass by heat and cold
109 Of the same in Tinn 110 In Brass Wires 111 The same proved by a different
Observable 112 That a Vessel also may be distended by Weight 113
Experiments about the Compression of Water 114 etc. Experiments against
positive Levity. 118 Experiments Magnetical 123 About Diverting the Passage of
the Magnetic Virtue 124 About the Magnetic Virtue passing through diverse Fluids
125 About the Placing the Magnetic in respect of the Poles of the Earth 127
Experiments touching Amber and other Electic Bodies 128 Experiments about
altering the Colors of several Fluids 133 Of Altering Water ib. Of Altering
Wine 135 Of Altering a Tincture of Red Roses ib. Of Altering a Tincture of
Saffron 136 Of Altering Greens ib. Of Altering Violet Colors 137
Experiments about the Motions of Sounds 138 Of Sounds passing equal spaces in
equal times ib. Of contrary and favoring Winds 140 Of the Equability of Motion
in Sounds ib.
Experiments about Bodies Projected 143 Of Horizontal Shot from the top of a
Tower ib. Of Perpendicular Shot 144 Motion impressed, not altered by a new
direction 145
Miscellaneous Experiments 147 Of the absolute weight of Air to Water ib. Of
Heat and Cold Of a Wire seeming lighter Hot than Cold 149 Of the force of Heat
in Rarifaction 150 Of Antiperistasis 151 Whether Cold be caused by the
intrusion of Frigorific Atoms 152 Of Ebullitions by Salts, etc. 153 Whether
Glass be Penetrable by Odours 155 Whether Glass be Penetrable by Humidity 156
Experiments of Light Of the instantaneous Motion of Light 157 Of Firing Bodies
with a Burning Glass 158 Of Bodies affording Light ib.
Experiments about the digestion of some Animals 160
Tab. 1. p. 1.

THE DESCRIPTIONS OF SOME Instruments To discover the Alterations of the AIR,
Caused by HEAT and COLD.
IT is most useful, and indeed a necessary thing in the making of Natural
Experiments, to be truly informed of all the Alterations the Air is incident
to; for since it receives into it self, and as it were, embraces all things,
leaning on them with its whole weight from a vast height, they must needs all
bend under this Pressure; and as this violence which they suffer, is more or
less, so are they more imprisoned or enlarged. Thus the Mercurial Standard
either rises or falls, at the different height of the Atmosphere, or as some
think, correspondent to the various Temperaments which the Air receives from
the Sun, or from the Shade, from the Heat, or from the Cold, when open, and
free, or when shaded and oppressed with Clouds, when it either rarifies, or
condenses it self, and so gravitates more or less upon the Stagnant Mercury, by
which, with different Pressures, it forces it higher or lower into the immersed
Cane. It is therefore requisite (as well for that Experiment which we shall
amply Treat of in the first place, as for others, which in the sequel of this
Discourse we shall handle) to be provided with such Instruments that we may be
able to assure our selves, what is the true Measure, not only of the greatest
changes of the Air; but if it be possible, the niceties of the smallest
variation. We will therefore in the first place, describe those which have been
serviceable to us, though they may have been already dispersed hence to several
parts of Europe, so that they will want the pleasing dress of Novelty to
recommend them: nevertheless, they will not be unacceptable to those that
desire a more nice and particular Information (if not of their use, which is
easily comprehended, yet) of the way and Artifice of making them.

The First Instrument
To measure the degrees of Heat and Cold in the Air.
Tab. 1. Fig. 1.
LEt the First Instrument be that represented by Fig. 1. which may serve, (as
likewise several others) to show the changes of the Air, in reference to Heat
and Cold, and is commonly called a Thermometer: it is made of Cristalglass,
after this manner. The Artificer by blowing with his own Mouth (instead of
Bellows) through a Glass-Pipe upon the flame of a Lamp, forces it in one
continued Stream, or several, at pleasure, from one place to another, where it
is requisite; and by this means, shapes most curious, and admirable Works of
Glass. Such an Artificer we call a Lamp blower. Let him then make the Ball of
this Instrument of such a Capacity, and join thereto a Cane of such a bore,
that by filling it to a certain mark in the Neck with Spirit of Wine, the
simple cold of Snow or Ice Externally Applied, may not be able to condense it
below the 20 degrees. of the Cane; nor on the contrary, the greatest vigor of the
Sun's Rays at Midsummer, to Rarifie it above 80 degrees. which Instrument may be
thus filled, viz. by heating the Ball very hot, and suddenly plunging the open
end of the Cane in the Spirit of Wine, which will gradually mount up, being
sucked in as the Vessel Cools. But because it is hard, if not altogether
impossible to evacuate the Ball of all the Air by Rarefaction; and the Ball
will want so much of being filled as there was Air left in it; we may thus
quite fill it with a Glass Funnel, having a very slender shank, which may
easily be made when the Glass is red hot, and ready to run; for then it may be
drawn into exceeding small hollow Threads, as is well known to those that work
in Glass. Put the small shank of this Funnel into the Cane to be filled, and by
forcing the Spirit of Wine through the Funnel with ones Breath, or sucking it
back again when there is too much; you may fill the Instrument up to what mark
in the Neck you please. The next thing is to divide the Neck of the Instrument
or Tube into Degrees exactly; therefore first, divide the whole Tube into Ten
equal Parts with Compasses, marking each of them with a knob of white Enamel,
Smalto Bianco. Smalto Nero.
and you may mark the intermediate Divisions with green Glass, or black Enamel:
these lesser Divisions are best made by the Eye, which Practice will render
easy. This done, and with the proof of Sun and Ice, the proportion of the
Spirit of Wine found; the Mouth of the Tube must be closed with Hermes Seal at
the flame of a Lamp, and the Thermometer is finished.

We rather make use of Spirits, than simple Spring Water for these Instruments;
because, first it is colder, ( i. e.) sooner sensible of the least change of
Heat and Cold, and by reason of its extreme lightness, it more readily
contracts it self, quickly falling or rising. Secondly, Simple Water, how pure
and clear soever, yet in a little time lets fall some Sediment, or Dregs, which
sticking to the sides of the Vessel, at last clouds its Transparency: whereas
the highest rectified Spirit of Wine, or the like burning Spirits, always keep
Pellucid, nor ever abate of their first Beauty. And since it is so clear and
Cristaline, that at first view it is hard to discern the bounds between it, and
the void space of the Neck of the Vessel; we sometimes used to tinge it with
the Infusion of Kermes, or Sanguis Draconis; But when we observed, that how
light and Refined soever the Tincture was, yet in time something still adhered
to the sides of the Glass, and augmented rather then lessened the Difficulty,
we at last wholly omitted the use of colored Liquors; the other being
discernable with a little straining the Eyes. We might here add many other
Works and Curiosities touching Lamp working; but as it is very difficult to
Design, and draw things of this Nature upon Paper; so it is altogether
impossible to make them intelligible in Writing: wherefore our Operator ought
to be pretty well instructed before, and his Art will improve with frequent
Practice.

The Second Instrument,
For the same use.
Tab. 1. Fig. 2.
THis is but a Copy of the former, in little; there being no other difference
between them, but in the length of the Stages the liquor has to run: that being
double the length of this; that being divided into 100 degrees. this but 50. that
at the greatest Cold of our Winter subsiding to 17 or 16 degrees. this usually to
12, or 11; and at a great extremity of Cold one year, to 8 degrees. and this to 6
degrees. And on the contrary, the first being exposed to the greatest Rage and Heat
of the Midday Sun in our Climate, does not rise above 80 degrees. When the Second
at the same time exceeds little, or not at all 40 degrees. The Rule of making
these, so as they shall keep such a correspondence, is only obtained by
Practice, teaching how to proportionate the Ball to the Cane, and so to adjust
the Quantity of Liquor, as they shall not vary in their Motions.

The Third Thermometer.
THe Third is also a Copy of the First, but much larger, whence it is more
sensible, and swifter near four times; its length is 300 degrees. made like the
other Two, but as was said before we can lay down no certain Rule to make it
Practice, and often Trials being the only way to effect it, by increasing, and
diminishing the size of the Ball, or the bore of the Cane, or the quality of
the Liquor, till at length it hits right: And a famous Man in this Art, who
served the most Serene Grand Duke, used to say, He could make Two or Three, or
as many as you desired, of 50 degrees. which being encompassed with the same
Ambient, should all agree: but that the case was otherwise in those of 100.
degrees. especially of 300 degrees. the smallest Inequality and Error committed, in
making one with a large Ball, and small Neck, being very easy to be
discovered: so that they will show great Disagreement and inequality when
compared together.

The Fourth Thermometer.
Tab. 1. Fig. 3.
THis Fourth Instrument has a Spiral Canale, yet differs not much from the
former; indeed it comes not near the same Scale of Proportion, it being
impossible to draw so very long a Neck equal, and of the same size and bore
throughout the whole length; because there is a necessity to pass and repass it
often over the flame to bend it; whence it cannot be avoided when the Metal is
softened by the flame, but the Cane will be straightened and contracted in some
places, and in others relaxed and swelled.

Blow then a Globe of a great Capacity, with a very long slender Neck, and Coyl
it round as in the Fig. each turn being close to the other, and rising but with
a small Angle, that the whole Height may be as little as possible, and so less
subject to be broken to pieces; then let it have at the top another less Ball
hollow, and sealed at the Flame, to be a receptacle for the Air in the Cane to
retreat to, from the pressure of the Water in raising it self, lest for want of
room, and being every way closed, it resists the ascent of the Water, and so
crack the Vessel; after this manner may be had a very ticklish Thermometer: and
as I may say, of so exquisite a sense, that the least flame of a Candle, in an
instant shall be able to make the contained Spirit of Wine move swiftly: which
Effect will be so much more conspicuous, as the Ball is larger, which may be
made very Capacious at pleasure, without being tied to any Rule: This
Instrument being made rather for fancy and curiosity to see the Liquor run the
Decimals of Degrees by the only impulse of a warm breath, etc. than for any
accurate Deduction, or Infallible Proportion of Heat, and Cold to be learnt
thereby.

The Fifth Thermometer.
Tab. 1. Fig. 4.
THis is more slow and lazy than any of the former, which immediately answer to
the least change of the Air; but this is not so nice to move upon a small
alteration; yet since it is made use of in diverse Parts of Italy, and other
places, we will not omit to say something briefly of its make.

To make it, you must fill a glass Vessel with Rectifyed Spirits of Wine, and
immersing a Thermometer of 100 degrees. therein, place it in Snow or Ice to cool
it; you must also put into the same Liquor many little glass bubbles blown, and
Hermetically Sealed at a Lamp; these by reason of the Air contained in them,
will keep themselves floating upon the Surface of the Water; and if by chance
any one being a little heavier in Specie than Water, shall sink to the bottom;
take it out, and upon a plate of Lead, with fine Emeril grind off so much of
the end as will make it light enough to swim. Then the Vessel being taken out
of the Ice, carry it into a Room where the Air is well heated by a Fire, that
the Liquor which before was very cold, may receive equally on all sides the
temperament of Heat. So by little and little, as the Liquor grows warmer, and
by Rarefaction lighter, the Balls (which at a more intense degree of Cold kept
just upon the Surface) shall begin to dive toward the bottom, and at the same
time the Spirit of Wine in the Thermometer shall creep up. That Bubble or Ball
thereof which sinks when the Thermometer is at 20 degrees. shall be reckoned the
first, that is, the heaviest, because it descended when the Water was yet very
cold, and little, or not at all altered. That which sinks when the Thermometer
is at 30. degrees. may be accounted the Second, at 40. the Third, at 50. the
Fourth, at 60. the Fifth, at 70. the Sixth, and Last, or Lightest; whence it
appears, that the Bubbles make a Scale of equal Differences; that is, from 10.
to 10 degrees. as likewise, whence this Instrument is more gross then the rest, in
that it shows by the rising and falling of the Bubbles, the alteration of the
Air; but to every 10 th. Degree of that Thermometer which is divided into 100.
and to about every 4 th. or 5 th. of that of 50 degrees. and to every 40. of that
of 300. Let these Bubbles so tried and chosen (And it would do well, if they
were of colored Glass, to be the more discernable in the midst of the Liquor)
be enclosed in a large Cane of Glass filled with Spirit of Wine, but not quite
to the top, leaving some space for the Liquor to rarefie, when the heat of the
Season shall require it; and then seal it Hermetically. If the heat of the Room
is not sufficient to make the Thermometer rise to 60, it may be helped, by
putting the Vessel in a Bath of warm water, increasing the heat by gradual
pouring in boiling Water, if needful; and so the Spirit of Wine contained
therein will not be more heated in one part than another, but take its
temperature as gently and equally as possible.

The Description of an Instrument to discover the difference of Moisture in the
Air.
HAving already treated of those Instruments which serve to show the
Alterations happening to the Air from Heat and Cold; we come next to Describe
another, useful to discover the Changes which the Air is subject to purely from
Humidity: and though there may be many and different Instruments of this
Nature, which have been Invented by several Ingenious Persons yet we will
describe this one: Of which (since it had its being first in this Court) we
will say something out of gratitude concerning its Invention and Use, though
perchance it is wrote of by others.

It is part of a Cone of Cork hollow within, and pitched; and covered on the
outside over with Tin: at the smaller end it is inserted into a Vessel of Glass
with a Conical Point shaped as in the Figure, Tab. 1. Fig. 5.
and closed Hermetically: The Vessel being so made, and placed upon its
Pedestal, is to be filled with Snow, or small beaten Ice; the water whereof as
it melts, shall have its issue by the Pipe made in the upper part of the Glass.
The Use of it is this, The subtle Moisture carried about by the Air, adheres by
little and little to the sides of the Vessel, covering it at first but with a
dew or mist, till by the coming of more moisture, it gathers into great drops,
and at last stealing down the sides of the Conical Glass drops into a tall Cup
in the shape of a Mumglass divided into equal degrees. and made on purpose to
receive it. It Is evident, as the Air is more, or less full of moist Vapors,
the force of the Cold condenses a greater or less quantity of Water, measured
by the graduated glass Cilinder. Wherefore desiring to compare one Air with
another; Observe in the first Air you would make use of, to what Degree the
Cilindrical Glass is filled in a determinate space of time, and then throw away
the Water, and carry the Vessel to the other place, and mark to what Degree the
condensed Water then rises in the same time: and so the difference between the
moisture condensed into Water at these two Experiments being found, gives the
true difference between the Humidity of the two Airs proposed to be compared.

We may likewise by exposing this same Instrument in the Air when the Wind
blows, find which is the moister, and which the dryer. So we have observed,
that when our South Winds prevail, the Glass sweats excessively, for the Air is
then very damp, it may be from the South Sea, where probably the Suns Influence
being great, Exhales those moist Particles which afterward incorporate
themselves with the Winds; and in a strong South-West Wind, it happened,
Libecciata Aquilonari Libecci*
that from 35, to 50 Drops have fallen in a Minute of an Hour. One time, the
North and South-West Wind striving together, the Weather being very thick, so
that the Clouds encompassed the Hills, we told 84 Drops in the same time: but
at last, the North Wind getting the better, it gradually gave over sweating*
and in little more than half an hour the Glass was dry, though there was still
a great deal of Snow within it: and so it continued all that Night, and the
next Day, while the same Winds kept abroad. Likewise when the West Winds blow,
the Glass is observed to be very dry. Poneuti.
Indeed, no certain Rule can be given of these things, since they may be
altered by so many Accidents, not only from the season of the Year, and
temperament of the Air, but from the Nature of the Soils and Countries
themselves, which sometimes alter the Criteria of these Winds. And we know in
some Cities and Places the South Winds are colder than with us, because
perchance they may be bounded Southward with Mountains of Snow, the winds
passing over which, are chilled. Nevertheless, our Instrument remains still
unalterably just to every place where it is made use of, corresponding in all
respects exactly enough to the ordinary Indications of Nature upon these Winds.

The Description of some Instruments to Measure Time.
WE need not go far to seek an Experiment, requiring a true and exact measure
of Time, such as that by Swings, and Sounds, or Strokes; since the foregoing
Experiment is a sufficient instance, where a Comparison is made of the Humidity
of Air, and Winds, to find the Difference and Proportion of Moisture which in
equal Spaces of Time distills from diverse Airs, by means of a Glass Vessel
filled with Ice: Which Difference consists sometimes in so small, and scarce
perceivable Minutie, that the Justness of the most Acurate Clocks cannot
discover it, because we either count the time from Stroke to Stroke, and the
Ears may possibly be deceived; or we take it from the Spaces shown by the Hand,
and then much more easily may the Eyes commit an Error; we must therefore of
necessity have recourse to an Instrument, that may be a more exact Time meter,
than the sound of four Strokes of the Clock, or the Minutes shown by the Hand
can be, in which the Judgment of the Senses is so subject to mistake. For (to
pass by the Errors that may be committed in the dividing of a Clock, or other
material Instruments) it is very difficult to distinguish, whether the Hand is
just upon the Point marked, or not. And then of Sounds, we must when all is
done conclude, That the time is already past, before the Clock has done
striking.

Wherefore, we take the Pendulum or Puppet, to be the most exact Instrument;
the Swing and Return of which, being taken for one Vibration, we never knew
that in the Number of many Vibrations one failure has happened, (a thing which
seldom succeeds so well in Practice) nor the least Variation able to cause an
Error worth the Regulating; but because the usual Pendulum hanging by a single
Thread in that free Liberty of swinging (whatever is the reason thereof) in
time deviates from its first direction, and toward the end when it approaches
Rest, its Motion is no longer in a vertical Arch, but in an Oval Spiral, in
which we cannot distinguish, nor number the Vibrations; wherefore to keep the
Motion true to the same Path, we hang the Weight in a double thread, fastening
each end thereof by it self at a little distance to an Arm of Metal, as in the
Figure. 6. So the Ball or Weight being hung on this Thread by a small Ring or
Staple, moves in the Figure of an Isosceles Triangle; for since it hangs free
upon the Thread, (though at the first impulse of Motion the Figure may be
rather a Scalne) yet by its weight, it slides down to the lowest part to which
it can fall, and keeps it self fixed there: from this Triangle it comes, that
the Motion of the Pendulum is regulated, while the Threads that make the legs
of the Triangle (if we may use that similitude) serve to stay the Ball from
swerving more to one hand, than the other, and keep it always directly in the
same Path. Since all Experiments wherein the Pendulum is made use of, require
not the same division of Time, a grosser sufficing for some, such as is made by
longer vibrations: and others again asking a Division so nice, given by
vibrations so quick one upon another, that the Eye can scarce distinguish them;
to be able with expedition and facility to lengthen or shorten the Triangle
without every time untying the Thread; let there be added below the upper,
another arm of Metal also, filled with a square hole on the upright piece of
the Instrument, so that it may slip up and down upon it, and be fixed at any
height by a Screw on the back: this arm is cut through the midst, which slit
being opened, and closed together by the means of Two other Screws, stops and
holds fast the Legs of the greater Triangle at any desired space between the
Ball, and the upper arm, the lower part remaining at liberty; while that part
between the two Arms is immovable: by this means the lesser Triangle below the
stop at the slit which is its Base, vibrates freely, and so much the swifter as
the Ball is suspended shorter, and by consequence the Legs of the Triangle more
contracted.

To interpose here a word or two; Experience tells us, (as Galileo has already
observed next the observation which he first made, of the very near equality of
Swings, about the Year 1583.) that not all the Vibrations of the Pendulum fall
precisely in equal spaces, but as they approach nearer to rest, so they
dispatch themselves in lesser spaces of time than at first, as may be shown in
its place. Wherefore in those Experiments that require a greater acuracy, and
so long a time of observation, that the little inequalities of these Vibrations
in a great number of them may at last happen to be sensible, 'twas thought good
to apply the Pendulum to the Movement of the Clock: a thing which Galileo first
Invented, and his Son Vincenzio Galilei put in practice in 1649. So the
Pendulum is moved by the force of the Spring, or Weight, and still carried to
the same height each way, with this great benefit, that not only the length of
the Vibrations become exactly equal, but in a manner all the Defects in the
other parts of the Clock are corrected and regulated. That we might be able to
make use of such an Instrument in several Experiments (which require the time,
some more, some less subtly divided) we made diverse Balls of Metal fastened to
small Iron Wires, of different lengths, each to be inserted into the same
female Screw when desired: of these the shortest made its whole Vibration, in
half a Second Minute of an Hour, the shortest needful; all other returns of
shorter Vibrattons being so swift, that the Eye is scarce able to follow them.

Let this suffice concerning those Instruments of a more frequent use in the
following Experim(...)

Experiments appertaining to the natural Pressure of the Air.
THat famous Experiment of the Quicksilver is now spread throughout all
Europe, which first in the Year 1643. offered it self to the thoughts of the
Ingenious Torricelli; nor is the noble and curious inference he makes therefrom
less enquired after, and known, when he comes to contemplate the cause of that
strange Effect; for he proposes, that it is the Air pressing upon all Bodies
under it, forces them, and removes them out of their places, when ever there is
a void and empty space whereto they may retire, and betake themselves; and
particularly fluids, from their great tendency to Motion: whereas solid Bodies,
as Gravel, and Sand, etc. or pieces of greater Stones (when there is an
endeavor to move them) are rather joined, and pressed together the closer by
that means, from the roughness and irregularity of their parts, so locking the
whole Mass together, that they sustain and prop up one another, and so resist
more powerfully any force applied to move them: but on the contrary, Liquid
Bodies, it may be from the smoothness or roundness of their Particles from some
other Figure they are of, are easily moved, their parts standing as it were in
aequilibrio upon a Point, that as soon as ever they are pressed, they yield
every way, and spread themselves, as we see Water from the least Body that
falls thereon, breaks away on all sides in orderly Circles: and who knows, that
from this incoherence and looseness of the parts, it may not happen that it is
seldom or never stable, though in its most proper receptacles, where it seems
sometimes Stagnant so that the smallest breath of Wind curls and agitates it;
and even in standing Lakes and Pools, where it seems most Sedate, though the
Eye perceives it not, yet there the Water is in perpetual Motion, and obedient
to all the undulations of the Air, which it may be is never at Rest; nor is
this more peculiar to Water than any other Liquid; in all which, as some think,
the force of the Airs Pressure is very evident; especially, when they are in a
place which in any one part of its Superficies has a Vacuum, or as it were void
space into which the Liquid may retire: for the Contiguous Air pressing the
Fluid on the one part with so many Miles height, when on the other part
(contiguous to the Vacuity) it touches not, nor can gravitate at all; it must
necessarily mount it into that void space, till the raised fluid becomes an
Equipoize to the Airs Pressure on the other part. This Equilibrium with diverse
Fluids, is at diverse Heights, as they are more or less heavy in Specie; a
lesser or greater quantity of which is able to resist the Force and Weight of
the Air. We (following the common Practice, as likewise the first Inventer
Torricelli) make use of Quicksilver, which being very heavy, is much more
commodious for the Experiment, making a Vacuum in a far less space than any
other Liquid can. What is needful to be seen in this Matter, the following
Experiments will manifest.

An Experiment,
Suggesting to Torricelli the first Inventor thereof, that it might be the
natural external Pressure of the Air which sustains the Mercury, or any other
Fluid, at a determinate Height in the empty space of a Cane, etc.
2 Braccia. Tab. 2. Fig. 1.
PRovide a glass Cane about 46 Inches long, Hermetically sealed at one end, and
open at the other, represented by ABC. fill this with Mercury, and stop the
mouth C. Tab. 2. p. 14.
close, either with your Finger, or a moistened Bladder tied over it; invert it,
and gently immerse it into the Vessel of Stagnant Quicksilver DE. then untie
the mouth C. and immediately the Mercury in the Cane will subside for the whole
space AF. where meeting with its Level, or Counterpoise after some
Fluctuations, it rests immovable: and the Cilinder of Quicksilver sustained E.
B. which bears upon the Superficies of the Stagnant Mercury DE. shall be about
the length of 28 6/10 Inches, un-Bracc
which length is found to vary, though but little, from External Accidents of
Heat and Cold; and something more from the diverse seasons of the Air, as
appears plainly from a long Series of our Observations. Nevertheless, these
variations being very little, it will be always about the beforementioned
Height of 28 6/10 Inches, or near it.

The space AF shall contain no Air, which is manifest by inclining the Cane
about the Point C as a Center, when you will find the internal Level F
successively move toward A, but never rise above the horisontal pricked line
FG, drawn from the point F, the first height of the Quicksilver, when the Cane
was perpendicular; and if the end A be inclined quite to the line FG, the Cane
will be full of Quicksilver, except a very little at A, whither still above
the level of the included Mercury, gathers together either some air wherewith
perhaps it is impregnated, or some other invisible effluvia exhaling there
from. This is most conspicuous, when a small quantity of Water is in the Cane,
which in making the Vacuum gets above the Mercury, and discovers in their
Passage through the midst of it, that several small Bubbles rise out of the
Mercury toward the empty space; as may be shown hereafter.

This Vacuity of Air may likewise be proved by Water poured upon the
Quicksilver in the Vessel DE. for lifting the Mouth of the Cane C out of the
Quicksilver, as soon as it is every way encompassed with the Water, the
Mercury will fall down, raising the Water in its place to the top of the Cane;
17 Bra. ^/3
provided it exceeds not the length of 33 Feet 45 Inches, to which (as may be
elsewhere discoursed) it is usual for Water to be sustained; probably from the
same power that bears up the Mercury to 28 6/10 Inches; and indeed, there will
be no great quantity of Air at the top of the Cane; since there is only some
thin Effluvia forced into an almost invisible space, which (as we said) rise
from the Quicksilver, or is some other subtle Matter capable of penetrating
thither.

Upon this ground we shall call (as before for brevitysake) the space AF, (and
any other left by the subsiding Mercury in a like Vessel) the vacuum, or void
space, (i. e.) empty, and void of Air; at least such as unaltered, and in its
Natural State encompasses the Cane; not presuming here to exclude Fire, Light,
or the Either, or any other very thin Bodies, which are either in part dispersed
with little vacuities interposed, or wholly fill^d the space, which we call the
vacuum, being stretched and attenuated as some think. Nevertheless, it is our
intent in this place, only to discourse of the Space filled with Mercury, and
endeavor to find the true cause of that wonderful Counterpoise of this Weight,
without entering into any Dispute with the deniers of a Vacuity. And since many
Experiments have been made for this end, (as well what is related by others, as
what has been invented by our Academy) the success shall be faithfully set
down; our Custom being always to deliver the Matter Historically, and not to
defraud the Inventors either of their Invention, or due praise.

An Experiment
Of Mr. Robervals in favor of the Airs Pressure upon Inferior Bodies, tried in
our Academy.
Tab. 2. Fig. 2. 2. Brac.
LEt there be a glass Vessel A, to the bottom of which BC perforated at D; let
the Cane DE 46 Inches long be affixt, over this hole set the square glass F,
then close the Vessel A with the glass Cover GH, having an open nose HI, and a
hole at G, through which let the Cane KI be put open at each end, and about 46
Inches long, 2 Brac.
or not less then 30; let this down into the Glass F, but not quite to touch
the bottom; and fasten it there with Mastic, or other Cement at the fire, to
the hole in the Cover G; this Cement, or Paste, is made of Brick reduced to an
impalpable Powder, and incorporated with Turpentine, and Greek Pitch; it is
admirable to stop Glasses to exclude the Air; let it be luted close with the
same, round about where the said Cover and Vessel join; and cover the lower
mouth E with a Bladder: Then pour in at the upper end K so much Mercury, till
running over the Glass F it falls upon the bottom BC, and thence by the hole D
fills the lower Cane ED, and after that the whole Vessel A, the Air having its
way out by the open Nose HI, which when the Mercury begins to run through it,
close well with the Bladder I, and lift up the whole Cane to K till a little
runs over, that not the least Air may remain when closed, which do with the
Bladder K. Lastly, open the other Bladder at the Mouth E under the Superficies
of the Stagnant Mercury MN, into which the Cane is immersed, and immediately
the upper Cane KL, and the Vessel A will empty themselves; the Glass F and OP,
part of the Cane DE being about 28 Inches above the Level, MN remaining full.
This done, Brac.
the ingress of the External Air upon opening, or pricking the Bladder I, will
immediately suppress the Cilinder of Mercury OP into the lower Vessel, and
raise up another QR from the Mercury in the glass Cup F into the Cane LK equal
to the former OP, 1 Brac.
and therefore 28 Inches long; and this Cilinder will not subside until the
External Air entering at the top K, rushes in upon it through the Cane LK.

If in this Vessel A, a little Bladder be enclosed, taken carefully out of a
Fish, the Air that is Naturally therein being first expressed, so as very
little be left in the folds thereof, and then the Orifice well tied together,
as soon as ever (by the subsiding of the Mercury) the Bladder shall be in
vacuo, that little Air remaining in it will swell, and distend it; nor will it
shrink again, 'till by opening the Vessel at K the External Air gets in to
press upon it.

But we have observed more clearly the like Expansion of Air in vacuo, Tab. 2.
Fig. 3.
in a Vessel made after another manner, as ADB, wherein a Lambs Bladder
squeezed together, and almost wholly discharged of Air, is enclosed thus; fill
the Vessel with Quick silver by the mouth D, and tie it over with a Bladder,
the lower Mouth E being before stopped with the Finger, then immersing it into
the Quicksilver, in the Vessel FG, open the Mouth E, and let the Quick silver
subside; then will the Bladder C hung by a Thread in the empty Vessel ADB swell
it self, and so continue, till by opening the Mouth D, the External Air enters
a the Top, which at the same time will bear down the Cilinder of Mercury into
the Vessel at the bottom FG, and press together the Bladder.

Likewise, if in closing the Mouth D, there be put upon the Mercury a little
froth made with whites of Eggs, or Soap-suds, still as the Vessel ADB empties
it self, the Air imprisoned in these small bubbles will so swell them, that at
length breaking through its thin Confinements, it shall be at liberty, and
quite released from the Liquor, which will fall down upon the Mercury like Dew
separated from that fine steame of Air contained in the froth.

Tab. 3 p. 19.

Experiments
Alleged by some against the Pressure of the Air, and the Answer thereto.
THere have been Two Experiments, from which some of our Academy judged a
considerable Argument might be raised against the Pressure of the Air upon
Inferior Bodies, and the Effect of sustaining Fluids attributed to something
else.

Tab. 3. Fig. 1.
One was, by covering the Vessel A, and likewise the Cane with a great Bell of
Glass BCD pasted down close to a Table round the edges: for then they imagine,
that if it were true, that the weight of the whole Incumbent Atmosphere of Air
did protrude the Mercury into the Cane, and counterpoise it with its weight; by
defending (with this Cover of Glass) the Stagnant Mercury from so great a
Pressure, the small, and scarce sensible weight of the little portion of Air
included within the Bell, must of necessity be unable to keep the Quicksilver
at the same height whereto the momentum of so vast a space of Air had raised
it; but notwithstanding this, they never observed it to subside a jot from the
usual height EG.

The Second Experiment was of the same Nature, but more Artificial.

Tab. 3. Fig. 2.
We filled with Mercury a small Vessel AB (which at first was made without the
Beak CD, added afterward for another Experiment) and plunged into it when
full, the Cane OF, and making the usual Vacuum, there was poured out from the
Vessel AB a small quantity of Quick silver, so that a little Air might be in
the space AH to bear upon the Stagnant Level HG, and then the Weight and
Pressure of the External Air was kept off, by closing carefully with the
aforementioned Cement, the round space A between the Neck of the Vessel, and the
Cane; and yet in this case, when the bulk of the External Air was so lessened
to nothing almost, we saw no sensible abatement of the Mercurial Cilinder IF
below the usual height.

But the Assertors of the Airs Pressure answer these Experiments thus. That
these Events on the contrary greatly favor their Opinion; for the immediate
cause (as they say) that forces, and powerfully sustains the Mercury, to the
height of 28 1/^ Inches, 1 Brac.
is not the weight of the Incumbent Air; which indeed is taken off by the Bell
in the first Experiment, and by the Cement in the second, but is in reality an
effect of Compression, which was produced and wrought in the Air (contained in
BCD Fig. 1. and in AH Fig. 2.) by that weight before they were Cemented close:
whence it is no wonder, that the Quick silver subsides not from its usual
height, the Air keeping in the same state of Compression as it is forced to do,
from the resistance made by the glass Bell, and Cement, which supplies the
place of all that vast Tract of Incumbent Air.

And because it is yet believed by some, that the force of a supposed Spring in
the Air acts wholly in this Effect, so as without it by no means it could
happen; 'twas therefore attempted to insinuate the contrary, by the following
Experiment.

Taking the same Vessel AB, with its Cane OF (before we poured off any of the
Mercury, as was directed in the former Experiment, or stopped up the Mouth of the
Vessel at A with Cement) and then setting all in a great Vessel full of Water
KLMN, the Quicksilver was observed to be sensibly deprest from A to GH; and on
the contrary, raised in the Cane from I to O; this Ascent being about the
fourteenth part of the whole height of the Water OF: then the Mouth A was
closed, that so only the Water in the space AGH might press upon the Mercury,
which nevertheless lost none of the height lately gained by the weight of all
the Incumbent Water OF, above the First Level I; yet in this case the included
Water AGH, not by virtue of any Springs (which perchance it had not) but
because it had been forced by the Charge of the whole height OF into the space
left by the Quicksilver rising from I to O, and kept there by the same force,
and so hindered from Returning. The same may be said to happen to the Air.

Lastly, Some desirous to see what Effect a greater, or lesser Rarefaction of
the Air included in AGH would have, made this Trial.

Joining to the Vessel AB the Beak CD (into which they fastened a Mouth of Metal
with a female Screw), they adapted a Syringe; Then whenever a Suction was made
of the Air in AGH, and so what remained attenuated and weakened, the Level I,
might be seen to subside, contrarily when compressed more, by forcing in new
Air; the same Level I was raised.

The same happens from Fire or Ice approaching it; for the Mouth C being
closed, when Fire is Externally applied to the Air in AGH, the Mercury rises,
and by the application of Ice subsides; as if after the same manner, as it
happened in the contrary operations of the Syringe; the Air had been Condensed,
and enforced by Heat, and rarefied and weakened by Cold; from all which Matters
it seemed probable, that this sustention of the Fluid does not absolutely
depend upon the weight of the Air, but also upon the compression which lower
parts of the Air receive from those above.

An Experiment
To know if the Air near the Superficies of the Earth, is pressed by the weight
of the Air above, and if it be put in a void space at its Liberty; whether it
will expand it self to a greater space, and how much when yet it is still
unaltered by any new degree of Heat.
THE Ingenious Observation made by M. Roberval with the little bladder of Air
enlarging it self in Vacuo, moved some to believe, it might be determined how
far the Air is capable of Expansion when at absolute liberty in any place; for
it seemed probable to them, that in any Vessel proposed, a void space might be
assigned sufficient for the whole increase of such a quantity of Air; whence
whatever should happen to exceed that Quantity (requiring a more ample space to
dilate it self in) must proportionably more, or less depress the Mercurial
Cilinder below the usual height of about 28 Inches: and on the other side, what
ever comes short of it, will easily permit the Mercury to rise to the usual
height. The Experiment is thus,

Tab. 3. Fig. 3. 2 Brac.
Let there be a Vessel of Glass ABC, with a shank BC about 46 Inches long, open
at G; and let there be a tall Glass provided, DEF filled with Mercury to
immerse the shank BC into, but such a Vessel as may not only serve to immerse
it into, but capable when desired of receiving either all, or a great part of
the Shank into it self as a Scabbard.

Tab. 3. Fig. 4.
Let there be another Vessel GHI equal in all respects, as near as may be to the
former ABC, in which make the usual vacuum, marking the height to which the
Mercury is sustained at that time, KL; then fill with Mercury the Vessel ABC
Fig. 3. being as was said of the same size by the Mouth C up to M, and let MC
remain filled with Air.

It is clear, that stopping with your Finger the Mouth C, and inverting the
Vessel, the small quantity of Air left MC will pass through the Mercury, and
take its place in A. Then plunge the Mouth C beneath the Level of the Stagnant
Mercury DF, and removing your Finger make the vacuum PA. The height of the
Mercurial Standard will be PQ, measure it, and if it be found equal to LK in
the Vessel GHI Fig. 4. in which no Air was left to alter it, it shows that the
Cilinder of Quicksilver PQ is not in the least influenced by that little Air
remaining MC, because the space left empty from A to P is more than sufficient
for its utmost Expansion* Proceed then gradually to depress the Cane, or Shank
BC into the Mercury DF, that the Level P may be gradually raised also, suppose
to R, successively lessening the space PBA left for the Air; continue this
depression as long as the Height QR shall be found equal to KL. And Note that R
is the fixed and utmost bounds of the whole height of a Cilinder of Mercury
equal to KL, all the subsequent heights toward B (caused by a farther
depression of the Cane into the Vessel DE) being successively diminished:
whence it is probable, that the void space ABR is quite filled by the Expanded
Air; because from R upwards, the Mercurial Cilinder suffers some force from
within: an evident sign (as some think) that the Quantity of Air MC will not be
contented with a less space, than ABR for its full, and free Expansion; the
measure of this space ABR, and by consequence of the Expansion of the Air MC,
is thus obtained.

Fig. 3.
All things being as in the Vessel ABC, where the air MC has its utmost
Dilatation in the space AR; then seek the proportion between the space MC
filled with air naturally comprest, and the space AR filled by the same air
dilated, which is found at one trial by weighing the water that may be
contained in the space MC, and likewise that which may be contained in AR; as
suppose they are found in Proportion to each other, as 1 to 174, we may affirm
the same of the air, that (when at its greatest Expansion it takes up 173 times
a larger space, than when in the state of its Natural compression.

Note, that having often reiterated this Experiment, and at diverse seasons it
has not always succeeded in the same proportion: for when at first we made it
with another kind of apparatus, though the Operation was much the same, yet the
Proportion was as 1 to 209. afterward making use of the present Instrument we
found it as 1 to 182; Lastly, the third time (which also seemed to be more
exactly performed than before) it was (as is set down) as 1 to 174; nor is this
diversity strange, considering that the Experiment can never be made with the
same air, but still either more or less comprest, as the Season is warmer or
colder, and as the place of Observation is higher or lower, whence it is
impossible it should be Dilated in the same manner, or in the same fixed and
unaltered Analogy.

Fig. 4.
Note also, that the Ball GH was joined to the Cane HI, because if any Invisible
Particles of air were disseminated through the Mercury, they might rise into
the Ball, and have room enough to expatiate in without being able by their
Pressure to alter the natural Height KL raised by the equipondium of the Air.

An Experiment,
Proposed to show, that where the Pressure of the Air is taken off, the Mercury
is no longer sustained.
Tab. 4. Fig. 1.
HAving chosen a small Cane of Glass AB not so long as the Mercurial Standard,
close its lower mouth B with a Tab. 4. p. 25.
Bladder, fill it at A with Mercury, and put into it a little Dart CA, the one
end gently touching the Bladder tied at the bottom of the Cane, and the other a
little above the Mouth A; which also close with a Bladder.

Let there be another Cane DE* longer than 30 Inches, the Mercurial standard,
made so that the Mouth thereof E may be easily covered with the Finger, and the
end D large enough to receive the Cane AB, which already filled with
Quicksilver must be put therein, observing to let it down so low, Brac.
that its end B may be less than 28 6/10 Inches from the Superficies of the
Stagnant Mercury FG, reckoning toward D; then fasten, and close stop the two
Canes together at D with Cement, that the External Air be perfectly Excluded.
After this at E fill the whole Cane ED with Mercury, and stopping it at E with
the Finger, invert it into the Stagnant Mercury FG, and make the Vacuum in the
upper part DH, that the mouth B may still remain immersed in the Quick silver
HI; close again the Mouth E with your Finger, yet not raising it out of the
Mercury FG; whence the Communication between the Quicksilver FG, and that in
the Cane DE being hindered by the Finger, the Cane DE will be as a Vessel, into
which the little Cane AB is immersed: then striking the end of the little Dart
AC, thrust off the Bladder from the bottom B; as soon as it is opened, the
Mercury will all run out of the Cane AB, (although it is shorter than the
Mercurial Standard, and its Mouth B still in the Mercury HI) contrary to what
would have happened, if the space DH now void, had been full of air: as the
following Experiment will manifest.

An Experiment
Likewise proposed, to try if (when the Pressure of the Air is taken of) the
sustained Fluids will subside, and upon its return be raised again.
Tab. 4. Fig. 2. 2 Brac.
LET the Cane AB be about 3 Foot 10 Inches long, and Hermetically sealed at A;
let the Beak AC be drawn so slender, that it may be easily nipt off with the
Fingers, and with as little trouble sealed again with the flame of a Candle:
fill the Cane with Quick silver at the Mouth B, which (as also the Mouths of
all Canes and Vessels employed in making a Vacuum) ought to be ground, and
rubbed smooth; so to be more securely stopped with a Finger. Then let there be
another Cane DE made of the length of the first AB, Tab. 4. Fig. 3.
and seal it at one end, but let it be open at the other, not with a round
Mouth as the former, but cut a slope; this when filled with Mercury, is to be
put like a Sword into its Scabbard into the Cane AB, made large enough to
receive it. Then the Mouth B being stopped with the Finger, invert both the
Canes, and plunge them into the Mercury in the Vessel FG, making the vacuum as
is usual; which will be at the same height in both Canes, Levelling the Mercury
in the innermost and outermost two at H; then with the Finger stop the Mouth B
of the Exterior Cane, while it is yet beneath the Superficies of the Mercury FG;
so that the Mercurial Cilinder BH may have no farther Communication with the
Mercury in the Vessel FG. But the Exterior Cane will be a Vessel to contain the
inner Cane DE, as in the former Experiment; and the Mouth of the inner Cane E,
will by reason of its Oblique Figure, remain open: this done, nip off the end
of the Beak C, that the Air entering thereat upon the Quick silver H in the
Exterior Cane, encompassing the other, and pressing thereon, may immediately
fill the innermost Cane DE; which it will do, provided that in the Cane AB
there is enough Quicksilver to fill it; and the space from A to H, which is
the vacuum, Br.
exceeds not 30 Inches This Experiment is easily made, and repeated in a short
time.

An Experiment,
Proposed for the same end, to know if the Air acts in the sustention of Fluids.
Tab. 4. Fig. 4.
LEt there be a little glass Vial as ABC, whereof the Mouth C is drawn so small,
that being filled with any Liquor, and turned downward, though open at C, yet
it will not run out; fill this with Mercury with a small Glass funnel, and stop
it at C with Wax, or Mastick, then place it in the Glass Vessel DE, so that the
Mouth thereof C may rest upon it, and the cover F be closed with the usual
Cement; then fill by the Mouth G, the whole Vessel DE with Mercury, and make
the Vacuum; which done, apply a Candle (on the outside of the Vessel DE) to the
Mouth of the Vial C, and so melt off the Wax: as soon as ever it is open, the
little Vial will begin to run, and empty it self of the Mercury; but upon
admission of air into the Vessel DE, it will immediately stop.

If instead of Mercury the Vial be filled with Oil, or Wine, or any other
Liquor, the Effect will be the same.

1 Brac.
An Experiment
To show, that in any Vessel above 28 6/10 Inches long, filled with Mercury,
provided it has a very small mouth, when it is inverted in the open Air, a
Vacuum will be made in all that space which is above the Height of 28 6/10
Inches.
Tab. 4. Fig. 5.
TAke a Glass Cane AB of what size and length you please, above 28 6/10 Inches,
seal it at A, and let it be open at B, with a very small Orifice; fill it with
Mercury, and hang it in the open Air Perpendicular, with the end B downwards,
the Mercury will presently run out, (not by drops, but) in a continued stream
till it subside to C, the usual height of about 28 6/10 Inches, and then it
will stop of it self. 1 Brac.


An Experiment
To show more evidently, that where the Pressure of the Air is wanting, the
bearing up of the Fluid is lessened in a Cane of any length; and upon the
return of the same Pressure, raised up again.
Tab. 5. Fig. 1. 2/3 di Brac.
LEt there be a Vessel of Glass AB, about 15 Inches long, with a Beak BC drawn
very small, and open at C; at the Mouth AD fill the whole Ball GFB with Tab 5 p
29
Mercury gradatim, that as it rises in the Ball, it may also in the Beak,
driving out the Air it finds there before it; and when it comes up to C, seal
it with a Flame. Then take a small Cane OF sealed at E, and cut transversly at
F; let it be a little shorter than the inward height of the Vessel AB; this
through the smallness of its bore, and being shorter than the Mercurial
Standard, may be inverted full of Mercury, and let down into the air within the
Vessel AB, plunging the Mouth into the Stagnant Mercury GH: then fill with
boiling Water the Vessel AB up to the top, and stop the Mouth AD with a round
Glass Plate ground to it, and perforated with a small hole; cover this with a
Bladder, and bind it close. The Water will gradually cool, and so condense it
self, causing part of the Vessel AI to be empty; and at the same time the
Mercury in the included Cane OF will subside, suppose to K, where it will stop,
and fall no farther. Then prick the Bladder over the hole in the Glass Plate,
and immediately upon the Ingress of the air, the Mercury in the Cane will
hastily mount up, and refill the whole Cane OF, although it were higher,
provided it exceed not the Mercurial Standard.

Note that KL is about the fourteenth part of the whole height of the Water ML
(for what Cause may be told presently) but when it does exceed it, (as it may
sometimes happen) it is from two Causes; First, either the Water wherewith the
Vessel is filled, was not poured in so hot, that the vacuum left by it, in
condensing, is capable of receiving all the Quick silver falling from the Cane
OF; for when the space AI left by the Condensing Water, is filled by the
subsiding Mercury (which falling into the Vessel GB raises all the Water) there
can no more Mercury descend out of the Cane OF, and so it will be above 1/14 of
the height ML.

Or Secondly, the other cause may be, when this void space AI is indeed
sufficient for the Mercury in the Cane, but not for the Air; which may rise
either from the Mercury in the Ball, or from the Water in the Vessel, which air
requiring a larger field to expatiate in the^ the void AI, may possibly make
some impression upon the Superficies of the Water, and so communicate it to the
Cane, and bear up the Mercury a little higher than the bare Weight and Pressure
of the Water would have sustained it at.

An Experiment
From whence is shown, the efficacy which the Pressure of another Fluid joined
with the Air, has upon the sustained Mercurial Cilinder.
Tab. 5. Fig. 2.
THe Vacuum being made with the Cane ABC, wherein the simple Pressure of the air
raises the Mercury to D, Brac.
the usual height of 28 6/10 Inches, pour Water upon the Stagnant Level EB, and
fill it up to A, and you shall see the Level D raised to F, and the space FD
will be 1/14 of the Water AB poured in: and that because, to the weight of the
Cilinder of Mercury DF, the weight of the other Cilinder of Water will upon
trial be found equal, having the same Basis, and of the Height of AB.

But if instead of Water the same space AB be filled with Oil, the Mercury will
rise to G only; if with Spirit of wine to H; whence we may (from the
proportion of the height of the Fluid AB encompassing the Cane, to the height
of the increase caused by that Fluid in the mercurial Cilinder above the first
Height of 28 6/10 Inches caused by the air) find the Proportion of Specific
Gravity between the mercury and any of the Ambient Fluids. 1 Brac.


And likewise as easily that of the Specific Gravities of the Fluids, in
respect of each other.

The same may also be obtained without a Vacuum with a plain Cilindrical glass
AB in the former Fig. into which by putting a little mercury, and the small
Cane AC (now supposed open at each end) and then pouring an equal quantity of
several Fluids, seperatim upon the Superficies of the mercury EB, and all to
the same Height, suppose A; from the different heights of the mercury in the
little Cane FG, HD, caused by their respective gravities, we may not only have
the Proportion of their Specific gravity with the mercury, but also that of
the Fluids compared with one another.

Note, that (in this, and all like Experiments) where it happens that the
inward or outward Level of the mercury is altered by the Pressure of some
fluid, or otherways, then the Letters pointing at those operations in the
Figures, are supposed to be removed to the places requisite, and successively
follow the Level, as it gradually moves from place to place.

An Experiment
Showing, that where the Air presses not at all, a Vacuum may be made not only
with Mercury, but also with Water, to any height of the Tube, provided less
than that whereto it used to be sustained by it.
Tab. 5. Fig. 3. 1 Braccio
LEt there be a Glass Vessel AB containing about 6 l. of Water and the Mouth A
big enough to receive the Cane CD 22 9/10 Inches long sealed at C, but
Obliquely open at D: this Cane must have at A, (the place whereto it is let down
into the Vessel AB) two small Anulets of Glass close together, that the Bladder
with a hole therein may be tied very fast between those two Rugs: then fill the
whole Vessel AB with Water as hot as possible, and the Cane CD with cold, put
upon it at the lower end D the Plate of Glass E fitted to shut the Mouth of the
Vessel AB: Immerse the Cane therein, turn down the Bladder, gather it together,
and bind it close about the Neck of the Vessel, having first pressed out the Air
from its Folds. Now as the Water cools, part of the Vessel FG will be empty,
and likewise (as in the former Experiment) part of the Cane CH, where the Water
will rest, nor move but upon some alteration of the External Heat, and Cold;
but upon pricking the Bladder, the Air forcibly entering upon the Level of the
Water in the Vessel, will refill the Cane as at first.

It was thought by some, that the water in the Cane does not fall at first when
the Vacuum is made to the same Level with that in the Vessel, (supposing the
space AG capable of receiving it) it may be from a cause mentioned in a
foregoing Experiment ( i. e.) from some Air which raises it self from the Water
into the void space, perhaps too narrow for its full Expansion: whence they
imagine, that if the Experiment were made with wine, oil, spirit of wine, and
other liquors, from a greater or lesser Vacuum remaining in the Cane, it might
be determined which of the Fluids has most Air dispersed through its Particles.

An Experiment
First made in France, and after by our Academy; whence it is probable, a more
cogent Argument for the Pressure of the Air may be drawn.
M. Pecquet in his Book of New Anatomical Experiments, writes, that it has been
observed by many, that the height of the Mercurial Cilinder in Vacuo, varies
according to the places where the Experiment is made; whence in higher places
it is less; and in lower places, and deep pits, greater: provided the height be
pretty considerable, as that of the highest Mountain of Auvergne, at the top
whereof the Mercury wants much of the usual height: which has been said to
happen, because the higher Air which is found upon the tops of vast Mountains,
having a lesser weight upon it, makes a more faint Pressure, nor is able to
raise the Mercury to that height whereto the lower Air of Valleys and Plains
easily mounts it. Howsoever, the truth of this assigned cause may prove, of
which it is not at present our intent to discourse; yet we have observed the
very same Effect on the highest Tower at Florence, Br* 142.
which is 271 Foot high: as likewise on diverse of those small Hills which
surround the City: and we find it manifest, that the height of the Mercury
varies in different parts of the Tower, or Hill, subsiding as we ascend toward
the top; and as we descend lower, and lower, it gradually rises, till being
brought into the plain, it balances it self at the usual Station. Br. 50.
But to make this Effect sensible, at least 100 Foot is requisite This
observation has given some ground to hope, this Instrument might be improved to
show and determine exactly the state of the Airs compression; believing that
the diverse Heights of the mercurial Cilinder ought infallibly to show the
various Pressures of the Air upon the Stagnant mercury, upon account of the
different height of the Atmosphere above the said Level. But from the many
inequalities, and irregular movements, which in a long Series of Observations
we have taken notice of, this thought is rendered dubious; for this Instrument
being let alone fixed and unmoved in any place, its variations were very small,
and seldom above 2 or 3 degrees, which came only from the different
temperament of Heat and Cold; and on the contrary, very notable variations to
above 12 Degrees have sometimes happened from other reasons to us unknown and
hid.

Nevertheless, to arrive at this Knowledge by other means, more certainly and
assuredly, we thought of making the next following Instruments, whereon though
the External Accidents of Heat, and Cold have some Effect, altering them from
their true and simple Operation: yet these disadvantages are not so
insuperable, but the accuracy and care of the diligent Observer may easily
avoid them.

Tab. 6. p. 35

THE DESCRIPTIONS OF THE Instruments: SHOWING, The various Alterations
happening in the State of the Natural Compression of the Air.
The first Instrument.
Tab. 6. Fig. 1.
Choose out the smoothest and evenest Glass Cane you can, being somewhat larger
than an ordinary Goose-quill, which must be bent in the Figure of ABCD, with
its two Arms AB, CD Parallel, and very near of the same length, as is
represented in the Figure; this must be acurately divided into equal Degrees,
so that the Decimal Marks upon each Arm, may be upon the same Level: which to
do more easily with the small Buttons of Enamel, Smalto.
you may glue on the outside of the Arms two Lists of Parchment, equally
divided; which through the Transparent Glass Cane will readily point at the
place where the Buttons ought to be fixed. The Arm CD is to be widened like a
Trumpet at D, and the other Arm is to be joined to one, or more Glass Balls, as
E, F, which are empty, and capable of containing some Quantity of air; the last
of which must have a Beak GH drawn small to be Sealed with a flame, as occasion
requires: Then pour in some Quick silver at the Mouth D, which (the Vessel
being open at each end, and the Two Arms of an equal size) will stand both
ways, at an exact Level, as I, K. The Instrument, being so prepared, is to be
carried to the foot of some Tower, where let it rest 'till the air contained
within the Balls, may be of the same Temperament with the Ambient: then
presently Seal it with a flame at H, but be sure to be very quick in doing it,
lest the included air should alter by heat of the flame. This done, let there
be one upon the Tower, to draw up the Instrument with a Pack-thread (fastened to
the upper part thereof, so as not to invert the Beak;) and when at the highest
part of the Tower, let it stand upon a plain, as at the foot thereof it rested;
then examining the Temperature of the air above, and finding it the same with
that below; you may perceive, that whereas at the foot of the Tower, the
Quicksilver rested at I, K; at the top of the Tower the Level I will be
sensibly deprest, as to L, and the Level K in the same Proportion raised for
the space MK: caused, as they say, by the more vigorous Pressure which the
lower air makes upon that included in the Balls E, F, in comparison of that
above; by which the Level K is more lightly pressed.

Remember, that every little difference of Heat and Cold between the air above,
and thar below, is able to cause a variation in the Levels of the Two Arms AB,
CD; and so alter what should have happened from the diversity of Pressures made
by the air: wherefore this Instrument is a sort of Thermometer for the air; and
that, for the most part, very nice. Therefore in the making this Experiment,
choose the Dawn of the day before the Sun is up, or any other close Season; that
the air above and below may be of an equal Temper, as near as possible; nor let
the time between the observation made at the bottom and top of the Tower be
long; take care also not to stand too near the Instrument, when you observe the
Degrees, which should be done quickly, and be sure not to breathe upon it, lest
it heat the Balls: which should be of as thick Glass as may be, to defend the
better from any External Impressions, the air contained in them.

All this diligence must likewise be used in the management of the Three
following Instruments, they being not at all less Nice, and subject to cause
the same mistakes as this first.

The Second Instrument.
Tab. 6. Fig. 2.
LET there be a Vessel of Glass AB containing about two Quarts, with its Beak CD
open; pour into it so much Mercury as will cover the mouth E of a small Cane OF
11 Inches long, and open at both ends, Brac.
but cut slopeing at E, and round at F; which being divided into equal Parts,
or Degrees, is to be immersed into the Stagnant Mercury GH; and the space left
round the Mouth of the Vessel A is to be closed with Cement to shut out the
air; being so made, carry it to the foot of a Tower, and let the internal air
be reduced to the same Temperament with the External; immediately Seal it, and
let it be drawn up to the top of the Tower; where having placed it on a Plain,
you will find the Mercury somewhat raised within the Cane, suppose to I: which
Rise, (they say) follows also from the same Reason which we gave in the
Description of the former Instrument, viz. The lower air, such as is included
in the space ACGH, has a greater force and power upon the Level of the Mercury
encompassing the Cane, than the higher air has, which presses upon the Level I,
entering in at the Mouth of the Cane F, so that it raises the little Cilinder
IK, to make a just Equilibrium between those two Momentums, or Powers.

The Third Instrument.
Tab. 6. Fig. 3. di Brac. di Br.
BLow a Glass Ball A 7 6/10 Inches in Diameter, with its Neck BC about 15 2/10
Inches long, divided into very minute Degrees, pour into the Ball so much Water
as will fill half the Neck, which is the space CD: stop the Mouth C with a
Finger, and plunge it into the Water in the Bladder OF, which is kept from
being filled to its whole Spherical Capacity, by means of a Weight at pleasure
hung at F: close then the folds of the Bladder, and bind it very strait round
the Neck BC, at E, taking care when you bind it, to pour in Water till it runs
over; so to be secure that no air is included, which might any way alter or
spoil the due and right Operation of the Instrument; Every thing being
performed after this manner, at the foot of a Tower, fasten to the Ball at G, a
string let down from the top of the Tower; and having observed the Degrees
whereat the Water stands, let it be drawn up: when again observing, it will be
found Deprest some Degrees lower, as to H, which will be more or less according
to the present State of the air; and the greater or lesser height of the Tower.

This also they say happens, for as much as the Bladder OF is encompassed with
the air of the higher Region; and so not sufficiently armed externally to
resist the Force made on it by the air of the lower Region (which is included
in the space GD) in Dilating it self; whence it must necessarily yield to
enlarge its internal Capacity, which the small Bulk of Water DH sinks down to
fill out.

Tab. 7. p 39

The Fourth Instrument.
Tab. 7. Fig. 1.
CAuse a Glass Ball to be made A, with its Neck BC like the Third Instrument,
only it must have an open Beak drawn very slender D, round the Mouth of the
Neck C bind the Bladder OF very close: this Bladder is to have in its lower
Ligature F a small thread of Glass, or Brass-wire, which passing through the
Bladder is to enter into the Neck of the Ball BC, and so point at the Degrees
it is minutely divided into: let this Instrument be carried to the foot of the
Tower, seal it as the other at D, and take notice of the Degree pointed at by
the End, or Dart G: raise it then to the top of the Tower, and you will find
the Dart higher than before, by some Degrees.

To give the reason of this Effect, they consider, that the Vessel is filled
with air of the same Temperament with that below, which as it finds one part of
the Vessel less Solid than the Glass, yielding, and easy to be distended, such
as is the Bladder OF, so it no sooner perceives it self relaxed from the Prison
of the surrounding air, by being raised to a higher place; but it immediately
endeavors to enlarge it self, and be at liberty; which it Effects, by swelling
the Bladder a little more: Now whilst this by being so puffed up comes nearer
to a Spherical Figure, the transverse Diameter of the Ellipsis OF is shortened,
as the bottom F is gradually raised, when also the Index FG fastened thereunto,
by obeying its Motion, rises higher in the Neck BC, and so comes to point at a
higher Degree than G.

Various Experiments made in Vacuo.
FRom the Series of the aforementioned Experiments, Torricelli's thought
touching the Airs Pressure upon all Inferior Bodies, seems fully confirmed. And
tho it may be a daring undertaking, and full of hazard, to determine of the
Causes where Geometry gives no Illumination; yet this boldness is never more
excusable, nor the danger more like to be avoided, than when our Understanding,
only by a Path of many, and all agreeing Experiments, makes toward the
attainment of its desire; which tho it may sometimes fail off, yet it is
satisfied in approaching as near as may be toward it. Since then it appears
from the Effects already mentioned, that we have gained some reasonable
probability of such a Pressure; it was judged not altogether a fruitless
labor, to proceed to make diverse Experiments in Vacuo: and observe, whether
the manner of their operation would succeed contrary, or any way different to
what they appear, when environed on every side with the free Air.

Experiments
To know whether small drops of Liquid Bodies, being freed from the Airs
Pressure encompassing them, lose the Spherical Figure they naturally are off.
SOme have Attributed to the Pressure of the air, that generally known
Observation of the drops of Mercury, Tab. 8. p. 41.
or any other Fluid; which spurted, or raining through the air, or let fall
upon any dry, or dusty body, always are nearly of a Globular Figure: wherefore
they were willing to try it in Vacuo, imagining there might then happen some
notable Variation. But Experience it self showed, That the Effect proceeded
from some other cause, than the airs Pressure; for having made the Vacuum in
the Vessel AB, the cavity A being quite void, Tab. 7. Fig. 2.
by turning the Stop-cock there was let fall some drops of Water, or Mercury
out of the Ball C upon some Colewort-leaves included in the Ball A, (which had
some drops of Dew hanging on them, with which they were gathered;) these Drops
that were admitted, contracted themselves as round, as if they had been upon a
growing Plant.

Tab. 7. Fig. 3.
So when the air in the Vessel A was condensed, or rarefied by means of a
Syringe CB; the Drops of Water, or Mercury, sprinkled upon the bottom of the
Vessel were not altered from their usual shape.

An Experiment,
Showing the Effect of Heat and Cold, applied Externally to the void space.
Tab. 8. Fig. 1.
BInd the Bladder ABC under the Ball D, make the Vacuum therein, turn the
Bladder upwards to be tied there likewise; then with a Cane of Glass, or any
thing else that will not alter, or bend, take the exact height of the Mercurial
Cilinder HG, from the Stagnant Mercury OF: after this, fill the Bladder with
hot water, and soon after measuring, you will find the Cilinder a little
depressed below the former height. This Observation made, throw out the hot
water, let it stand till it returns to the former height H, and then fill the
Bladder with cold water mixed with beaten Ice, and Salt, and in a little while
measuring (as before) you will observe the Cilinder notably raised.

Nor will we omit, that the Hot Water made use of in this Experiment raised a
Thermometer of 50 degrees. to 48. and with the same Heat shortened the Mercurial
Cilinder one 146 th part of the whole Height. And that the Cold Water increased
to one 50 th part, when in the same Water the Thermometer came to 11 degrees. ^/2.

If then a little air be admitted into the Ball D, this because it becomes very
thin, by reason of the Dilatation it has in the void space; quickly imbibes
Heat or Cold, and by its Rarefaction, or Condensation causes that the
Alterations in the Rise, or Fall of the Mercury are much more sensible, and
swift.

An Experiment
To manifest whether the Air be that which serving as a Foil to the lower
Superficies of a Lens of Glass, reflects that second Image inverted more dimly
and faintly which we see of a Flame, or any other Object Visible there, Astr.
Opt.
as Kepler thinks it is.
Tab. 8. Fig. 2.
ON the Mouth of the Glass Vessel AC we cemented with hard cement a Glass Lens
AB: this Mouth had its Lips turned a little outward, and made smooth for the
more easy fastening on of the Lens; then filling the Vessel with Mercury, we
made the Vacuum; and inclining the Tube we tied it to the Rest, as in the
Figure; and having made the Room dark, and bringing a Candle near it, we
observed in the Lens, the two Images of the Object, as is usual: one of these
was lesser, but very vivid, and always direct; which was reflected from the
Unequal outward Superficies. The other was indeed larger, but more obscure and
languid, and inverted, which nevertheless was not lost, though the imagined
foil of air was wanting (on the Concave inward Superficies of the Lens) by
reason of the Vacuum made.

In making this Experiment, we always used to put three or four Fingers depth
of Spirit of Wine upon the Mercury, that when the Vessel was Inverted to make
the vacuum, the Spirit getting uppermost might wash, and cleanse the Lens from
all foulness left there by the Mercury, lest that should give some occasion to
imagine it might serve instead of the Foil of Air. But nevertheless (as we
said) the Appearance of the Two Images was the very same; and when we permitted
the air to fill the void space, it gave not the least Difference.

An Experiment,
To know whether Amber, or other Electrick Bodies require the Medium of Air to
make them Attract.
PRepare a Vessel of thick Glass, big enough to stir, and turn the Hand within
the upper part thereof AB. Let it have Three Mouths A, C, and DE; let A be open
closed* C with a Bladder, Tab. 8. Fig. 3.
and rest it upon a little bundle of Cotton, or some soft Cushion Floating upon
the Mercury in the Basin FG, that so the great weight of Mercury to be poured
in may not burst the Ligature, or break the Cane. The Mouth DE made large
enough to receive a Man's Hand, must have an Edge, or Lip of Glass round it,
about which must be tied very close and fast a large Bladder open each way, as
DE, HI, through this the Hand is to be put into the Vessel, with a small piece
of the best yellow Amber, having first placed in the Vessel a little light bit
of Paper, or Straw where the Amber may readily approach it, when it has been
rubbed, and heated upon a piece of cloth K, fixed for that purpose within the
Glass: then bind the other side of the Bladder HI, round the wrist, a little
above the Pulse, that so the Hand may move freely in the Vessel; and let the
place where the Ligature is made, be armed with a ring of Leather bound fast to
the skin of the Arm, upon which Ligature the Bladder may be cemented to the
Arm, which done, fill by the Mouth A, and the Vessel with Mercury, taking care
in filling it, that the Folds and Wrinkles of the Bladder be all filled with
Mercury, that as little air be left as is possible; when quite filled, close
also the Mouth A with a Bladder, and untying the lower Ligature C, beneath the
Stagnant Level FG, let the Mercury fall to make the Vacuum. Then holding the
Amber between your Fingers, rub it strongly upon the Cloth K, and present it
to the Paper or Straw; and observe whether it attracts it, as it does in the
Air.

This Experiment was unsuccessful with us, for whenever we made it, the Air
entered, and filled the Vacuum; so that we were never able to see what Effect
the Amber had. Wherefore reflecting thereon what Aperture it was possible for
so great a quantity of Air to enter at so suddenly; we concluded, it could be
no otherwise, but at the Ligature round the Arm. But since the Ligature could
not be made closer without manifest hurt to the Veins, and stoppage of the
Blood, we made use of a small piece of Wood, as LM. with a round bit of Amber
fastened to the Top: Tab. 8. Fig. 4.
wherefore binding the Bladder HI, between the two Rings in the Wood NO, we
again filled the Vessel with Mercury, and made the Vacuum. Neither did this new
way of making the Experiment succeed; for though the Air indeed did enter more
slowly, (as it will always enter) yet the endeavor of the External Air to get
in was so great, that it forced in the Bladder; and therewith the wooden
Instrument beyond the piece of Cloth, so that the Amber could by no means be
rubbed and Tab. 9. p. 45.
heated thereon; nay, it was impossible to draw back the Wood, and move it
forward and backward as was requisite, until the Air getting in, had filled the
Vessel, and so the included of the same with the External.

Tab. 9. Fig. 1.
Yet still desiring some fruit of this Experiment, we thought of making another
Vessel, as ABC: persuading our selves, that therewith we might more easily
obviate the inconvenience of the Airs entering, and also the difficulty of
moving the Wooden Instrument forward and backward. Wherefore, filling at the
Mouth A, this Vessel, having first closed its other Mouth C, and rested it as
in the former Experiment upon the Cushion as was directed; we then bound the
Bladder ABC about the piece of Wood, Tab. 9. Fig. 2.
and thrust it into the Mercury, so as the end thereof, whereto the Amber was
fastened, might reach a piece of Cloth stuck to the side of the Glass. Then we
threw in some small bits of Straw, and turning down the Bladder, we bound it
fast down the Neck A, the Vacuum made, by moving the Wood or handle which stood
out we rubbed the Amber upon the Cloth, and when we thought it might be hot,
we applied it to several pieces of Straw, which in the Descent of the Mercury
stayed to the sides of the Glass; but we could never perceive that any were
attracted by the Amber*

But Note, that this Experiment is not to be much accounted of, nor the Effect
to be Attributed absolutely to the want of Air; for in such a Vessel at least a
small quantity always gets admission; nor could we ever so bind the Ligature,
but by some unseen ways it deceived us, which it may be happened from the
Motion required in this Experiment to heat the Amber; so that we may almost
judge it impossible, but the Ligature must be relaxed; at least, so much as is
needful to let in the subtle Air. 'Twas observed also, that when the Vessel was
full of Air, though we rubbed the Amber with great force upon the piece of
Cloth B, yet it had no Attraction; a thing which at first made us suspect that
some Dregs of the Mercury adhered to the Cloth, whence the Amber by rubbing
might acquire some foulness to close and stop up the imperceptible pores of
those passages by which the attractive Virtue issues out; which suspicion
seemed more probable, because we already knew some Liquors wherewith the Amber
being wetted (or any other Electric substance) refuses to attract. But since we
after found, that the same Amber rubbed upon a piece of Cloth often dipped in
Mercury, did nevertheless draw with great force, we thought the humidity of the
Gum (made use of to fasten it to the Glass, being imbibed by the Cloth) might
impede the Effect: we therefore sealed a piece of Shamois instead of Cloth,
with Wax to the side of the Glass, that all manner of suspicion of any wet
soaked up, might be avoided. Nevertheless, all this diligence was in vain, for
whether the Vessel were full, or Empty of Air, the Amber attracted not, which
is all we can with truth report of an Experiment attempted so many ways
unsuccessfully.

An Experiment
Examining what may be the motion of the invisible Effluvia of fire in Vacuo.
BEing already satisfied by many Experiments, that the heat of Fire is not
equally carried every way, but diffuses it self, and has greater Virtue upwards
than any other way comparatively: 'Twas imagined, that on the contrary, if it
were Experimented in Vacuo, some variation might happen, from whence some
probable conjectures might be drawn of the Principles of the Natural Motion of
Fire, and that by such an Instrument.

Tab. 9. Fig. 3. 2 Brac.
Let the Cane AB be about 46 Inches, long into which (being open at A) put a
Thermometer of 50 degrees. from one end to the other, made flat at that end, where
sealed to stand fast at the strait place of the Tube CD; and lest when the
Quicksilver comes to be poured in at the Mouth B, this Thermometer should fall
upon that placed above, and so by the collision of the Balls, one or both be
broken; there may be fastened to the bottom a Thread coming out of the Mouth B,
by which it may be stayed when the Cane is turned with the bottom upwards to be
filled. The first Thermometer being thus placed, let there be put in another
exactly correspondent to it; this enclosing the Mouth of the Tube A, must be
fastened there by its sealed end with the same Glass Cement at the fire. The
Instrument being fitted, the Mercury must be poured in, and the Vacuum made.
Note, that the strait CD, must be above the height of 30 Inches, that the whole
Thermometer may be exposed to the Observers view, and not buried in the
Quicksilver. When the Cane is fixed, and immovable, apply a great Degree of
Heat to the void space, by the help of Two Iron Balls heated red hot, and held
at an equal distance from the Cane, but unequal from the Balls of the
Thermometers, inclining more to the lowermost, that so the Heat (which is
always carried upwards by the Air) may be the more equally distributed to the
two Balls of the Thermometers; we having very often repeated this Experiment,
yet cannot otherways Affirm, but the upper Thermometer was indeed most affected
by the Heat; we confess the difference is very small, in comparison of what we
observed in the open Air; for whereas that was sometimes five Degrees in the
Vacuum, it never exceeded two. Neither did some think it would be otherwise,
because the Air encompassing the two Balls, was more heated in its upper part,
and so gave a greater heat to its neighboring Thermometer.

An Experiment
Of the Motion of Smoke in Vacuo.
Tab. 9. Fig. 4. Pastiglia Nera.
WIthin the Ball of the Vessel AB hang a Pastile of Perfume or other Bitumen of
a dark Color, upon which the Fire has an easy Effect. Then making the vacuum,
cast the Rays of the Sun thereon with a Burning-glass, you may presently
perceive the Smoke issue from the Cake, which instead of mounting upwards, as
it uses to do, as soon as parted from the Ball, or Cake of combustible Matter,
descends like the spout of a Fountain in a Parabola: the Air being admitted to
move it, it immediately rises to the top of the Ball.

Many Experiments having been made, that did not require any peculiar Apparatus
of Instruments (as most of those hitherto related have) it will be advisable,
to avoid tediousness in the Discourse, to give a short Description of an
Instrument, and of its capacity, (the size of our Plates being too little to
represent it in its full proportion;) and then succinctly Explain what Method
we took to menage it most commodiously and easily. That so any who desire to
try, and compare the Truth of our Experiments with their own, may be able to do
it; at least, till they light upon a more safe and easy way.

Tab 10 p 49

The Description of a Vessel made use of in many of the following Experiments.
THE Vessel then is AB made of Glass, whose M(...) AC is turned outward flat.
The bigness of the Neck or Mouth is three Fingers, the length of the Neck AD is
four Fingers; the Diameter of the Ball DE is about 7 Inches; the height of the
Cane ED about 46 Inches. di Brac. 2 Brac.
Close the lower Mouth B with a Bladder, and set it upon a little Leather
Cushion, swimming upon the Mercury in the Basin, ( Tab 10. Fig. 2.) then fill
it at the Mouth AC; but because in filling it, the Mercury falling directly
upon the Tube, will intercept and detain a great quantity of Air therein; The
small Funnel ABC ( Tab. 10. Fig. 3.) was made to prevent it, being of equal
length with the Vessel: keeping the Body of this AB always full of Mercury,
there can no air get into the Shank BC: so the Mercury falling gently into the
Vessel, raises the Air before it quietly. When filled, we cover the Mouth AC
with a Glass Cover a little Unequal ( Fig. 4.) and then with a Bladder bound
fast about with a waxed Thread below in the small of the Neck. Put then your
hands under the Ball on each side; and gently lifting it up, take away the
Cushion, and Immerse the Mouth B into the Stagnant Mercury in the Basin: loosen
the Knot of the Ligature at B, and the Mercury by its weight falling, will open
it, and make a Vacuum.

When there is occasion to put such things in the Ball as may not be covered
with Mercury, either to avoid mixing therewith, as Liquors; (which we put in
the Vessel A, Fig. 5.) or to prevent their being stifled therein, as Animals;
we then use to leave so much Air in the Neck of the great Vessel AD, ( Fig. 1.)
as may serve to receive this little Vessel, or the Animal we would include
therein. This Air when the Vacuum is made, dilating it self to so large bounds
as the capacity of the Ball will be so extremely rarefied, as if almost it were
not there at all, that in reality, it will be no impediment to any of the
Effects desired to be observed.

But when we would enclose Fish therein, we leave no air, nor do we fill the
whole Ball with Mercury, but pour in so much Water, as when the vacuum, is
made, and the Mercury sunk down into the Cilinder, the Water swimming thereon
may fill about half the Ball, that the Fishes may move, and bear themselves
thereon.

When we had a mind to put small Animals therein, as little Lizards, Lucertole.
Mignatte Fig. 6.
or Horse-leeches, or the like, we shut up with them a little Ball of Solid
Glass, which following the Mercury in making the Vacuum stops the Mouth of the
Cane E, and keeps the Animals in the Ball to be more commodiously observed.

All these Advertisements may perhaps seem superfluous to some; but those who
are conversant in Experiments, and know the difficulties they often meet with
in making them, through the impediments and inconveniences of a material
Apparatus, will rather approve of, than slight these niceties, it being almost
incredible to tell their use, and how great an expense of time may be saved by
them.

An Experiment
Of Sounds in Vacuo.
Tab. 9. Fig. 4.
HHaving hung a small Bell by the thread, instead of the combustible Ball in the
former Experiment, and making the vacuum, we began to shake the Ball forcibly,
and the Bell gave the same Tone as if the Ball had been full of common Air; or
if there was any Difference it was too little to be perceived; indeed, in this
Experiment the sonorous Instrument (tho the thing is impracticable) ought to
have no communication with the Vessel, otherwise we cannot certainly affirm,
whether the Sound proceeds from the Rarefied air, and Effluvia of the Mercury
in Vacuo, or from the Vibration communicated by means of the Thread from the
percussion of the Metal to the Glass, and so to the External air encompassing
it.

Nevertheless, we thought of making this Experiment with a Wind Instrument,
because it receives its trembling, not from Percussion as a Bell, but from the
Impetus of the Air rushing out of it. And because it might be too hard a Task,
if not impossible, to place such an Instrument in a Vacuum made with Mercury,
we resolved to enclose it in a Vessel exhausted of its air by Attraction, so as
it has been lately practiced by Mr. Boil, with admirable success, in those his
curious and noble Experiments; among which, this was thought of also, though it
was not put in Practice for want of a fit Artificer to make the Apparatus. Now
tho the Vessel can never be emptied so perfectly by that way, as by Mercury;
yet the air is always so far Rarefied, as from the manifest difference which
appears in those Effects that depend really upon the ordinary Natural Pressure
of the Air upon them, we may easily come to form a right Judgment what they
would be in a perfect Vacuum. We will here truly relate, what we happened to
observe; confessing, that it is more to show the manner and Method we thought
of to make the Experiment, than for any certainty we were able to gain thereby:
since it may be said, we rather failed, than made the Experiment.

For this purpose we made a little Organ, Tab. 10. Fig. 7.
as ABCD of but one Pipe, and with the Bellows having Communication with the
Pipe by an hollow Conveyance in the Basis BC. This Organ we included in the
Brass Box F, Fig. 8.
and put the handle HI through the Mouth G of this Box. This handle we rested
upon the Pillar, or Prop KL, when we had first put it through the Ring M,
sodered to a small Iron Rod passing each way through the boards of the Bellows,
and fastened to them, so that by moving the handle this way, and that way,
either the one, or the other was opened and shut, forcing the air into the
Pipe. Then taking a Piece of soft Leather, and making an hole in it, we put it
over the Handle, binding it fast upon the Mouth G, and likewise gathering it
together, we tied it about the Handle (as in the Fig.) so that all Ingress of
the air might be prevented; and through the pliantness of the Leather, the
handle easily moved every way. All being so prepared, and the Cover E Cemented
on very close; we began to exhaust the air out of the Box with a Pump screwed
on to a Hole in the Cover N, Tab. 10. Fig. 9.
and at every Draught turning the Stop-cock O, that when the sucker was forced
down to drive out the attracted air at the valve, and Nose P, the air might not
re-enter into the Box F, and frustrate the Labor of the Operator. After many
draughts, that the air became so rerified, as the Leather which closed the
Mouth G was quite drawn in, and the Force of a very strong Man was unable to
draw back the Sucker, or Plug; we began to move this way, and that way, the
Handle so to convey the Subtle air out of the Bellows, into the Organ-pipe,
and listened to the Sound. But the Truth is, we could not perceive it to differ
at all (not only) from that which was made in the same Box, when shut up full
of air in its natural state, but (also) not sensibly from that made in the Box,
when we had, by the Pump forced and condensed a great quantity of air therein:
Wherefore (some did say jestingly, either that) the air has nothing to do in
the Production of Sounds, or is able to do it alike in any state.

An Experiment,
Of the Operation of the Magnet in Vacuo.
HAnging a Needle by the Thread by which the Bell was fastened before, Tab. 9.
Fig. 4.
we applied a Magnet to the outside of the Ball, and found it was attracted at
the same distance as when the Vessel was full of air.

An Experiment
Of the raising of Fluids in small hollow Canes in Vacuo.
AMongst other Effects of the Airs Pressure, some have reckoned that of almost
all Fluids rising up in small Canes therein immersed; believing, that the small
Cilinder of air pressing through the little Cane upon (any fluid suppose) the
Water, acts more faintly, by reason it is lessened or straightened by the great
Adhaesion of the Fluid to the inside of so small a Vessel: as on the contrary
they judge, that the air which freely presses upon the large Superficies of the
Fluid round the outside of the same Cane, being permitted to bear upon it with
its whole force; raises it therein, until the Momentum of the Water raised,
together with that little Pressure within the Cane, counterpoize that of the
external air. To have some light as to the Truth of this Discourse, we
attempted to see what the Effect would be in Vacuo.

We therefore prepared the former Ball as was directed for Fish, ( Tab. 10.
Fig. 1.) that is, by filling the upper half with Water, Tab. 11. Fig. 1.
into this we immersed the small Cane AB (represented in the Table of its full
bigness) which was open at each end, and had Cemented upon it in the middle an
hollow Button of Glass, counterpoised to keep the Cane upright in the Water;
Tab. 10. Fig. 1.
Then closing the Mouth of our large Ball AC, we made the Vacuum, the Water
standing to the midst of the Ball: Tab. 11. Fig. 1. Tab. 10. Fig. 1.
and the small Cane stood Erect, by reason of its hollow Button, and the Water
rose in it up to C; then the lower Mouth being stopped with a Finger, that the
air entering might not empty our larger Vessel, we unbound it above, and opened
the Mouth AC, to see if (the air being admitted to press upon the Water) that
greater and more violent impulse would cause any alteration in the Level C of
the small immersed Cane; but it did not.

After this Experiment, 'twas yet doubted, that the wet received by the whole
Internal Superficies of the little Cane, when quite Immersed in the Water,
before the Vacuum was made, Tab. 11. Fig. 1.
might serve like Glue to detain the small Cilinder of Water CD whereto it
might be kept by Adhesion also, as well as it was before by the force of the
External Pressure: wherefore it was resolved, first to rarifie the air in the
Vessel which we intended to try the Experiment in; that the first Immersion of
the Cane might be made with the air already dilated, and rarefied, and with the
inside of the Cane dry, that there might be nothing in it to raise more Water
than that which the weak Pressure of that thin air was able to do: and that
afterward reducing the air to its natural state, and then Artificially
compressing it; it was thought we might discover some observable variation in
the height of the Water contained in the Cane.

Tab. 11. Fig. 2.
We therefore took the Vessel ABC made of thick Glass, into this we let down the
small Cane AD and closed the Vessel at A with a Bladder; then we laid the
Vessel with the Neck AE, and the included Cane AD Horizontal, and poured in red
Wine (the better to discern the Level in the Tab. 1.. p. 54.
Cane) by the Mouth F, till it came to the Mark G, H: taking Care (in pouring
it in) that the mouth of the Cane D was not wetted; this done, we screwed on
the Nose of a Pump into the female Screw before sodered on to the Mouth F, and
made several strong Attractions: after this we set the Vessel upright, and the
Wine stood at the Level BC, the Mouth of the Cane D being immersed therein:
through this then the Wine was immediately raised up toward E, equal to what it
would have been in air naturally compressed; for not only when by opening the
Mouth F, we suffered the air to return to its natural state, but when we
condensed it very much with the Pump, we could not perceive the Wine rise at
all above the first height, to which the rarefied air had mounted it.

There was also made another Experiment, which was this; Within the Ball so
often made use of, we placed the Siphon ABCD, so hung, that when the vacuum was
made, Tab. 11. Fig. 3.
it might remain upright in the midst of the Ball, and full of Mercury; we then
observed, to what Degree the Mercury rose in the smaller Leg AB, and then upon
admission of the air could observe no alteration. This Experiment was often
repeated, always with the same success.

Lastly, They that took the raising of Fluids to a determinate height, to be an
undoubted Effect of the Airs Pressure, were desirous to see, if the air (which
presses upon the Stagnant Level) when forced to pass through the hole of a very
small Cane, and must necessarily do so to exert any Pressure, comes thereby to
be so weakened and lessened, that any observable alteration follows in the
height of the Fluid so pressed: which they thought would probably happen;
because if one Momentum were weakened, the other must certainly preponderate,
and so alter the first Aequilibrium.

To this End, there was taken the Cane ABCD, whose height AB was 46 Inches, and
the Return BC 11 Inches, Tab. 11. Fig. 4. 2 Brac. di Br.
drawn to a greater Degree of smallness than is represented in the Figure: this
being open at A, and D, was filled with Mercury at the Mouth A, till it came to
D, the Mouth of the Return which we then sealed at the Flame of a Candle, and
completed the filling of the Cane to A, and tied it over fast with a Bladder;
then we broke off the End D, and the Mercury began to run out very slowly,
contrary to what we have observed, when the air pursued it at the other end;
whereas, instead of air, the Cane had now a vacuity, which increased gradually
from A, so that the Mercury was no otherwise forced out, but by the weight of
that which was above 28 6/10, 1 Brac.
reckoning from C toward A: and it immediately stopped when it came to F the
very same height above C, as the Mercury was off in another Tube immersed in a
large Vessel at the same time. After this, holding the Cane Perpendicular to
the Horizon, by lifting it gently up and down, we caused a Motion in the
Mercury, so that by the Vibration of it backward and forward, in the two Arms
of the Vessel, there ran out at each Vibration a little Mercury at the Beak D;
so that when the Cane and Mercury were at rest, there remained a small part of
the little Cane, empty of Mercury GCD. So the Air pressing upon G, tho strained
through so narrow a passage as D, yet had not lost so much of its force, as to
cause any sensible abatement of the Height of the Cilinder F C.

From all these Experiments, and some other of a like Nature, which we have now
no time to relate, some thought they saw good grounds to Affirm, that That
Opinion of a more Languid Pressure made by the air through so narrow
conveyances, taken absolutely so, is not sufficient to produce this, and the
like Effects; but they believed, That there must be at least allowed some other
concurrent Cause.

An Experiment
Of Water in Vacuo.
THat Noble Observation of Mr. Boiles, of the boiling of warm Water in Vacuo,
made us above measure curious, not only to see so rare, and surprising an
Effect, but also gave us an hint, and desire to try the same Experiment with
simple water, and also with Water brought to as great a Degree of Cold, as it
is capable of; without Freezing.

There was put into the Vessel (represented by Fig. 5. Tab. 10.) a quantity of
natural water, unaltered from its ordinary temperament: in this, after the
Vacuum was made, there appeared a shower of small drops, which tho they were in
great Plenty, yet came very slow, and the Water lost nothing of its
Transparency: their Motion was upwards, till the Shower gradually ceasing, the
Water became sedate, and quiet as at First.

The warm Water, as soon as ever the Vacuum was made began violently to boil up
toward the top of the Vessel, with a noise not unlike that made by a Cauldron
boiling very fast; but upon opening the Ball, and taking out the included
Vessel, we could not observe any heat acquired by this Ebullition.

The chilled water threw up four, or five small Bubbles, and then rested,
without any other sensible Change, or Alteration.

Note, that upon the admission of the Air, the shower of small Drops ceased
immediately in that Water of a natural Temperament; as likewise the boiling of
the warm water.

An Experiment,
Of Snow in Vacuo.
AT first we put in a small piece of Snow, of which upon the fall of the
Mercury there scarce appeared other than the melted Water. This so hasty
dissolution thereof seemed strange to us; wherefore to make the Experiment more
clear, we repeated it with a larger piece made somewhat Cilindrical, as long,
and big as could be put into the Ball: which being filled with Mercury, we
thrust the Cilinder of Snow into it. But slipping out of his hand that immersed
it, and so swimming upon the Mercury, we might perceive that in the very act of
Immersion, the Mercury had preyed upon, and eaten off a good part thereof; and
the dissolved Water swam upon the Mercury. So we concluded, that it was the
Mercury which melted the first small piece of Snow so suddenly, and not the
Vacuum, as at the first view it seemed to be; wherefore putting the Snow in
again, closing the Vessel, and making the Vacuum, the little that remained, was
as slow in Dissolving, as it used to be in the air.

This Experiment was made in the Summer, so that the Snow was not in Flakes (
Solla, we call the Snow at Florence, when it falls like Down, before it is
frozen together;) but some of that taken out of the Conservatory where it was
trodden down, and pressed together.

An Experiment
Of the Dissolution of Pearl, and Coral in Vacuo.
THis Experiment we owe likewise to Mr. Boil, which was after this manner.

Pearls, and Coral (as is well known) are dissolved in Vinegar. Tho this
Action proceeds very slowly in the open air, and consists in the curious
discharging of very small Bubbles, which rise from Bodies of the Pearl, and
Coral themselves: yet they do not Rise so thick, as to hinder the Transparency
of the Vinegar; especially, from the Coral, which if not finely powdered, is
much slower in Dissolving: but Pearls being softer, afford a greater plenty of
Bubbles. We desired to see each of them severally in Vacuo; and observed so
great a quantity of Bubbles to arise from each; that the Vinegar was raised all
in froth, and run over the Vessel, which therefore showed as if it had been
full of Milk, or pure Snow: Then we gave admission to the Air, whereby the
froth was immediately sunk, and the Vinegar with its Natural Transparency began
to act as before.

We will not omit here an Effect accidentally observed in this Dissolution,
which was this: The Pearls when they sink to the bottom, gather into one, or
more little bubbles of Air, which naturally rising up, carry the Pearl with
them: but as soon as ever the Bubbles rise above the Vinegar, and by the chock
of the Air break, their Covering is curiously scattered about. Then the Pearl
sink down again, and at the same time other parts thereof gathering into new
Bubbles, raise themselves. And so all the while the Ebullition, or Fermentation
lasts, there is a continual Motion of them up and down through the Vinegar.

A RELATION OF VARIOVS ACCIDENTS, Observable in some ANIMALS Included in Vacuo.
FRom the very time Torricelli found out his First Experiment of Mercury, he
had thoughts of including several Animals in the void space, to make Remarks
upon their Motion, Flight, Breathing, and all other observable Accidents: But
not being then provided with fit Instruments for this purpose, he was contented
to perform what he was able to do: for small, and tender Animals oppressed by
the Mercury, under which of necessity they must lie, to be at the top of the
Vessel when inverted and immersed in the Stagnant Mercury, would be most
commonly dead, or expiring; so that it would be hard to determine, whether they
had received more damage from the Suffocation of the Mercury, or from the want
of Air. And either for this cause he forbore, or was deterred from attempting
the Experiment in an open Vessel, misdoubting the sufficiency of the Ligature
to sustain the air, bearing thereon with its whole Weight: and besides, he was
diverted soon after this Invention by other Employments which wholly took him
up, that he had no time to apply himself to this, and give it a greater
perfection, which it is probable he would have done, if a too hasty Death had
not prevented him. But we being satisfied, that the force of the Air was not so
great that the Cement, and a Bladder well tied down, was unable to withstand
it; have always successfully made use of a Vessel open at both ends, as already
has been shown, and as we have also done in these. Wherefore, we will now
proceed to give an account of the Accidents observed in diverse Animals included
in this Vessel; as follows.

Mignatta
An Horse-leech being kept in vacuo above an hour remained alive, and well;
freely moving her self, as if she had been in the Air.

Lumaca.
The same did a Snail; in both these, tho deprived of the Air we could observe
nothing to argue it had any Effect upon them.

Grilli.
Two Grass hoppers were for a quarter of an hour very lively, continually moving
up, and down, but not leaping: upon the admission of the air they leaped away.

Farfalla.
A Butterfly, whether hurt by the hand in putting it into the Vessel, or whether
it suffered from the want of air, it is certain, that as soon as the vacuum was
made, she was quite deprived of Motion, except a scarce discernable, and
languid Tremour in her Wings, which upon the Ingress of the air shoke very
much; but we could not discover well, whether the Animal it self, or the Motion
of the air caused it; but upon taking out of the Vessel, we found it dead.

Moscone.
There are a sort of Flies larger than ordinary, commonly called Moscone in
Italian, that make a great Buzzing through the air with their Wings: one of
these (which being shut up in the Vessel, continued to buz very vigorously) as
soon as ever the vacuum was made, fell down as if it had been dead: and the
noise of its wings ceased; we presently gave it air, whereupon it moved a
little, but the Remedy was too late; for it was scarce taken out before it died.

Lucertola
A Lizard in vacuo quickly grew sick, and soon after closing her Eyes, seemed to
be dead: but we agreed afterward, that we observed some Respiration, perceiving
a little swelling in the Thorax, between the Forelegs: we continued the
Confinement for the space of six Minutes, in which time it had lost all
breathing, and appeared Dead: we then admitted the air, which so recovered it,
that presently the Vessel being opened, she leaped out, and ran away; catching
it again, we included it the second time, and she appeared sick, as before; but
the air revived her again: we Imprisoned her the Third time, and in Ten Minutes
after some strainings, as if poisoned, she vomited, and fell down quite dead in
the Glass.

Another little Lizard in less time suffered the same strainings, or
Convulsions; and then had a little Rest, and as if she had taken breath, and
gotten strength thereby, she endeavored several times to creep up the sides of
the Vessel; when the same Convulsions returned with strange Distortions of the
Mouth, and swelling of the Eyes, as if they would have started out of her Head;
she turned upon her Back, and after a little gaping for breath, dyed. It was
after observed, that she had discharged something by the Mouth, and Anus;
whence the Belly became flaccid and empty.

Another beginning to suffer the same torments, had immediate Relief from the
Air.

Uccelletto.
A small Bird, as soon as the vacuum was made, began to gape, and pant for
breath; and shaking its Head, hung down its Wings, and Tail; after half a
Minute, when it seemed almost dead, we gave it air, and so at first it seemed
to revive, but in few moments shutting the Eyes, it dyed.

Calderugio.
A Gold-finch, and after that another, though presently succored with the air,
yet found it too late. So sudden is the irreparable hurt these tender Animals
receive from the privation thereof.

Allodola.
The almost Instantaneous Death of these Birds, may at first view seem to
contradict an Experiment of Mr. Boyles, wherein he mentions a Larks living in
the Evacuated Receiver, though one of its Wings was hurt, about Ten Minutes.
Passera.
And a Sparrow taken with Bird-lime endured for Seven Minutes; at the end of
which, seeming dead, she was recovered with the fresh air: and being again
included, and the Vessel Evacuated, in the space of Five Minutes dyed. But
whoever Reflects upon the different ways of making the Vacuum in the one, and
the other Instrument, will confess that the two Experiments, how different
soever they seem; do indeed wonderfully agree: for whereas in that, the air is
thinned by repeated Attractions, and slow, and little more then insensible
acquists at each draught: in our Instrument, it is reduced to the greatest
degree of Rarity by the Instantaneous fall of the Mercury; to which, when the
air is brought, it is no longer serviceable to their Respiration. And if (when
we had included the Animals) we inclined the upper Mouth of our Vessel below
the perpendicular Height of 28 6/10 Inches reckoned from the Level of the
Stagnant Mercury in the Basin, 1 Brac.
and opening the lower Mouth, we gradually raised it by little, and little to
an upright; we have observed the very same Effects, related by Mr. Boil; the
air then of necessity passing through all the intermediate degrees of
Rarefaction, from a greater to a greater (as it does in Evacuating his
Receiver) is not so soon rendered useless to the Respiration of these Animals.

Granchio. Tenero.
A soft Crab at first putting in, moved; then grew feeble, and began to faint
away; when he had stood a little while motionless, or rather with all his
Members contracted, we gave him air, whereat he seemed revived, and began to
move slowly; but taken out of the Vessel, soon dyed.

Ranocchio.
A Frog was presently giddy, and notably swelled all over; but when the fresh
air came in, with a sudden leap, he showed himself recovered.

Granchio duro.
We enclosed at another time, in the same Vessel, an hard Crab, and a Frog
together, the Crab seemed to move, till the end of the Experiment, which was a
full half hour without any, alteration, except perhaps a little swelling.

Ranocchio.
The Frog in ten Minutes was unmeasurably puffed up in every part, and two great
Bladders appeared on the sides of his Jaws, and vomiting up a great quantity of
froth at his Mouth (which stood wide open, filled with his Tongue, and all the
membranes disformedly swelled, and blown up) in this posture he remained
Motionless: at the entrance of the air the swellings fell at once, and he
appeared quite changed, being extreme lank, and thin; so that we thought him
much less than when he was first put into the Vessel; when we took him out, he
was Dead. The Crab as we said before, was alive, but in few Minutes dyed.

Another Frog, much swelled as the former, cast up a great deal of Froth, and
other things at the Mouth: and in half an hour was found quite dead. At the
Entrance of the air he appeared shrunk up, and lank as the other. The Thorax
was opened by an Acurate Anaetomist, who at first could not find the Lungs,
they were so shrunk up together for want of the air: but by blowing with a
Straw in at the Ductus by which they breathe under their Tongue, (they were
redistended; whence it was visible, the most part of the air which was
contained in the Animal when first included, was got out to enjoy a larger
Field in the Evacuated space, without tearing, or hurting any of the Vessels;
for upon blowing they were all tight, and swelled up.

Pescett^.
Several small Fishes which were very lively, were included with a sufficient
quantity of Water; and as soon as the vacuum was made, they were remarkably
swelled, and fainting turned up their Bellies. They endeavored several times
to keep their backs upwards; but they still turned again: when the Vessel was
opened, they sunk to the bottom, where unable to recover, they dyed. We
presently Dissected one of them, and compared it with another taken alive,
which had not been in a vacuum; and examining the Intrailes, we found the
little air Bladder empty in this; whereas in the other, it was round and full,
as is usual in all Fish.

Barbio.
In a pretty large Barbel the Eyes were much swelled; the Fish turned on his
back, stretching out the Finns, as if they had been stiff and frozen, with the
Gills opened wide, and the whole Body distended with wind, and so it lay at the
top of the water. It attempted by several jerks to turn to its natural Posture,
but in vain* After six Minutes, upon the return of the air, the swelling of the
Eyes assuaged; and tho the Thorax returned to its due proportion, yet it was
forced to keep at the bottom continually gaping, and unable to raise it self in
the Water; and being put into fresh, it soon dyed: being opened, we found the
Bladder all shrunken, when that of another Fish (dissected alive, tho five
times less than this) was yet much larger, and turgid.

Anguilla.
An Eele stayed a long time without fainting, or any diminution of its vivacity:
but at last in an hour that dyed also; and being opened, the bladder was empty,
as they of the other Fish were.

Barbio.
Another Barbel having been in vacuo, and refreshed again with the air; by great
chance was taken out alive: wherefore we gave him his liberty in a Cistern
where others were kept, 1 Brac.
being above 34 Inches deep. This Fish, whether it was easier for him, or
whether he was necessitated so to do by the emptiness of his bladder; it is
certain, for the whole time he lived, which was about a Month, (although we chased
him about, and frightened him, by stiring the Water) he was never seen to raise
himself, as the other Fishes did; but still left a Mark behind him on the
bottom, sweeping it with his belly: his bladder, when dead, to sight was
swelled with Wind as it is Naturally, but was very much softer to the touch,
than those of other Fish are.

Observations upon the Bladders of Fish in Vacuo.
THe Bladder of a great Fish swelled with Wind, as it was taken out, being put
in vacuo, showed no alteration there: wherefore we opened the Vessel, believing
that nothing else could vary the Experiment, except the Coats of the bladder
were of too strong a Texture to be burst by the force of the air Naturally
included therein: but upon the first Ingress of the Air, the Bladder appeared
neither more nor less full than we had observed it in Fish killed in vacuo; a
clear sign, that the greater part of the Air in the bladder, by forcing, or
taring the Swim, gets out through some invisible Passages; and any little
Portion that remains, by the increase which it receives in vacuo, serves to
keep the bladder distended as at first.

Then being desirous to find, where the air gets out of these Bladders, if by
any Ductus naturally there, or made by the force of the air; we took, with the
greatest care possible, the bladder out of another Fish, and tied the two Ends
with a Silk, supposing, if there were any passage, Tab. 11. Fig. 6.
it must be at one of them: this in vacuo appeared full, as the other had done;
but upon the Ingress of the air, it shrunk up after the same manner: wherefore,
to find the Passage where the included air breaks away, we made a small hole,
to put in a little Glass Cane, and bound the bladder fast about it, (the
extremities being yet tied) and blew Wind into it through the Cane; which being
in great plenty, swelled the bladder; but at the same time, we perceived it got
out of a small crack at A, (which must be that, where the air in vacuo found a
vent) to which, holding a lighted candle, we might perceive the flame to wave;
and viewing it attentively, when distended, it was not so small, but it might
be discerned with the naked Eye.

Having thus found, that the air did not get out at the Ligatures made, whilst
to free it self, it was forced to make a new crack, we had a mind to see if it
gets out after the same manner in the bodies of Fishes killed in vacuo; that
is, by breaking the thin Membrane of the bladder, or by finding some hidden
passage: Tab. 11. Fig. 7. Lasca.
wherefore taking carefully the bladder out of a Roach that dyed in vacuo, we
made a hole in the smaller end, and put a cane in, as before, and blew very
strongly, but it held tight: an evident proof, that the air without breaking
it, has some vent, which the weakness of our Eyes could not discover.

We then thought of making the Experiment under Water, which perhaps might
detect something to us: Tab. 11. Fig. 8.
so we took the bladder out of the Fish alive, and well tying it in a Net,
fastened a convenient weight, and sunk it in water, and then made the vacuum,
when we might see many small bubbles of air issue from the slender part
thereof; where it is probable, the Natural Meatus is, which transmits it; when
the Vessel was opened, the air shrunk it like the other.

Lastly, willing to see what way the air takes from the bladder to get out of
the Fishes Body, whether by the Gills, Lasca.
or Mouth; we covered a Roach with the same Net, that by affixing a Weight it
might be kept under water; the vacuum being made, we saw a great deal of air
come out of his Mouth in large bubbles, as before from the submersed bladder.

Here should have been the End of these Experiments; but while these Sheets
were in the Press; one of our Academy having thought of a way to facilitate
very much the management of our Vessel to make the vacuum, we will not omit to
set it down here; and the rather, because we found it indeed very convenient.
The Invention consists in joining to the Cane BE ( Tab. 10. Fig. 1.) the Retum
BFG (designed in the Figure by the Pricked Line) for putting as usual the
Mercury in at the Mouth AC, when it comes up to G; in the Return, we tie it
down close, and fill it up to AC, where being closed after the usual manner, it
is sufficient to open the Mouth G, and without any immersion, ^ Br. 2/4
all the Mercury above 28 6/10 Inches taken from G toward E, runs out: and
Note, that the Ball FG serves to keep in the Mercury in the fluctuating Motions
it makes in the Two Branches of the Cane, (before it rests) caused by the
impetus of its fall.

This is all at present touching the Natural Pressure of the Air, and its
Various Effects.

EXPERIMENTS OF Artificial Freezing.
AMong the rest of the stupendous Works of Nature, that admirable Power has
been always much regarded, whereby she binds the slippery Waves, changing their
fleeting Inconstancy into Solidity and hardness. This Effect, tho daily before
our Eyes, in comparison of others more secret and rare; yet has continually
afforded Ample Subjects of Curious Speculation to the Mind of Man: for, whereas
Fire, when disingaged in swiftly winged sparks, by insinuating it self through
the close Pores of Flinty and Metalline Bodies; opens, melts, and reduces them
to a perfect Fluid: so Cold on the contrary (a much stranger thing) stops and
consolidates the most Fluid Liquors, changing them into downy Snow, and glassie
Ice; which upon the least Ray, or warm breath, break Prison, and steal away in
their first fluidity again. And (which is yet more amazing) so violent a force
of Cold in Freezing, is observed penetrating not only Glass, but even the
secret Pores of Metals. As in the Subterranean Caverns, and deep Mines, the
Raging Flames impetuously divide, and in fury open all those dark Passages; so
Cold in the Act of Freezing, cracks shut Vessels of thick and strong Glass;
stretches, distends, and at last, tears those of pure Gold, and bursts asunder
those of Cast Brass; and of such thickness, as to break them by dead weight
would require perchance, nay assuredly, some Thousand weight: upon this strange
Phenomenon of Freezing, observable in water more than any other Fluid: Some
have thought, that where the Cold operates in its proper Laboratory with fit
materials, it reduces the pure Water to such a temperament, that it turns it
into even the hardest Rock-Cristal, and Gems of various Colors, according to
the different Tinctures received from the neighboring Mineral steams; nay,
even into the Invincible hardness of the Diamond. And Plato was of this
Opinion, That Diamonds were Generated of the remains of those Waters whence in
the secret Caverns of the Earth he thought Gold was produced; and therefore a
Diamond is called, the offspring of Gold, by that Divine Philosopher in Timaeo.

But to return to the Causes of Freezing. The ingenious in all times have had
various Sentiments thereof: whether it does indeed come from any real and
proper body of cold (which in the Schools they call Positive) that (as Light,
and Heat are Originally in the Sun) is either in the Air, or Water, or Ice it
self; or any other part of the Universe as its proper place, and Residence,
where it has its Repository and Treasury; Job 38. ver. 22.
in which sense the Words of the Divine Oracle in Sacred Writ may be taken.
Have thou entered into the Treasures of the Snow, or have thou seen the
Treasures of the Hail? Or whether Cold is nothing else but a Total Privation,
or driving away of Heat. Touching this, and other curious Observations of the
Artifice used by Nature in Freezing (whether she Atchieves her End by
Contracting, or Rarefying the Fluid; whether the Change proceeds slowly, or
instantaneously, etc.) we were induced to try several Experiments of Artificial
Freezing, made by the outward application of Ice, and Salt; fully persuaded,
that the operation does not at all vary from the procedure of Nature, when by
the pure and simple cold of the Air she Congeals Water.

What hitherto we have had the good luck to observe, upon so vast and boundless
a Subject, capable of so great and endless Observations, will be offered to you
in the following Experiments.

Experiments
To know, if Water dilates it self in Freezing.
IT was the thoughts of Galileo, That Ice was rather Water Rarefied, than
condensed; because, (says he) Condensation consists in Diminution of Bulk, but
increase of weight; and Rarefaction in the increase of Lightness and Bulk too;
but water in freezing gains in Bulk, and Ice is lighter than Water, since it
swims thereon, etc.

This being supposed, (which Experience will sufficiently prove) we were
curious to see what water would do when confined in a Vessel where it had not
the least room to dilate, yet on all sides being encompassed with Ice to freeze
it; since we still observed (agreeable to Galileo) that water as well frozen
into great Mountains of Ice, as in the smallest pieces, and of what Figure
soever, continually swims upon the Surface of other Water; a certain proof,
that in the act of freezing, (the increasing of the Bulk considered,) it grows
lighter; whether it be by the interposition of small and insensible vacuities,
or interspersion of Minute Particles of air, or the like matter, after the
manner of little blebs in Cristal, and Glass, (for such they appear to the Eye
through the body of the Ice when held up against the Light) in some places
thicker, in others fewer; and if the Ice be broke into small pieces under
Water, they rise up through the Water in great Numbers.

The First Experiment.
Tab. 12. Fig. 1.
TAking a Vessel of thin Silver Plate, with Two Covers to screw on, such as we
use to cool our Sherbet, and other Drinks in Summer; we filled it with fair
water cooled with Ice, and then set it to freeze: it was cooled first, lest if
it had been put into the Vessel at all rarefied by Heat, upon the first
Refrigerating it should Contract, and by that means gain room to Dilate in
afterward in freezing. When 'twas thought the Ice outwardly applied, had done
its work, we took the Vessel out, and opening the first Cover (which was
Concave) we found the second Cover cracked, and covered over with a thin cake
of Ice, caused by the Water forced thither, by the Rarefying of that within the
Vessel as it froze.

Neither can it be thought, that this crack was caused rather by condensation
of the water in freezing; which being constrained by the violent force of the
cold, to withdraw it self into a less space, for the avoiding a Vacuum,
gradually drew down the Cover as it retired, 'till at last, unable to stretch
any farther, it cracked. I say, this is improbable; for if so, we should have
found the Cover bent inwards, whereas it was forced outward, and considerably
raised from the flatness it had before, as was also the Superficies of the Ice
in the Vessel; moreover, the Edges of the Crack turned outward: whence we
gather, how great the Impetus must necessarily be, that caused it; and would
have been much more considerable, if a larger proportion of water had been
congealed; whereas, breaking the first Cake, we found almost all the Water
Fluid.

Tab. 12. p. 72.


The Second Experiment.
Tab. 12. Fig. 2.
FInding that the force of freezing far surpassed the Resistance of this our
First Instrument; we thought of making a Ball of Cast Silver of the thickness
of a Crown piece, 1 Piastra
and of an Oval Figure, to open in the middle with a screw, and with a Top
screwed on at the End of the Neck, as in the Figure: Then shutting this Vessel,
and screwing fast the middle screw with a Vice, we filled it with Water at the
Neck, and screwed on the little Cover, and set it in a mixture of Salt and Ice
to Freeze, and in a little while taking it out, we found it perfectly sound,
and whole; opening it in the middle, we took out a shell of Ice, but it was
very tender, and less Transparent than usual; and perchance more dense and
close; for being put in Water, it did not seem to buoy up so well, but rather
(as all thought) dived toward the bottom: in the midst was a Cavity as big as
a large Almond without the Shell. This Experiment was repeated after by us,
with the same success.

The Third Experiment.
THere were some that wondered at this unexpected accident, seeming at first
view to contradict, not only the Opinion of Galileo, but what is more, to be
inconsistent with it self; seeing tho this Ice appeared Condensed, and heavy,
in respect of that made by the cold of the air without any art; yet it must
necessarily be lighter than Water, because it in some measure still swam
thereon: and so much the less could they satisfy themselves, as they saw the
vacuity always in the middle of the Water Congealed: whence it seemed necessary
to conclude, That the Water, which fluid, sufficed to fill the Ball; being
frozen, withdrew it self into so much a less space as the aforementioned
vacuity; from so manifest an inconvenience, they were inclinable to think,
there must be some fallacy, and therefore set themselves to observe very nicely
the whole progress of the Experiment; So taking the Vessel very often out of
the freezing mixture, and carefully viewing it on all sides, they perceived an
almost insensible boiling, and bubling out at the middle Screw, from time to
time; a manifest sign, that the Water (so great is the force of its
rarefaction) crept through the Spiral Passages of the Screw; upon this, the
Screw being waxed, and the Ball again filled, it was set in the Ice and Salt to
freeze; and tho 'twas many times taken out, there was never observed any
bubbling, or any hissing heard as before; but after the freezing was done, upon
taking it out of the mixture, the Vessel was open on one side of the middle
Screw, the rarefying power of freezing being great enough to force the Screw;
The Experiment being often repeated, had still the same Effect; and being again
tried in a Ball of Brass with a Screw of twice as many threads as the silver
one had, it still showed the same trick.

The Fourth Experiment.
Tab. 12. Fig. 5. and 6.
TO avoid this inconvenience of the Screws, we got some Balls made of glass half
a finger thick, and filling them with Water, set them to freeze, being first
sealed at the Flame of a Candle: The Effect was exactly the same as that of the
first Vessel made of Plate; for they all were diversely broken, and split: some
had their Necks quite thrown off; others through the unequal thickness of the
glass, or irregularity of their Figure, Fig. 5. Fig. 6.
were burst on one side; others were Tab. 13. p. 75.
cracked all over. And 'twas observable, that the Neck was generally broken
off; when the whole ball was covered in the mixture of Ice, and Salt, so that
the Water in the Neck being of the least bulk, 'twas first frozen Solid there,
and by that means stopped, and forced the Ball: for in the procedure of the
freezing, the remaining Water endeavoring every way, and either finding the
neck the weakest part, or the Ice therein being as a Cone, or Wedge to split
it, it still most easily brake through there; which never happened when the
upper part of the Ball was left uncovered with the freezing mixture. How great
the force of this Rarefaction was, may be gathered from this; that when the
Necks were not turned downwards, upon the Vessels bursting they flew off into
the air, five, or six feet high, throwing up a great deal of the Ice, with
which the Balls were covered.

The Fifth Experiment.
Ottone 2 Piastre
AT last we resolved to cast a Ball of Brass all of one piece about Two Crowns
thick, having but one Mouth at the foot thereof, Tab. 13. Fig. 1.
so made as to be very close shut with an exquisite Screw. Then to take the
Lump of Ice out whole, we made a small crease round it, where by putting it
again in the Lare, it might be cut in two in the midst, which showed a strange
accident in the Water; for this small inequality, as little as it was, made the
Ball burst in that place.

Whereupon we made another Ball, and without weakening it in any part, set it to
freeze; but this was broken, as all the other (for we tried it often) in that
place which the water found most defective.

The Sixth Experiment.
Tab. 13. Fig. 2.
THE Last Experiment was made with a ball of fine Gold of the size represented
in the Figure: this having undergone many freezings without any visible crack,
caused at first no little wonder: and some began to doubt, whether, or no, the
space requisite for the freezing by the Diminution of the Thickness of the
Metal, by the force of the Water, and by reason of its softness, might
insensibly be comprest, (as Tin, Silver, and Gold it self, become more compact
by being hammered:) but at last observing, that whereas the Ball before
freezing, was flatted so, that it would stand upon the bottom; when it was
taken out of the freezing mixture, it would not stand upright; every one was
well satisfied whence this happened: and because it seemed to us perfectly
Spherical, to be the better assured thereof, whether it would remain of its
first Size (if it did not burst in repeating the Experiment) or whether it
would stretch bigger; Ottone.
we made a Ring of Brass exactly fitted to the Vessels greatest Circle. All
along in the freezing, by examining it with this Ring, we still found it grow
bigger, and bigger; that pure metal, by reason of its softness and pliantness,
still dilating and stretching it self: and perhaps, if it had been made of cast
Metal, the Effect would have been more conspicuous; but being made of Two
pieces, it at last burst at the place where it was sodered with Silver, and the
Crack beginning at the Soder, ranslanting down into the Gold also.

An Experiment,
To measure how great the force of Rarefaction may be in Water shut up in close
Vessels, to Freeze.
Ottone.
TO obtain this, we thought of making a Metal Ball of brass, like the former,
but perfectly round, and according to our Estimation, so much thicker, that the
force of Rarefaction should be unable to break it; and filling it with Water,
to set it to freeze, as before; the Cover being fast screwed down.

This was done, and at first we found that the Water was frozen without any
running out, or cracking the Vessel: wherefore we put in the Lare, and (keeping
it as near as possible of the same Figure) there was taken off every where a
thin coat of Metal; and then 'twas set to freeze the second time with water;
and not being burst also, although it was frozen; we again turned off a thin skin
from the Ball; this Experiment we repeated with three Balls, the thickest
whereof is represented by the 4. Fig. which seemed to us the greatest thickness
the force of Rarefaction in freezing Water could overpower: having proceeded
so far, Tab. 13* Fig. 4.
we were desirous to reduce this to the force of dead weight, and the most
probable means we thought of, was to cast a Ring of the same Metals and
hardness, and exactly of the thicknes of the Ball, turning the inside conical,
and fitting thereto an Iron Cone, so that the Iron might rise about the breadth
of the Ring, above the upper Edg thereof; being thus prepared, we thought of
putting the Ring over an hole made in the midst of a thick Stone Table,
something larger than the bore of the Ring; we then thought to proceed to lay
on Weights upon the top of the Iron Cone; or at least, force it down with
Weights hung to an hook made at the lower End thereof, that so the force being
Perpendicular, it might equally drive the Iron into the Ring, and then
leasurely adding small leaden Weights, we might know the least Weight capable
of bursting the Ring: and to be secured, that the bearing of the Ring upon the
roughness of the Table might be no hindrance to its breaking, we thought to
fasten round the hole of the Table, a Plate of Polisht Steel, and smooth the
under-side of the Ring, that it might upon the least touch slip upon the Steel:
but because an immense Weight was but sufficient to Conquer so great a
Resistance, we thought to obtain our End, by making the Experiment with several
much smaller Rings, but of different Sizes, and with more managable Weights;
and so by examining the Resistance of these Rings, and comparing the repeated
Trials, to come near the knowledge of what would break the first Ring, of the
same thickness of the Ball; and by consequence, the force of Rarefaction in
Freezing.

These were our thoughts; but still finding upon cutting our Balls that were
cracked in the freezing, several inequalities, and defects in the founding,
proceeding either from the wind, or dregs of the Metal; when infusion, we were
discouraged from Prosecuting the Experiment, upon so many uncertainties;
nevertheless, we forbear not to relate our intentions freely, tho we came short
of our End; yet it may serve for an Advertisement to others, not to take a
wrong Path; and perchance, excite the Ingenious to find out a means to obviate
these difficulties, or a happier Journey another way.

Experiments, To Measure the utmost Expansion of Water in Freezing.
The First Experiment.
WE made this Experiment two ways, by Measure, and by Weight; that by Measure,
was after this manner: We procured a glass Cane, drawn as equal as possible; we
Sealed it at one End; and filling it to a certain Mark with Water, we set it in
Ice very well powdered, and incorporated with Salt to freeze: then comparing
the height of the Cilinder Frozen, with that of the Cilinder Fluid, having the
same Bases, the Proportion was found to be as Nine to Eight.

The Second Experiment.
WE did not think fit to rest satisfied with this one Experiment, judging it
little less than impossible, to find a Glass Cane, (which has no other Rule to
draw it by, than the equal breath of the Artificer) so truly Cilindrical as to
take away all scruple of the Proportion of the Cilinders of Water contained
therein: wherefore to have a more Regular Vessel, we took the Barrel of a
Pistol, and turned it within to the truest Cilindrical Figure attainable by a
Material Instrument, shutting the touchhole with a Steel Screw, and covering
that with a Polished Steel Plate, we poured in Six Fingers Water, and thrust in
a turned Cilinder of Box, of the exact Size of the remaining part of the Tube,
well oiled and greased, that it might not imbibe any Water: when it was driven
in so far, that the Mouth of the Barrel was well stopped, we inverted the Cane,
that the Water might all rest upon the Base of the Cilinder, and unscrewing the
touchhole, we forced the Cilinder; of Box in further, till the Water began to
run out; then screwing in the Pin again, we set the Barrel upright, and marked
how much of the Wood stood out, and covered it with the Freezing mixture
sprinkled with Aqua vitae, which, as is well known enforces the freezing very
much. When it had lain there about 12 Minutes, the Mark made at the Nose of the
Barrel upon the Box, was raised the thickness of a Crown, and presently after
two more, where it stayed, tho we reinforced the Cold by a great quantity of
fresh Snow and Salt: after a full hour, we took the Barrel out, and found it so
cold, that we could scarce endure it in our hands; whence we gathered, it was
thoroughly Frozen: and that the rather, because unscrewing the Touchhole, and
striking the end of the Box Cilinder against the Wall, we were not able to
force it an Hairs breadth in; and except a few drops at the Touchhole, we
could not observe any Water between the Cilinder and Barrel; and by trying with
a Piercer, we found it Solid Ice: for all this, we were not certain the Water
was all frozen; nor could we be easily satisfied, because of the opacous Tube.
And 'twas possible some Water might get out at the Screw of the Touchhole; and
so part of the Tube between the Cilinder of Ice and Box, remain empty. Or in
fine, the Water when at perfect liberty, may Rarefie in a greater Proportion,
than it can do when under the constraint of a close Vessel, as it was here; for
the Box was so fitted to the Barrel, and by imbibing the Water, notwithstanding
the Oil so swelled, that after the Ice was Thawed, and the Water poured out at
the touchhole, we were not able to pull it out with a pair of Pincers, or a
Vice; so that we were forced to burn it out.

The Third Experiment.
BEing sensible of the many Difficulties we encountered in endeavoring to gain
these Proportions by the Height of the Cilinders upon the same Basis, and a
Metalline Tube, we betook our selves to the other Experiment of weight: this we
tried with a Transparent glass Cane, and Weighed the Water put therein to
freeze, and afterward, as much Ice as filled that same space in the Cane, in a
pair of Scales that turned with the 1/48 part of a Grane; and the Proportion
was found to be, as 25, to 28 1/19, little less than that observed in the First
Experiment of measure, which was as 8 to 9, the same as 25 to 28; finding so
great an agreement in the proportions not to flatter our selves with this
success, we repeated the First Experiment with the same Cane, and found it as
at first, as 8, to 9: and we were satisfied, that the weight was not altered
for keeping the Glass Cane close shut the whole time of the freezing, and till
it Thawed again; our Balance showed it to be of the very same weight as at
first.

Experiments,
Touching the Procedure of Artificial Freezings, with their wonderful Accidents.
THe first Vessel we made use of in these Experiments, was a Bolt-head of
Glass, di Brac. 1 Brac.
about 2 8/10 Inches Diameter, with a Neck about 34 Inches long, slender, and
divided into Minute Degrees; into this we poured fair Water to a Sixth Part of
the Neck, Tab. 41. Fig. 1.
then setting the Bolt-head, or Ball in the freezing Mixture, as we used to do
to freeze Liquors; we attentively observed the Motion thereof, by viewing its
Superficies: we knew before, (as indeed, few are ignorant of) That from the
first Application of Cold, it contracts all Liquors, lessening their Bulk; and
this we found true, not only in the Aqua vitae of the Thermometers; but also,
we had often made the Experiment with fair Water, Oil, Mercury, and many other
Fluids; on the other side we had taken notice, That the Water passing from a
Simple Coldness, to lose its Fluidity, and receive consistency, and firmness by
Glaciation, does not only return to its first Bulk, but so far Exceed it, as
to burst Vessels of Glass, and Metal with great violence. But we were yet
ignorant, what Period these several alterations (produced by cold) observed;
neither was it possible for us to attain it in Opake Vessels, as those of
Silver, Brass, and Gold were, hitherto made use of in the Freezings: wherefore
not to fail in this, which seemed to be the very Life of all these Experiments;
we had recourse to Vessels of Cristal, and Glass, hoping by the Transparency of
the materials, to be satisfied in the procedure of the Experiment; since upon
every Motion of the Level in the Neck, we might take the Vessel out of the
mixture, and mark the correspondent alteration therein. But the truth is, we
found greater trouble than at first we imagined; to gain any certainty as to
the Periods of these Accidents.

But to relate the success more distinctly, you must know, That upon the first
immersion of the Ball, as soon as ever it touched the freezing Mixture, we
observed in the Water in the Neck a little rising, but very quick, which soon
subsiding, it fell in the Neck, with a Motion regular enough and a moderate
Velocity retiring to the Ball, till arriving at a certain degree, it stopped for
some time, as far as our Eyes could judge, immovable. Then by little and little
it emounted, but with a very slow Motion, and apparently equal, and then of a
sudden without any proportionate acceleration it flew up with a furious Spring:
at which time it was impossible to follow it any longer with the Eye,
instantaneously running through the Decades of Degrees. And as this fury began
of a sudden, so of a sudden it ceased, changing from that great swiftness to a
movement, though very fast, yet incomparably less swift than the precedent: and
with this it continued to rise most commonly, till it ran over the Top of the
Neck; and all the while these things happened, were observed several little
corpuscles of air, or some other more subtle Body to arise, and pass through
the Water, sometimes in a greater, sometimes in a less Proportion: this
separation was not visible, till the Water began to receive an intense Degree
of cold, as if the force of the Cold had the faculty of secreting such a matter
from the Water. After this, we were willing to see, if these Alterations kept
any kind of equality or proportion with each other; wherefore we repeated the
freezings, scarce one Ice being dissolved, but we set it again to freeze: but
the Water always froze with the same Series of Changes: yet because they did
not still every time rise to the same Marks or Degrees in the Neck, we began to
imagine, there was no fixed Period; for which, it seemed we had some reason. At
last it happened, that in often repeating these Experiments, we by chance let
the Water in the Bolt-head freeze in the Neck first: (of which we spoke in the
Fourth Experiment of freezing, Tab. 14. Fig. 2.
) and so brake our Vessel. Whereupon, we were forced to make another; this we
blew less than the former, that the cold might soon Insinuate it self through
all the Water; we also made the Neck longer, to the height of 45 ^/10 Inches, 2
Brac.
that it should not run over. This we filled to 160 degrees. and set it to freeze
in Ice very diligently; heeding it we found at first, that all the accidents of
subsiding, rising, resting, remounting, swiftly running up, and stopping again,
were the very same; ( i. e.) happened always when the Level of the Water was at
the same Mark or Degree in the Neck; for upon putting it in the Ice, we
observed, it was reduced to the same Degree, as in the former Trial: that is to
say, at the same Temperament of Heat and Cold; taking the whole Instrument for
a nice Thermometer, by reason of the largeness of the Ball, and proportion of
the Neck; being satisfied so far, we proceeded to find the exact time of
freezing; and to obtain this, we took the Ball out of the Mixture often, yet as
often as we tried it, we were never so successful as to find the first small
Veins, or stiriae of Ice, but it was either all Fluid, or all over Frozen;
whence it was easy to gather, that the Act of Glaciation must be very quick:
and whoever should happen to take it out of the Mixture in the very instant
that the Water begins its swift car^ere; might certainly observe some Notable
alteration therein: and because we had so often taken out, and immersed the
Ball into the Mixture, we were not well assured of the Point of its Change; we
let it stand therefore, and be reduced to its first Mark, and placed it again
in the mixture, and took notice of the Degrees whereat it began to mount so
swiftly; and half a Degree before it came to it, we took it out, and very
needfully regarding it with the Eye, the Water in the Ball, through the
Transparency of the Vessel was easily discerned to be yet all Fluid; but the
before received Impression of cold still acting (though it* was now taken out
of the Ice) when it was just arrived at the Point, with a swiftness
indiscernable by the Eye, and therefore scarce to be conceived, forced the
Water through the Neck, and in an instant took away all Transparency from the
Ball, and changed its Fluidity into Ice. There was no reason to doubt of its
being wholly converted into Ice; and that it was not only outwardly crusted
over, because in Thawing it loosened first from the sides of the Glass,
lessening by degrees, till at last it was like a small Lens of Ice which was in
the End Dissolved.

We were well satisfied by often repeating the Experiment, that it was just as
we have related it; and that we were not imposed upon.

Tab. 14. p. 81.


We were after this, very desirous to see the Order and Method observed by
diverse Liquors in freezings which for brevity are set down in the following
Tables; wherein

Stato Natural.
STATE NATURAL, signifies, the Degree whereat the Water, or other Fluid stood
(before Glaciation) in the Neck of the Vessel.

Salto dell Immersione.
RISE UPON IMMERSION, is the first Leap made by the Water upon the Balls first
touching the freezing Mixture.

This, (as the following Experiments will more clearly show) proceeded not from
any Intrinsic Alteration of the Fluid; but from the Extrinsic cause of the
Vessel: whence it is, that varying sometimes a little, it Communicated some
variety to the other Changes through which the Liquor passed in freezing; but
whereas this is it self but small, its variety is also but little, and what it
communicates to the subsequent Changes very inconsiderable.

Abbassamento. Quiet.
ABATEMENT, or Fall, denotes the Degree to which the Water is reduced (after the
Rice upon Immersion) when it just begins to receive the Impression of Cold.

REST. Is the Degree whereat the Water stands for some time after its fall,
without any apparent Motion.

Sollevamento.
REMOUNTING, shows likewise the Degree to which the Water is raised from its
lowest fall, by means of Rarifaction, with a very slow, and seemingly equal
Motion, altogether like the first, wherewith it subsided.

Salto dell Agghiacciamento.
SPRING UPON GLACIATION, signifies the Degree to which the Water rises with that
extreme Velocity upon the very point of Glaciation.

We said before, that after this Spring or Start, the Water does not stop upon
a sudden, but continues to rise with a Motion swift enough, though incomparably
less than the preceding: but of this Subsequent Motion, we have taken no
account, it proceeding only from the Prosecution of Rarifaction in the Ice
already made, or to say better, from the Ice shooting in the Ball by little and
little, as it hardens after the fury of the first Impetus. This we call the
first shooting of Ice, which is (as we have found upon breaking the Balls) from
a very tender and weak beginning; and like Sherbet, when it is a little too
hard, being of no closer a Consistence than the first coagulations of Liquors.
Moreover, it happens that this way of Freezing, shows not the utmost
Rarefaction of Fluids violently frozen, it being impossible without bursting
our Instrument to reduce the Ice to a perfect Solidity.

We have likewise, to show our utmost diligence, and exactness, made use of a
Thermometer and Pendulum in each Experiment of freezing: that with the
Thermometer we might see at what Degree of cold, and with the Pendulum at what
time every change happened to the Liquors: wherefore in the same Box with the
Ball, Tab. 14. Fig. 3.
or Bolt-head, we put a Thermometer of 400 degrees. but indeed, we found great
inconveniences, both in Noting the Degrees of cold shown by the Thermometer,
and the spaces of Time given by the Vibrations of the Pendulum; so that we must
confess, all our diligence was fruitless through the difficulty and
impracticableness of applying an equal Proportion of cold to the Ball, and to
the Thermometer; by reason of the inequality of the Pieces of Ice, and quantity
of Salt sprinkled. And the cause is, That in Artificial Freezing we make use of
Snow or Ice, which though ever so well bruised, and as it were ground to
powder; yet upon mixing it with the Salt, they become one Solid Mass, and as
hard as Stone; so that it is impossible to close it round about the Vessel, or
be assured, that it touches every where alike: yet rather than be deficient, we
have set both down in our Tables, that is, the Degrees of the Thermometer, and
the Vibrations of the Pendulum; leaving it to the discretion of the Reader, to
make a due Estimation of such Remarques.

The First Freezing
Of Spring Water.
The Degrees. of the Vessel. Differ. Degrees. of Therm. Differ. Vibrat. Diff. State
Natural 142 139 Rice upon Immer. 143 1 133 6 23 23 Abatement. 120 23 69 64 255
232 Rest. 120 49 20 330 75 Remounting. 130 10 33 16 462 132 Spring upon
Glaciat. 166 36 33

Note, That 65 of the Vibrations of the Pendulum set down in this, and the Four
following Tables made one Minute.

The Second Freezing
Of the same Spring Water.
Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural. 144
141 Rice upon Immers. 146 2 118 23 25 25 Abatement. 119 27 38 80 280 255 Rest
199 28 10 415 135 Remounting. 131 11 17 11 882 467 Spring upon Glaciat. 170 39
17

The Third Freezing.
Of the same.
Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 143 141
Rice upon Immersion 145 2 125 16 23 23 Abatement 119 25 51 74 369 346 Rest 119
44 7 565 196 Remounting 129 10 38 6 933 368 Spring upon Glaciat. 169 39 38

From these Three Examples of Freezing, the same Water may be observed, That
the state Natural of the Water was not all three times exactly at the same
Degree caused by the different temperament it had at one time, from what it had
at another, from the External Accidents of Heat and Cold; whence likewise all
the other alterations happening to the Water, did not precisely keep their
Degrees; nevertheless by reducing in the second and third Experiments the state
Natural to 142 degrees. and also substracting in the like Proportion from all the
other heights, you will find that they differ from the Degrees noted in the
first Table very inconsiderably.

The First Freezing
Of Myrtle Flower water drawn off in a cold Still. Acqua di fiori di Mortella

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 145 141
Rise upon Immers. 147 1 133 8 31 31 Abatement 109 38 49 83 347 316 Rest 109 45
4 387 40 Remounting 125 16 25 19 925 538 Spring upon Glaciat. 230 105 25

The Second Freezing
Of the same Water.
Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat Diff. State Natural 146 142
Rise upon Immers. 149 3 131 11 18 18 Abatement 108 41 35 96 460 442 Rest 108 32
2 518 58 Remounting 126 18 19 13 1327 809 Spring upon Glaciat. 232 106 19

In the following Experiments of Freezing, we changed our Pendulum taking one
60, of whose Vibrations made an Exact Minute.

The First Freezing
Of simple Rose Water stilled in a Cold Still. Acqua Rosa.

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 140 142
Rise upon Immers. 143 2 138 4 20 20 Abatement 116 27 50 88 351 331 Rest 116 46
4 389 38 Remounting 127 11 26 20 745 356 Spring upon Glaciat. 194 67 26

The Second Freezing
Of the same Water.
Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 140 141
Rise upon Immers. 142 1 125 16 21 21 Abatement 115 27 39 86 354 333 Rest 115 29
9 522 168 Remounting 127 11 18 11 1257 735 Spring upon Glaciat. 194 67 18

The First Freezing
Of Orange-flower Water drawn off in a cold Still. Acqua di fiori di Aranci.

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 137 142
Rise upon Immers. 139 2 130 12 ^^ 14 Abatement 111 28 46 83 311 297 Rest 111 44
2 375 64 Remounting 127 16 20 24 880 505 Spring upon Glaciat. 250 123 20

In all the Tables of the Second Freezings of the abovenamed Liquors many be
observed how much longer time was requisite to Freeze it the second time, than
the first; which we taking notice of, were willing to discover, whether it
arose from any intrinsic cause in the Liquors after their suffering the first
Freezing; or from an External cause in the Ice's being less cold after it had
suffered the first incorporating with the Salt: and for this intent, we emptied
the Case, and putting in fresh Ice and Salt, we made Trial of

The Second Freezing
Of the same Water.
Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat Diff. State Natural 137 142
Rise upon Immers. 140 2 120 22 29 29 Abatement 111 28 46 74 366 337 Rest 111 44
2 384 18 Remounting 127 15 31 12 907 523 Spring upon Glaciat. 248 121 3^

So that the Disserence in time between the First and Second Freezings must not
be attributed to the Liquors, but to the Ice, which being much dissolved, and
weakened, its Freezing Power arising from the salt requires a longer time to
perform its Operation; and indeed, the whole difference between the two
Freezings of the Orange Flower Water amounted but to a Minute and 46 Seconds;
whereas, when the mixture was not changed, it arose to 7 minutes 29 seconds;
nay, to 13 Minutes 20 Seconds; as appears by the comparing of the First and
Second Freezings of the Rose Water, and the First and Third Freezings of the
Spring water; and that the small difference of 1 Minute 46 Seconds observed in
the Second Freezing of Orange-flower Water, was merely accidental, and not from
any resistance acquired by the Water in being once before Frozen; is Evident
from the seeond Table of the Freezing of Strawberry-Water, following, where the
Ice being changed, the second Freezing happened in 3 Minutes 15 Seconds less
time than the First.

The First Freezing
Straw-berry Water stilled in Balneo. Aqua di Frauole.

Degrees of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 137 143
Rise upon Immers. 139 2 120 23 30 30 Abatement 111 28 37 83 437 450 Rest 111 36
1 450 15 Remounting 126 15 18 17 988 538 Spring upon Glaciat. 215 89 18 2/^

The Second Freezing
Of the same Water.
Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 139 143
Rise upon Immers. 141 2 134 9 18 18 Abatement 114 27 42 92 1/9 420 402 Rest 114
41 1 427 7 Remounting 129 15 21 20 873 446 Spring upon Glaciat. 215 86 21

Note, That the Spring upon Glaciation is more or less high, as likewise more
or less swift in Different Fluids: and it seems to be higher and swifter in
those that Freeze stronger.

The Freezing
Of Stilled Cinnamon Water. Acqua di Cannella.

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 139 141
Rise upon Immers. 141 1 133 7 13 13 Abatement 111 29 45 88 360 347 Rest 111 39
6 420 60 Rem^unting 120 9 27 12 720 300

The Water rising with a very slow Motion from the State of Rest to 120 degrees.
instead of springing up as it then uses to do, it only mounted with a quicker
pace; which perceiving, we immediately took the Vessel out of the mixture, and
found the Water shot into a very tender Ice, which melted as soon as ever it
was sensible of the Air. And Note, That of these Artificial Freezings, some
were more weak and tender, as the Ice of Cinnamon Water, and that of
Rose Water; others more firm and hard, as that of Orange, and
Mirtle-Flower-waters; than which we found no Liquors so hardened at the first
instantaneous Freezing.

We have omitted the repetition of this, and the following freezings, since
their agreement may be sufficiently seen in the Examples given of each Liquor.

The Freezing
Of Snow Water. Acqua di Neve Strutta.

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural. 136
141 Rise upon Immers. 139 2 132 9 27 27 Abatement. 111 28 54 80 345 318 Rest.
111 48 4 377 32 Remounting. 116 5 40 8

And then with a somewhat quicker motion (tho very slow in comparison of that
which the other Liquors sprung up with upon the point of Glaciation) it began
to congeal at the sides of the Glass, and successively from the more outward
parts approached the Center of the Vessel with the same equal slowness of
Rarefaction, and raising of the Level in the Neck. The Ice was not throughout
equal as the other, but broken, and shot into irregular Veins and Rays, and
every where interwoven: being repeated, the second Freezing was in all respects
the same as the first; And making it with the same Water boiled, we found no
great difference.

The Freezing
Of Fig-Water. Acqua della Ficoncella.

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 98 Rise upon Immers. 100 2
19 19 Abatement 71 29 288 269 Rest 71 363 75 Remounting 83 12 816 453 Spring
upon Glaciat. 200 117

The Freezing
Of the best red Florence Wine. Vini Rosso di Chianti.

Degrees. of Vessel. Differ. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 141
141 Rise upon Immer. 143 2 137 4 15 15 Abatement. 77 65 27 109 600 585 Rest 77
23 4 695 95 Remounting. 81 4 15 7 1035 340

From the 81 Degrees. it visibly accelerated the Motion of the Level, and by little
and little froze without any other motion in the Vessel,

The Freezing
Of white Muscadine. Muscadello Bianco.

The Degrees. of the Vessel. Differ. Degrees. of Therm. Differ. Vibrat. Diff. State
Natural 140 139 Rise upon Immer. 142 2 132 7 16 16 Abatement. 77 65 24 108 660
644

Being come to that Degree of 77 without any rest or stop, it began to rise
with a little swifter Motion than we observed the Liquors used to remount with,
which Freeze in the instant of that they exert their violent spring. When we
took it out, we found the Liquor began to have some Ice next the sides of the
Glass.

The Freezing Of Distilled Vinegar. Aceto Bianco.

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural. 141
140 Rise upon Immers. 143 2 134 14 11 11 Abatement. 75 68 24 110 735 724
Remounting. 79 4 19 5 1175 440 Spring upon Glaciat. 273 194 19

Which Velocity was less than that of the Freezing Water, but considerably
greater than that of Muscadine, Cinnamon Water, and Simple Vinegar.

The Freezing
Of the Juice of Limons Agro di Limoni.

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. State Natural 142 143 Rise upon
Immersion 144 2 134 9 Abatement 84 160 32 102

When it was fallen to the 84 th degree of the Vessel, it began to rise again
with a very slow motion, gently freezing.

The Freezing.
Of Spirit of Vitriol. Spirito di Vitriolo.

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. Degrees. of Therm. Diff. Vibrat. Diff. State Natural 140 140
Rise upon Immers. 142 1 133 7 15 15 Abatement 90 52 37 95 420 405

This Liquor did likewise not rest at all, but being reduced to 90 degrees. began
to remount in the Neck of the Vessel with a slow uniform motion, and at the
same time shot it self in several planes of ice from place to place in the
Liquor, as is the manner of fair water set to freeze by it self in the open air.

The Freezing Of Oil. Olio.

Degrees. of Vessel. Diff. State Natural 140 Fall upon Immers. 122 18 Abatement

When it had contracted it self all within the Body of the Vessel it there
congealed without the least Rarefaction: for it may be the Frozen Oil sinks to
the bottom of the Fluid, whereas all other Ice swims upon their Fluids.

Spirit of Wine condenses extremely, but never Rarifies afterward, nor affords
any ice.

EXPERIMENTS OF Natural Freezing.
ALthough the Freezings we have hitherto Treated of, have been called by us
Artificial; yet that takes not from their being the true Works of Natures own
hand. Now the same Nature Acting by other Methods, and it may be with the only
ingredient of the Air, we were curious to know, if any variety in the Procedure
of the Operations, might be discovered in producing the same Effects by other
means. And when we already had this before us, we attempted to draw thence some
other Conclusions; as will appear in the following Discourse.

The First Experiment. Of the Freezing of common Water in the Air.
IT is already declared, in the foregoing Experiments, that the Artificial Ice
(in the then described Vessels) proceeded from a beginning very soft, and
incompact; especially, in regard of those made in the Winter air; which, tho
they are not so suddenly made, but begin from a thin coat, or hair-like Vein,
scarce discernable; yet those Veins, or Coats (excepting their brittleness,
which comes from their being so very small) are more firm, and hard Bodies, and
as it were more Cristaline, and Solid Ice. And very admirable is that Lusus
Naturae which for many years we have observed in Natural Freezings, viz.
Setting Water taken out of the same Spring in several Vessels, as of Earth, of
Metal, and of Glass; in the shape of tall Glasses, or broad Bowls, some
part-filled, some quite-fill'd; some open, others covered, and in several sorts
of bottles, with different Mouths; some only stopped with Cotton, others sealed
at a Flame, being all set in the same place undisturbed, or beside one another
upon a Table: sometimes that Vessel which had least, was first Frozen;
sometimes that which had most, and so in all the Vessels, without any regard
had of the form, or fullness thereof.

As to the Materials, we may positively aver, That Earthen Vessels freeze the
contained Fluid sooner than either Metal, or Glass. But as to the rest, we have
found nothing so constant, as the perpetual irregularity of the Accidents; and
among others, there have some Vessels stood all Night without the least Coat of
Ice, when some next to them have been frozen in an hour. Moreover, in the same
sort of Vessels set to freeze, in the same Night, we have observed the like
varieties, whether placed North, South, East or West; and as well those Vessels
which have stood more Southwardly have been frozen first, as at other times,
those that stood more Northwardly, tho the Cold generally comes from that Tract
with us: and sometimes those Eastward, sometimes those Westward have got the
better; nay sometimes both have surpassed the North, and South, and at other
times been vanquished by them.

The Method also observed in Freezing, is very curious: The water begins first
to congeal at the top round the edges, and from that List of Ice shoots several
small Threads to the middle, after which it sends others downwards, and that
indifferently from all parts; by degrees these Threads became ragged, yet
thicker, and broader at one end, and more acute at the other, like little
Daggers; from the sides of these shoot out other small Threads close together
like feathers, or Palm branches; these are as it were the first warping, and
with a confused, and disorderly filling up, they proceed shooting and
increasing till the Woofe closes all with a total freezing of the Water; the
Superficies whereof may be perceived to be all razed, and full of strait Lines,
like Cristal scratcht with a fine Graver. At first the Superficies of all these
Ices appears plain; but when the freezing is thoroughly finished, and all the
Water Congealed, it at last becomes raised in hillocks, but without any regular
Figure. This Effect made some call to mind what was Registered in our first
Experiment of Artificial Freezing, where the innermost Cover of the Silver
Vessel was found cracked, and all Coated over with a thin Ice made of the water
that got out of the Vessel at the crack in the instant of freezing; thereupon
they said, that the first Crust of Ice which spreads it self over the
Superficies of the Water, and shuts it closer than any Cover can, by sticking
fast to the sides of the Vessel; does not leave space enough for the Water
under it to rarifie in, as it freezes, but it is forced to seek room where it
can; and finding the Cake of Ice weaker than the sides of the Vessel, it makes
its way there, and heaps it self up more in one place than another, according
to the inclination of the plains in which it breaks, when the first Cake
splits, which afterward likewise freezing, forms that little swelling
mentioned: this happens sometimes to break the Vessels, which (as they think)
is most probably caused, by the slowness of the Waters freezing at the bottom;
whereby the Cake of Ice at the top becomes so hard, that it is easier to break
the sides of the Vessels than the Icey Cover: but no certain Rule can be given
concerning these matters, since there may be many cases wherein either the
Vessel is only burst, or the Cover only: or first one, then the other; or
both at the same time, according as the External accidents of the Air vary; as
to cold, calmness, or winds; and from the inequality of the Vessels Resistance,
or from the Nature of the Liquors themselves.

Before we put an End to this Discourse; it will not be amiss to Relate a
trifling Accident observed this year, which though of small Moment, may
nevertheless be some help to the former Opinion. A cup of Water being exposed
to the Air in the Evening, we found in the Morning all the Water frozen; and in
the highest part of its Superficies it had a Point of Ice a Finger high, like a
small sharp splinter of Rock Cristal: This in all likelihood was no other than
the Water issuing out at a crack in the first incrustation, being forced by the
freezing, underneath, which violently rising in a small stream, (and
predispos'd to Freeze,) by the Cold of the external Air, was congealed to an
hard Ice, in that very instant, not having time to fall.

The Second Experiment Of the Freezing of Water in Vacuo.
WE have likewise tried to Freeze Water in a Vacuum made with Mercury: and that
we might compare it with that made in the Air, we put Water in a Vessel like
that included in the Vacuum. Therefore exposing them all Night, we found in the
Morning both frozen: yet with this Difference; that the Ice made in Vacuo
seemed more equal and hard, and less transparent and porous than the other; and
upon Examination, was heavier in specie. The way we took to discover this, was
by turning a piece of each Ice like a Cilinder, and of the same bulk, as near
as we could, and putting them in Spirit of Wine, upon which gently pouring some
Red Wine, we saw the Ice made in the Air rise up before that made in Vacuo; and
when upon the top of the Water, it swam about lighter, and quicker because the
Fluid covered less of it, than of the other.

The Third Experiment Of the Freezing of Stilled Water.
HAving set common Stilled Water in several Vials to freeze, we found the Ice
more limpid and transparent than usually the water is: only in the midst there
was as much as a small Nut of a more opaque Ice, and whiter than the rest, and
round about it diverse spiculae of the same kind of Ice: in fine, to give a true
Picture of it, in each Vial 'twas like the Burre or Husk of a Chestnut, frozen
in a piece of Rock-Cristal, as we see Flys, Worms, or Butter-flys entombed in
Amber; or like little bits of Straw, Herbs, etc. in Cristal it self.

The Fourth Experiment, Of the Freezing of Sea Water.
TO see the Freezing of Sea water, we exposed one Evening to the Air (when a
Thermometer of 50 degrees. stood at 9, two Glasses full of it, to freeze: in an
hour we found the shallowest began to freeze; but in a manner somewhat
different from common Water; for it showed like a great many small scales of
Talk broken to pieces, and put in Water. These took away the Trasparency of
the Water, and gave it the consistence of Sherbet, which is drank frozen in the
Summer, when the Externally applied Snow growing more Languid, it begins to
dissolve. In a while looking upon it again, we observed it a little firmer, as
the Multiplying of the Scales lessened the Fluidity of the water; in the
morning it was yet harder, tho it came nothing near the hardness of common Ice;
for upon any little agitation, it turned to water: the Figure of the Scales was
narrow, and longish, and between them it was for the most part Fluid: moreover,
the Mass stuck no where to the sides of the Vessel; but turned freely about in
it. The Superficies was altogether plain, without any prominences, or Risings:
And the Difference consisted wholly in a more loose and thin Order and Texture
then that of ordinary Ice.

The Fifth Experiment, Of the Efficacy of Sal-Armoniac, Nitre, etc. in Freezing.
IT is well known, that Ice is most efficaciously cold when sprinkled over with
Salt. As to this we have observed, That Sal-Armoniac invigorates it more than
any other; for we have experimented it upon the same water, of the same
Temperament, and in like Vessels of the same figure, capacity, and thinness,
equally encompassed with the like quantity of beaten ice, and the one being
sprinkled with Sal-Armoniac, the other with the same proportion of Nitre, they
were not frozen in the same space of time: for a Thermometer of 100 degrees. being
(when it stood at 20 degrees.) Immersed in Water set to freeze with Nitre, subsided
but to 7 degrees. when at the same time a like Thermometer put in Water,
encompassed with the mixture of Sal-Armoniac, fell down to 5 degrees. and the Water
began to be skinned over.

We have already said, upon another account, That not only Salt, but
Strong Water wonderfully intend the freezing; and if besides the strong-Water,
you add salt, it will prove most powerful: nay, sugar produces such an Effect,
but not much in comparison of common Salt, Nitre, and Sal-armoniac, which we
found much more successful in the operation of freezing, than all the Rest.

The Sixth Experiment. Touching what Metal preserves Ice best.
PUtting Ice in Vessels of several different Metals to observe which kept it
the longest unthaw'd; yet, of this we could obtain nothing certain, tho we may
say at large from a very great number of Experiments which we made, that it was
preserved best of all in Lead, very well in Tin, Piombo Stagno Rame Ferro oro
Argento.
but a short time in Copper, and Iron, less in Gold, and yet a lesser time in
Silver; nevertheless, at sometimes this order was changed, it melting sooner in
Tin and Lead, than in Silver and Gold: wherefore (as we hinted) this Experiment
is not to be much confided in, but proposed here rather to excite others to
attempt it by some more secure way, than to show any certainty we obtained in
our Observations.

The Seventh Experiment Of Freezing a Piece of Ice to a Table.
GAssendus Writes, and it is very true, That if a Plate of Ice be laid upon a
flat Table, and well sprinkled above with Salt, it will freeze fast down to the
Table: we were desirous to make the same Experiment with Nitre, but it
succeeded not, so as to show us the least beginning of Adhaesion: we have often
observed in those stuck down with common Salt, that we much more easily
separated them from the Table, by lifting them up Perpendicularly (or at one
end first, as a Board nailed down is raised up with a Lever) than they could be
forced along parallel to the Plain; moreover, the Water on the under-side of
the Ice was Salt, and that side also thereof was Opake, and covered with a
white hoariness made of innumerable small particles of Salt: and brought to the
Light, it appeared rough, as if it had been prettily razed with the point of a
Diamond; like the Glass of those Vessels, which from the Artificial similitude
they have to Ice, we call Ice-glasses.

The Eighth Experiment. Of freezing the Dew upon the outsides of Vessels.
THat Dew which covers the outsides of Glasses, containing any cold Liquor, or
Ice, is sometimes observed to congeal there: and the same happens, when the Ice
or Snow in the Vessel begins to alter with the strong Water or Salt: there is
also an Exhalation, or cloudy moist Vapor rises up as it seems from the bottom
of the Vessels, whence proceeds a very cold air, which besides that it sensibly
affects the hand, is likewise more discernable, by the agitation which it
causes in the flame of a Candle brought near it.

This Experiment we repeated, by putting Ice sprinkled with strong water and
Salt in several Vessels of different Figures and Metals; Acquarzente.
to observe if either the one, or the other afford any variety in the smoking:
and as to the materials, we could not perceive any diversity, whether the Cups
were of Glass, Earth, Wood, Metal, or precious Stones. But as to the Figure, it
seemed to us, that whereas in Beer-glasses, Bicchieri*
and all other tall, narrow Vessels, the smoke began above, Tazze Sparse.
on the contrary in wide bouls it smoaked from the bottom freely upwards for a
short space.

In a Golden Boul, we observed an effect which ought to be Universal in all
Vessels, tho it is less observable in some by reason of their shape: it was
this; when the smoke ceased, that crust of Ice began to let fall after the
manner of dew, a fine Ice, like poudered Glass, and continued till the ice in
the Boul being dissolved, that thin outward covering likewise melted.

The Exhalation said to proceed from the ice seems very different from that of
any combustible Matter, and much resembles the Morning mists that rise from the
Earth.

The Ninth Experiment. Of Reflected Cold.
WE were willing to try, if a Concave Glass set before a mass of 500 l. of Ice
made any sensible repercussion of Cold upon a very nice Thermometer of 400 degrees.
placed in its Focus. The truth is, it immediately began to subside, but by
reason of the nearness of the Ice, 'twas doubtful, whether the direct, or
reflected rays of Cold were more Efficacious: upon this account, we thought of
covering the glass, and (whatever may be the cause) the Spirit of Wine did
indeed presently begin to rise; for all this we dare not be positive; but there
might be some other cause thereof, besides the want of the reflection from the
Glass; since we were deficient in making all the Trials necessary to clear the
Experiment.

EXPERIMENTS, Touching an Effect of HEAT and COLD, Lately observed as to the
Alteration of the inward Capacity of Glass, and Metalline Vessels.
WE said in the Experiments of Artificial Freezing, that the first Motion
observed to be made by the Liquors (exposed in Vessels to freeze) was a small
rising up, there called Rise upon Immersion; because it happens upon the
Vessels first touching the freezing mixture: and you must know, the contrary to
this is observable, when it is immersed in hot Water; for the Levels of the
contained Fluids sensibly subside, and then (as it were) take time to Rise
again, which they do with a quick Spring, up to the degree they stood at when
first immersed in the hot Water, and thence successively rise, as the heat
received continues to rarifie, lighten, and raise them. On the other side, tho
they are raised upon the first immersion into cold Water, or ice, yet they not
only subside again to the former height, but continue to do so for many
Degrees, till at last (sometimes after a little Rest, sometimes without any)
they all remount (Oil, and Spirit of Wine excepted) until the whole freezing is
finished. This Effect was by some attributed to a cause much favored by
several following Experiments: their apprehension was, That the appearance of
this sudden motion in water, and other fluids, was not really from any
intrinsic alteration of rarity, or density at that moment wrought in their
natural temperament by the power of any Tab. 15. p. 105.
contrary quality of the outwardly applied ambient, which some by a noted Word
call Antiperistasis; but rather, (to speak first of the subsiding upon the
immersion of Vessels in hot Water) their thoughts are, that it comes from the
fixing of several volatile Corpuscles of the fire, (evaporated from the hot
Water) into the external pores of the Glass, which as so many wedges, forcing,
and separating the parts thereof, must necessarily distend, and enlarge the
internal Capacity thereof; till they find a way through the hidden Passages of
the Glass to the Liquor therein contained. That on the other side, Cold binding
up, and contracting those pores of the Glass, makes the Vessel become too
scanty for the bulk of Water in it, before that bulk of Water, yet unaffected
by the Cold, contracts likewise. In fine, that the Vessel being first sensible
of Cold or Heat, by shrinking or enlarging it self also first, is the true
cause of that Phenomenon of the Rise or Fall; as it becomes more strait, or
large to the contained Liquors, yet not vitiated by the quality of the ambient.
This Opinion was rendered more probable to us, by the following Experiment.

An Experiment,
Proving, That in the Instant that the External Heat or Cold dilates, or
contracts the vessel; yet then the natural temperament of the Liquors therein
contained is unaltered.
Tab. 15. Fig. 1. Smalto.
WE included in a Globe of Glass filled with Water, several small bubbles of
Colored Glass, empty, and sealed Hermetically: these were all near the
Specific gravity of the Water, by means of the air they had in them; whence
the Floaters upon the top of the water upon the least breath of warmth sunk
down, and those at the bottom, upon any accession of Cold, mounted upwards:
hanging this Instrument in the air, and suffering the bubbles to rest, we began
to approach to it underneath a pan of Water heated, and after that of Cold
Water mixed with Ice well broken; And though upon the application of these
different Ambients, we observed the same Effects in the Level, of raising it
self upon the touch of the Cold, and subsiding upon that of the hot Water; yet
we could not find, when the water seemed condensed, and contracted, that any of
them at the bottom rose up, nor when the Water seemed rarefied, and enlarged,
any of the Floaters sunk to the bottom: but these were observed to fall, and
those to rise, when the Water after its abatement upon the first impression of
heat, began to rise again, and when after its rising upon the impression of
Cold it began to subside again: an argument to insinuate, that, the water, and
so any other Fluids in this first Motion, do not really move themselves, but
only obey the alteration of the Vessels they are contained in.

Yet it may be objected, That these first alterations did really proceed from
the inward changes of the Liquors, which tho discernable by the Eye, by means
of the small Neck of the vessel, yet were not great enough to be discerned in
changing the aequilibrium of the Bubbles; of which it may be thought, that, in
that very instant, they began really to move, though in their first parting
from Rest, the Eye could not perceive it.

To this is answered, That, the true Rarifaction, and the true Condensation of
the Water (that is able to make it rise or fall so very little a space as it
does rise or fall at the entrance into the Icey mixtture, or hot Water,) is
sufficient to alter the Aequilibrium also between it, and the bubbles,
apparently to the Eye. And indeed, when the Water really rises or falls from a
true Rarifaction or Condensation, the bubbles likewise begin correspondently to
move, before ever it comes to the same Degree, at which (the same bubbles
remaining immovable) it stood at the instant of its first immersion.
Nevertheless, the discovery of this Effect ought not to cause in us the least
scruple of the truth of our Thermometers; since the whole contraction or
dilatation in Vessels containing an Ounce and half, at most amounts but to a
grane; whence proportionably how small will that be in Vessels of a few granes
content, such as our Thermometer of 50 degrees. which are the most convenient, and
exact, and upon that account most made use of to discover the Alterations of
the Air?

Now to manifest by diverse ways, even to sense, the Truth of this Phenomenon,
we made the following Experiments: which first founded in the Theory, are
confirmed by the Effects.

The First Experiment,
Showing the Alteration of the Size of a brass-Ring put in the Fire, and in
Ice, its Figure still remaining unaltered.
THere was ordered to be cast a Ring of Brass, Armilla di Branzo. Tab. 15. Fig.
2, and 3.
and by turning it was fitted exactly to a Cilinder of the same Metal: this was
put in the fire for a short space, and then being put upon the Cilinder while
hot, it was sensibly loose; being dilated by the heat into a Ring of the same
shape it was of before, but its concavity was 9/100 parts larger: when it had
remained some time upon the Cilinder, and had communicated its heat thereto,
between the increasing of that, and the shrinking of the Ring by little and
little as it cooled; they not only came to fit as at first, but were so firmly
united, that before they were quite cold, a considerable force was but
requisite to separate them.

The contrary in all respects happened when we intensly froze the Ring.

The Second Experiment,
Whereby it appears that Bodies are dilated by the imbibing of moisture, as
well as by the insinuation of heat.
Tab. 15. Fig. 4. Fig. 5.
WE made a Conical Ring of Box, whose concave Superficies was curiously turned,
and polished: there was also made a stock or Conical Mandril of Steel turned,
and well smoothed, and nicely divided with many circles Parallel to the Base:
fitting the Ring upon this, we marked which of those Circles the bottom thereof
just touched; taking it off, we let it lie in Water three whole days; that it
might have time to penetrate through the whole stubstance of the Wood; then we
put it on again, and observed, that the Concavity was stretched, the bottom of
the Ring falling much lower upon the stock, than it did at first.

This Ring was made two several ways, in one the Ligneous Fibers were
Perpendicular, in the other Parallel to the Plane of the Basis; the first after
soaking in the water kept its spherical Figure exactly, the other came near to
an Oval, and put upon the stock sunk down much short of the former.

Observe to make these Rings of firm, clear Wood, that is without Knots, and of
an uniform hardness; especially, when the Fibers are cut transversly; that so
all being swelled by the steeping, their enlargment may be the more sensible.
Note also, (as was said at first) that the Rings must lie so long in the Water,
as their whole substance may be penetrated: for the Effect will be different;
if those that are but a little soaked on the outside, be put upon the Stock;
because they will not slide down so far, as when they were dry. Therefore let
them be well impregnated, and satiated with moisture, that their dilatation may
be the more visible.

The Third Experiment,
Which discovers more evidently the readiness of Glass to contract and dilate
it self upon Heat and Cold.
Tab. 15. Fig. 6. 1 Brac.
THere was made a hollow Ring of Glass (as in the Figure) about Two Foot in
Diameter, with Two Funnels, that when the Liquor was poured in at one, the Air
might have vent at the other: then was made a Cross of Glass just to touch with
its Extremities the Concave of our hollow Ring, Ciambella.
and filling the Vessel with hot Water by the Funnel, as it proceeded in
dilating it self; so visibly, either the one, or the other of the Glass Rods
lost their hold; for they did not bear equally stiff against the Instrument,
and at last both were loosened; so that the Cross being at liberty, fell down
upon the Table whereon we set the Instrument, within the Circumference of the
Ring. After this, pouring the hot Water out, we filled it with a mixture of
Salt and Ice dissolved; and it not only held the Cross again, but with greater
firmness than at first.

The Fourth Experiment,
To find the same Effect in Metals.
Stagno. Tab. 16. Fig. 1.
HAving bent a small Plate of Tin like a Stirrup, and hung it up, so as the two
Extremities might touch a Plane put under them, upon which we drew two Lines,
where the aforenamed Extremities must necessarily strike, if they had been
prolonged: we then put a live Cole over the bending of the Plate, and
attentively observing one of the Points, we discerned, that by little and
little it parted from the line drawing within it; and this was when the unequal
of the Plate only being heated, dilated it self, and the Concave was
contracted: but when it had penetrated (which it soon did) the whole thickness
of the Tin, being then equally dilated, the point not only again reached the
Line, but passed beyond it, more or less in Proportion to the Heat communicated
by the Fire to the bending of the Stirrup.

The Fifth Experiment,
To observe by the Sound the like Dilatation in a Stirrup of Glass.
Minugia. Tab. 16. Fig. 2.
WE fitted a Minikin to a broad Stirrup of Glass, as in the Figure, and tuned it
an Octave to the string of a Guitarre, and applying the heat to it after the
same manner, as we did to the Stirrup of Tin, when it had not yet affected the
Concave Superficies thereof, but only the Unequal, Tab. 16. p. 110.
the Tone was flatter, because as in the foregoing Experiment the aperture was
lessened, and consequently the string slackened; but when the heat had
penetrated quite through, the String was straightened so, as the Sound was sharper
than the first tuneing.

The Sixth Experiment,
Discovering the same Effect more clearly to the Eye.
Tab. 16. Fig. 3.
WE fastened to the same String with a bit of Thread, a small Leaden Plummet, and
put under it a little Plate of Glass, so as not quite to touch the Weight; and
applied fire to the usual place: the Effect as to the stirrup was the very same
as at other times; for being at first drawn together, the Cord became slacker,
and the Weight Rested upon the plate of Glass; but at last extending the
Aperture, it strained the Cord, and raised up the Plummet; the contrary Effect
was wrought by Ice made use of instead of the Coal, but sensibly less, in
proportion as its activity is less; than the fires.

The Seventh Experiment*
Showing the same effects in Wire strings. Minugie.

Rame Ricotto.
A Leaden Plummet being fastened to a nealed Brass-Wire, and hung over a Glass
Plate, at a little distance therefrom, drew nearer to touch it as the Wire
became heated, by applying a lighted Candle to it, and still retired from it
upon every little Rubbing with Ice.

Ottone.
In like manner, two wires of mixed brass tuned unisons, so that one being
struck, the other sounded, were made discordant, either by approaching to one
of them a live Coal, or a piece of Ice, that by lengthening the wire made the
Tone flatter; and this by shortning it, sharpened the Sound thereof.

The Eighth Experiment,
Whereby from the appearance of a contrary Effect it is confirmed, That the
first Motion of Liquors comes from the Capacity of the Vessels being altered in
the instant of Immersion.
IT may happen upon the first Immersion of Vessels into the Ambient Hot or Cold
Body, that the Level of the contained Liquors shows a different Effect from
that beforenamed; that is, That it may immediately rise in a hot Ambient, Tab.
16. Fig. 4.
and subside in a Cold one: this will be always if the Vessel be made in the
shape represented by the Figure; in this upon the first touch of warm Water,
the Liquors will presently Rise, because (in the lateral Angles, being very
strong and thick of Metal in comparison of the hollowed faces,) the heat
acting, first upon the outward Superficies, lessens those Angles (as we said
before it does to the Stirrup of Glass) and so necessarily comes to stretch the
thinner hollowed parts, which Dilating inwards, happen at first to lessen the
Capacity of the Vessel, and to raise the Liquor in the Neck: which falls again
from that space new filled, when the heat has penetrated the whole substance of
the Glass, and the Vessel begins to enlarge it self uniformly, returning to its
first size, and larger; and at last the Liquor Rises again, when impregnated
with the fiery corpuscels it begins to Rarifie. And it is manifest, that the
contrary to this, is observed from Cold, the same causes acting contrarily. And
Note, That the Capacity of the Vessel was lessened, by the pressure of the Hand
only, made upon two opposite hollow sides; nor could the Rising of the Liquor
be attributed to the heat of the Hand Rarifying it; for it was raised after the
same manner, by pressing the Vessel with two pieces of Ice.

The use of the next Instrument may easily be comprehended from its Figure;
being only a Plate of Steel, Tab. 16. Fig. 5.
perforated with Circles of diverse Measures to observe the different
increasings, caused by different Degrees of Heat given to the same, or several
Conical Rings of Metal.

The Ninth Experiment,
To show, That a Vessel may be distended, not only by Heat, or by soaking up
of moisture, but also by Weight.
THere were made Two Vessels of Glass, Tab. 16. Fig. 6.
the one Conical, the other Pyramidal; and letting them into a thick Table, we
marked round the outside of the Vessels how far they sunk down; then taking
them out, we filled them with Mercury, and put them again into the holes in the
Table; but they would not go down so low as the Mark made at first, because
they were distended by the force of the Mercuries weight*

EXPERIMENTS About the Compression of Water.
THat Experiments do not always reach the truth aimed at, is not from any
defect of the Idea conceived of them in the mind; but rather happens from the
necessity we have of material Bodies, and corruptible Instruments, to put our
Conceptions in Practice; which though of themselves unable to blemish the
Theory and Speculative part, yet through the Defaults in their substances, are
not always capable of seconding our thoughts: but we must not hence conclude,
the Experimental Method fallacious in the Quest of Natural Events: for though
by it we may sometimes come short of the very depth of that Truth, which we
first sought after; yet it is hard, if it does not give some glimmerings and
marks to discover the falsity of any contrary supposition. This has been our
Fate in our Research, Whether water can suffer any Compression, as air does; in
which attempt, for as much as the weakness of our Vessels came short of
affording us a perfect knowledge of the Truth, we making use of Glass ones as
most fit, because of their Transparency; yet at least we gained this much, that
Water cannot be compressed with a very great force; and so far we have
proceeded, That a power able to reduce Air into a space 30 times less than what
it first filled, that power not only thirty times, but a hundred, nay
perchance a Thousand times increased, was too weak to compress a quantity of
Water a Hairs breadth, or the least visible Space from its Natural Extent; the
Methods we took were those that follow.

TAb. 17. p. 115.

The First Experiment.
Tab. 17. Fig. 1.
LEt there be at the Ends of Two Glass Canes AB, AC; two balls of Glass also,
the one larger than the other; fill both with fair water to D, and E, and join
them together with a Lamp, remembering to leave a passage open in sealing them
at A, and to draw the beak AF very long, and open; then apply to each Ball a
Glass full of beaten Ice, burying them therein, that by condensing the water
there may enter as much air as possible into the Canes; and the better to force
it down, you may rub a piece of Ice backward and forward upon the outside of
the Siphon DAE, which by its Coldness contracting the air in the Canes, there
will enter in more to fill it at the Beak F; then Seal it at a Flame, and the
contained Air will remain pressed and thronged together; after this as it is
Sealed, take the Ball B out of the Ice, and at first immerse it in tepid Water,
next in warm, and at last in boiling; keeping the Ball C all the while covered
with Ice, to reduce the Water therein to the utmost condensation, which suppose
to be at E; moreover, endeavor to compress the Cilinder of Air GE to its
greatest density by the force of the Water rising to G, being Rarefied by the
received heat from the Water supposed to boil round about the Ball B; now if
the Water could suffer any Compression, it ought to subside from the pressing
Air below the Mark E; but with us it still happened otherwise; for when the
Water at E was once reduced to its utmost Condensation by the Cold, etc. the
force of the Air GE pressing thereon, was unable to gain a Tittle, and did
sooner burst out the bottom of the Ball C, than force the Level E a jot; Rame.
and when to add a greater strength to the Instrument we made the two Balls of
Copper, the Water in the Ball C has sustained the Force between the Air
pressing at E, and Solidity of the Metal with insuperable Resistance, rather
bursting the Siphon, (which must be of Glass to discover the Internal Motion of
the Water) joined fast to the Copper with Mastick, or the usual hard Cement.

The Second Experiment.
Tab. 17. Fig. 2.
LEt there be prepared a Vessel of Glass AB, contained about 6 l. of Water, the
Mouth large enough to receive a Glass Cane bound close about with Lead to keep
it from bursting: fill this Vessel with Water up to CD, immersed the Cane OF
open at each end therein, and Soder it close at A with the usual Cement,
remembering to lift up the lower End a little from the bottom of the Vessel FB,
that the Liquor poured thereinto, may have free passage into the Vessel: then
begin to pour Quick silver down the Cane into the Vessel, raising up the water,
'till the Vessel is quite full (the air having its exit at the Beak H) and to
be certain all the air is gone, let some Water out at the Beak H, and
immediately Seal it with a Flame; noting, at the same time, the Degree the
Mercury stands at in the Vessel IK: afterward, pouring in more Mercury, fill
the Cane to the Top; then if the Water by this force is compressed, the height
IK will gradually increase, as the Water yields: we by a charge of 80 l. of
Mercury, Brac. 4.
in a Cane above 91 Inches long (for so much our Instrument held without
cracking) could not perceive the Level IK raised an Hairs breadth, the Water
obstinately resisting the force of so great a momentum.

The Third Experiment.
Tab. 17. Fig. 3.
WE ordered a thin large Vessel of Silver to be cast, and filled it with Water
cooled very well with Ice, and screwed the Cover on with a very close Screw;
then we began to hammer the Vessel gently every where, and the battered Silver
(which being so little Ductile did not at all thin, and distend it self, as
refined Gold, Lead, and other soft Metals do) lessened, and comprest the inward
Capacity of the Vessel by Degrees; yet the Water for all this suffered not the
least Compression; for at every stroke we perceived it to sweat through the
Vessel at all the little Pores of the Metal, as Quicksilver when pressed with
a piece of Leather spirts through in little drops.

This is what we thought worth relating of these three Experiments; but are not
yet able to say, whether, if the same Experiments be repeated in Vessels of
greater strength, and if the Rarefaction of the Water be Augmented in the first
Experiment, and so the Pressure of the Air; or if the height of the Mercurial
Cilinder be increased in the second; or if in the last, the Vessel be
successively made of thicker Silver; I say, we are not positive, whether the
water may not at last happen to be comprest; this is certain, That Water in
comparison of air resists the Compression (we may almost say infinitely) more:
which confirms what we said at the beginning of these Experiments, That if
Experience does not reach the very bottom of the enquired Truth, yet it goes
hard if it strikes not out some Light.

EXPERIMENTS To prove there is no Positive Levity.
ANcient, and Famous is that Question, Whether those Bodies that we usually
call Light, are so really in their own Nature, and mount upwards from any
proper tendency; or whether their Motion be no other than a chase, or flight
they are forced to by more heavy Bodies; which having the greater force, and
desire to descend, and place themselves undermost; press, and as it were,
compel the other to rise? This Opinion, which chiefly seems to have been
entertained in these latter Ages, was yet not unknown to the Ancients: Nay, it
was Asserted from rational grounds by many Philosophers in those times; among
the rest clearly by Plato in Timaeo; and he advanced so far upon the
probability of that thought, that he not only holds, That the heavier Bodies
force up the less heavy, as Fire does Air: but also the more heavy, as Water in
respect of Air, when ever it is made lighter by the interspersion of Fiery
Particles: and this he seems designedly to insinuate in the above cited
Dialogue of Timaeus, when he says, That the fire rising from the hot Entrails
of the Earth, and not entering into a Vacuity, thrusts forward the Air that is
contiguous to it; which not only gives way thereto, but even divests it of
those moist Particles wherewith it ascends; and then helps it forward, and
raises it up unto the seat of fire, and that by no other, than by the natural
gravity of those humid parts, being (by means of the Coalition with it)
attempered by the new acquired Levity: however this may be, in confirmation of
this Opinion, we will produce only Two Experiments, whose weight may perchance
make up the deficiency of their Number.

Tab. 18. p. 119.

The First Experiment.
Tab. 18. Fig. 1.
LET there be a Cilinder of Wood ABC, whose base BC exactly touches the
Horizontal Plane DE; and that the Ambient air getting between the Two
Superficies's, may not hinder the trueness of their Contact, let the Base of
the Cilinder be lined with a Plate of Metal plained, and well polished, and
another like piece Leaded into the Horizontal Plane, then making a Ridge with
Wax, or Plaster round about the Cilinder, pour Mercury into the Trench up to
F, that the Contact may be every way covered and hindered from the ingress of
the air: Then fasten the end of the Cilinder A to one of the equal Arms of a
Beam GH, whose Center is I; at the other End H, hang the weight I, equal to
that of the Cilinder ABC: it is manifest to sense* that to raise the Cilinder
from the Plane, the Weight L is insufficient, but several weights must be added
to the End H, till at last (suppose) L and M raise it, resisting now with a
double force; that is, with that of its own weight equal to L, and with that of
the Contact, or Repugnance to Vacuity, or what else it may be termed. The
Superadded weight M must not only equal, but exceed the power of the said
Superficial Contact.

Tab. 18. Fig. 2.
To measure this force (which in our Instrument was about 3 l.) put the Cilinder
into a Cilindrical Vessel of Wood, or Potters Clay glazed NOP, of an equal, or
greater height therewith, that the Base of the Cilinder may touch exactly the
Plane of the Vessels bottom; let that also be covered with a polished Metal or
ground Glass. Then pour Quicksilver into the Vessel NP, to what height you
please, even to the Top of the Cilinder, which will never separate it from the
bottom; but if with the hand you move the Base BC from the Plane OP, it will
with great force rise up, and swim upon the Quick silver.

Seek then how great this Raising power is, supposed to proceed from lightness;
by us 'twas so found: we loaded the Top of the Cilinder A with so much Weight Q
as would sink it to the bottom: which Weight in our Experiment being about 5 l.
we concluded, the force enquired to be so much: Next we considered, That the
Resistance of the Contact of the Superficies's was no more than 3 l. (as was
said) and the force of the supposed Levity of the Cilinder was found to be 5 l:
wherefore in this case, that of the Levity was more than that of the Contact:
wherefore again, considering the Cilinder of Wood AB closed down with its Base
BC to the Plane OP, there were then two contrary Powers acting; viz. That of 5
l. from the Levity to raise it; and that of 3 l. from the Contact which held it
down: now the lesser force ought to yield to the greater, and so the Cilinder
be raised: but it was not so here; for the Contact was not loosed: wherefore it
seems we must conclude something besides Levity buoyed it up.

The Second Experiment.
Tab. 18. Fig. 3.
LET there be a Wooden Vessel ABCD, in the thickness of the Bottom whereof a
Concave Hemisphere is turned EFG, exactly fitting a Ball of Ivory H, adapted to
its greatest circle EG; then the whole Vessel was filled with Mercury, so that
the Globe was quite covered therewith; it is manifest, that the weight of the
Mercury incumbent upon the bottom of the Vessel, and hindered from running
between the lower Unequal of the Ball, and Concave of the Vessel by the
closeness of the Contact at the circumference EG, was not able by descending
thither to raise the Ball by pulsion, but the Natural Levity of the Ivory, if
there be any such thing, might easily buoy it up in the heavy Ambient of the
Quicksilver. But this did not follow; the Ball remaining unmoved in its socket
under any height of Mercury.

Nor can it be objected, That Natures avoiding a Vacuum (which must follow upon
the first loosening of the Ball from the concave of the Vessel) hindered the
Natural Levity of the Ball from its Effect; for though we made an hole thorough
the bottom of the Vessel FI, whereby the air had admission to fill the space
left void upon severing the Ball; yet for all this it was not raised.

And because it may be said, That the Ball being touched by the air below, is
not lighter, but heavier than it; we again stopped up the hole, and enlarged the
Socket (as it appears) ELG, so that only the Edge, or upper circle of the hole
EG remained equal to the greatest circle of the Ball; but the Hemisphere EFG
was not now fitted to the concave ELG, as is plain in the Figure: we then
filled ELG with Mercury, and forcibly thrust down the Ball till its greatest
circle touched the Edge of the concave: now tho it was but slightly held by the
Circle EG, so that with a very little force it might be turned about; yet we
filled up the Vessel with Mercury, and it was not raised, nor moved.

Tab. 18. Fig. 4.
Lastly, That it might not be suspected, that the Mercury poured on, by
pressing upon the Ball, held it down with its weight from swiming; we took
instead of the Ball H a Conical Glass Vessel ABCD, and fitted a lesser circle
thereof to the Edge OF, and pouring Mercury round about it, it kept still
unmoved: and to be satisfied, if the supposed tenacious Union between the
Glass, and the Mercury, together with Natures fuga vacui, were able to surpass
the power of the Glasses Levity; we tried the force of that Contact by taking
away the Mercury from about the Glass, and fastening of it to the one Terminus
of an equal Balance GH, hanging a weight I at the other H, till the glass was
loosened from the Socket OF, which weight was with us about a Pound* then
filling the Vessel again with Mercury, we set the Glass to swim therein, and
loaded it (as in the other Experiment) 'till it sunk it to the bottom, and kept
it there: this Weight (which with us was about 2 l.) may be the true measure of
the momentum, believed to proceed from the Levity of the Glass ABCD, which is
more than that whereby it resisted a vacuity which was but one Pound. Then if
the Lightness is that which causes the Glass to swim, it would have produced
its Effect, dissolving the Contact, since its force is much greater than that
of the Contact resisting it: but it does not do it; therefore it seems, that
the same is confirmed by this Second Experiment, which was concluded from the
former, viz. That it is some other Cause besides the Levity, that lifts up the
Ivory Ball, and the Glass Vessel.

EXPERIMENTS Magnetical.
Although the strange Effects of the Magnet are so boundless an Ocean, that tho
many Discoveries have been made thereon; yet it is probable, enough remains to
satisfy the Labor and Curiosity of future Adventures: yet we have not
hitherto been so hardy to launch forth into it; well knowing, that any thing
new therein, requires a long application, and uninterrupted by other
speculations: wherefore we would not have it thought by any, that with two or
three Observations upon this Subject, we should be so vain to boast, that we
have brought any Light to the Magnetic Philosophy; for we rather own, that
these hints are mean enough, and it may be not altogether new, being such as
have not been aimed at in a designed Application of our Endeavors Magnetical;
but either have been accidentally found out, or sought after upon some
particular end by some one of our Academy. But such as they are, we were
unwilling to conceal them; our intent being to communicate all that has any
agreement with Truth, tho of but little Value.

The First Experiment,
To discover if (except Iron or Steel) there be any Solid, or Fluid Body, which
interposed between the Magnet and Iron, will cause any variation, or quite cut
off the Passage to the Magnetic Virtue.
Tab. 19. Fig. 1.
AT one end of a Wooden Box ABCD, we fixed a Compass, and opposite to the Dart
(respecting the point E) at the other end of the Box, we moved a Magnet, and
gently approaching it nearer till the Dart was removed one Degree, that is,
from E, to F, we there fixed the Lodestone, and in the space remaining between
it, and the Compass, we set either glasses filled with Mercury, or Wooden
Vessels filled with Sand, or Fileings of Metal, (except of Iron, or Steel) or
solid Parallelipipid's of the same Metal, or of diverse Stones, and Marbles; but
still we found the Dart unmoved from the Point F. Lastly, we filled the same
Vessels with Spirit of Wine, and set it on fire, yet that Flame did not in the
least divert the Power attracting the Dart to F: and a thin Plate of Iron or
Steel, only was able to vary it, and make it return to E, as is already known.
And not only the abovenamed Causes were unable to obstruct the Magnetic
Activity; but we have laid upon one another 50 pieces of Gold, and laid a
Needle upon the uppermost, which has obeyed the Motion of a Magnet, moved under
the lowermost.

Tab. 19. p. 124.


The Second Experiment,
To show yet more nicely, Whether the Magnetic Virtue suffers any change by
passing through diverse Fluids.
Tab. 19. Fig. 2.
WE hung upon a small stick cross a Glass Vessel AB, a Needle touched with a
Loadstone, and in the bottom of the Vessel placed a little Cilinder of Lead;
upon the upper Surface thereof we fixed two Points of Brass, (they may be of
any metal but Iron) one placed in the Center, the other the breadth of a Crown
off it; then we adjusted the Needle exactly Perpendicular to that in the
Center, and placed the Magnet at such a distance, as not to move it; Then we
gently approached it toward the Needle, keeping the Pole still direct upon it;
which to be certain of, we slid the Stone with one of its sides along a Ruler
CD fixed in a Frame, and levelled exactly upon the Two Points, whereof that
which was not in the center respected the Pole of the Magnet, as well as that
which was: coming nearer and nearer, at last its virtue began to act upon the
Needle, which sensible of it, moved softly toward it. The Observer did not rest
there, but thrust the Loadstone a little forwarder very slowly, till the Point
of the Needle reached to the Second brass Pin, which was nearer to the
Lodestone: then he stopped, and gave a Mark upon the Rular, at the distance
between the Magnet and Needles Point, which was just over E. After this, the
Magnet was removed, and fair Water poured into the Vessel about the Needle, and
the Operation was repeated as before, by approaching the Stone gently till the
Needles Point touch upon E; and again, the Distance upon the Rular was marked:
and throwing out the Water, 'twas reiterated with several fluids, the Distances
being taken every time between the Point of the Needle and Magnet: from all
which it appeared, that the Magnetic Virtue was neither weakened, nor enforced
by the differing Fluids through which it passed: indeed the distances were
diverse, but that happened according as a lighter or heavier medium facilitated
more or less the motion of the Needle in it; whence the same Virtue and Power
moved it at a further or nearer Distance; for 'twas observable, That those
several Distances at which it acknowledged the Loadstone, were in reciprocal
Proportion to the Specific Gravity of the Fluids; that is, to the making the
Needle lighter. Amongst all the Liquors experimented, the Needle was drawn at
the greatest Distance in Seawater, at a lesser in common-water, lesser in
Spirit of Wine, and least of all in the common Medium of Air.

Note, That Repeating this Experiment at several times, it may happen, that
this Distance varies at one time from another; but it is to be considered, That
this may arise from External Accidents, viz. the different Temperature of the
Air, a rustier or brighter Needle, or the fortuitous nearness of some Iron,
which makes the direction of the Magnetic Virtue to deviate some way or other,
etc. Wherefore we still took care to make this Experiment upon a large Table
glewed together, and fastened with wooden Pins instead of Nails: and the
Observer (and every body else that came near) was very careful to lay aside any
Iron they had about them, it being well known, That to approach the Table with
a Key or Knife in their Pocket, immediately caused an alteration in the
Experiment; but when all sort of Iron was laid away, the Effect was always the
same: but for what depends upon the other forenamed accidents, such as the
Temperament of the Air, and the like, which cannot be helped; we have found,
that they do indeed cause some difference in the Distances; that is, The
Distance whereat the Needle was moved Yesterday, is not the very same to Day,
in the same Mediums; yet the Differences observed at these diverse times, were
still found nearly proportionate to each other.

The Third Experiment,
To try if the Activity of the Poles of a Magnet alters, being placed
respecting the opposite Poles of the Earth.
THo in this Experiment we have not yet proceeded so far, as to satisfy in
order the many particulars depending thereon; yet in general we will touch upon
those few which we think we may aver upon any more certain grounds; as these:
The North Pole of the Magnet when respecting the same Pole of the Earth, draws
a Needle hung freely in the Air, at a greater distance, than when it respects
either the South, or East; placed Westward, its Sphere of Activity is larger
than Southward, and a little less than Northward.

On the contrary, the South Pole not only seems to us, to act at the same
Distance Southward, as the North Pole Northward; but also in a North Position
happened to draw the same as it did when Southwards; toward the East or West
it becomes more faint and languid, as the North Pole does also.

EXPERIMENTS, Touching AMBER, and other ELECTRIC BODIES.
Ambra Gialla. Cera Lacca. Diamante. Zaffiro Bianco Smeraldo. Topazio Bianco.
THE Electric Virtue, as all know, is excited by a slight, or violent rubbing in
all Substances not Mineral. Yellow Amber is of all others best stored with this
Power: next to which, the best Sealing Wax seems to take place; these are
followed by Rose Diamonds, the White Sapphire, the Emerald, the White Topaz, the
Spinelle, and the Ruby Baleis; after them, are all the Transparent Gems, as
well White, as Colored; all which, more or less show themselves to be
Attractive.

And in this it does not seem, that they keep any Scale or proportion in
respect of their hardness: for we find that the soft Spinelle and Ruby-balleis,
not at all to give place to the hardest Diamond, or Saphir, in Electricity.
Next precious Stones, Ambra Bianca e nera.
come Glass, Cristal, Yellow Amber, and Black; between all which Bodies, there
is little difference of force, they being all very weak in Operation. For the
rest, neither Lapis Lazuli, Lapis Lazzali, Turchine, Diaspre, Agate, Coralli,
Perle, Metalli, Lapilli de Sali.
Turquoise, Jasper, Agate, nor other the like Precious Stones not Transparent,
nor Rocks, nor the finest Marble, nor Marine Bodies, as Coral, and Pearl, nor
Metals, nor Cristalized Salts, have any attractive Virtue, as some have wrote
they have; and it may be the mistake came from their observing some light
Bodies, as bits of Straw, and Paper, etc. stick to them, which we have also
observed; but perchance that might happen (as some think) from a Superficial
roughness, or inequality in the Substances, whose Points piercing the light
Bodies, raise them up therewith: willing to avoid this Cheat, we resolved to
attribute Electricity to no Substances, that after a due Friction did not
attract those light Corpuscles at some small distance, which we only found
done by the above named.

We have also Noted, That whatever External accidents alters Amber (whether by
heating, or freezing, or wetting with any Liquor) the same has the like Effect
upon Gems, and all other Electrick Bodies: yet indeed it is more manifest in
Amber, as it is impregnated with a greater Virtue: wherefore omiting all
others, we will here only treat of that.

Amber then, of all sorts of Bodies presented to it, refuses only to draw
Flame; although Plutarch says, Saggina. Bassilico.
That it does not attract any thing steeped in Oil, and Grease; or as some say,
Basilicon, which we found a mistake: yet Smoke is attracted; and it is very
curious to observe, how by holding a piece of Amber rubbed hot, to the smoke of
a Candle blown out, it will presently bend, and wave toward the Amber; part of
it will be arrested by the Amber; and part, as if reflected from a Glass, will
mount upwards, while that which remains, unites it self like a small Cloud, and
as the Amber cools rises in smoke again, and vanishes.

On the other side, Flame, not only refuses to yield it self; but if a piece
of Amber, after it is well rubbed, be a little while held to it, it loses its
Virtue, and a repeated Friction is but necessary to make it attract; and if
after it has taken up any small thing, it be held to the Flame, it will
immediately let it go again.

But the Heat that comes from burning Coals, is not so great an Enemy to the
power of the Amber, it being sometimes capable of exciting it without rubbing,
and indeed by the heat received from the Fire only, it acts faintly; but then
becomes more vigorous, by adding friction thereto.

Ice alone is not prejudicial to the Amber, but when altered by mingling
therewith Salt, or Aqua Vitae, it so quells the Virtue, that some time is
required, as likewise a long and violent rubbing, to regain it. So that it has
been thought, that this stupifying of its force proceeds not from the increase
of Cold in the Ice, from the sprinkling of Salt, or Aqua Vitae; but rather from
some fine Rust, or hoariness, as it were, contracted by the Amber, from the
Salt; or rather indeed, from the imbibing the Aqua Vitae, which is one of the
Liquors that destroy the Electricity of Amber.

Neither are all matters capable to draw forth this Virtue from the Amber; for
being rubbed upon Bodies of a smooth Superficies, such as Glass, Cristal,
Ivory, and polished Metals, or Gems, it still continues asleep, and shows no
sign of Life; so that it needs some small inequality and asperity of the
Superficies; as Cloth, Linen, and a thousand other things have, unnecessary to
be named here: and likewise Human Flesh excites this Power; but some more, some
less: and we have known some, that let it be rubbed never so long on their
hand, yet could not happen to make it attract.

It is commonly believed, That Amber attracts the little Bodies to it self; but
the Action is indeed mutual, not more properly belonging to the Amber, than to
the Bodies moved, by which also it self is attracted; or rather, it applies it
self to them: of this we made the Experiment; and found, that the Amber being
hung at liberty by a thread in the Air, or counterpois'd upon a Point like a
Magnetical Needle; when it was rubbed and heated, made a stoop to those little
Bodies, which likewise proportionally presented themselves thereto, and readily
obeyed its call.

Liquors also are sensible of this Power of the Amber; the smallest drops of
which, it attracts, even those of Mercury: indeed it is unable to manage them,
except very minute; whence it soon lets them go, after they have been
attracted: but when we have presented it to the Superficies of standing
Liquors, and Mercury it self, it did not raise up one drop; but as it were,
made the Level of the Superficies swell under it; which raised it self in a
little Bubble toward it, but inverted so, as to respect it with its pointed
part. This Effect may be better observed in Oil, or Balsam; than other Fluids

There are some Liquors wherewith the Amber being wetted, after rubbing, draws
not; and there are others not producing this Effect; they that so act, are
generally all Natural Waters, Distilled Waters, Wines, Vinegar, burning Waters,
all Acids; the Juces of all sharp Fruits, all Liquors distilled from Animals.
Balsames, and all Artificial Liquors, as Juleps, Essences, Spirits, and Oils
made by Distillation: on the other hand, these are ineffectual; Oil of Flints,
Sallet Oil, Oil of sweet Almonds, and bitter, made by Expression. Tallow, Fat;
and Lastly, all Butter, whether simple, or Perfumed, with any Flowers,
Ambergrice, or Musk; provided unmixed with Essences or Oils.

A particular Effect has been observed in Diamonds, Gruppiti Tavole.
whereof the Roses (as we said) are reckoned among the most Electrick Gems; but
the Tables were found so weak, that they seemed sometimes quite deprived of
that virtue; and some thought that their plain Superficies had no part in the
Effect, seeing when the Diamond has depth, tho smoothed and polished upon the
Wheel, it draws vigorously; whereas the flat Table-Stones, that are shallow,
such as are set in Lockets at the end of Neck-laces, commonly called Spear, tho
very large, when strongly Rubbed, will yet not draw; or if they do, it is so
faintly, that you must make them touch some hairs of the bit of Paper, or
Straw, to make them raise it up; yet it is not to be doubted, but some may be
found that have a little force; yet of these, we at least were so unsuccessful
as to find but few. We indeed had one which by many trials for several days, we
were never able to make attract; but a Year after, desirous to see the same
tried again, we took the same Ring in which the Stone was set, and having but
slightly rubbed it, as we used to do upon the Cloth, as soon as ever it was
held to the bit of Paper, it drew it vigorously: this same Effect was often
observed with wonder by all those that the year before had often attempted in
vain to make it draw: and on the contrary, (as we said at first) the fausets
(i. e.) those that are ground of their own Octoedral Figure, seldom or never
failed.

In fine, since Amber, and all Electrick Bodies have been observed to be
obstructed by a very thin Vail placed between them, and the thing to be
attracted; therefore taking a sheet of Paper, we made several little Lattices
in it; and the first of them was covered with a close Network of hair, another
with the Lint of a fine Rag, a third with a Leaf of Gold; the success was, That
the Electick Power of the Amber did not penetrate them.

EXPERIMENTS ABOUT Altering the COLOVRS of several FLVIDS.
THere is nothing more frequent amongst the Niceties of the Chemists, than
their Fantastic humor of changing Colors; we indeed do not professedly meddle
therewith; and if any such Trials were made, we were moved thereto, from the
occasion we had of making use of some Liquors, fit to examine the Qualities of
Natural Springs. Concerning which, we will relate the little that came to our
Knowledge; again reminding the Reader, That by the perfixt Name of Essays, we
would intimate, That we do not presume, we have examined these Matters with all
the Experiments which may be thought on; but only barely given some hints of
those things we were most inclined to take pains about.

The First Experiment,
Of altering Water.
WAter Distilled in a Leaden Still, thickens and muddies the Water of all
Rivers, Baths, Fountains, or Wells wherewith it is at any time mixed; and
losing their Transparency, they both look white like Whey; only Water
Distilled in Glass Vessels, and of Spring Water, that of the Conduit of Pisa
remains Limpid and Transparent. But all those Waters so muddyed, become clear
and pure again by a few drops of strong Vinegar shook together with them.

The same Waters are changed by a dropping in of Oil of Tartar, Olio di Tartaro
e d' Anici.
and Oil of Anniseeds, which give the Appearance of a little white Cloud
higher, or lower, therein; which by shaking, diffuses it self through all the
Liquor, and inturbidats it. This also is brought to its former clearness, by a
small Quantity of Spirit of Sulphur, which at first raises a few little
bubbles. Sp. di Zolfo.


Note, That all Waters indifferently do not become turbid by the abovenamed
Oils; and those Waters that are not altered by waters still^d in Lead, are
likewise left Transparent by Oil of Tartar and Aniseeds. Moreover, inflammable
Waters, Waters stilled in Glasses, and that of the Conduit of Pisa, are not at
all changed from their Natural clearness; and we find that in Waters generally
held the lightest, purest, and noblest, the little cloud is thinner and higher,
which is raised therein; and only in heavy Waters, and those that are
impregnated with Minerals, or dreggy, it thickens it like Milk; whence some
have pretended to prove Waters with some of the abovenamed Liquors; for
thereby is discovered the more hidden Quality of them, and so their Goodness or
Badness found.

If at any time the Thickness, and Turbidness of the Water is very great, and
not to be Clarifyed by the ordinary proportion of Liquors, it may be increased
by some drops still agitating the Water, till you see it become clear.

The Second Experiment.
Of Altering Wine.
OIL of Tartar, not only in Water, but also in Wine, produces the same Effect;
for through its Natural cleansing Quality (as is known) it makes a separation
in all Liquors, of what ever is mixed with them, from the purer parts, by a
sediment that it lets fall; whence that which shows like a white Cloud, higher,
or lower in the Water, according to its different Qualities and Weight, in all
sorts of White Wines that we Experimented, appears like a thin Cloud of a Red
Color, which by shaking the Wine, quits its first place, and disperses it self
uniformly throughout the whole Body; it makes no other change in Red Wines than
a little Tinging deeper; especially toward the bottom.

On the contrary, Spirit of Sulphur shows no alteration in the natural
Transparency of the Wine; and likewise restores it to those deprived thereof,
by the Oil of Tartar.

The Third Experiment.
Of the Tincture of Roses.
Tinctur^ di Rose rosse.
A Tincture of Red Roses (extracted with Spirit of Vitriol) being mixed with Oil
of Tartar, shows a fair Green: with a few drops of Spirit of Sulphur, it
ferments all into a Vermillion froth, and at last returns to its first Rose
Color, without losing its smell at all; nor will it be again altered by
dropping Oil of Tartar into it.

We found the best way of getting the Tincture of Roses for this Experiment, as
follows.

Taking a good handful of dried red Rose-buds, we cut them, and putting them in
a Glass, with one Ounce of strong Spirit of Vitriol, stirred them together for
a quarter of an hour, in which time the Roses were well Macerated, and the
Tincture Extracted; to this must be added, at Three or Four times, about half a
pound of Spring Water, still shaking the Glass till the very deep Color of the
Spirit being Diluted, the Water is all tinged therewith: then we let it stand
an hour, and so obtain a lively and beautiful Tincture of Roses. To half an
Ounce of this, put Ten or Twelve drops of Oil of Tartar, and afterward as much
Spirit of Sulphur, which suffice to produce the Related Effects.

The Fourth Experiment,
Of the Tincture of Saffron.
Safferano
WAter tinged with Saffron, helped a little with the Tincture of Roses, but not
so as to lose its golden Color, changes green with Oil of Tartar, and again
yellow with Spirit of Sulphur.

The Fifth Experiment.
Of Greens.
Verde Giglio. Vinato.
WAter Colored with Iris Green, mixed with Spirit of Sulphur, makes a Purplish
Color, and with Oil of Tartar takes its own again.

This Green is a Tincture taken from the Purple Flower-de-luce, which prepared
with a mixture of Quicklime, gives a pleasant lively green, much demanded by
Limners; then it is set to evaporate and dry in Muscle-shells, as shell- Gold
and Silver.

See more fully the ways of making the like Extracts in Antonio Neri's Book of
the Art of Glass-Painting, Printed at Florence, 1612, Lib. 70. cap. 108, 109,
and 110. as likewise, how to take the Lake of any Flower.

The Sixth Experiment. Of Violet Colors.
JUice of Limons, Spirit of Vitriol, and Spirit of Sulphur, change the Violet
Color of Lacca to heighten Gold, Lacca Muffa.
and the Tincture of Blew Violets, into a Vermillion; which with the Oil of
Tartar again, makes a Purple: also Vinegar gives them a red Color, but it is
fainter.

EXPERIMENTS About The Motions of SOUNDS.
SOund, that Noble Accident of the Air, keeps so unchangeable a Tenor in its
Motions, that a greater or lesser impetus wherewith the Sonorous Body produces
it, is unable to alter it. This strange Propriety of Sounds is related by
Gassendus, who affirms positively, That all sounds, whether great or small,
pass the same space in the same time: and he declares, That he had Experimented
it in Two sounds, the one much louder than the other; that is, one of a Musket,
Moschetto. Artiglieria.
and the other of a Piece of Ordnance: in repeating this Experiment, which we
found undoubtedly true, we happened to observe some Particulars which we did
not think fit to conceal, since possibly they may offer something not thought
upon by every one; or if thought on, yet all Persons may not have the
opportunity and means of satisfying themselves Experimentally.

The First Experiment,
Of Sounds passing equal Spaces in equal times.
Spingarda. Smeriglio Mezzo-Cannone.
WE made this Experiment in the Night, with three several sorts of Pieces, with
a Harquebuss, a Falconet, and a Demicannon, planted at Three Miles distance
from the place of Observation, whence we could well discern the flash of the
powder in firing the pieces; from this flash then, we always counted an equal
Number of Vibrations of the Pendulum of a Clock, whether the Shot was of the
Harquebuss, or the Falconet, or the Demicannon, and that upon all Levels and
Directions of the Barrels of those Pieces.

Since Gassendus was so taken with that known Example brought by the Stoics to
represent to the Life how the invisible propagation of sounds is made by the
Air, we will take this opportunity to consider it: they say, That, as we see
standing Water move in Circles by casting in a little stone, which Waves
successively enlarge into greater and greater Rings, till at last they reach
the Bank of the Water, and there vanish; or dashing themselves against it, are
reflected back again: so they assert, That the air every way undulates from the
sonorous Body in successive Circles for an immense space, which Wavings meeting
with our organs of Hearing, and finding them soft and yielding, impress upon
them a certain Tremour, which we call Sound: hitherto the Stoics, without
Prosecuting it any farther: but Gassendus was so pleased with the aptness of
the Example, that he desired to go through with it, and make it capable of
explicating the peculiar properties of Sound; one of which, as was said, is the
unalterable Velocity of its Motion: whereupon he says, That the undisturbed
Proportion of the swiftness of sounds, agrees with a like observable also in
the undulations of Water, which he affirms, are neither swifter nor slower, but
always with the same degree of Velocity approach the Shore, whether made at
first by a great or small Stone, whether falling only with its own weight, or
forceably cast thereinto: which nevertheless (with due respect to so great a
Man) we have not found to answer; for we have observed by frequent Experiments,
that by how much the Stone is larger, and the force greater, wherewith it is
thrown into the Water, by so much the Circles approach the shore swifter.

The Second Experiment,
Of Contrary, and favoring Winds.
THere is another strange observable in the Motion of sounds, related also by
Gassendus: (i. e.) That it is neither retarded by a contrary blast of Wind, nor
accelerated by a favoring Gale; but always travels the same space, with an
uninterrupted course, in the same time. This likewise we desired to bring to
the Test, and found it true, thus:

At a Season when the West Wind blew, we made Two Discharges of two Pieces, one
planted Westward, the other Eastward, at an equal distance from the place of
Observation: so that the one was favored by the Wind, the other crossed; but
for all this, they both transmitted their sound to the Observer in the same
space of time, measured by the equal Number of Vibrations of the same Clock:
though indeed, that which was Eastward, and so against the Wind, was observed
much more Languid, than that which was Westward.

The Third Experiment,
Of the Equability of Motion in Sounds.
ONE of our Academy took occasion from those Experiments to think, that the
Motion of all Sounds might be equable, as well as equally swift; we arguing,
That thence, if true, many curious and profitable hints might be gained: but
first, to be fully satisfied if there were really any such equability, we made
the following Experiments.

At the distance of one of our Miles exactly measured, which are about 3000 of
our Braccia, or 5925 Foot, Spingarda. Mastio.
we fired several Pieces, that is Six Harquebusses, and as many Chambers; at
each whereof from the Flash to the arrival of the Report, we counted Ten whole
Vibrations of the Pendulum, each for which was half a second. Repeating the
Experiment at half a Miles distance, that is, at the mid way, we observed it to
be exactly in half the time, always counting at each Report, about five
Vibrations, wherefore we rested satisfied of the certainly of this equability.

The Consequences which we pretend will follow from this equability, amongst
the rest are, That by the Flash and Sound of diverse shot, we might obtain an
exact Measure of the Distances of places; particularly at Sea, of Ships, Rocks,
and Isles, where we cannot come to take several bearings, as is requisite in
using the common Instruments: we may also by a single stroke made upon Wood,
Stone, or Metal, or any other sounding Body; judge how far off he is that gives
the blow; telling the Vibrations between the stroke seen, and the hearing of
the Noise, which if the Wind be favorable, may be heard for some miles, and it
will be easy as well as curious, to find the Distance of clouds from us, and
of what height from the Earth, Thunder is generated, counting the Vibrations
between the Lightning and the Blow.

If we would likewise know the Distance of Places, which because of the
Roundness of the Earth, or interposition of Hills, we cannot have a sight of,
yet with ease we may obtain it, and that by Two Discharges, answering each
other; so that to our firing at one place, they must return another at the
other place; and taking the middle time between our discharge, and the arrival
of their Answer, the half of the Sounds Journey will be found, that is, the
whole Distance of the Places sought.

By the same way of sounds, the Maps of particular Places may be adjusted, and
truly laid down in plano; taking first the Angles of Position of the Cities,
Castles, and Villages, to place them in their due situation; with several the
like curious Inventions very, useful, nor to be disesteemed.

Then to gain the unknown Distances of each, we may make use of time for a
Scale, the sound traveling with us the known space of a Mile in Five seconds.

EXPERIMENTS About Bodies Projected.
Dialog. 2d. de Sistemi Colubrina.
IT was Galileo's Opinion, That if a Culverin be planted upon the top of a
Tower, and a Shot be made point blank (i. e.) Horizontal, according as the
Charge of Powder in the Piece is greater or less, so should the Ball fall at a
proportionate distance of 1000, or 4000, or 6000, or 10000 Braces, etc. and
that all these shot would be made in equal time to each other, and all equal to
the time of the Balls falling from the Mouth of the Piece to the Ground,
without any impulse; but only dropped Perpendicular, when there is no accidental
hindrance from the Air, which may in part impede the swift Motion of the Shot:
we were desirous to bring this to the Test of Experience, and it seemed to us,
that we succeeded very well; wherefore we will relate what little Remarkables
we can with certainty say that we observed on this Subject.

The First Experiment,
Falconetto.
Of Horizontal Shot, with a Falconet from the top of a Tower.
UPon the Top of the Tower of the Old Fortress at Legorn, about 94 Foot high,
with a Falconet carrying an Iron Ball of 7 l. with a Charge of 4 l. fine
powder, 50 Brac
we made several Shot Horizontal into the Sea with the Balls, and observed them
to fall into the Water at about of a Miles Distance in 4 Vibrations, Their mile
is about 5925 f.
each whereof was an half second: and examining the Perpendicular fall of other
Balls of the same size from that Height of 50 Braces, we found there were 4 of
the same Vibrations.

The Second Experiment,
With a Demi-Culvering. Colubrinetta.

Fasciate.
WIth a Demiculvering carrying 14 l. Ball of Iron, and 10 l. of fine Powder, the
Balls being wrapped about in 5 of the abovementioned Vibrations, fell into the
Water; and without being wrapped about in 5 Vibrations; Ignude.
whence it seems, that they flew farther than the other.

The Third Experiment,
Of Perpendicular Shot with an Harquebuss. Archibuso

Dialogo 40 del Trattato delle 2 nuove Scienze.
GAlileo writes in his Discourse of Bodies Projected, Words to this purpose:
From the height of 100, or more Braces, fire an Harquebuss with a Leaden Bullet
Perpendicular to a stone Pavement, and with the same Charge shoot another at
the distance of one or two Braces upon the like Pavement; examine then which of
the two Balls shall happen to be more battered; for if that from above shall be
less battered than the other, it is a sign that the Air has retarded it, or
diminished the Velocity imparted thereto by the Fire at the beginning of its
Motion; and consequently, that the Air will not permit such a Velocity to
increase by falling from any great Height. That when the Velocity communicated
by the Fire to the Ball, excceds not that which the same Ball would naturally
acquire by descending, the stroke of the Ball downward then ought to be rather
more violent than faint. I have never made the Experiment (Galileo subjoyns)
but am inclinable to think, that the Ball from an Harquebuss, or piece of
Ordnance coming from any great Height Perpendicular, will not give such a blow,
as it will when discharged upon a Wall some few Braces off (i. e.) so few, as
that short passage, or (we would say) cutting of the Air, shall not have taken
away the Excess of the unnatural violence communicated by the Fire.

We made this trial with a Harquebuss, not firing it against a Stone Pavement
to observe the battering of the Bullet, but against an Iron Breast Plate,
Pettabotta.
and in this we found that the Shot from a lesser height made a deeper
Impression than that from a greater; because as was urged by some (after
Galileo) in a longer Passage the Ball loses continually (by cutting the
interposed Air) some of the Impetus, and preternatural force received from the
Violence of the Fire.

The Fourth Experiment.
That the power of Motion already impressed, is not destroyed by a new direction.
IN Confirmation of what Galileo Affirms in several places, viz. That the
Virtue impressed upon Bodies projected, is not destroyed by a new direction of
Motion, it was by some proposed to make the following Experiment.

We fitted upon a Carriage with Six Horses, a Saltamartino, carrying 1 l. Ball
of Iron) so as it stood Perpendicular to the Horizon; with this we made diverse
Shot with the same quantity of Three penny weight of Musket Powder; 3 Danari
some we made with the Carriage standing still, others while it ran a full
Cariere upon a Level Plain: at the first Trials the Ball fell near the Mouth of
the Piece: at the Second, after the Carriage had run 64 paces from the Firing,
to the Return of the Ball, it came short of the Piece but about 7 Foot, where
it fell; 4 Br.
all the times were very near equal in all the Trials.

The Fifth Experiment
Much to the same purpose.
Balestrone. Br. 78.
WE made the like Experiment with one of those Crosbows that are bent with a
Bender, its Bullet of Lead weighing Three Ounces, and in 149 Foot Course (we
mean from the Discharge to the Return of the Ball) it came short of falling
upon the Carriage but 11 Foot, and a Ball of common Clay in running 191 Foot,
Br. 6. Br. 100. Br. 17.
fell short Three Foot. Whence some confirmed themselves more in the Opinion of
the same Galileo, That the Air takes not a little from the force of heavy
Bodies, that cut it, but more sensibly of light Bodies.

MISCELLANEOUS EXPERIMENTS.
THough it has been always chiefly endeavored in our Academy to keep a
continued Thread of Experiments upon what Subject soever they were made; yet
that did not hinder the admission of any particular Observations as they were
still suggested by any of our Members, arising from their proper Studies, tho
from the design then chiefly intended: Now of these irregular Experiments,
there being some Quantity, since they have little or no Connection together;
although they may be instructive, we have reserved some Essays of them, like the
former, for the last place, as a Conclusion of the Work.

An Experiment,
To know the absolute Weight of Air in Respect of Water.
THere was taken a Ball of Lead, closed every way, and full of Air; because
this being immersed in Water, swam thereon, we charged it on the outside with
so much Lead as sunk it; and weighing all in exact Scales, we found it 31216
gr. being plunged in Water, the same altogether weighed but 4672 gr. so the
difference was 26944 gr. which was the absolute weight of a bulk of Water equal
to that of the whole Ball, and Lead.

Then pressing the Ball together, as much as its thickness would bear, without
letting the Air out, and weighing it in the Air with all the Lead, 'twas found
31209; and this we concluded was the absolute Weight in uncompress'd Air, as
that was, which was in the Ball before it was battered together.

In this State all being put into the water again, and weighed, 'twas found gr.
12518, which subtracted from gr. 31209, (the weight of the Ball pressed together
in the Air) there remained gr. 18691, the weight of a bulk of water, equal to
the bulk, of the same Lead, and battered Ball. This Weight then of gr. 18691,
being subtracted from the other of gr. 26944, left 8253 gr. which was the
Weight of a bulk of water equal to such another bulk of Air as weighs 7 gr.
(which bulk was equal to the diminution of the bulk of ball by the battering:)
whence we concluded, That the Weight of that sort of Air which we weighed, is
to the weight of so much water, as 7, to 8253; that is, as 1, to 1179.

This Experiment being by us repeated at diverse times, the Proportion was not
always found the same. Indeed, the variations have not been great, consisting
in one, two, or three Hundreds of grains, more or less: Which is all we can
pretend in making the Comparison between one body that, as we may say, never
alters in its weight; and another, never twice the same.

EXPERIMENTS Touching some EFFECTS of Heat and Cold.
The First Experiment.
Of a Steel Wire, seeming to grow lighter by being heated.
PUtting in the Essay-Scales two Steel Wires of equal Weight, the one heated,
the other cold; it seemed that this was heavier than the other: but holding a
lighted Coal, or red-hot Iron near it, it soon came to an aequilibrium with the
hot one. The same would have happened if they had been of Gold, or Silver, or
any other Metal: likewise, if a lighted Coal be held over one of the Basins of
a pair of Scales, when empty, it raises it; and if held under it, it causes it
to descend. For all this, some of us could not apprehend, how the bare heating
could any ways alter the usual weight of the Metal; nay, 'twas thought by some,
that the Pressure of the Air might have its part as well as any other cause, in
producing this Phenomenon.

The Second Experiment.
Of the vast force of Heat in raising up an included Liquor.
Tab. 19. Fig. 3. 1 Br.
HAving filled with Sp. vin. half of the Vessel AB, whose slender part was 35
8/10 Inches long, with two Sealed Balls of equal capacity, we set the Ball A in
a Glass of Oil, over the Fire, and the Sp. vin. began to give notice of its
Rarifaction by Rising: but afterward, when the Oil boiled very fast, it
retired all into the upper Ball, leaving that below quite empty with the lower
half of the Cane. It is also necessary to promote this Effect, besides a strong
Fire, to blow the Coals continually about the Glass; (this must be done through
the hole of a Plank, serving to defend the Operator; behind which also the
Observer must stand to look through a Glass in the same Plank) for when the Sp.
vin. is all forced into the upper Ball, 'twill be thrown off: and not only
that, but the lower will be burst with such force, as one time amongst the
rest, making use of a brass vessel, instead of the Glass, for the Oil, it broke
the bottom thereof, and tore off a Band of Iron of the thickness of a Crown,
and cracked a Stone in the Pavement. But we made choice of Oil, and of Glass
Vessels; because their Transparency makes the Procedure of this admirable
Effect more visible. Else Wax, Pitch, or Lard, or it may be any unctuous Matter
may produce the same Effect.

The Third Experiment,
About Antiperistasis.
TO do something upon the score of Antiperistasis, we filled with Ice finely
powdered, a Leaden Vessel, and putting thereinto a Thermometer of 50 degrees. we
let it stand still, and it composed it self to about 13 degrees. Then we plunged
the Vessel into a Cauldron of boiling Water, regarding nicely the Thermometer,
if in that instant that the Ice became encompassed with its contrary, it then
gave any show of greater Cold, by subsiding. But that, as often as we repeated
the Experiment, was never seen to alter a hair: nor was it ever observed to
rise, when the Vessel being full of hot water, we plunged it in water mixed
with Ice: nay, then it was readily seen to subside; for as much as the Fluid
water more easily gave a passage to the Quality of the Ambient, than in the
first Experiment the Ice could do. Nor let it be thought that all the Care
possible was not taken to prevent the Air Encompassing the Thermometer from
receiving any alteration, upon immersing the Leaden Vessel in Different
Ambients, the said Vessel being let into a Plank, which was very broad round
it, and so cut off all Communication between the basin under it, whereinto the
bottom was immersed, and the air above; but for all this, we observed no
difference from what is related.

The Fourth Experiment,
Whether Cold be caused by an intrusion of Frigorific Atoms.
TO gain some light, Whether the chilling of Bodies were caused by the
insinuation of any kind of peculiar Atoms of Cold, as the opinion is, They are
heated by those of Fire; we caused to be made two Glass Vials like each other,
with very slender Necks: being sealed Hermetically, we put one of them in Ice,
and the other in hot Water; letting them remain some time, and then breaking
the neck of each, off under Water; we observed in the Hot one a Surcharge, or
Repletion from something got into it, observable by the Bubbleing of the Water,
from a strong breath issuing from the Vial as soon as ever it was broke open.
Some might think the same should have happened in opening the Cold one, if the
Chilling of the Air therein had proceeded after the same manner, as the heating
of that in the other; ( i. e.) by the Intrusion or soaking of the Atoms of Cold
exhaled from the Ice, through the invisible Pores of the Glass: but the quite
contrary happened; for instead of breathing forth any surcharge of Matter, it
showed an emptyness, or loss of something, (if there was not a condensation of
what was there) since it sucked in so much Water in place of it.

The Fifth Experiment.
Of heating and cooling of Water by Salts, etc. And of hot and cold
Ebullitions, etc.
Vetriole.
VItriol, the Spirit being drawn off, remains like a Tartar, or Grumous Body,
of a lively Fire color, which with a long and continued Fire distills a
blackish Oil, almost like Ink, highly corrosive. This being mixed with Water in
a certain proportion, produces an immediate Heat, which increases without
raising any Bubbles, or perceivable smoke, till the Glass wherein this mixture
is contained can carce be endured in the hand: the like happens by mixing it
with all other Liquids, except Oil, and Strong Waters; of which, the First is
not in the least altered from its Natural State: and the Second, if a tall,
scarce sensibly.

Sal Nitre Sal Armoniaco.
On the contrary, it is a known Experiment, That Nitre dissolved in Water, chills
it: and Sal Ammoniac congeals to that Degree, that if in the Water wherewith
it is mingled in a due proportion, you set a thin Glass of other Water (cooled,
before well with Ice) the Cold produced by the said Salt, as it dissolves, will
freeze it.

Cold Ebullition.
Having mingled together one Third part of Sal Ammoniac and two Thirds of the
forementioned Oil of Vitriol, there followed an unusual Effect: for still as
the Salt dissolved therein, it smoaked, and boiled up furiously, and so much
the more if we stirred it together with a little Stick, for then it rose up
much easierly in froth, so as it then filled a space 25 times bigger than the
Bulk of the Two separate Bodies, of Oil and Salt: but for all this fury of
smoke and boiling, we not only could observe no sensible beginnings of heat,
but a strange degree of Cold produced therein, chilling the Glass that
contained it; and the Spirit of Wine, of a Thermometer immersed thereinto
swiftly subsided, till the Salt being dissipated, and evaporated, the Boiling
ceased, and the Oil returned to its former Natural state.

Such a Production of Cold we have known, when ever we have repeated the
Experiment; indeed that, as well as the Ebullition and smoking, is more or
less, as the Salt is stronger, or the Liquor more refined. We have also
observed, That a few drops of strong Water, Acquarzente. Sp. di Vetriolo. Olio
di Tartaro. Sp. di Zolfo.
or Sp. of Vitriol put into the Oil in its greatest fury of Ebullition, stops
it, and makes the Mixture immediately hot; adding Oil of Tartar, the Heat is
augmented; the Smoke, and Ebullition returning; but by dropping in of Sp. of
Sulphur it quickly cools again.

It is worth a little Reflection: That as Oil of Vitriol mixed with all Liquors,
heats them, ( Oil and Strong Water excepted) so contrarily Sal Ammoniac stirred
together with all Liquors, cools, and refrigerates them more or less; ( Oil,
and Strong-water likewise excepted, upon which two only it is ineffectual:) and
again, that upon mixing together* the same Oil of Vitriol, and Sal Ammoniac,
there should follow so wonderful a Cold Ebullition as is related.

SOME EXPERIMENTS, TO KNOW If GLASS and CRYSTAL be Penetrable BY ODOVRS and
HVMIDITY.
The First Experiment,
Touching Odours.
Olio dicera Quintes. di Zolfo. Estratt. dorina di Cavallo. Sp. di Cedrato.
OIL of Wax, Quintessence of Sulphur, and Extract of Horses Urine, which are
reckoned the most acute, and strong smells that are; do not sensibly transpire
through a Sealed Glass Vial, as could by many persons that tried it, be
perceived, tho 'twas heated.

The Halitus also of that thin Spirit that flies away upon cutting an Orange,
or Lemon Peel, or which in a small Thread spins out of the same Peel when it is
squeezed, did not penetrate to give any smell to a little Water contained in a
Cristal Glass Sealed Hermetically.

In like manner, Sealing up a Partridge in a small Glass Vessel, Starna
and setting it in a corner of the Room, and bringing a Setting Dog in, we led
him round, near the place where it was set; but he showed no sign of perceiving
the Partridge.

The Second Experiment,
Of Humidity.
A Glass Ball being filled with Salt, well ground to Powder, and dried, was
sealed up at the Flame of a Lamp, and put for ten days at the bottom of a
Cistern of Water; and after that, as long in a Conservatory of Snow; but it did
not increase at all in Weight; and when broken, the Salt was taken out so dry,
that it fell to powder.

Yet we have sometimes chanced to find in the Ball of Salt some little part
thereof dampish; but we can not argue a Penetration from thence; for if it were
really so, it ought not to be more in one place than another; whereas, that
little moisture being always found in one place, it is very probable it was
only a little of the Humidity which the force of the Cold drove out of the Air
remaining in the Ball, and sticking as a Cover to the inside thereof*

SOME EXPERIMENTS Concerning LIGHT, and its EFFECTS.
The First Experiment,
Of the Instantaneous Motion of Light.
Page 43. Edit. Lugd. 1638.
GAlileo in the First Dialogue of his Treatise of Two New Sciences; suggests an
easy way to discover, Whether Light moves in time, or with an Instantaneaus
Velocity: the Trial consists in the Confederacy of Two Companies of Men to
expose Two Lights to each others view, so that the discovery of the one, may
answer immediately to that of the other: that when the one uncover their Light,
and expose it, they may at the same time perceive the Light of their
Confederates. This being often practiced at a small distance Galileo desired to
have the same tried by observers at a greater Distance; to see, if the mutual
Correspondence of Exposing and Covering their Lights, kept the same Measure as
when nearer; that is, without any observable Delay.

We tried it at a Miles distance (which in the going forward, and Return of the
Light must be reckoned Two, and could not observe any. If in a greater Distance
it be possible to perceive any sensible Delay, we have not yet had an
opportunity to try.

The Second Experiment,
Of Fi^ing Bodies with a Burning-glass.
Acquarzente. Pastiglia. Balsamo Bianco, etc.
THE Light Refracted by a Crystal Lens, or reflected by a Burning Concave, will
not fire Spirit of Wine, tho made opaque by a Tincture. Amongst other
combustible matters, Gunpowder fires upon the uniting the Rays of a Lens or
Concave. But the Perfumed Pastils, white Balsame, Storax, and Incerse, melt,
but will never take fire.

Likewise Paper, and fine white Holland, when exposed flat to the Reverberatory
of a large Concave, at length Fire: wherefore it is a mistake, that the Light
will not inflame any white Bodies, as is generally thought; indeed they take
Fire with more Difficulty, than Colored Bodies, and it may be with a small
Concave or Lens they will not Fire.

The Third Experiment.
Of Bodies affording Light.
BEsides Fire-stones, there are other Bodies that seem to be greater
Conservatories of Light; for by striking them together, or by breaking them in
the Dark, they Sparkle. Such are White-Sugar, Loaf-Sugar, and Sal-Gemme in the
Stone; all which being broken in a Mortar, give forth so great a Light, as
distinctly to discern the sides of the Mortar, and the shape of the Pestle
thereby: but we have not succeeded to see the same appearance in pounding
Common Stone-salt, Alumn, or Nitre; nor in Coral, the Yellow or Black Amber,
Gr^^ats, or Marchasites: But Rock-Chrystal, and Agate, and Oriental Jasper,
either struck together, or broken, give a clear Light.

EXPERIMENTS ABOUT The Digestion of some Animals.
WOnderful is the Force wherewith the Digestion of the Hen, and Duck-kind is
performed; for they being crammed with little Balls of Solid Crystal, were
dissected by us in a few hours, and opening their Ventricles in the Sun, they
seemed to us covered all over with a glittering Coat, which examining with a
Microscope, we found it to be only strewed over with exquisitely fine and
impalpable powder of Crystal.

In others, likewise crammed with hollow Bubbles of Crystal-Glass with a small
hole in them, we were amazed to find of the said Bubbles some already broken,
and powdered; others only cracked, and filled with a Whitish Substance, like
curdled Milk, got in at the small hole; and we also observed, that those were
better powdered, (than the others) which had in the Maws with them a greater
Quantity of small Stones. And it is less strange, that they break, and grind to
pieces, Cork, and any hard Woods, as Cypress, and Beech, and rub to Powder
Olive-stones, the hardest Pineapple Kernels, and Pistaches put down their
Mouths, with the Husk on. Pistol bullets in Twenty four Hours we have found
much Battered; and several little hollow square Boxes of Tin were observed to
be some scratched, and battered, others tore open from one side to the other.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF The Principal Matters Contained in this Work.
A.
ACademie del Cimento intends not to dispute of the Experiments. Page. 16, and
33. Air diminishes the force of all Bodies that cut it. p. 146. perhaps in
continual motion. p 14. Presses together those Bladders that seemed full in
Vacuo. p. 18. Dilates and Expands it self in Vacuo. ib. What remains in the
void space above* the Mercury presses not thereon. p. 23. When it is Dilated
beyond the state of its Natural Compressure, p. 23. The measure thereof, ib.
Proportion between Air Natural, and Air Expanded, as 1 to 174. p 24 When most
rarifyed, unfit for Respiration of Animals, p. 61. Of Altering the Colors of
several Fluids. p. 133. Amber in Vacuo loses its Electric Quality, p. 43. Which
sort richest in that Quality, p 128. Attracts any thing but fl^me, p. 129.
Rubbed upon smooth Bodies Attracts not, p. 130* Acts no more upon the attracted
Body than it suffers thereby, p. 130. Acts upon all Liquids. ib. By what
Liquors hindered from attracting, p. 131. Antiperistasis, Experiments against
it, p. 151. Attraction by what hindered in Amber, by the same also in other
Bodies of Electic Virtue, p. 129. A peculiar Effect observed in the Attraction
of Rose and Table Diamonds p. 13^
B.
Balls of Glass burst with great Violence, p. 150 A Barbel taken alive out of a
Vacuum, and kept in a Pond, with some observables thereon, p. 66 Birds soon
killed in Vacuo, and why, p. 63 Bladders of Fish in Vacuo, p. 66 Bl^bs in Ice
what, p. 71 Brass, to what thickness, burst by Frost. p. 77 Bullets not wrapped
about, fly farther with the same charge of powder than those that are p. 144
C.
Canes of Glass how made to be stopped with a Finger easily, p. 26 Cement to
join together the mouths of Vessels. p. 17 Change of Air produces an alteration
in Experiments, p. 1 Changing of Colors in several Liquors, p. 133 Circles in
Water move swifter, as the force that makes them is greater, p. 139 Clocks
incapable to show the Minute divisions of time, p. 10. Why made use of in the
Experiments of Freezing, p. 82 Cold whether reflected by Glasses as Heat and
Light are, p. 103 Cold and Heat, Clouds and Mists increase and lessen the
weight of the Air, p. 15. supposed by some the parent of Rock Cristal, and
Gems, p. 70. Whether any thing Positive, or only a Privation of heat, p. 70.
Once impressed upon a Fluid shoots it into Ice after it is taken out of the
freezing mixture, p. 80. * whether caused by an Intrusion of frigorifique
Atoms, p. 152:
D.
Dew upon the outsides of Glasses frozen, p. 102 Diamonds how generated
according to Plato. p. 70 Table Diamonds less Electric than Roses p. 131
Digestion of some Animals how performed, Several Experiments thereon. p. 160
Drops of Liquors thought to be Spherical from the Airs Pressure, p. 40
Disproved p. 41
E.
A Cold Ebullition, caused by a mixture of Sal Ammoniac, and Oil of Vitriol p.
153 A strange Effect of Heat in subliming Liquors, included in Vessels p. 150
Electricity, what substances impregnated therewith p. 128 Experiments requiring
an Exact measure of Time p. 11 the best way of Examining Nature p. 1^4
Extrusion, or pulsion of Bodies, a thing known to the Ancients, more especially
evident from a Passage in Plato's Timeus, p. 118
F.
Fire and its Effluvia what Effect they have in Vacuo. p. 46 Fishes kept a
while in Vacuo dye, disgorging some Air. p. 65 Flame diverts, and abates the
Virtue of Amber, p. 129 Fluids aptest to move, and why? p. 13 Why different
Fluids are raised to different heights by the incumbent Air p. 14. Fluids added
to the Airs Pressure, raise the Mercury above the usu^ height p. 30 Force of
Rarifaction in freezing Water, how great p. 77 How thought reducible to dead
Weight ib. Freezing, how caused in Fluids, p. 95 Artificial, with its procedure
and accidents, p. 77 * Made in a very short time, almost instantaneous, p. 80 *
What order it observes in diverse Fluids p. 83
Tables of Freezings p. ib. The Expl^catian of the Terms used in the Tables of
Freezings, p. 81 Those of the same Fluids Repeated, still uniform p. 84
Natural Freezing, with the procedure thereof p. 95 Diversity of the Figure of
the Vessels causes some little diversity in the Freezings, p. 96 Whether caused
by the intrusion of Frigorifick Atoms p. 70
Froth in Vacuo expands it self p. 59 A sort of Funnel to fill Vessels with
narrow Necks p. 3
G.
Gems Transparent, all Electric more or less, p. 128 Glass Vessels enlarged by
hot Water, and lessened by cold, p. 104 Stretched by the weight of the
contained Mercury, p. 113 Impenetrable by Odours, and Moisture, p. 155 Glass
Balls burst with great violence, p. 150 Glass and Cristal Electrical, p. 128
Gold Vessels distended by the force of freezing, p. 76 Gunpowder fired with a
Burning glass, p. 144
H.
Height of Liquors set in hot Water, or Ice altered by the dilating or
contracting of the Vessel p. 105 Horizontal discharge of Cannon dispatch the
Ball in about the same time that it falls from the Mouth of the Piece
perpendicular to the ground, p. 143 Humidity of Winds how distinguished, p. 9
I.
Ice according to Galileo is Water Rarifyed, not Condensed, p. 71 Has not its
full hardness at first, p. 95 Produced by Art tenderer than the Natural ib.
Made in Vacuo, wherein different from that made in Air p. 98 How to find that
difference ib. Sends forth a moist Exhalation p. 102 Sprinkled with Salt
destroys the Virtue of Amber p. 129 The cause thereof proposed by some p. 130
Instruments showing the heat and cold of the Air p. 2 Showing the moisture of
the Air p. 8 To measure time p. 10 Showing the different Pressure of the Air p.
14 Showing the Alteration of the Natural Compression of the Air p. 35. An
Instrument convenient to make the Vacuum p. 49 Made use of in Artificial
Freezings p. 77 * Iris-green what; p. 136

L.
Light: Bodies most impregnated therewith p. 158 Whether its Motion
instantaneous p. 157 Transcurs the space of 2 Miles in an undiscernable time p.
157 The supposed positive Lightness of Bodies does not raise them up p. 118
Experiments thereon 119
Liquors making other Fluids turbid and clear again p. 133
M.
Magnet not hindered by the interposition of any Fluid, or Solid Body p. 124 Its
North Pole weaker when placed Southwards than Northwards p. 127
Mercury fittest to make the Vacuum p. 14 At what height sustained in Vacuo p.
15 Altered by External accidents ib. Raised higher in an ambient of water than
air ib. A Vial filled with Mercury not running out p. 27 How high raised in a
Tube by the simple pressure of Water, p. 30 Rises or falls as the place of
observation is higher or lower, p. 35 Dissolves Snow put into it p. 58 Is
attracted by Amber p. 130
Metal of the Vessel causes no alteration in the Liquors freezing p. 96 Which
sort preserves Ice best p. 101 Dilated by the Heat of Fire p. 110
Moisture of the Air shown by Instruments p. 8 Motion observed in the heights
of Liquors, when first the containing Vessels are set in several ambients p.
105 Muscadine, its Effect in freezing p. 92
N.
Nitre chills water when mixed therewith p. 100, 153
O.
Oil of Vitriol mixed with Water produces a great heat p. 153 And with all
Fluids the like except Oil, and Spirit of Wine ib. That, and Sal Ammoniac
together, make a cold Ebullition ib. etc.

P.
Paper white fired with a Burning-glass p. 158 Pearl with what Effect dissolved
in Vacuo p. 59 Pendulum's the best Time-meeters p. 10 Their description and use
p. 11 Their Vibrations quicker or slower according to their length p. 12 First
applied to Clocks by Galileo ib.
Plato's thoughts of the raising up of Fire and Water by the Air p. 118 Poles
of the Magnet when most efficacious p. 127 Prejudices against material
Instruments p. 114 Pressures of the Air acts upon all fluids p. 13 Its
difference shown by Instruments p. 35 Experiments in favor of that Pressure p.
17 Objections against it p. 19 The Reply of some persons thereto p. 20
Procedure observed by some Liquors in freezing p. 77* Proportion of Air
Natural, to that Rarifyed, not still the same p. 24 Whence it may proceed ib.

R.
Raising of fluids higher in small Canes not only to be attributed to a weaker
pressure of the Air in them p. 56 The Reflection of the object by the Lens the
same in Vacuo as in the open air p. 42
Reports of a Demicannon etc. pass equal spaces in equal times p. 138 Rings
turned out of Wood, by imbibing moisture dilated p. 108 Cilindrical Rings of
Brass dilated, by heating in the fire p. 107 The same vigorously frozen,
contracted p. 108 Rods of Steel seem lighter hot than Cold p. 149

S.
Sal Ammoniac, most efficacious in producing Cold p. 100 Mixed with water
arrives to a degree of freezing p. 153
Scale for the Velocity of Sounds p. 142 Scope of the Academy in their
Experiments with Mercury p. 33 Smoke descends in Vacuo in a Parabola p. 48 Snow
melted by Mercury p. 58 Dissolves as slowly in Vacuo, as the open air ib.
Snow-water longer in freezing than other Liquors p. 90 Yet the same after
boiling ib. Sounds pass equal spaces in equal times p. 138 How propagated,
according to the Stoics p. 139 Unalterable in their Velocity p. 140 Sound of a
Bell and Organ the same in Vacuo, as in the Air p. 50
Spirit of Wine makes no sediment p. 3 Sprinkled upon Ice increases the Cold p.
100 Not to be enflamed with a Burning-glass p. 158 That, and Spirit of Vitriol
ferment with water, with Ebullition, and Heat. p. 154
Spirit of Sulphur stops fermentation, and chills p. 154 A cold steam from
Vessels filled with Ice p. 102
Sugar promotes freezing p. 100 Superficies of Ice, how raised in the midst p.
97
T.
Tables of freezing p. 83 Thermometer what, p. 2 How sealed p. 3 Used in
Experiments of freezing, and why, p. 82 Their exactness unalterable by the
small alteration of the capacity of their head or ball p. 107
Tincture of Roses how made p. 136 Tinctures altered to several Colors by an
infusion of diverse Spirits ib.

V.
Vacuum what intended thereby p. 16 Made better with Mercury than by Succion p.
51
Velocity communicated by the Powder to the Bullet, when fired downwards
preternatural thereto, according to Galileo's sentiment p. 144 Confirmed by
Experiment 145
Vessels with small Necks how filled p. 3 One made use of in many of the
Experiments of Vacuity p. 49 Of several Materials burst by frost p. 72 Of Earth
contribute most to the freezing of the contained Liquor p. 96 Of Metal, and
Glass alter their capacity by the external application of heat and cold p. 104
The Temperament of the contained Liquor yet unaltered p. 105
Vibrations of the same Pendulum not always equal p. 11 Vincenzio Galilei first
adapted the Pendulum to Clock-work p. 13
Vinegar styled, dissolves Pearl and Coral p. 59 Virtue Electric in what
substances most conspicuous p. 128 Hindered by the least obstacle interposed p.
132 Virtue, or Force already impressed upon Bodies not alterable by a new
direction of Motion p. 145

W.
Water, in Vacuo rises not above 33 Foot 5 Inches p. 15 How tried with other
Liquors p. 31 With what care it ought to be set to freeze in Vessels p. 79
After Remounting upon freezing continues to Rarify p. 81 In specific gravity to
Ice, as 9 to 8; or as 28 to 25 p. 79 In freezing, forces through the Screws of
Vessels p. 74 Frozen in Vacuo p. 98 Difficult if at all to be comprest p. 114
Attempted by Rarifaction of Air p. 115 Dead Weight p. 116 Percussion p. 117
Stilled in Lead thickens fair water p. 133
A way to open, and close again quickly, and easily any Glass Vessel p. 26
Weight able to enlarge the capacity of Vessels p. 113 Specific Weight of Air in
respect of Water how found p. 147
Winds contrary or favoring neither Retard, nor accelerate the Motion of
Sounds p. 140 The contrary only weakening the vivacity thereof ib.


