THE Account Examined: OR, A VINDICATION OF Dr. ARTHVR BVRY, RECTOR of EXETER
COLLEGE.

THere will shortly be Published, an Impartial Narrative of the Proceedings of
the Rector and Fellows of Exeter-College, in relation to Mr. Colmer's
Expulsion; and the Bishop of Exeter's Visitation, etc.

THE Account Examined: OR, A VINDICATION OF Dr. ARTHVR BVRY, RECTOR of EXETER
COLLEGE, FROM THE Calumnies of a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Account of the
Proceedings of the Right Reverend Father in God, Jonathan, Lord Bishop of Exon,
in his Late Visitation of Exeter College in Oxon.

LONDON, Printed: and are to be Sold by Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
MDCXC.

A VINDICATION OF Dr. ARTHVR BVRY, THE Rector of Exeter College, etc.
THE major part of the Fellows of Exeter College needs no other Apology for
their Proceedings, in relation both to Mr. Colmer and the Visitor, than a Plain
Honest Narrative. But the Rector needs to be justified, not only against the
Visitor's Sentence, but likewise against the Calumnies of a Pamphlet, that
represents him to the World, as worthy to be Expelled, not only from the
Government of his College, but from the Society of all Mankind, without the
help of an Excommunication.

To take particular notice of every gross Falsehood and malicious Insinuation,
were to transcribe a great part of it. But two Cardinal Errors must not be past
by, because upon them the whole Affair is pretended to have turned. 1. Mr.
Colmer's Expulsion is not imputed to his Guilt, but to the Opposition which he
made to Sir Kingston's Election to the Chaplain-fellowship. 2. And the
Visitation, not to his Lordship's willingness to judge of Mr. Colmer's Appeal,
or assert his own Jurisdiction; but to the necessity of freeing the College
from an intolerable Rector; who, on his part, did not oppose it out of
faithfulness to his duty, but to divert an enquiry into those Actions which
could neither be denied, nor defended. The former of these will in few words be
confuted; and the latter, by that very Account which the Author himself gives
of it.

1. With the Former he solemnly begins his Account, p. 15. but in so
confused a manner, as plainly betrayeth his Ignorance concerning Elections in
Colleges; yea, and concerning the behavior of the present Fellows of This very
College. For had he known that three, if not all the four, of those who now
consented to the Expulsion of the Rector, owe their Places in it to his
kindness; he must know, that he could be no more secure of commanding Sir
Kingston 's vote, than any other man's; and did he understand the business of
an Account, he could not think the Rector needed one Vote to make the division
of the College equal, when he had the majority on his side. The truth of the
Story is plainly this; Dr. Reynel (late Fellow of C. C. C.) recommended to the
Rector a young man of his College, whom he admired for his singular
acquaintance with Books: the Rector therefore upon examination finding this to
be true, had a particular eye upon his Manners; and as he found him otherwise
unblameable, so he observed him to be one of the very few that were constant at
monthly Communions.

When the Chaplain-fellowship was shortly to be vacant, he received a Letter
from the Chapter-Clerk of Exeter, informing him, That the Dean and Chapter (in
whose Gift that place is) had for this time given him the nomination of it; he
therefore promised it to Sir Kingston: Which Mr. Colmer understanding, went
himself, and then got as many as he could of the Fellows to write to the Dean
and Chapter, praying them not to nominate Sir Kingston, who on his part got a
greater number to write a contrary Letter in his favor, whereby, and by the
Rector's mediation, he obtained the place.

Such an Affront put upon a Rector by a Batchellor of Arts, the Libeller
(judging of the Rector's mind by his own) thinks sufficient to make him
declare, That he would upon that account compass Mr. Colmer 's Expulsion: but
this revengeful, malicious Old Man (as somebody charactered him) was so far
from it, that he gave him not the least reprimand in word or countenance: yea,
whereas he had now time to take his Degree of Master of Arts, but could not
have it without the Rector's consent, and the denial of it would make him sick
of his Fellowship, which would not be so advantageous to him, as the hindrance
of his Practice of Physic would be prejudicial; the Rector was so far from
denying it, that he did not put him to the trouble of asking it, but consulting
his (then supposed) Modesty, frankly gave him his Letter to the Sub-Rector
(themselves being then in Devonshire) whereby he had his Degree: nor did he
afterward change his Countenance toward him, till he found him named Father of
a Bastard.

2. The other Cardinal Falsehood, viz. That the Visitation was held on purpose
to free the College from an intolerable Rector, is sometimes contradicted by
the Accomptant himself, particularly, p. 11. His Lordship was sworn to preserve
the Rights of his See; and This of receiving Appeals, and Visiting of Exeter
College, was not only one of them, but so much the more necessary to be
preserved, as his Lordship's Diocese has a more than ordinary relation to That
College.

Again, The enormous Crimes of the Rector are sometimes made the Cause of the
Visitation, and sometimes the discovery of them are gloried in as the Effect of
it. Were it fit to follow the Author's Example, by exposing him for his
notorious Falsehoods, as he has labored to do the Rector for his pretended
Crimes; he has been very liberal in giving occasions; but this were to honor
the Scribler with a supposal, That the Reader would think it worth his time to
know what kind of thing he is. We shall therefore so far only take notice of
him, as may suffice to clear the Rector from the Crimes objected; which come
under two Heads, Heresy and Immorality.

1. Concerning his Heresy, thus talks the young Man, that is not of standing
sufficient to study Theology: P. 22. Not long before this time, an Heretical
Book, entitled the Naked Gospel, was Published by Dr. Bury, wherein he
endeavors to confute the Divinity of Christ, and to expose it. Dr. Bury
denies that he can properly be said to have Published that Book; and again, he
professes, that he never denied the Divinity of Christ. He declares his Faith
to be no other than that of the Church of England; and renounceth any word,
which in that, or any other Book, may seem to contradict it. Yea, he thinks
manifest, that the Author of that Book is so far from denying the Divinity of
Christ, that he plainly asserteth it, and that in many places; which for
brevities sake may here be omitted; One, if a plain one, being in this case
sufficient: And such an one we meet in Chap. 11. in the comparison which he
there makes between the Full Assurance of a Christian, and the Faint Hopes of
a Heathen, in the great Article of a Resurrection. He considers the great
difference between the Persons in whom the One and the Other believed. Seneca
called his Masters Great Men; but (says this Book) Our Author of the Gospel
was not only Great, but Infinite. Whatever expression, unsuitable to so plain
an Assertion, may drop from an hasty Pen, ought to be thereby interpreted; and
imputed, not to the Author's settled Opinion, but his too great heat, in a
Question which indeed did not concern the Divinity of Christ, but the Manner of
his Generation: For the Former was on both sides acknowledged; the Later was
the whole Subject of the Dispute, which Constantine's Letter so often calls
sily.

Whoever reads That Book with Application and Judgment, will find that the
design of it is only to disable Human Authority from imposing upon our belief
more Doctrines than our Lord or his Apostles declared to be necessary; that so,
by a due confinement of Faith, Charity may be enlarged. And if this be an
Heresy, it is so good an one, and so generally embraced, that no man needs be
afraid or ashamed to own it. And in the particular Doctrine of Christ's
Generation, whatever is intended in the Naked Gospel, is summed up by Dr.
Wallis, (whose strict Orthodoxy was never yet questioned) near the Close of a
little Treatise, lately by him published, concerning the Doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity, in this Parenthesis, (For neither has God distinctly declared
it to us, nor are we able fully to comprehend, nor is it necessary for us to
know.)

This once well observed, the Naked Gospel must be acquitted from Blaspheming
the Divinity of Christ; and for the charge of Exposing it, there is no other
evidence pretended, but this, That he is sometimes styled a crucified Vagabond:
He is (indeed) once, and but once so styled, and that is in the Introduction;
in which place the Author plainly personateth an Infidel, that he may convince
him. The Argument is drawn from the incredible disproportion between the
meanness of our Savior's appearance in his Lifetime, and the Triumphs of his
Cross after his Death: In which kind of Argument, by how much more emphatically
the former is depressed, by so much the more powerfully the Inference is,
exalted, and our Savior's Divinity proved: The Jeweller does not diminish the
value of his Diamond, when by the blackness of a Foil he sets off its Luster.

What follows, That the Godhead of our Savior is declared to be an
Impertinent and Dangerous Speculation, is answered by the now mentioned
distinction; the overlooking whereof is the true Reason, both of the Libeller's
and many other Men's mistakes. Those Fathers, who were the most earnest
assertors of the Doctrine of Christ's Divinity, were also the severest
censurers of Curiosity concerning the manner of his Generation, which is the
proper design of this Author.

He never was either so unjust as to pretend to a sole, unqualified, and
incommunicable power; nor so Foolish as to claim it from those words in the
Coll. Stat. Sit unus Rector.

That the whole System of the Socinian Doctrine, is by this Plagiary
transcribed and made his own; if it be true, is an evidence that the Rector is
not this Plagiary; for he protests, that in his whole Life he never spent so
much time in reading Socinian Books, as, put all together, would amount to one
day. And to some it may seem wonderful, that so young a Scribler, should be so
skilful in the Socinian Doctrines and Arguments, when, by the Law, none under
the quality of a Dean are permitted to read such Books.

If the Rector ordered this Book to be Printed, he never ordered it to be
Published. If he intended to have presented it to the Convocation, it was to
have been done, not openly, but within doors; that so from the Principles of
the Gospel, they might be induced to enlarge their Charity, at a time when all
the Christian World expected it from them. If he made Alterations, it was to
remove Offenses, which might be taken by some of the Vulgar, for whom it was
not calculated.

II. WE are now come to the second part of the Charge, his Immoralities. P. 24.
This Book of the Rector's was not more complained of to the Visitor, than his
Life; and his Morals discredited the College no less than his Speculations. A
heavy Charge! But how proved? Even by the contents of such false or frivolous
informations, as were given in the Visitation it self.

The weight and truth of them we shall quickly find a fitter place to examine;
we may at present judge of the honesty of the Accountant, by observing how he
contradicts himself, in making these pretended Exorbitances the Cause of the
Visitation, that thereby they might be reformed; and yet the Discovery of them
the Effects of the Visitation, wherein they were (his Lordship says) detected
and proved. What! Could they move his Lordship to undertake so great a trouble,
before they were detected? or could they be said to be detected before him in
Visitation, if they were so notorious before he resolved to Visit?

No less gross is the Anachronism which follows: So that the Dissentions of
the Fellows, upon these arbitrary proceedings, grew high; and without the
interposing care of the Visitor, there was no prospect of quiet or agreement.
Never was there a deeper Calm in the College, till its Peace was disturbed,
first by Mr. Colmer's Appeal, and then by the Visitor's Interposition. From
that very day, wherein it appeared that his Lordship would be concerned, the
Juniors threw off the respect which either Statutes or good Manners made due to
their Seniors and Officers; and by this Visitation, the disorder is raised to
such a height, as allows no prospect beyond it, without the interposition of
a greater Power.

What follows is ridiculous. It was easy now (when nothing of danger
appeared) to foresee, that nothing could put a stop to the ruin of the
(Prosperous and Peaceful) College, but a Visitation; no other way of reforming
these (unknown) enormities; or of composing these (unmade) divisions; no other
method could prevent the change of this Nursery of Religion into a Seminary of
Socinianism, whereof it was not in the least danger; and therefore his Lordship
was resolved to strain the great trust reposed in him, by exercising a Power
which none of his Predecessors ever pretended to.

Whatever is said either before or after this, concerning the Rector's carriage
toward the Visitor, can make him no more Criminal than the majority of the
Society, who joined with him in every step, and that by advice of Counsel.

The proper weight of his Charge must lie in those many enormous Crimes, which
the Visitor in his Sentence declares to have been detected and proved before
him, whereof we are obliged to the Accountant for a Catalogue. But they are
such as may be blown off with a puff of breath without a solemn Answer.

1. That the Rector was the reputed Author of a Book called the Naked Gospel
(which is not proved to be either Schismatical or Heretical) That he sat at St.
Athanasius 's Creed in the Chapel (twice or thrice at most) That he was
generally suspected of Heresy (without any occasion by him given) And did not
read Prayers so often in the Chapel, as by Statute he is obliged (yet as long
as his sight enabled him to do it without Spectacles, he constantly read the
Communion Service every Month.

2. He pretended to an Arbitrary Power over the Fellows, and put some of them
out of Commons for obeying the Inhibition of the Visitor in Mr. Colmer 's Case.
He never pretended to an Arbitrary Power; and in Mr. Colmer's Case he did but
his duty, having no better way to put him out of the College, when Expelled,
than by Suspending him that kept him in it.

3. That he sold Places and Offices in the College, particularly those of the
Cook and Butler. Those places are more profitable than the Rector's own, and
therefore worth purchasing. It was done about Twenty years since; was approved
of in a Visitation held about Fourteen since by Dr. Master; is countenanced by
a Statute, which taking away the Mancipal's place, allows the Rector 10 l. 13
s. 4 d. in compensation for his loss of the advantage which had belonged to him
by the disposal of it; His predecessors had openly practiced it; and Harding
himself (if interrogated) must have declared that his Father bought it of Dr.
Prideaux. The Cook and Butler (when examined) deposed, That the Rector, when he
took the Money of them, told them it must be laid out in College-building
(which the Accountant thought not fit to take notice of). By valuation of
Workmen it appears, that the Rector added to it 500 l. out of his own Purse:
and he can give account of 200 l. more, not by them known.

He proposed the illegal exaction of Bonds from the Fellows who thereafter
should be Elected, whereby they should be engaged to seek no reparation if he
Expelled them. To propose any thing to the Fellows is no Crime, He did this by
advice of Counsel; it is practiced in some other Colleges, and our present
trouble makes it advisable in ours, so to avoid future Appeals, not if the
Rector, but if the Rector and his Statutable Assessors should expel any.

4. That he was by public fame, upon probable Grounds, suspected of
Incontinency. For this Information he is to thank Mr. Colmer, and will answer
it anon. But how can those answer their breach of Oath, who spoke nothing of
Mr. Colmer's Incontinence, not only upon probable grounds supposed, but by
plain evidence proved.

5. That Dr. Hearn having a Parsonage above the value limited in the Statute,
kept his place contrary to the intent of the Founder. The Rector had a
controversy with Dr. Hearn concerning it; the Vice Chancellor, now Lord Bishop
of Bristol, had the hearing of it; he determined that we must not act by the
intent of the Founder, but the Letter of the Statute; and that by the Letter of
the Statute the Rector could not void his Fellowship: He therefore, according
to his obligation, acquiesced in that Sentence.

6. That Mr. Vivian was Elected into Mr. Colmer 's place, being then full. That
Place was both vacated, and filled by direction of Statute.

7. And Lastly, That Divinity Disputations were seldom held; The Philosophical
Lectures performed by Deputies; The Catechists Duty not observed; and in short,
the whole Discipline of the College neglected. The Rector labored hard to have
Divinity Disputations duly held; but neither he nor his Predecessors could
effect it; partly by reason of a Decree which obliged the Commoner-Masters to
be equal therein with the Fellows; partly by absence of Fellows when their
turns came. That Philosophical Lectures were performed by Deputies, has no
color of blame. That the Catechists Duty was not observed, is a crime beyond
memory; the stipend being but 20 s. and the Duty not clearly expressed. That
the whole Discipline of the College was neglected, is a Charge too general to
be either Believed or Answered.

2. After such discoveries of such Crimes, little will need to be said of the
Sentence, which in Latin speaks thus, -- Propter ejus manifestam and
multiplicem Contumaciam, and circumstantiis variis aggravatam in non
submittendo se Visitationi nostrae Ordinariae sed contumaciter se absentantem
(quod quidem repetundarum and criminum aliorum enormium, imo Haeresis metu
fecisse videtur) which may thus faithfully be translated into English, -- For
his manifest and manifold Constancy, aggravated by the concurrence of the
greater part of the Society, in not submitting himself to our Vnstatutable
Visitation, but constantly absenting himself, which he seems to have done,
for fear of being found a Benefactor to his College, and for a few other
frivolous miscarriages, part falsely suggested, part insignificantly proved,
yea, of the charitable Heresy of the Latitudinarians, who Teach, that a Man may
be saved if he believe all that our Savior and his Apostles declared to be
necessary.

This better deserves the name of an Account, for it is a faithful one; of,

1. The Innocence of the Rector, in whose Twenty five years Conduct no greater
faults could be found.

2. The Officious malice of the Informants, who would rather play such small
game than sit out.

3. The unreasonableness of the Accountant, who makes such outcries for
nothing.

4. The exact Justice of the Visitor, punishing the same contumacy in the
Rector with Deprivation, and in the equally guilty Fellows, only with such
Suspension as might disable them from defending him; and all by the
extraordinary power of an Ordinary, now first heard of in the College, and
practiced upon a person whom himself had put out of his Jurisdiction if he had
any.

The parity of Reason therefore which is pretended between the Rector's Case
and Mr. Colmer's, alleging, that the one may no more Appeal than the other, is
utterly void of Reason: For in Mr. Colmar's Case, both Judges and Crime are
statutable; but in the Rector's, neither the one nor the other. And his Story,
That the Rector openly declared, that he would not acquiesce in the
determination of Their Majesty's in Council, is equally void of Reason and
Truth. And indeed, the Art of that Paragraph is admirable, if it can impose
upon any considering Reader; for he so wordeth it, as to accuse the Rector for
declaring he would not submit to His Majesty in Council, yet excuse the Visitor
in case he should do the same. Application to Council (says he) in things of
that Nature, has always been warranted by Custom; the Precedents of their Final
decisions are not few: There Is for the Rector. But for the Visitor, the softer
word Arbitrations is added to Decisions; and their Orders have been usually, by
mutual consent of both Parties, obeyed. -- Whether their Lordships did not
think this Cause to fall under their cognizance, or upon any other motive
(which being things secret and uncertain, it is not proper to enquire into)
their Lordships thought fit wholly to dismiss this Cause from that Board, and
to refer the Visitor to the usual course of Law. All this is for the Visitor,
whose Petition was dismissed in the same manner, and upon as full a hearing, as
in Chancery any Complainants Bill is dismissed when his Cause appears to be
bad. Yet was the Rector never so rudely insolent, as to say that he had laid
the Visitor upon his Back.

But now, since in this entangling Paragraph things are spoken for the Power of
that Honorable Board, that the Rector may appear disobedient; and some for
diminution of That Power, that the Visitor may be excused; how can it be
prevented that these different Assertions should not mistake their way, and so
his Lordship bear the blame which was intended for the Rector, and the Rector
be justified by what was intended for the Visitor? Nothing appears but mere
confidence that his charms have so enchanted the Reader, that he cannot believe
any good of the One, or any ill of the Other; and an impotent malice to the
Rector, whom he would not forbear to calumniate, tho his Lordship might suffer
equally with him.

But the plain matter of fact is this: His Lordship, upon the College's refusal
to submit to his Visitation, made his complaint to that Honorable Board: yet
now, that the College (following his example) complained of his Unstatutable
Proceedings, and Her Majesty, then personally present in Council, ordered that
his Lordship should send his Answer in writing with all convenient speed; which
Order was presented to his Lordship on the 22d of August: yet has he not taken
any notice thereof; and those of his Party in the College say, That his
Lordship declares (as this Writer falsely says the Rector did), That the
Council has no Power to determine it. On the contrary, the Rector always did,
and still does declare, That ever since there was a College in England, His
Majesty's Predecessors have been acknowledged Supreme Visitors in them all;
That there are many Precedents of their determinations of all kinds of
Controversies, and in all kinds of ways, sometimes in Council, sometimes by
references to persons appointed by themselves, sometimes by Letters, etc. But
never any Precedent of mutual Consent of both Parties.

And he adds, That however other Subjects may claim to have their Rights
determined by course of Law, yet with Societies of Students the case is very
different. For the continuance of dissension during so tedious a time, may
probably be more mischievous to such a Corporation, than any quick Sentence.
And he professes, that were not the Interest of his College wrapped up in his
own, he would rather choose to be ruined by a speedy Order of that Honorable
Board, than indemnified by keeping his College so long in the disorder it now
groans under, which in half an years time will do it more mischief, than can be
repaired in a whole Age.

And for his poor College, he cannot avoid pleading, that it appears very
strange, that One should suffer for refusing to submit to a Power, which since
the foundation of the College, till now, was never Claimed; and another triumph
in refusing to submit to a Power, which till now, was never Questioned.

THE Rector thus vindicated from the Sentence of the Visitor, it remains that
he be so from an Information of the Author, so agreeable to his good humor,
that he cannot forbear to suggest it, tho in good manners (forsooth) the modest
man will not expose it. Concerning the fourth Article (says he) three
Affidavits were taken, which out of respest to the Rector's Character, it is
thought fit at present to conceal.

How! Three Affidavits! A Bishop by the Apostle's Rule may receive an
Accusation against an Elder by Two or Three Witnesses. And if there be Three,
concerning a Crime which of it self the Statute makes sufficient for
deprivation, what needs the superfluous trouble of hunting about for other
petty Informations to make up an accumulative Guilt? And (which is yet more
unaccountable) when the Visitor in his Sentence so apparently straineth for a
competent Crime, why is not This once mentioned, which would make so
considerable a Figure among so many Ciphers? That it was not reverence to the
Rector's Character, but his Own, which made his Lordship ashamed to mention so
gross a Story, and nothing but malice could tempt the Author to do it, when his
Lordship had not done it in those Proceedings, whereof the Title Page
professes an Account, will appear to any honest judicious Reader by the
Relation which we shall now give of it.

About 20 years since, the Rector took pity of a Country Woman of his (one
Thomasin) who by marriage with an Idle, Drunken Fellow (one Ferdin. Smith) was
fallen into extremity of want: he gave her such Employments in the College as
enabled her to maintain Him, her self, and Children.

The Rector, with his Wife and whole Family, spent a good part of the Summer
1688. in Devonshire; he was obliged to be at the College at Allhallontide;
thither therefore he came, leaving his Family in Devonshire, with intent to
return to them as soon conveniently he could, and winter with them there. But
by the happy unexpected coming of his present Majesty, then P. of O. the
Country being full of Soldiers, he was necessitated to delay his return two
months longer than he intended. Being therefore loath for a short and uncertain
time to take a Servant into Covenant, he spoke to this Woman to get somebody to
keep clean his House, etc. by the week. She sent him the famous A. Sparrow,
whom after some weeks patience he complained of, and said, he found he needed a
better Servant, and one that might be in his House at all hours: To the same
purpose also he spoke to Mrs. Wells, who got him another, which when he told
Thomasin of, she dissuaded him from taking her, because she was ill
conditioned; and recommended her own Daughter, who had formerly been his
Servant, and was then at home with her Parents. He took her, and being now a
Housekeeper, took home one Grace Weeks, (whom at breaking up of House, his Wife
had put to a Boarding-School in the Town, and kept her in his House while the
Town was full of Soldiers.

Presently after Christmas, he returned to Devonshire to his Family, and soon
after his return thence to Oxford, he found this Woman's Husband so impudent as
to take upon himself to Father a Bastard, tho it were plain he was in Cornwall
when it was begotten; and to refuse to answer such Questions as the Rector
proposed to him in order to the finding out the True Father; The Woman her self
also prevaricating in her Answers, he took away one of her Places, threatening
to deprive her of the other also, if her Husband would not undergo examination
upon his voluntary Oath, or otherwise discover the True Father of the Bastard;
and after some months time was as good as his word, notwithstanding some
threats which were brought him from her, of something that should be sworn
against him.

When his Lordship came with such an high hand to visit the College, and
everyone doomed the Rector to expulsion; whether in hope of favor from the
Future Rector, or an itch of revenge upon the Present, or to gratify their good
Master Colmer; or whatever other Reason, the Mother, Daughter and Son, combine
to disgrace and ruin their Old Master.

The first and greatest blow was to be given by the Daughter, who would swear
that he tempted her to Incontinence at the time when she was with him in the
House, above a year and half past; he being at that time threeescore and five
years old.

As soon as this Trull discovered her intent, two of the Seniors, and two of
the Juniors of the Visitor's Party made this Address to him.

May it please your Lordship,
We whose names are underwritten, do humbly beseech Your Lordship, not to give
credit to, or take any notice of the Testimony of Mary Smith, or any of her
Relations, in order to the proving Mr. Rector guilty of Incontinence with her,
or any other: for we are verily persuaded it is a mere Forgery, and done out of
Malice.

Rich. Hutchins, Rob. Ratcliff, Hen. Northcot, Fran. Webber.




This is a competent Answer to Mr. Colmer's 4th Article: For if the Rector were
before this by public fame, upon probable grounds, suspected of Incontinence;
that must have made the present Information credible, so far at least, as to
have discouraged them from such an interposition.

The Daughter's Affidavit is indeed very particular; and that it might be
strengthened by some auxiliary Evidence, Grace Weeks is vouched for a Witness,
and a Mole in the Rector's Foot for a Token. Grace Weeks the Visitor very
kindly examined, exhorting her not to spare the Rector, because it would be for
his good to have his Lewdness discovered: but finding her constant in clearing
him, believed (it seems) his Compurgators had reason for their confidence. Yet
he constantly interrogated all that were brought before him, and had used to
come to the Rector's Lodgings, Whether they knew any ill concerning him?

The Mole is no competent Token, for it is proved not to have been a Secret.

The Mother's Affidavit voucheth Mrs. Wells and Goodwife Harper: The former
clears the Rector by Affidavit; the other by Word before Witnesses, there
being no means to compel her to make Oath, and she being fearful to be undone,
as others had been, if she should do it voluntarily.

The Son tells an insignificant Tale of the Rector's sitting in a Settle, and
then going out into the Kitchen with one Martha Wotton, who makes Affidavit,
That she believes the Rector to be as chaste as any man whatsoever.

This good Family have neglected no means to get some strengthening to their own
suspected Testimony, they have hunted about the Country, to try if by any
means some one that had lived in his Family might be brought to Witness against
the Doctor Particularly Joan Richardson, the Sister of one Elizabeth Terry,
told one Elizabeth Austin that Thomasin Smith came to her Mother and her, to
enquire where the said Betty Terry lived, and asked if they thought she could
say any thing against Doctor Bury, which if she did, she should be well
rewarded: But the said Joan told the said Elizabeth Austin, that she would not
tell the particular reward which was offered. This Elizabeth Terry testifies
that she lived in Doctor Bury's House a whole year, and never saw any immodest
or indecent carriage in him toward her self, or any other body. But poor people
affrighted at the undoing of others for swearing truth, though compelled to it
by Warrant from the Vice Chancellors Court, are very hardly induced to say any
thing, for which reason the Mother and Sister of Elizabeth Terry will not speak
what they know.

Lastly. Since the whole force of the Accusation depends upon the single and
contradicted testimony of one Wench, it is worth heeding that she is an
infamous lying Creature, and proved so by some Affidavits annexed, to which
many more might have been added had there been need.

And now what more in such a case can be expected to clear an innocent man,
from the malicious slander of a Revengeful Woman? The Rector superannuated, the
Wench infamous, the whole Family revengeful, every word of either of their
testimonies disproved, endeavors used to get others to corroborate their lying
accusations, the Visitor convinced, etc.

Though the Rector has met with as much severity in the world (perhaps) as any
man of his quality, yet he has reason to expect that this scandal should
rather turn to his Credit, than Disgrace, notwithstanding the sticking quality
of this kind of filth.

ANd now before he leaves the Stage, on which the Authors malice has exposed
him, it is thought fit to give some account how he has provoked the Younger,
Looser, and Busier Part of the University, to persecute him as they do.

When Oxford was rather a Garrison than an University, he did his little to
serve King Charles I. by laboring in the Works, and watching in the Guards, as
a Soldier in the University Regiment. When the prevailing Party sent Visitors
to the University, he refused to submit, and for that, and reading Common
Prayer in the Chapel, was driven out of Town by a file of Musketeers. (What
malignant Star visited this poor man's Birth, that He only since the Creation of
the World should be twice expelled out of the same College for the same Crime
(I should have said Merit) faithfulness to his Duty.)

Thus expelled from his Fellowship, he went into the Country, where with his
sequestered Father, without any sinful compliance with the prospering Party, he
weathered out that troublesome time.

Upon Restoration of the Kingly Government, he was proffered preferment more
than eight times the value of this Rectorship: But just in the nick, some of
the Fellows (whereof one was Mr. Paynter, his new elected Successor) made
complaint to the then Bishop of Exeter (Doctor Ward) that the Rector must be
removed, or the College ruined. The present Rector was by a Friend persuaded
that it would be a very meritorious Work if he would take the place: It was
contrived that be should quit his proffered preserment, part whereof should be
given to the Rector in exchange for his Rectorship: In this agreement the
Society of the College had not been consulted, and when it came to be put in
practice, would not consent to it, none more opposing it than Mr. Paynter, who
thereby lost the pleasure of seeing a Rector expelled.

This present Rector therefore begged the Bishop to leave him to his former
course: He said he was ready to exchange a Preferment that would maintain him,
for one that would need maintenance; but he was loath thereby to purchase an
uneasy life among those that would hate him for it. The Bishop was too far
engaged to retire, expressed great anger against the now Rector for mentioning
it, and brought him to the Archbishop (Sheldon) who promised, that when he had
done this good office, he should not be long left in the place. He was
therefore constrained to submit to be elected upon the King's Mandate.

This made him looked upon as an enemy to the privileges, not of this College
only, but of the whole University: And though in the One by his Conversation
and Conduct, he overcame this prejudice, yet he finds himself not pardoned by
the Other.

Thus in recompense for having been banished out of his College for Loyalty,
he was banished into it for Generosity; obliged to add three pence of his own
to every penny he received for his maintenance in that Station; wherein
notwithstanding, he sat down contented, without the least endeavor for
advancement.

And as for his behavior in that costly place, this is the sum of his
Socinianism and Arbitrary Government. He publicly in the Chapel told the
whole College, that by the Canons of the Church, they were obliged to bow at
the Name of Jesus; and whereas formerly there had been only annual Communions
at Easter, he made them monthly, himself always Consecrating.

Whereas they used in rustic manner to sit when Psalms were reading, he
assumed not Arbitrary Power to Command, but Persuading some of the best
inclined to join with him; by his own and their example he shamed the rest, and
so brought all to stand up. Whereas there had used to be a Psalm in rhythm sung
after the Chapter, he caused the Hymns regularly to be read: And hoping to get
them sung as they are in some Colleges in Cambridge, at his own cost set up an
Organ in the Chapel: But this design failed, partly for want of maintenance
for an Organist, partly because the company join not their voices when there is
one.

This is the true account of his indifference to Orders in the Chapel,
objected by the Libeller.

Then for Discipline in point of Manners: Whereas Tutors had long neglected to
bring their Pupils to Prayer in their Chambers, or take any other account of
them at night, by which neglect they had free liberty to be drunk: To supply
this defect, he proposed to the Society, and had their consent, to have Prayers
in the Chapel at nine of the Clock; where by having a view of every one that
was present, and a Note of every one that was absent; and by exacting an
account of the reason for which the absent were so, he immediately effected a
visible change in point of Sobriety, which continued till this Visitation did
not only Slacken but quite Break the reins of Government, and then the young
men took liberty to be more debauched than ever, and in gratitude joined
together against the Ruler and other Officers. For economy, he found the
College plunged in debt, but had now not only freed it from debt, but stocked
it with some Money to defray the Expenses which our Patron does now necessitate
us to undergo. His own Lodging was so unhabitable, that he was fain to hire the
House which his Predecessor (Dr. Prideaux) built, designing to leave it to his
Successors, but necessitated to leave it to a Daughter. He so altered and
enlarged it, as to double his Lodging, and make it suitable (at least) to the
quality of the Inhabitant.

College Chambers were so scarce and bad, that a Fellow must have six or seven
Juniors before he could have one free to himself, as every one now has by
raising a Pile of Building upon a disgraceful waste corner. This was done
partly by Contributions of Gentlemen that had formerly been of the College,
partly by Entrance-money of Fellow-Commoners with consent of the Society,
partly by the Rector's own.

And for a further reception of young Gentlemen, and augmentation of the
Rector's Maintenance by the Rents, out of his own Purse he added an equal Pile
of Buildings adjoining thereto.

Thus has this unhappy Man spent and been spent about five and twenty years,
to the impoverishment of himself, as well during the whole course of his
Government, as at his first entrance upon it; and his love to his College is so
unalterable, that however grievous it may seem to leave those advantages to a
Competitor, which he purchased for his lawful Successors; yet he would rather
do it, than be an occasion of damnifying his beloved College by an expensive
defense of his right, were it not a greater damage to it, to be spoiled of its
Privileges than to spend its Money.

Depositions and Certificates.
The Deposition of Grace Weeks, Spinster, taken before Sir William Walker
Knight, one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of Oxford,
September 13. 1690.
THis Deponent says, that while she was lying in Bed with Mary Smith in the
Rector's Lodgings at Exeter College in Oxford, she the said Mary did tell her
the said Grace, after her awaking in the night, that some person had come into
the Bed where they lay; but she, the said Grace, did neither see, nor feel, nor
hear any such person; and she then told the said Mary so, who then said to her,
perhaps it was Richard (meaning the Rector's Servant of that name) and if so,
said she, we shall know to morrow.

And she does further Depose, That Dr. Bury did never show any uncivil, or
unbecoming behavior toward her the said Grace.

And this Deponent does further say, That when she was Summoned by the Bishop
of Exeter in the late Visitation at the said College, and Examined by his
Lordship, whether she knew any lewdness by the Rector, she the said Grace
replied, That she never did; and she did then offer to swear so much; but his
Lordship said, being a Gentlewoman she should be dismissed.

And she does moreover Depose, That she having blamed the said Mary Smith at
the time of the said Visitation, for her Information against Dr. Bury, as being
false, she the said Mary replied to her, Malice shall have revenge.

Grace Weeks.
Die and Anno praedict' supra scripta Gratia Weeks Juramentum prestitit, tactis
per eam, and deosculatis S. S. Christi Evangeliis coram prefato Venel' Viro
Gulielmo Walker milite de veritate permissorum. Ita testor Ben. Cooper Not.
Publicus.

The Deposition of Mary Wells Wife of Thomas Wells, Cook, taken before Sir
William Walker one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of
Oxford, upon Oath, October. 8. 1690.
THIS Deponent says, That she lived as Servant about seven years in the Family
of Dr. Bury Rector of Exeter College, and has much frequented his House for
about twelve years since she left his Service, and in all that time she never
knew any dishonesty by the said Rector; or that he had ever showed the least
indecent behavior toward her, nor did she observe him to be rude to his
Servants, or to use any immodest words, but that he was of a sober and regular
Conversation, and took great care that his Servants should frequent the Church
and Prayers. And this Deponent further says, That when Katherine Wakeham,
being a Servant in the Rector's Family together with this Deponent about twenty
year ago, did appear to be with Child, she the said Katherine being called upon
to declare who was the Father of her Child, did answer, that the Father of the
Child should himself confess it, as this Deponent was then informed; and she
says, that the next Evening after, while this Deponent was drawing Drink in
the Cellar of the Rector's Lodgings, a young man who waited upon the Rector
came to her, and with trembling begged her to make his peace with the Rector
and his Wife, or he should be undone, for that Katherine Wakeham had laid her
Child to him. To whom this Deponent replied, That she believed then that he was
the Father of it; whereupon he confessed to this Deponent, that he had lain
with the said Katherine several times. And this Deponent also says, That the
said Katherine did declare him, the said young man, to be the Father of her
Child; and though this Deponent did press the said Katherine to own whither she
had lain with any other man besides him the said young man, yet she did not own
to her that she had, nor to any other that she heard of. And this Deponent
says, That she did always think that the said young man was Father of the said
Katherine's Child; and that he provided for it, and that after it did appear
the said Katherine was with Child, and that the said young man was Father of
it, they were both on that account turned out of the Rector's Family, and that
she never knew any of the Rector's Servants happened to be with Child besides
Katherine Wakeham aforesaid.

The Mark of Mary Wells.

In Cancellar'
MArtha the Wife of John Jagoe, Clerk, and Daughter of Robert Wotton of Oxford,
makes Oath, That she never did know Dr. Bury Rector of Exeter College, to be
guilty of any immodest Carriage in word or deed; But she believes him to be as
chaste and honest as any man whatsoever.

Jurat' apud Wendron in Com' Cornub' Vicesimo quarto die September. Anno Dom'
1690. Coram me

Rich. Remfry


Martha Jago.

The Deposition of Mrs. Frances Guise of Abload's Court in Gloucester-shire,
taken upon Oath before Sir William Walker, one of Their Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for the City of Oxford, September the 18th. 1690.
THis Deponent says, That living in the Rector's Lodgings of Exeter College in
Oxford, that Thomasin Smith (Mother of Mary Smith) when the said Thomasin Smith
was in danger of being turned out of her Employment in the said College, came
to this Deponent and threatened, that if the said Thomasin and her Family were
put out of the College, there would be Swearing against the Rector: And this
Deponent asking her, what would be Sworn? she the said Thomasin answered and
said, that the Rector had come to bed to her Daughter Mary and Mrs. Grace
Weeks; upon which this Deponent went immediately to the said Rector and
acquainted him with what Thomasin had said, and the said Rector replied, he
would not be frighted out of his duty, and this Deponent pressing the said
Rector, what ground there was for it? he answered, Nothing but pure malice and
invention: But, said he, for your satisfaction, ask Grace Weeks, which
accordingly this Deponent presently did; and the said Grace did protest to this
Deponent, that if she was to die the next minute she did not know that ever
that Rector came to bed to her, and the said Mary Smith; but only that Mary
Smith told her one night, that she thought that some one had been in the Bed
with her, and that they two had talked together their several imaginations.
This Deponent further says, that before and after that time she has seen the
said Thomasin very much enraged against the said Rector, saying he would and
had taken away the Bread out of their Mouths, and could do them no greater
spite, unless he would hang them. And this Deponent further says, That
several years past she has seen the Mole in the said Rector's Foot, and has
often heard him say, That if he was lost, he might be known by that Mark.

Jurat coram me William Walker.
Frances Guise.

The Deposition of Elizabeth Weeks Spinster, taken before Sir William Walker
Knight, one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of Oxford,
September the 18. 1690.
THis Deponent says that about two years since as she was waiting upon the
Rector of Exeter College, and his Wife: Her Master and Mistress at their going
to bed, she saw the Mole on the foot of her said Master, and that she did not
think it to be a secret.

Jurat coram me William Walker
Elizabeth Wyks.

The Deposition of Edward Strickland Apothecary in Oxford, taken before Sir
William Walker Knight, one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
City of Oxford, September 18. 1690.
THis Deponent says that Mary Smith having been for some short time Servant in
his house, was while she lived there very much addicted to lying, and did
practice it so frequently, that those of the family could not believe any thing
that she said, and this Deponent further says, that the said Mary did use to
keep ill company, and particularly that she went from the house of him the said
Edward with a young man, who was said to be expelled from his College, and
that she staid away all night, and did never return again to her Masters
service.

Jurat coram me William Walk
Edward Stricklnad.

The Deposition of Mary Strickland of Oxford taken before Sir William Walker
Knight one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of Oxford,
September 18. 1690.
THis Deponent says that she observed of Mary Smith, who lodged at her house
while she was servant to Edward Strickland, her Son-in-law, that she was so
much addicted to lying that no credit could be given to any thing that she
said; and this Deponent further says, that the said Mary used to keep ill
company, and also that she was much given to swearing, and that she did
endeavor to get belief to her lies by addition of Oaths.

Jurat coram me William Walker.
Mary Strickland.

I Catherin Wiggins of St. Peter's, in the East, in the City of Oxon, do
certify all persons to whom those Presents shall come that Mary Smith daughter
of Ferdinando Smith, my late Boarder, and Scholar is of a loose Life, and
Conversation much addicted to Swearing and Lying, wishing sad wishes upon her
self and others, and told me she was a Night-Walker, and burnt eighteen Faggots
in one night, and confessed that she with her confederates stole from me a
Vessel of strong beer, which Vessel of strong beer was stolen from my house,
and many of my School-Scholars were kept from me, as I conceive by reason of
her dishonesty and ill behavior, and I had several other goods taken out of my
house feloniously whilst she was with me, all which I do say, and can safely
depose upon my Oath to be true, Dated under my hand September 22. 1690.

Ann Wiggins.

The day and year abovesaid, the said Katherine Wiggins came before me, and did
voluntarily depose that the aforesaid Certificate is Truth:

Richard Hawkins, Mayor.

ANn Hale of the Parish of St. Peter, in the East in Oxon Spinster, the day and
year abovesaid deposes that the said Mary Smith, acknowledged that she and her
Confederates stole a vessel with strong beer from the house of the said
Catherine Wiggins.

Ann Hale.
Jurat die and anno super dict. coram me Richard Hawkins, Mayor.

I Anne Harper the wife of William Harper of the City of Oxford Maltman do
hereby certify all whom it may concern, that I never had any acquaintance with
Dr. Bury the Rector of Exeter College neither did I ever see him unless it
were in the Streets: Nor did I ever know any harm of him in all my life: Nor
did I tell any ill thing of him to Thomasin Smith.

All this was owned to be true in presence of us

October 9th. 1690 Frances Guise Ben. Archer Elizabeth Wykes


October. 9. 1690
THese are to Certify all whom it may concern that I Elizabeth Terry lived as a
servant in Dr. Arthur Bury's lodgings at Exeter College a whole year and in
all that time did see no indecent or immodest behavior of the said Dr. Bury
toward me or any other body, which I am ready to testify upon Oath when I am
thereunto lawfully called.

The mark of Elizabeth Terry.

I Elizabeth Austin wife of William Austin Butcher of the Town of Cumner in the
County of Berks, do certify whom it may concern that Jean Richardson Sister of
Elizabeth Terry told me that Thomasin Smith came to her Mother and her to
enquire where the said Betty Terry lived, and asked if they thought she could
say any thing against Dr. Bury the Rector of Exeter College, which if she did
do she should be well rewarded; But the said Joan did say that she would not
tell me what they were offered.

Witness my hand. The mark etc.
October. 11. 1690.
The Deposition of Elizabeth Roberts Widow taken before Sir William Walker
Knight one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of Oxford,
upon Oath October the 9 1690.
THis Deponent says that she did never use any means for persuading Ann
Sparrow to lay her Child to Mr. Colmer or any other man; and she farther says,
that when she was sent for by the Lord Bishop of Exeter at the time of his late
Visitation in Exeter College there was nothing objected against her concerning
Ann Sparrow nor any question put about her. But that this Deponent was then
asked whither she knew any harm (or words to that effect) of the Rectors house,
to which this Deponent answered that she did not, and was thereupon dismissed.
And this Deponent says further that when Ann Sparrow was in Oxford, she asked
her the said Ann Sparow if ever she had persuaded her to lay her Child to Mr.
Colmer, to which she answered that she never did, nor did she ever say so.

The Mark of Elizabeth Roberts.

The Certificate of Richard Hedges Cook, October 9th 1690.
I Richard Hedges Cook of Exeter College do dedeclare that in the presentment
which I delivered into the Bishop of Exeter, at his late visitation of Exeter
College I did say that I gave Mr. Rector fifty pounds for my place, which he
told me was to be laid out upon the new buildings of the College, these are the
words as near as I remember, but that this is the substance of them I am ready
to make Oath when I am thereunto lawfully called:

Witness my hand, Richard Hedges.

I William New Butler of Exeter College do hereby certify that at my
admission into the said Office I paid to Mr. Rector one hundred and seventy
Pounds. And he said it should be laid out on building in the College.

William New.

WE whose names are underwritten having viewed the new Buildings in Exeter
College. Erected by Dr. Arthur Bury Rector of the said Coll. at his own cost,
namely the Building at the West end of the Chapel, the Addition made to the
Rector's Lodings, and the new Stable, according to our best Estimation judge the
charges of all the said Buildings to be as follows;

The Building at the West end of the Chapel, four hundred sixty nine pounds
four shillings and two pence.

The Addition to the Rectors Lodgings, two hundred and sixty pounds.

The Stable and Sadle house fifty pounds.

The whole sum, seven hundred seventy nine pounds four shillings and two pence.

The Valuation of the charges of the Buildings above mentioned was given in
upon the respective Oaths of the Persons, whose names are under written before
Sir William Walker one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of
Oxford, September 13. 1690.

John Townsend, Mason. William Collisson, Capenter John Wiggins, Plaisterer.

Ita Testor Ben. Cooper Not. Publicus.

FINIS.

