AN ACCOUNT Of a Dangerous Combination and Monopoly UPON THE COLLIER-TRADE.
In a LETTER from the Country.
SIR,
I Am infinitely obliged to you for the Welcome Notice you gave me of the
Joyful Hopes and Wishes that appear in most Peoples Faces and Conversations,
that the ensuing Parliament, will move the King to enter into Treaties, and
Alliances, for the preservation of the Peace of Europe, against the formidable
Conjunction of France and Spain. The best Return I can make you, for the
Transporting News, is, an undoubtable Assurance that we in the Country keep
Pace with you in the Town, and are not behind you, either in the Zeal nor the
Generality of our Dispositions and Sentiments.

But since we are entered into the Theme of Foreign Alliances, I beg leave to
give you some account of a Domestic one, upon the Collier-Trade, from which
worse Consequences is to be feared to the Navigation, and all that depends upon
it, and perhaps a greater Imposition upon the City of London, and the
Consumption of Coal in general, and the Manufactures depending upon the use of
Coal, than our Foreign Alliances will stand the Nation in, to second them, and
make them good; the Business is plainly thus.

There is a dangerous Combination and Monopoly set on Foot upon the
Collier-Trade, which must lay one half of our Ships by the Walls, and Tax the
Consumption of Coal, at Home and Abroad, at the Discretion of Mr. Arthur
Shallett, who is the unlucky Author of a more pernicious Project, than the
Invention of our greatest Enemies could have found out against us, which is to
this Effect.

This Project Mr. Shallett, after much Toil and Labor at last has brought the
Majority of the Coal-Owners in the North, to give unto. This Project he has had
in his Head (as is known to all that know him) for many Years: The General
Articles were agreed to, in November last, betwixt him, and so many of the
Coal-Owners in the North, as were then in Town; and these Articles have been
since extended into Writings, and are Signed and Sealed by the Parties on one
side, and the other, which in substance are thus.

1. The Coal-Owners on the one side oblige themselves to Work nor Vend no
greater quantity of Coals than Thirteen Thousand Tenns of Coals, which is but
130000 Chaldrons of Coals, New Castle Measure, and Two hundred and Sixty
thousand Chaldrons London Measure; Instead of Twenty three thousand Tenns of
Coals, which is 230000 Chaldron of Coals, New Castle Measure, and 460000
Chaldron London Measure, (Rockoning at double Goal, as by this Project the
Coal-Owners agree to Over-load their Keels, and have the Ships make out at
London) which has been the Medium of the Vend of Coals since the War, from the
River Tine Coast-ways, and over Sea, and can never be less, unless this Project
takes Effect.

2. These Coal-Owners agree to Sell or Dispose of this quantity of Coals, to no
Man or Company of Men but Mr. Shallett, or his Order.

On the other Part, Mr. Shallett agrees to take the foresaid Thirteen thousand
Tenns of Coals, and no less from the said Coal-Owners which is one Third less
than the foresaid Medium of the Vend or Export from the River Tine, but he
obliges himself to Pay for every Chaldron of the said 13000 Tenns, no less than
Ten Shillings and Six Pence per Chaldron; and for some Eleven Shillings per
Chaldron; which is one Fourth Part more than the best Coals in the River Tine
have been Sold for, for many Years, and a Fifth Part more than the best
Collieries can afford to Sell for, at Reasonable Profit.

This is the main Business of the Combination, and that which chiefly concerns
the Public. I shall not trouble you with the Detail of the private Parts of
it, which contains the several Quota's of the Coal-Owners, which are to be
Delivered by them, and Received by Mr. Shallett, nor shall I trouble you with
the Method agreed to deliver them at New Castle, and to Vend them at London,
which would take almost a Volume to Explain to you. But in genetal, I assure
you my Friend, by this Combination, the Coal-Owners will receive a Fifth more
Profit than reasonably ought to be expected, and Mr. Shalett, being possessed
of all, or most of the Coals Exported from the River Tine, can set what Price
upon the Coals at London be pleases, and where the thing will end no Body
knows, for every Day they may advance the Price of Coals upon us; and thereby
equal their Collieries in the North, to the Mines of Peru and Mexico, or the
Trade round the Cape of Good Hope, and hereafter the Collier-Trade shall be
Christened the Black-Indies, and Mr. Shallett's Project upon it shall be
enlarged into Companies, upon Joint Stock.

The first sight of this soul Business, my Friend, no doubt will raise both
Horror and Contempt; but, I assure you, the thing is Practicable upon the
forementioned Measures, and will take Effect. The Persons concerned in it, are
Men of Conduct and Interest, and have Wit, and Address to Color, Countenance
and Support most things they Undertake; and therefore I beg leave to give you
the necessary Lights, I have into this dark Business in order to your
prevention from being surprised, with what may be cunningly offered for the
Justification of the Undertakers; and in doing of this, I shall have occasion
to give you some further Prospect of the Consequences of this fatal Combination.

But before I begin to Propose and Answer what the Combinators may say for
themselves, I desire to discover unto you the Spring that gave Life to this
Combination, and the Engine that set it first in motion, and must keep it still
a going: Which is in plain English, The King and the Peoples Money, viz. The
Branch of Excise upon Salt, in the Port of New Castle and its Members; Together
with Excise upon Beer, Ale and Spirits in Northumberland, Bishopric, and Part
of Yorkshire; which together one and all, amounts to Two hundred thousand
Pounds per Annum; which 200000 l. by Agreement made betwixt the Commissioners
of Excise, and Mr. Shallett, is returned from the North by Mr. Shallett, for 8
s. in the 100 l. into the Treasury of Excise, in Broad-street, London, this 8
s. in the 100 l. is just 800 l. clear gain to Mr. Shallett, per Annum; Besides
the unspeakable Benefit, that it has been, and continues to be to him in his
Trade and Credit; but Mr. Shallett not content with so Profitable and
Convenient a Gain, is resolved to make a farther use of it; (of which the
Commissioners of Excise, are absolutely Innocent, and no doubt as soon as they
discover the ill designs that the King's Money is put to, they will take care
to place it in better hands) which the Nation, or he, must repent of at last;
which I shall have occasion to Explain in answering what I know will be offered
in his Favor, and those concerned with him.

1. It will be offered that the Combination will fall of its self, for nothing
less than a Bank of England can carry it on: One hundred and thirty thousand
Chaldron of Coals New Castle Measure, demands a Hundred and thirty thousand
times 16 s. which is 104000 l. to Buy up and Ship these Coals with; which no
private Man or private Company of Men can advance upon this Occasion.

Answ. Mr. Shallett, having the Return of the 200000 l. arising from the
abovementioned Branches of the Excise, can very conveniently Pay down the
104000 l. demanded, and having 28 Days time allowed him to make his Returns in;
the Coal within that Interval will be brought to London, and turned into Money;
the Collier-Trade being always upon Prompt Payment, and ready Money, both at
the Loadning and Unloadning Ports.

2. It will be offered, That the Combination is Justifiable by Law, for there
is a Saving in the Statute against Monopolies for the Hostmans Company at
New Castle: And this Combination is Countenanced by the said Hostmans Company.

Answ. It is granted there is a Saving in the Statute in favor of the Hostmans
Company, but whether this Combination is approved or not approved by an Act of
the Hostmans Company, is a Dispute; but grant the Combination is, or shall be
approved by that Company; It is answered, the Company cannot exceed the Powers
and Authorities of their Patent and Institution. That Company is indeed in
Possession of Regulating the Price of Coals within the River Tine, and obliging
its Members to sell at a reasonable Price with Profit to the Coal-Owners; but
then, All Buyers are Welcome for their Money: But sure it never was pretended
before now, that this Hostmans Company could Authorize her Members, the
Coal-Owners, to Sell and Vend no Coals but to One particular Man or Company of
Men, which is the Case here complained of; Mr. Shallett by his Covenants having
the Coal-Owners tied up to Sell no Coals but to him, and Company or Order,
which certainly is a manifest Monopoly both in him and the Coal-Owners, and
without the Saving in the Act against Monopolies.

3. It is offered, Mr. Shallett has not agreed with all the Coal-Owners in the
River Tine; for Sir James Claverin, and others, stand out, and refuse to come
into the Combination, nor neither will the Coal-Owners in the River Wear (or
the Port of Sunderland) nor the Coal-Owners in the Ports of Collar Coats, Blyth
or Seaton, come into it.

Answ. Collar Coats, Seaton, and Blyth, Mr. Shallett never intended to
comprehend in this Combination; the Coals exported from these Ports are not at
all fit for the Forge or the Furnace, and for Domestic Use little better, as
all the World knows, and the Blyth Undertakers will witness with Sorrow. Mr.
Shallett has made offers to the Coal-Owners in the River Wear (or the Port of
Sunderland) to let them come into the Combination, but hitherto they have
rejected them, as Sir James Claverin within the River Tine has likewise done.
But it is notoriously known, that all the standing out Collieries and
Coal-Owners in both Rivers, Tine and Wear, are not able to work Seven Thousand
Tenns of Coals, which can answer the demands of the Forge, the Furnace and
Domestic Use (Pan-Coal excepted, which is not understood to be within the
State of the Debate in hand) so that this 7000 Tenns being added to the 13000
Tenns, makes in all but 20000 Tenns, instead of 30000 Tenns; which has been the
Medium of the Vend and Export of Coals from both Rivers since the War. Thus the
Coal-Works being laid in one Third, the Price of Coals must necessarily rise
one Third; and under 30 s. the London Chaldron Coals cannot be expected.

4. It will be offered this Monopoly will be of Service to the Navigation, for
Mr. Shallett pretends to Freight most part of the Collier Ships, and give them
certain Profit at least 6 s. and 6 d. per London Chaldron; whereas they go now,
and have gone since the late Act of 5 s. per Chaldron upon Coals, for 5 s. or
less the London Chaldron.

Answ. This is, indeed, what Mr. Shallett pretends; but it is all over
Imposition. To say the Combination will be a Service to the Navigation, is an
audacious Affront to common Sense and universal Experience. The Combination
reduces the Vending and Shipping of Coals one Third, and consequently the
Navigating the same one Third too; So that the Navigation, and all that depends
upon it, both in the Loadning, and Unloadning Ports, must be reduced one Third;
and there is not a Master of a Ship, nor a Sailor in England, nor a Keel-man, a
Ballast-man, a Fitter at New Castle, nor a Labourer, a Crimp, a Coal-merchant
at London, nor a Man of common sense but will affirm the Truth of this Answer,
and the Falsehood of Mr. Shallett's Insinuation. Mr. Shallett, indeed, by
proposing 6 s. and 6 d. or 7 s. Freight for a London Chaldron, does make a show
of Serving the Owners of Ships; but in reality they can reap no Profit by it;
for the Shipping will not make above half of the Voyages under the Combinators
they did before, which will raise an Advance, both upon the Masters and Sailors
Wages; and the Charge of Victualling above what Mr. Shallett pretends by the
Advance of Freight. For the Master, and Sailors will have double Wages, when
they can make but Four Voyages in stead of Eight, and yet they will eat no less
Provisions in the Four Voyages, than they did in Eight; for the Ship has her
whole Equipage aboard, the whole Trade Season, and whether she be at Sea or in
Harbor, the Charge is the same. Mr. Shallett by his Combination, will surely
have Occasion to employ the Ships he has any Parts in, which indeed are very
many, he being esteemed to have more Money in Parts of Shipping than any Man in
England: And after those are well employed, no doubt, he will next prefer those
Ships that his Confederates, the Coal-Owners, have any parts in, and these are
not a few; so here is a Wheel within a Wheel, a Monopoly upon a Monopoly; Mr.
Shallett must not only have all the Coals in his own hands, but he must have no
Ships but his own, and his Confederates, to carry them; and, no doubt, none but
his and their Servants, to Load, Deliver, and Vend them.

It must be acknowledged, and it can never be too much regrated, that the
Navigation goes to wrack, and is at present Perished to a Degree beyond what is
consistent with the Safety and Tranquillity of England. The Ships go to Sea, and
return without Profit to the Owners, but the true Reason lies in the
Super-plusage of Tunnage in Shipping, we are possessed of above the Bulk of
Cargo we have to fill and Employ our Shipping, either in their Imports or
Exports, The War raised this Increase of Shipping, confined it to Convoys, and
reduced the Number of Voyages, and consequently increased the Number of Ships.
The Peace took off the Confinement, and one Third of our Shipping wanted due
Employment, which certainly ought to have put us upon increasing our Bulk of
Cargo, or the Extent of our Trade: But instead of this, we have diminished our
Bulk of Trade by the Mischievous 5 s. Tax upon Coal; and yet under those
unhappy Circumstances, the Shipping must all go to Sea, every one Endeavors to
Sell cheaper than another, that they may run faster than another, and thus they
have gone since the Tax, and run the Coals off their due Price, the Owners out
of their Profit, the Ship out of Stock, and the Poor Masters, and Sailors out
of Wages, and Victuals, and all concerned in Navigation out of Heart, and many
out of their Senses. And for an Improvement and Increase of this Calamity, Mr.
Shallett will lay on 5 or 10 s. more at his Discretion, upon the Chaldron of
Coals, and make a Reduction of another Third in the Collier-Trade, and all that
depends upon it; and at the same time, will have us to understand it to be for
the Service of the Navigation.

These Things are, what I hear the Combinators offer for themselves, or Mr.
Shallett in their Names; and I am afraid, it is all that can be said for their
Justification: I assure you, my Friend, if I were Conscious of any real Benefit
their Project would be to the Nation in general, I should not fail to represent
it to you, and give it the best Color I could lay upon it; but as I know
nothing that can be urged for its Defense, so I cannot forbear to give my
Opinion, against the Combination, as a Pernicious and Dangerous Monopoly, which
must produce most terrible Effects and Confusions, for it cannot fail to lay
the Navigation by the Walls, or wear it out at Sea, or Starve it in our
Harbors; Diminish the Collier-Trade one Third, and lessen His Majesty's Duties
upon Coal, Coastwayes, and Over-Sea to the same Proportion. The Orphans Fund,
and Cities Mettage will have the same Share in the Calamity; and if this will
not move us, we shall have the Cries and Curses of the Poor to Rouse us. Nor
can we expect better Language from the Housekeeper, the Brewer, the
Glass-maker, the Salter, the Smith, and all the Manufactorers, and Workers with
Fire, who are One and All too nearly concerned to be silent upon this Occasion.
Indeed, one would think the vast number of Persons and Trades this Monopoly
must deal with, would fright any one Man from the Attempt, or at least out of
hopes of succeeding in it; but Mr. Shallett is a Man of Invincible Courage,
Nothing is too bold or daring for him. This intended Engagement is not to be
Paralleled in Story, nay, not by that Prodigious Attempt the King of Sweden
made upon the Muscovites. That King had to deal with Muscovites indeed, but Mr.
Shallett has Englishmen to Encounter him. That great Prince had the Vows and
Prayers of Europe on his Side; but this Man has the Curses of all England to
attend him, from whose heavy Consequences, I pray God deliver him; which shall
ever be the Prayer of

Your most Humble and obliged Servant.


