AN Account from Lymrick, Of the TAKING A Castle above the English-Town, Making
the Garrison Prisoners of War. WITH The Numbers of Men Killed in the late Great
Action, etc.
As also the Series of Actions, from the 16th. to the 24th. Vlt.
LICENSED,

October. the 2d. 1691. J. F.

COlonel Matthew's Dragoons, with some Horse and Foot, having passed the
Shannon, over a Bridge of Boats, about a Mile and a half above the English
Town, on the 16th, about Five in the Morning, notwithstanding the Oppositions
made by the Enemy's Dragoons, as you have already heard. Their Main Body, that
lay higher up, immediately decamped, marching away in great Confusion toward
the Mountains: So that not being yet got into a Posture of Pursuing them, we
contented our selves with Taking in a Castle in the River, wherein were 60 of
the Enemy, who were all made Prisoners of War; and securing our Bridge by a
Fort we flung up on the County of Clare side. In this great Action we killed
about 80 of the Irish; and had none killed, and only 20 wounded on our Side.
This Night a very considerable Officer, and a very sensible Gentleman, Deserted
the Town, and came over to us, and informs us, that our Bombs and Cannon have
killed great Numbers of the Garrison, and left few Houses standing in the
English Town, and that they have Bread but sor a very few Days. Notwithstanding
our being busied in Passing the Shannon, we Fired plentifully last Night into
the Town, and continue to do so this Day.

17th. All this Day we continued to ply the Town with Red-hot Balls, Carcasses
and Bombs, with great Execution; and truly, the Noise of the falling of the
Houses, the tearing and splitting of the Timber, together with the Shrieks and
Outcries of the Inhabitants, was indeed very terrible. Last Night the General
gave Order that most of the Regiments of Horse and Dragoons, with diverse of
Foot, should prepare to march over the new Float. On Tuesday in the Evening our
Cannon were thrice Discharged, and our Army made several Vollies, in
demonstration of their Joy for the great Defeat given the Turks, by the
Emperor's Forces, commanded by Prince Lewis of Baden. About 60 Wagons of good
Wool, taken from the Enemy hereabouts, were lately put on board our Ships.

18th. All last Night and this Day we continued Firing furiously into the Town
from several Batteries, on which are Mounted 60 Pieces of Large Cannon, the
least of which is a 12-Pounder. Our Lines in some places are run so near the
Enemy, that we can annoy one another with Pistol-Shot. This Night Orders were
given to the Men of War to destroy all Corn, Forage, etc. near the Waterside,
in the County of Clare. Just now some of our Militia brought in 3 notorious
Rebels, who it is said will be hanged: They took them 12 Miles from the Camp.

19. This Morning before Day we drew off all our biggest Guns from one of our
Batteries, and carried them down to the Ships. On Thursday last 11 of the
Enemy's Troopers came over to us, with their Horses, Arms and Accouterments, 5
of whom were Yesterday Entertained by Captain Took, in the Lord of Oxford's
Regiment; the rest in others.

20th. We continue Night and Day firing into the Town, and this Morning the
Enemy are not sparing of their Cannon Ball, at our Men, as they pass by.

21st. We continue to play into the Town from our Batteries.

22d. This Morning early the General, Lord Scravemore, Duke of Wirtemberg, etc.
with all our Horse and Dragoons (except Colonel Coye's Regiment of Horse, and
50 Dragoons out of each Regiment) with 10 Regiments of Foot, marched over our
Bridge of Boats, with 14 Guns, viz. 10 Three Pounders. and 4 Twelve Pounders,
each Man taking with him 7 Days Provisions into the County of Clare: The Major
Generals Maccay and Talmash, stay to secure our Works on this side. We continue
Night and Day firing into the Town to this Morning the 23d.

Slego having Surrendered to us, according as you have already heard, the Dublin
Militia are on their March homeward; and the Northern Militia are gone to take
in Ballahy, Newtown, and Castlebourk, which will totally reduce that part of
Connaught, and prevent the Robberies, and Barbarous Murders, so frequently
committed by the Irish, in those parts; one whereof lately happened thus: Upon
the 6th. Instant, Doctor William Brooks returning home from Visiting Mr. Edward
Lewis of Dunmore in the County of Gallaway, with two of Mr. Lewis's Servants,
and another Englishman in Company, were set upon within a Mile of the Docter's
House by a Party of Rapparees, who stripped one of the Men and stabbed him in
several places; notwithstanding which, he outrun and escaped them Naked, but
the Rebels, after having stripped, and given the Doctor, and Mr. Lewis's
Servants 12 or 13 stabs apiece, concluded this Dismal, and Barbarous Murder, by
cutting their Throats.

Mac-Cabe, the Grand Rapparee of the Bog of Allen, and four others of his Crew,
were lately Hanged at Naas, and are ordered to be hung in Chains, as a Terror
to the rest of their Crew, who are yet out. Lieutenant Colonel Foulks, Major
Nettles, and Captain Heges, have lately killed about 40 of these Notorious
Villains in the County of Cork.

LONDON, Printed for A. Mason, near Temple Bar, 1691.


