SIGILL: COLL: YALEN: NOV: PORT: NOV: ANGL
LUX ET VERITAS
(...)
university blazon "I give these Books for the founding of a College in this
Colony"

YALE UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

1916



YALE UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

1916

AN ACCOUNT Of a Late, Horrid and Bloody MASSACRE in IRELAND, Of several
thousands of Protestants; procured and carried on by the L. Tyrconnel and his
Adherents.
Which Occasioned the English, under the Conduct of the Lords Grenard,
Mountjoy, etc. To seize and secure the said Tyrconnel, in the Castle of Dublin,
in order to be sent for England.
FRom the death of the late King Charles the the Second, of blessed Memory, the
Irish date their Happiness; and from the first Promotion of Mr. Talbot, to the
Earldom of Tyrconnel, they conclude on the continuance of it: the crafty
Priests to raise the Natives Zeal to the Cause, having Insinuated, by way of
Prophecy, into their Minds, That one of that Title should free them from the
Slavery of their Conquerors, and render that Kingdom free and in dependent of
all other Nations: And that as I have been credibly informed, made the now
Governor Sue to the King for that particular Title, by which he did not only
satisfy his own Ambition, but raised his Reputation so among the Irish, as
they looked upon him now no otherwise than their Guardian Angel and Deliverer.
And now being Commissioned by the King, first to be CheckMaster General to the
Army, and presently after Lord Deputy, and General Governor (though directly
contrary to an Act of Parliament, which admits of no Irishman born to that
Office) his first business was to new Model the Army, which in one Years time
he did so effectually, that of seven or eight thousand, there was hardly one
Hundred Officers and Soldiers of the English left; the Name of Protestant or
Englishman, being a Crime too great to be suff red in any Military or Civil
Employment, he having the whole disposal of all the first, and most of the
other. Having now secured, and rendered himself Formidable to the Protestants,
his next care was to ruin the Interest and Estates of all the English
throughout the Kingdom; which he struck at by making Irish Papists Judges, in
the Courts of Judicature, by dissolving the Charters* by packing of furies,
Suborning Witnesses, discountenancing the Protestant Councils, etc. So that in
most Causes, especially in the court of Exchequer; not the Right, but the
Religion of the Defendant was chiefly considered: By this time Matters grew to
such a Head, that His Lordship thought it necessary to disarm the Protestants
throughout the Kingdom; but this Resolve not proving very effectual, he
pr^ceeded to weaken the English first, and afterward to provoke them by
public calumnies and reproaches, branding all protestants promiscuously, with
the title of whiggs and rebels; the commonalty threatening daily what they would
do if the King should Die, protesting with bitter execrations, that they would
never part with the sword now they bad it, and daily marking out to themselves
such and such proportions of the English Estates: All this notwithstanding, the
English patiently bore, making no other return than by applying themselves to
some of the English Nobility, who represented their Case to the King, though
without Redress: But now the apprehensions of the Prince of Orange's Coming to
England, being made known, Tryconnel presently takes the Alarm, and resolving
on all the Injuries done to the English, made no doubt of their inclination to
revenge; therefore no sooner the News of the Dutch landing arrived, but he
sends his Emissary's to exasperate the Irish, by telling them that the English
bad sent for the Dutch to cut off the King, and destroy the Catholics
throughout the three Kingdoms; so that in several places the Irish rose and
destroyed several Families; the Deputy Issuing out at the same time, an Order
to disarm all the Protestants; resolving that if matters miscarried bear in
England, to cut them all off, and set up for himself, aecording to the
Sham-prophecy aforementioned. But the Earl of Grenard, a very Noble and Worthy
Protestant, and one exceeding powerful in the North, where the chief of the
English strength lies; hearing of this Order, went boldly to the Deputy,
desiring to know if he had Order from the King to disarm the Protestants, and
desiring to see it, was refused: whereupon he told his Lordship plainly, it
should not be executed, if he could hinder it; and communicating presently the
Design, to the rest of the Protestant Nobility and Gentry; then forthwith sent
Intelligence to all parts, with Advice to stand in their own defense to the
utmost: which we hope, with some speedy Assistance from England, will preserve
that Interest in the Kingdom, which the Protestants with their Blood, have
dearly bought.

For this seasonable Intelligence, being well digested, by the Nobility and
Gentry of the English Interest; they presently importune the Earl of
Inchiqueen, to make an early provision against the palpable, and now no longer
doubted designs of the Irish; who thereupon immediately summons his party,
already, though privately prep ^r'd for the business, so that in less than Ten
days time, he had well nigh Eight Thousand Men, well appointed, and resolved to
oppose the common Enemy: in the mean time the Lords Grenard and Mountjoy, were
not idle in Dublin, in making parties, and securing the English Militia, or
Trained-bands to their designs; not doubting that if they could secretly and
seasonably seize the Lora Tyrconnel, they might with very little effusion of
Blood, secure the whole Kingdom; so that now there seemed nothing wanting, but
a good pretense to send away all, or most of the Army, remaining in, and about
Dublin, nor could this be l^ong wanting, considering the necessity of quelling
the growth of Inchiqueens party; for matters being come to a head, and my Lord
Mountjoy's Regiment being ordered to march toward the Enemy, before they were
well got fifteen miles from the City, the Militia at an hour appointed, rush
unanimously into the Castle of Dublin, seizing immediately all the Gates, Ports,
Avenues and Guards; while the Lords Grenard and Mountjoy (who upon some feigned
pretense) staid a while behind his Regiment with others, laid hold on the Lord
Tyrconnel, putting him immediately under a strong Guard; and leaving a
sufficient number to keep the Castle and City: the Militia, with what
additional Forces they could appoint, out of the Protestants, that came in
voluntarily to assist in the Business, made up a formidable Body, to resist the
Irish; who upon the News, were coming back to the rescue of the Deputy; but
perceiving such an unexpected number, ready to oppose them, they presently
dispersed, so that the Castle and City were without much noise secured to the
English, and the Lord Tyrconnel ready to be delivered into the Hands of
Justice: the consequences of this Action are greater, than can readily be
supposed; for beside the disabling that pretense of Authority by which they
might then seem justly to act, we have weakened the hopes and expectations of
those who reposed on Tyrconnel as an Insallible power. So that with those
Forces that are said to be raising in the North, by the Interest of the Lords
Grenard, Mazarine, Mountjoy, and others; by the Lord Inchiqueen, and the
English Nobility and Gentry of Munster, and the Protestants in and about
Dublin; It is not doubted, but by the help of God, that Kingdom may happily be
relieved in a very short time, with as little loss of Blood, or otherwise, as
England; which we hope and heartily pray for, etc.

Printed in the year 1689.


