An ACCOUNT of a Late Engagement at SEA NEAR Rye, on the Coast of Sussex. WITH
The Particulars of Taking (...) French Man of War, and bringing her into the
said Port; of ^he Number of Enemy Killed, among whom was the Lord Strabane, etc.
In a Letter from R^e, August the 8th 1691.
LICENSED, According to Order.

1691.


SIR,

THIS Morning came in h^e a Dutch Privateer, of Twenty Four Guns, and Eight
Patte^roes, called, The Anne of Flushing, Jacob Vander-Linder Com^ander; she
brought in with her, as Prize, a French Frigate of Thirty Guns, which she took
in the Channel; The said French Ship came from the River o^ Lymerick, and was
making all the Sail she could, either for Hauver de Grace or Diep in France;
Ship had a considerable number of Passenge^ on Board, both French and Irish,
among which were the Lord Strabane, and several other Persons of Quality, with
Two Priests; There was like^ise a Velvet Coffin, in which is the Corpse of some
Considerable Person of Q^^lity. After the Privateer had reached them with his
Chase-Guns, and ca^e up with the said Ship, the Gentlemen, with their
Small-Shot, (with the ^ssistance of the Tarrs, on Board) made a Resolute and
Obstinate Defense, (...) some time, coming up with the Privateer, Board and
Board, exchanging man Broad-Sides with her, till, at last, having their Mast
brought by the B^rd, and other Parts of their Rigging, greatly Damnified, they
were fo^ed to yield; But, just as the privateer's Crew were Boarding them, they
^ere observed to hurl Overboard, a small Trunk, and Leathern-Wallet; in which
were supposed to be Pacquets of Letters, etc. There were about 3^ of the Ships
Crews killed and wounded on both Sides: Amongst the Slain (...) the French Man
of War, was the Lord Strabane, etc. and some Persons ^f Note wounded: They say,
There was another Ship, but just before in their Company, Laden with Plate, and
other Rich Goods, Bound for France.

Here are only Three other Ship ^n this Harbor, Laden with Wheat and Oats,
Bound for London: The Wind's at West South-West, a Moderate Gale.

London, Printed for Smith in Fleet Street, 1691.


