AN ACCOUNT of a most Horrid and Barbarous MURDER and ROBBERY,
Committed on the Body of Captain Brown, a Gentleman of Eight Hundred Pound a
Year, near Shrewsbury in Shropshire, (who lately lived in Soho-square) by his
own Tennant and Servant, and seven more Villains, cutting off his Head, putting
it into a Sack; and burying it with the Body in a Hop-Field, in his Scarlet
Clothes; with the most strange, wonderful, and miraculous discovery of the
same, on Tuesday the 22d. of March, 1694. by the Apparition of the Gentleman's
spirit to diverse Persons of good Quality in the Country; and of the Noise of
Drums and Trumpets beating Points of War on the very spot of Ground where the
Murdered Captain was buried; with the Murderers Confession, and diverse others
strange Particulars. Licensed according to Order.
WHAT Dreadful Remembrances have we, of the Judgments of Almighty God, showed
against Murderers in a most remarkable manner, as diverse of our Modern
Chronicles do set forth, which is enough to deter the basest Person from the
Commission of so horrid a Fact as Murder; yet it is daily seen how the Sin
increases rather than abates: for how many Instances have we of late of this
Nature, both in City and Country, and none will take warning till they are
involved and ensnared in utter Ruin.

For the Hainonsness of this Sin of Murder, I suppose none can be Ignorant,
that it is of the deepest Die, a most crying Sin. This we may see in the first
Act of this kind that ever was committed. Abel's Blood cries from the Earth,
and God tells Cain, Genesis 4. 10. And it is worth our Notice, what strange, and
even miraculous Means it has often pleased God to use for the discovery of
this Sin; the very brute Creatures have many times been made Instruments of it;
nay, often the extreme Horror of the Person's own Conscience has made him
betray himself; other times the Apparition of the Murdered Person, (as in the
following Instance) from whence its evident that it is not any closeness used
in the acting of this Sin, that can secure the Malefactor from the Vengeance of
it.

I forsee there are abundance of Men, in whose Hands this Paper may come (and
those as they think themselves, no mean Wit too) because forsooth, they have
not been Eyewitnesses themselves will dread many of the following Passages, in
the Discovery of the Murder, as Fabulous: All that I shall say to these
Gentlemen is, if they dare believe nothing but what they themselves have seen;
I am sure they dare not believe themselves to be Rational Creatures, and at the
same time avouch it.

I know there are some men in the World so hardy and bold, as not only to deny
Apparitions, Damons, and Specter, but the very Being of Spirits; These I look
upon as Men possessed with such an incurable Madness, as no Hellebor is
sufficient to quit them of. Others who belive they are, yet think them so
confined to their own apartments, that they may not inter-meddle with Humane
affairs, at least not show themselves to Men: There is, no doubt, variety of
Impostures in the stairs of them, but to reject all such Appearances as
Fabulous, is too severe a Reflection upon the Credit of the best Historians,
both Ancient and Modern. But to proceed to the Relation.

Captain Brown the unhappy Subject of this Narrative, was an honest, generous,
and worthy Gentleman of Shropshire, near Shrewsbury, had an House in
Soho-Square, London, he was extremely well beloved of the Gentlemen of the
Country: His Lady and R^lict is a very virtuous Person, of an Honorable
Family, being sister to the present Lord C -- The Captain had one of his
Tenants to wait upon him, when he went Abroad; while in the Country, a Fellow,
whom he put much Confidence, and who was indebted to him 50 l. for Rent, for
which he only took his Bond, saying often in the hearing of many, that he would
never touch him for it, till he saw him able. In the Christmas Week last past,
this Fellow understanding, that the Captain, his Master, was to receive
fourscore Pounds at a place about Ten Miles from home, communicated the same to
seven Country Labouring-fellow of the Neighborhood, all as wicked as himself;
These idle Persons consult and confederate together to Way lay the Captain, at
a place agreed on in the Road, as he is as to pass Home, resolving there to Rob
him of his Money and Life at the same time* but it so happened, that the
Captain returning late in the Evening, and calling at a Friends House, He by
their Persuasions, lest his Money there for fear of a casual Robbery, not
apprehending in the least, at the same time, the Treachery of the Servant that
accompanied him. Now at the place these blood (...) fell on the Captain, (the
Servant joining with them) knokt him off his Horse, cut his Skull, cut off his
Head, and put it into a Sack they had provided; after which they carried him to
a Hop Ground just by, where digging a Hole, they threw him in, Clothes and all,
and covered him with Earth having first ^ifled him of his Watch, Rings, etc.
though they (...) of the 8 (...) their Booty, went every Man to his own Home.
The next day the Captains Tenant-Servant went to the Captains House impudently,
like Solomon's. Whore Wiping his Mouth, and saying he had done no ill. But the
Captains Lady seeing of him, asked him for his Master, who replied, he thought
he was come Home the other Night: However great search having been made after
the Captain, and he not returning, the Servant was Apprehended, and sent to
Shrewsbury Prison, on suspicion of his Murder* Soon after the Murder, the
Spirit, or Apparition, in the plain Dress, Form and Shape of the Captain,
appeared to two Gentlewomen of the Captain's Acquaintance, as they lay in Bed;
he drew the Curtains, and looked on them with a smiling Countenance, and then
walked to the Window, and opened the Casement; the Gentlewomen said, Lord (...)
Captain; what make you here, you're very merry, sure you have been up a
Drinking all Night, but he retired without answering a Word; after which the
Gentlewomen calling the Servant-Maid, she came up, to whom they demanded the
Reason why she let the Captain up into their Room. But the Maid declared, that
she neither saw, nor heard him, and that the doors of the House were shut.

Some days after the Captain appeared to an Acquaintance in the same Village,
an ancient Gentleman that was sick of the Gout: Coming into the House, the Son
of the Gentleman desired the Captain not to make a Noise, for that his Father
was ill, and just in a slumber; the Captain went and looked on the Father, and
then sat down with the Son, who talked to the Captain, but he made no reply,
only smiled, and then retired, or vanished. At the time of the Apparition, the
two Gentlewomen, nor this young Man, knew any thing of the Captain's Murder,
from Christmas till last Thursday was Seven-night, being the 22d. of March, it
was not known what was become of the Captain; but on the Thursday the said two
of the seven Rogues that assisted the Captain's Servant in the Murdering of
him, were with six other laboring Men, working in the very same Hop-Garden
where the Captain was buried; and on a sudden they heard the noise, or sound of
Drums and Trumpets; upon which, thinking some Forces might be Marching by, they
all run out to see them, but when they came, could see nothing, only heard the
noise, upon which, returning to their Work, the noise increased, and of a
sudden, one of the Murderers said to the other, These Drums are for the
discovery of Captain Brown's Murder; but the other replied with a frowning
look, Hold your Bawling you fool, you know not what you say, but some other of
the Company hearing of the Words, went out, and acquainted the next Justice,
who was the County Coroner, of what he heard, who enjoining them silence, and
ordering a Guard near the place, came and heard the like noise, and then said
to all the Fellows at work. Certainly here must be some Murder or otber
extraordinary hapened hereabouts, that we thus hear this noise, and see
nothing. Upon which he ordered all the Fellows to dig, and thrusting in his
Cane at many places, pushed at last in the very spot that the Captain lay
buried, where Digging, one of the Captain's Legs, and piece of the Scarlet
Cloak appearing, the two Fellows of the Company, that were two of the Captain's
Murderers, took their Heels and ran for it, but were soon stopped, and committed
to Shrewsbury Goal, where the Captain's Man was before, who as soon as ever he
saw two of his Companions come, and that his Captain's Body was found, made a
large Confession of the whole Murder; upon which the other five were
immediately apprehended, and are all now in Goal, in order to receive their just
Punishment for so horrid and barbarous a Murder.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year 1694.


