AN ACCOUNT Of a Horrid and Barbarous Murder, COMMITTED On the Body of a Young
Person supposed to be of a good Quality in the Fields beyond
Whitechappel-Church, in the Parish of Stepny commonly known by the Name of
Tom-turds Field where she was found, on Monday the 16th. of March, her Throat
Cut, and several wounds upon her Body, which was there left stark Naked in one
of the Pits belonging to the Field.
DId we not by the too often repeated Instances of this kind behold the
Barbarity of Man's Temper, when left of God Almighty, we should be more
Astonished at the Bloody and Savage Cruelty in the following Relation, which is
enough to draw Tears from the Eyes of the most Unconcerned, and raise Pity in
the Breast of the worst of Men: But not to detain the Reader with too long
Exordiums, I shall proceed to the Story it self:

In the Fields beyond White-Chappel Church, commonly called Tom-turds Fields,
some Children were on Monday the 16th of this Instant playing near the Pits,
and one of them casually striking his Ball thereinto, the Lad endeavoring to
reach the same with a Stick lit upon a Foot as he concieved it, and so it
proved true, of a Person that had been there Murdered; whereat calling his
Companions they came about it, and the Crowd increasing, they quickly pulled
the Carcass to the side of the Pit, and by that means perceived it was the Body
of a Young Woman stripped stark Naked, except the Lyning of an old-Gown to Cover
her, and on her Right Leg a Man's Stocking and Shoe; she was Bruised all over
her Body, and had several Wounds which were seen thereupon; to wit, one in her
Right Breast, another upon the side or her Right Eye, and another in her
Throat, which was cut half through, with several other Barbarous Gashes in
several parts of the Body, The Person is as yet unknown, but by the Conjectures
of most Persons that have viewed her, she is supposed to be of some Quality,
and the rather for that she has a very Clear Skin and soft Hand; she seems to
have several good Features, and is as supposed not above the Age of 16 or 17 at
most: on her little Finger of the Right Hand she had a Cornelion Ring, but how
long she has lain in that Place is not yet known, tho it cannot be very long,
for that her Wounds are fresh.

And upon the removing her from the Pit where she was first found, to
Mile-end-Green at the sign of the George, where her Body now lies, she Bled a
fresh: The Field where she was, has been always looked upon as very Dangerous
for Passingers, after Night is shut in, and several Persons have been there
Robbed, but the Barbarity of this is hardly to be Parralleled, not only in
Relation to her Sex, but also her Youth; And how Malice: it self should be so
Trancendently wicked in the perpetration of so Horrid and Abominable a Murder,
it can scarce enter into the Breast of Humanity to Imagine: Murder in any
degree has been always looked upon as the most Crying of all Sins, and seldom
is it that the same scapes Unpunnished, the Vengeance of the Almighty pursuing
the Criminal generally to hss Punnishment even in this World, much more may we
hope that in so Horrid an Instance as this is, where neither Beauty nor Youth
could work Compassion on the obdurate and Cruel Hearts of Accursed Perpetrators
thereof, that in God's good time the same will come to a Discovery, and the
Criminals to their deserved End: Which that the same may come to pass, is the
Prayers of all good People, who cannot but upon sight thereof compassionate the
poor Innocent, and look upon the Authors of this Tragedy with more than common
Detestation.

LONDON Printed by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in Thames Street,
over against Baynard's Castle. 1684


