AN ACCOUNT OF A VINDICATION OF THE English Catholics From the Pretended
CONSPIRACY AGAINST THE LIFE and GOVERNMENT OF HIS Sacred Majesty, UNDERTAKING
To Discover the chief FALSITIES and CONTRADICTIONS contained in the Narrative
OF TITUS OATS, etc.

Etsi coram Hominibus dura fit Frons vestra; erubescit, coram Deo, men's vestra.

LONDON, Printed for James Vade, at the Cock and Sugar Loaf, near S. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street, 1681.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE VINDICATION OF THE English Catholics, etc. The Introduction.
SECT. I.
WEre the Jesuits, etc. who stand thus positively charged with projecting
against their Prince and Country (and that under the Masque of Religion too)
such monstrous, hellish Villains as are not to be thought of without an
extremity of horror and astonishment, and even capable of forcing a Blush from
the very Sun it self; were these (I say) a sort of people who either by their
principles or practices had ever approved themselves equitable to Monarchichal
(to any kind of Civil) Regiment, or respectful to the common Offices and
Obligations of humane Society: It would then have been severe to have refused
them such a proportion of Christian Charity as might have suspended an absolute
conclusion upon their Guilt; or at least, in contemplation of our frailty, have
engaged a compassionate regret for their misfortune, and ransacked ancient and
modern Story in quest of Presidents to insinuate that even Good Men have many
times been over-set, upon the encounter of a powerful and artificial
Temptation. But if, upon a strict enquiry into their ways of Acting (And how
can man judge of man but by his Doings?) the world finds so little reason to
cherish a favorable opinion of their Inclination to cultivate such sacred
Impulses, as strongly dispose us toward the comporting our selves suitable to
the Rules of Morality, and the Dignity and Excellence of our Christian
Profession; that on the contrary they appear to it only famous for their
Impieties, for embroiling and over-turning Kingdoms and States, for violating
and trampling upon all things holy and profane, that stand in competition with
their ambition or avarice; for pouring forth innocent Blood like water, washing
their hands in the tears of Widows and Orphans; and in a word, for propagating
Feuds, Seditions, Rapines, Rebellions, Murders, Massacres, and the like
Barbarities, wherever they once set their foot: If (I say again) the world
does or has discovered them to be jointly and severally concerned in a Bed-roll
of such stupendous wickednesses, (and what Corner of the Universe is not by
sad experience qualified to bear witness against them to this Truth?) they must
excuse Mankind in general, for looking upon them as Locusts and Caterpillars,
fit to be extirpated and swept away from off the face of the Earth: and they
must also excuse Us in particular, if, after so many Providential Deliverances
from their Plots upon our Religion, Lives and Liberties, from the very dawning
of the blessed Reformation upon our then benighted Island, down to this
instant, we stand fairly warned and premonish'd to beware of their Malice, and,
upon the least rumor of their being crept in among us, to provide against the
worst that Hell and such its miscreant Agents can devise against us: and they
must not think hardly of the Law neither if, after a fair Trial by their Peers,
and full conviction upon such credible evidence as, were the Tables turned, is
competent to cast the noblest Protestant Subject in any Roman Catholic Court
of Judicature in Europe, it do condemn every shavling traitorous wretch of them
taken in the manner. Not that I do hereby aim at the encouraging or abetting of
a popular, and undue Inquisition after Blood, (it being inconsistent with the
Grandeur and Elevation of a True English Spirit to be sanguinary, or to reject
the petition for life even of the bitterest Enemy, that lies disarmed and at
mercy) but would imply thus much only: that if they will continue to make so
bad an use of the Time and other Indulgences granted to their importunities, in
order to the capacitating them to be their own Compurgators in a fair and Legal
Way, as still to employ them toward the support of their evil Designs upon the
Lives and Credits of their Accusers, toward the abusing and inflaming the
people with an uninterrupted course of scandalous and flagitious Impostures,
toward the arraigning the Wisdom, Honor, and Justice of the Kingdom, and
toward the rendering the British Nation odious and contemptible in the eyes of
other Countries; in the name of Goodness let them have all the fair Play, and
other advantages that the Law of the Land can allow them; and we shall then see
whether their clamorous pretenses of Innocence, or the tender and merciful
Nature of their Sovereign, will prove their surest Sanctuary. -- But to come a
little nearer the matter in hand. Although I well remembered how feeble and
obnoxious these men had approved themselves in their former Nibblings at some
special Branches of the Evidence against them; yet the Pamphlet I now came to
examine, appearing under the Pompous Title of A Vindication of the English
Catholics from the pretended Conspiracy against the Life and Government of his
sacred Majesty, discovering the chief Falsities and Contradictions contained in
the Narrative of Titus Oats, I read it over with much attention, as expecting
from it such an ingenuous and substantial Confutation of the Narrative in
question, as might hold proportion with the Parts, Pains and Promises of the
Persons interested in the compiling of it, and be able to abide the Test of a
Parliament, or a Court of Judicature: but, not to anticipate, or prepossess the
Readers Judgment by calling it a Compound of unjust Surmizes, immoral
Reflections, unmanly and insipid Scoffs, egregious Sophistries and
Prevarications, Illogical Inferences, fallacious Reasonings, and Proofs, weak,
unsatisfactory, and childishly extravagant, to the highest degree imaginable; I
found it not a jot otherwise then in the Cursory, but impartial Notes ensuing,
is Represented.

SECT. II.
HE begins his previous Address to the Courteous Reader, (page 1.) with an
assurance, that the Narrative here in debate is an Original, because the
Composer of it found none to Copy by; and yet in the next Line unbethinks
himself that Lucian's True History (rather than the Golden Legend) might
furnish the President; and, upon this Presumption, proceeds (in regard few
Comparisons are able to run upon all four) mathematically to state the Breadth
and Depth of the Differences between them; winding them all up with this
doughty Remark, that whereas Lucian in that intended (a hopeful beginning to
pronounce upon the Intention of a man that died so many hundred years since)
only to recreate those, who never did him any good, Oats (on the other side)
in this designs the ruin of those who never did him any hurt, (excepting only
a refusing him Holy Orders, back and belly-beating him, etc.) but intended him
much good, (at Latter-Lammas; for in their List of Ecclesiastical Aga's I find
not Titus Oats pricked down for the Reversion of a Cure in any of the poorest
Country-Village:) If his bad nature (his Tongue) had been susceptible of good
advice (could have kept within his Teeth, and told no Tales of the mighty
preparations of the Holy Legions.)

Then he confesses he never saw the man, and so can know nothing of him, but by
hearsay. To which he gives a more positive and implicit Faith, thoroughout the
whole course of his Observations, than his own Ears and Eyes could ever expect
from him: and so presently lays the courteous Reader abord with a pretty
Third-hand Story of a certain Dignitary, who was so deadly cunning at seeing a
man's Heart through his Ribs, and reading his Meaning by his Jaws, that he
scrupled the Deponent the Sacrament (their Sacraments and their Senses are
equal in number) of Confirmation (or laying his hand upon his head) merely out
of a conceit that his face was not promising enough. O the Sin and Folly of
these Wretches, thus grossly to abuse and impose upon their Bigoted Proselites!
For mere shame ( Sirs) leave off to trouble the world with such Trumpery, lest
the very Boys in the Streets, by the proper arguments of Turnip tops and addle
Eggs, compel you to an acknowledgment of your Forgeries.

Next, he produces a Reason that, at a blush, looked as big as a Giant, as
having four or five little Reasons in the Belly of it; but upon the approach, I
found it only a meagre Jack-a-lent, set up to raise wonderment in Children, and
in Men Laughter; a shadow, and no more: as you your selves may see upon the
uncasing of it: Thus. He denies the Deponent to have been made a Doctor. 1.
Because he never was at Salamanca. 2. Because he was not a Priest. And 3.
Because he was not Scholar good enough. His two first Reasons he endeavors to
corroborate with the Attestations (A and B, page 42.43.) of Lynch the Titular
Archbishop of Tuam in Ireland (who stands accused as one of the Conspirators)
and Duelly another Tiege; the former of which (that part of it that relates to
the point now in agitation) amounts to thus much; That Lynch protests and
declares by his Consecration, and ex abandanti, per Sancta Dei Evangelia (do
but behold how fluently the man spits Latin) that he never saw the Deponent, (I
suppose his Reverence is blind, for otherwise it is more than he can safely say
(much less swear) of any man living, even the Great Turk himself) and that he
never was at Madrid, (gallantly undertaken!) both because he had been told he
came no further than Vallodolid, and also for that he vouchsafed not his
Lordship a Visit and Complement, for having refused him Holy Orders: and the
Latter is only a Declaration (in manner and form abovesaid) that the Deponent
never was at Madrid: 1. because a Mule-man said so to the Protester, and then,
because he was, by an Epistolary Correspondence, acquainted with all his Grace
of Tuam's motions. Those that stick not to swear and protest at this
extravagant rate, how can it be expected that they will make Bones of any Oath
whatsoever? But now admitting the produced to be true Copies of these two
obnoxious persons (verbal) written Assurances. Yet since they run only upon the
Negative, and of themselves are Naked, Undue and Conjectural, they ought not to
have any effect upon the Solemnity and Positivity of an affirmative Oath
confirmed by several Collateral Evidences: a Tithe of which from one of their
own hands, in their Inquisitive Courts, would be esteemed a sufficient ground
whereupon to condemn the worthiest Heretic (so they are pleased to dignifie
us) in England to the Faggot. But they insist much upon the Deponents not being
a Priest. Should we, for peace and quietness sake suppose this, I believe the
Observator would yet make some difficulty to resolve me whether it be
impossible for a man, in their Universities, to commence Priest and Doctor in
one and the same week? I must also mind him that this Reason is wholly new to
us; for the only Objection that we could hear of on this side the Sea, upon the
first dusting of the Question was, (and it came as piping-hot too from
Oraculous S. Omers) that no man could be made a Doctor in any Roman Catholic
Country, under the charge of 400 l. a Sum, they said, that the Deponent never
had at command at one time. Both these Flams now (to give him his own words
again, page 1.) are alike true per Antiphrasin. But how can they have the
confidence to tax him with Illiterateness, when he has so publicly approved
himself to be a better Scholar than his Masters? Yet the Compendious
Calumniator pawns his honor, that the Deponent is not able to turn five Lines
of Latin into true English. This was a handsome stretch indeed! and yet we find
their own Authors every where telling scurvy Tales of, and inveighing against
their ignorant Clergy, and what feeble parts, backed with a strong Purse, are
commonly found qualified for a Degree in any of their Colleges. Besides, what
is it to any one, if their Reverences were pleased to vouchsafe to the
extraordinary merits of this their diligent Servant, the reward of an empty
Title that only feeds the fancy of the Receiver, and substracts nothing from
the Coffers of the Bestower? But now I think on it a great deal of this might
have been spared, for it is not the Oath, but the Veracity of the Deponent that
lies here at stake; he never having (that I could hear of) given in this
Punctillio as any part of his Evidence.

The first Paragraph, of page 2. furnishes another Circumstance not only to
strengthen the preceding Allegations, but even to call in question the very
being of the Plot too; and it is taken from the Order, kept in the Jesuits
Houses, they never employing their Scholars (such as he told us before the
Deponent was) in Negotiations (and Treasons) of the highest Consequence. And
hence he wire-draws the Burden of his Story, that the Deponents Doctorship,
and Papists Treasons were both hammered upon the same Anvil. Strongly
concluded, I Will promise you, would but the scurvy Premises bear it out! This
man will never take up with less than a Cardinals Cap sure, he is such an old
dog at Syllogism! But if Clodius will impeach the Adulterers, who can help it?
And since the Gentleman brings the best Arguments he has, (though never so
ordinary) for the support of his Tottering Cause, in Charity we ought to accept
the will for the deed.

He goes on to smatter most distinctly upon the name of D' Oliva; to twit the
Deponent for impropriety of Speech, in terming those Letters the Inscription,
which he is pleased to call the substance of the Jesuits Seal; and to threaten
him correction for some other instances (to be produced in due time) of his
ignorance in the (less material) Customs of the Jesuits; he already (it seems)
perfectly well understanding their more important ones of plotting upon the
Persons and Dominions of Princes and Potentates.

From this word of Reproof he comes (next) to attempt the laying open of the
Deponents Contradictions, which he will needs have to be so very many, that it
were an endless work to reckon them all. He cites (at the bottom of page 2.)
the twenty seventh fol. of Coleman's Trial thrice, the 58 Item of the Narrat.
the 28 th. of Irelands Trial, and twice the eleventh of Langhorns; relying all
along upon the credit of the Prints of these kinds, notwithstanding that he has
been so often told, that of themselves they are no Legal Evidence. Had he now
been able to make out his Charge of Contradictions upon the Deponent, his work
had been done: for I readily agree with him, that Truth has a real Ground, and
is always the same; but falsehood is built only upon fancy, and changes
accordingly; page 2. But let me assure the Observator, that there are some
certain persons in the world who have examined all the Trials with much
strictness, and yet have not been able, even out of Them all, to pick any
passages so directly contradictory as ingenuity and good will might not easily
reconcile; or such as were worthy the cognizance of a Court of Justice: and as
to those places that he has instanced in; to me they appear so far from
interfering one with another, that contrariwise thy sufficiently explain
themselves, without being beholden to an Evasion for a Salvo. And yet so
resolutely is he bent upon* doing his best toward the blasting of the Deponents
Credit, (an atchievment that, no doubt of it, would be highly accounted of by
Holy Church, could it be found practicable once) that nothing will serve his
turn but concluding him (in despite of Logic and Reason) undeniably perjured,
upon the ground of the foregoing sickly Suggestions. Now though it be one of
the Jesuits Customs (so much applauded by our Observator!) from slight and
weakly Premises to infer weighty Consequences: yet this sort of Argumentation
is so forced, partial, and trifling, that to me it seems to be something less
even than downright Sophistry.

The first Break of P. 3. has nothing in it worth the taking notice of, save
only a shred or two of Latin, which are of much more natural application to the
Observators Party, than to the person for whom (out of pure kindness) he
intends them: and in the Second, he picks a quarrel with the manner of the
Deponents Accusation; calling it such, as any Knave who dare tell a Lie, and
confirm it by Oath, by it may bring any man or men, how innocent soever, into
question. This Suggestion, from such a Pen, may fairly be understood as a very
notable Complement. He then sets forward, with giving his word, that none of
the Letters mentioned in this Narrative were ever found, and that their Authors
deny the writing of them. The confidenter man he, and the wiser they. But still
the Windsor-Packet sticks in his stomach; for having met with a sleeveless
Fable, upon the Subject of those Letters, in one of their own Printed
Pamphlets, he presently swallows it down for Gospel, puzzles himself to find
out a Providence, in the detection of what, upon the simple ground of a Libel,
he strongly conceits to have been an Imposture: and thence takes occasion, with
great Gravity and Superciliousness, to enjoin the Deponent Penance; backing his
admonition with a Text; and to make all sure, subjoyning one of Whitebreads
Learned Sayings. Let him but stay till there be occasion for it, and then no
doubt, his advice will be taken: And I must also mind him that F. Beddingfield
knew very well what he did, in waiting (contrary to custom) the coming in of
that Mayle; for having before had notice of the Discovery of their Rogueries,
and that the credit of the information depended in a great measure upon the
intercepting of that Packet, he found himself concerned to be the first
Receiver, and Divulger of it; and to do what he could toward the Representing
the whole matter as a Forgery. And blame him now who can. But if the Observator
be desirous to know the true Contents and Meaning of those Letters, Kirby's and
Tonge's Narratives (which are of more credit sure than a worthless, nameless
Libel) will give him particular satisfaction.

Having thus dispatched his preliminary Reasonings in proof of the Nullity of
the Plot, and the Knavery of the Deponent; the fourth page brings him to his
Promises and Apologies; which I am already half of belief will prove of the
very same complexion, and validity with the other. But yet he is so cock-a-hoop
upon the business, that, though he tells us indubio favendum est Reo, potius quam
Actori, yet he scorns to be beholden to the Peoples Charity in the case; as
undertaking to prove irrefragably (he must be excused if he fall short of his
word) what he advances, with such Evidence, and undoubtedly true Attestations,
that unless his Adversaries shut their eyes very hard, (I promise him to keep
mine as open as I can; but the Thing is so wretched heavy, that it casts me a
Nod almost every Period of it) they shall see he is in the Right, page 4. He
threatens Candor and Clearness too; (faults that a Jesuit never yet was guilty
of, and I Am mistaken in the man if he prove a By-blow,) only he pretends
scruple of Conscience for not uttering publicly such treasonous expressions,
as his Brethren whisper in private: then at one Puff of his Breath he lays the
Brat of the Plot at the Deponents Door, generously passing his word for the
Honesty of all the Priests and Jesuits in Europe, Asia, Africa and America;
but at the next, in a manner, recals it again.

This leads on ( Page 4. Par. 3.) to a Shuffle, and a new fashioned sort of an
Hail Master, amounting to within a Nutshel of a Profession, ex abundanti, that
he would not for a world be so unmannerly as to call the Deponent a Rogue, were
it not purely out of an ardent zeal to contradict an Heretical Prince,
Parliament and Court of Judicature. And thus after a suspicious squint at
Tongue, etc. as the Contrivers of the Plot, he falls to handling the King
himself a little familiarly, telling him of his Wickedness and Cruelty (a Loyal
Subject the mean while) in Scripture Phrase, and minding him that it is an
abomination to Kings to commit wickedness: Prove. 16.12. Methinks it would
better have suited with his pretenses of Duty, to have admonished His Majesty
to love his Enemies, (the Observator and his Tribe) and bless them that curse
Him; rather than still to have run on in charging Him with the effusion of
innocent Blood, because the Law, upon due proof, has hanged a few of their
Religious Conspirators. Believe me, it is well for his Majesty (it should seem)
that the Act de Haeretico comburendo is not in force; for the Fellow argues
devilish suspiciously.

And now for a solemn adieu to his Courteous Reader, he tells him in effect, (
page 5.) that it is only a natural Concern for Reputation that prompted him to
this Unworthy Undertaking; because that though his Brethren be never so great
Rascals in secret, yet they are in common prudence obliged to carry their Dish
as even as they can, to the Eye of the World: Which in truth is no contemptible
piece of Policy. And thus we have done with his Preface.

SECT. III.
THE Observator introduces his Notes upon the Deponents Epistle Dedicatory with
a florid and Rhetorical Excursion, which ( page 6.) he winds up thus; that if
the Narrative be True, (as it may be for any thing he has yet been able to
prove to the contrary) no reward can be too great for the Author of it, if
otherwise, there is no punishment but will seem too little for him: All this I
shall not scruple to subscribe to. But then in the same page 6. he falls
heavily upon him for presuming to say he was a Loyal Subject, when his Father
was pretended to be otherwise. What is this but an endeavor to introduce that
Maxim of their Inquisition here among us, that, Cornelius Agrippa tells us,
admits it to be a sufficient ground to condemn any Man for a Witch, whose
Father or Grandfather before him had there been sentenced for dealing with the
Devil. Yet still he runs on to represent all the Deponents words that tend that
way, as criminal, and to torture them to a compliance with his own evil
meanings. He next labors to take off the edge of his Assertion, (Ep. Ded. to
the Narrat. fol. 1.) that the Papists many past Treasons and Encroachments upon
several Princes for these thousand years in the world, will prove their
inclinations for the future: by opposing to it the like Practices of the
Presbyterians: as if another man's stealing of a Horse were an excuse for my
breaking open a House! yet he will needs have it, that they did more mischief
in four years, than the Crimes charged upon the Jesuits (only an unfortunate
Attempt to murder the King, subvert the Government, and massacre the People)
had they been put into act, would in all likelihood have produced in four
thousand: (A moderate Stretch!) and that the Disorders that happened in Popish
(I should, for good manners sake, have said Catholic) Times, (as the several
Irish Rebellions, for instance; the Parisian and Piedmont Massacres, etc.) were
like an Ague in the Spring, painful, but not dangerous, and leaving the Body
more healthy than before; whereas those of Presbyterians, (or Papists still;
for, mutato nomine de Te) are like putrid Fevers, or the Plague, which leaves
scarce hopes of Life. It is no new thing for a Jesuits Glass to represent other
men's faults at Large to the Prospect, but their own in Little. But they are
both bad enough of all conscience, to be better; which will never be (I fear)
till they have changed their Principles for Ours.

Next; he is very pleasant upon some sneaking Monk or other (I suppose) for
charging the Jesuits with the first Murder in the world, and with tempting
Eve to eat the forbidden Fruit. This indeed is vastly disproportionate from the
Character they give of themselves, ( Mystery of Jesuitism, page 48. and 49.)
viz. Men eminent for Learning and Prudence; a sort of People that have the
Pillar of Divine Wisdom going before them, a surer Guide than any thing of
Philosophy; they are that society of Men (Angels I should have said) whereof
Isaiah has prophesied in these words* Go you swift and ready Angels. (Is not
the Prophecy as plain as the back of your hand) They are Eagle-like Spirits, a
flight of Phoenixes; there being an Author who has not long since
demonstrated, that there are more than one: They have changed the face of
Christendom, etc. This is the Substance of their own words: and whether This or
the Former Panegyric more becomes them, and is wider from Truth, I leave it to
the world to determine. But now he reaches the Deponent a blow for hinting that
King James 'scap'd not their Poison. This I am very sure of, that he escaped not
the Presumption of it.

In page 7. he falls most bitterly upon him again for insinuating ( Epist. Ded.
to the Narrat. fol. 2.) what so many authentic Writers have averred before
him, viz. that the Papists, by their known diabolical art of inflaming Parties
and Passions against each other, were the first Authors and Contrivers of the
late Unnatural War. I cannot imagine what harm there should be in this, save
only that it contradicts (and justly too) the Observators fancyful and florid
Blazonings of the Gigantick (not Romantic) Doings and Sufferings of his Party,
upon that occasion. For it is as clear as the Sun, that the Scots began that
Rebellion in 1637; and it is alike clear, even from their own Authors, that
those very Commotions were raised, and fomented chiefly by the Arts and
Activity of Richelieu and his Agents. So that they first set us all in a flame,
and then, under the notion of Porters, Dray-men, Schismatics, and Fanatics,
(for they can indue all shapes; being as malliable us the materia prima it
self) rifled and dispoiled us. Some of them indeed perished in the Scuffle; but
then those that escaped had (or at least hoped to have) the better bargain on it:
and nothing venture, nothing win. It Is true (as Papists) they were never able
to make a separate Party in England; but then it is as undeniable, that they
influenced in all; this (in all probability) being their chief aim, to protract
the Quarrel, till we had beaten one another Brains out, and wasted our
strength, so to make way for their shoals of hungry Pilgrims to cross the Sea,
possess, and re-people the Land. Yet God in his mercy disappointed them. But
now, I would fain know of these Loyolists who they were that began the Irish
Rebellion, (at the same time with the other,) where so many thousand
Protestants of all Ages and Sexes were, without the least distinction or
remorse, inhumanly butchered in a few months? I make no question but they will
strive to shuffle even that too upon the wicked Fanatics. Let me therefore
tell them once for all, that these Traitorous Fanatics, and those Traiterous
Papists make up one and the same Pack of Rebels, under different Appellations;
they are Bone of the some Bone, and Flesh of the same Flesh; a swarm of
malignant Insects generated upon a commixtute and coition of the putrid
Exhalations of the Rhosne and Tyber; bearing in their Faces the very Picture of
their Sire: and though, like Sampson's Foxes, they looked diverse ways, yet with
Them too they are tied together by the Tails, and drive at one and the same
End, I mean the fattening themselves upon the Substances of Others, and turning
Order into Confusion. This Observation is now so justly and generally
entertained and noted, that all these men's bitter and elaborate Invectives
against the Rogueries of the Fanatics, have no other effect upon the wise and
sober, than to be looked upon as a more gross and prostitute discovery of their
own nakednesses: so that did they but well consider it, they would hold
themselves concerned, in common prudence, to forbear the like for the future.

But since they are unwilling (and not without reason neither) to confess
themselves (otherwise than as Popish Fanatick^) guilty of the Disorders that
commenced in England in 1641; it may not be altogether impertinent, in this
place, to inquire into their proceedings, under the name of Catholics (a Title
so immoderately affected by them) in the Civil Wars of France, in 1572, I shall
therefore presume (in imitation of our Learned Observators Method) to ask Who
they were that massacred such numbers of Hugonots in Paris and elsewhere, in
cold Blood, and without any cause or provocation, other than that they were
honester men and better Subjects than themselves? Man and Me must answer for
them; these Catholics! Who were they that, by force of Arms, drove their
Lawful Prince ( Henry the Third) out of the Capital City of his Kingdom;
entered into a Treasonous Combination, or Holy League; (the Architype of our
Solemn League and Covenant) raised a Religious Rebellion against him, under the
Popes Banner; pursued him with Fire and Sword; and at length by the hand of one
of their Priests stabbed him to the heart? The Catholics! Who were they that
prosecuted the same Rebellion against his Rightful Successor Henry the Fourth;
called in a Foreign Power upon him; fought him in sundry Pitched Fields;
attempted upon his Person both by Sword and Poison; swore themselves into a
fresh Engagement, never to admit him (or any other) to the Throne of France;
but upon the terms of his being a Catholic, etc. In a word, who were they
that, when they had brought him over to hear Mass (while he was in a good mind)
spilt his Blood (by one of the Jesuits) in the face of the Sun, and in the open
Streets of Paris? why, the very same pretended Catholics still!

Now our hand is in, and that we see what these Modern are; I hope it will not
seem tedious if we take a short view of the Behavior, in the like cases, of
the Primitive Catholics. Who were they then that would sooner renounce their
Breath, than their Allegiance; or then be engaged in Arms against their Lawful
Sovereign (whether Christian, Jew or Gentile) or any duly Commissioned by him?
The Primitive Catholics! Who were they that held his person to be sacred; that
accounted the least Violation of his Royal Prerogative, a Sacrilege; that would
rather choose to die by Inches, than to lift up their hand against the Lords
anointed; and that were still in readiness to sacrifice their Lives, Fortunes,
and all that was dear to them, in the service of their King and Country? These!
these were (and, in modern Praise, are the Church of England Men, or) the true
Catholics. The Use and Application of all this is so natural, and obvious,
that any Descant or Remark upon it would be a superfluity; the Goodness of the
Tree being ever more known by the quality of its Fruit. So that I shall now
return to tell the Observator, that the second Paragraph of this his seventh
Page will readily be allowed him, upon the single condition of its being
understood in the sense that himself really intended it (and that all other
passionate Declamations of the like nature, by a private Key well known to
themselves, are usually expounded in;) that is to say as an Encomium upon Holy
Church for certain pious Villainies, by the successful courage and conduct of
her Votaries perpetrated against a Race of unregenerate Heretics. And whereas,
in the fourth, he says that Papists leave Monarchy the full Liberty of the Law:
I shall remember him, that it is only because they cannot do otherwise; and
that a greater liberty than that will allow, must be had, before such as he
gain their ends upon us. But in his next Break he falls again to proclaiming
the Merits of the Roman Catholics, and the Malice of the Presbyterians at such
a rate, as if Ireland had not stood in need of an Act of Indemnity as well as
England. It Is a hard matter I find to make this Observator see on the Right
Side.

In Page 8. he will not allow the Jesuits, Simond and Carleton, to have
offered a thousand pounds for the King's Discovery after his escape at
Worcester, because he knows there were others then to be found, as able and
willing as they, to disburse such a Sum upon that account. To the Deponents
affirming that Oliver kept a Convent (they call the same thing by another name)
of Benedictines, he shapes an Answer as if he would have it thought that there
are no such people as the Benedictines in the world. Then he passes his Word
(which is of little value, upon this Score especially) for Mannings honesty,
whiles a Papist, only because the Deponent avows the contrary. And thus having,
in his own imagination, cleared the Coast, and got the wind of his Antagonist,
he falls to insulting over him, in this manner; By your honesty (says he) in
relating things done in the sight of the Sun, and known to all men, we see what
credit you deserve in things done in corners, and known only to your self. A
mighty Cry truly; but I Am afraid we shall find but little Wool come after it!

The Deponent then asks ( Ep. Ded. of the Narrat. fol. 3.) What Arguments can
persuade them to be true to their Natural, who profess allegiance, out of
conscience, to a Foreign, contrary Sovereign? And the other answers to this
purpose; that the Papists profess allegiance to a foreign Sovereign in temporal
Concerns only in order to spirituals. An acute Reply! I promise you. He next
pinches him for recommending it to the King to trust to, and rely upon his
Parliament; chopping and changing his words most Jesuitically, to make them
speak as he would have them. But I Will give both fair Play, by transcribing the
passage it self; and so leave it to be judged which has the better on it.

Next to Christ and the Truth (says the Deponent, Epist. Ded. to his Narrat.
fol. 4 and 5,) I shall with the utmost of my breath and power, according to my
Oath and Duty, in what place and station soever I am, endeavor to be found
ever Loyal and True to your Majesty in all your Rights and Honors, as all good
Subjects and Christians ought, and as I find this Noble and Loyal Parliament
are resolved to be to an hair, or an expression; and therefore cannot forbear
to pray to God, out of my sincerity and zeal for public Peace and Concord
between King and People, that, seeing your Majesty must highly trust some or
other for your necessary ease and help, God would put it into your Majesty's
Heart more to trust and rely upon your two Houses of Parliament (who will be
most true to your Laws, and consequently both to You and your People) than to
any single Minister or Ministers whatsoever, unaccountably, who may pretend to
more Loyalty, or more comply with any humor, or humane frailty of your
Majesty's, but are not true Friends either to your Majesty or their Country, or
themselves, therein; but erect and prefer an Imperial Paramount Self-end, or
Lust, before all; which your Majesty, by their art, must be brought unworthily
to serve and promote, to public disturbance always, and the confusion of
themselves and their posterity most an end, by God's just vengeance. It is a
false suggestion which such tempters use, that a King that rules by will is
more great, or glorious, or strong, than a King that rules by Law. The quality
of the Retinue best proves the State of the Lord; the one being but a King of
Slaves, while the other, like God, is a King of Kings and Hearts. No Prince was
ever more absolute, to have what he wished, than Queen Elizabeth, who wished
for nothing more than the Subjects Right and Welfare -- But nothing will make
your Majesty so amiable and acceptable in the Eyes of God and Man, and your
Name and Memory blessed and glorious for ever, as the copying of the Laws of
our Savior in your Life, by a decent, paternal Example before the Sons and
Daughters of your People, to increase the fear of God, and its Consequences
amongst us; it being the chief end and work of all supreme Powers to suppress
Vice, and encourage Virtue amongst their Charge, according to S. Paul, Romans 13.
which is best done abroad, when it is first and effectually begun at home in
your own House and Family, (according to the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.) by
banishing all vicious Livers from your Presence and Converse, and advancing the
Virtuous in their stead: by the neglect of which principal part of their Royal
Trust, and Office, Princes depose themselves as useless before God and their
own Consciences, whatever may be their State and Glory in fact, and by humane
Laws and Power, before Men, etc.

After this; only with questioning the sincerity of the Deponents Prayers for
the King, he shuts up his Observations upon the Epistle Dedicatory, and
undertakes for a Discovery of the Lies in the Narrative it self: as follows.

SECT. IV.
THE first thing we meet with in his second Chapter, is this homely Courtship
to the Deponent. To tell Lies, (says he, page 9.) seems as natural to you, as
breathing; nothing comes from you without them. So he forthwith lays to his
charge a great Lie (as he is pleased to call it) in saying in his Preface to
the Reader, that his Narrative was presented to his Majesty the thirteenth of
August, when as it contains things which happened on the 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8 of
Sept. after. Now I must mind him, that this (if it be a Lie) is one of his own
framing, by making it the whole, when the Deponent there plainly declares it
was only part of it, that was delivered as is above specified: Thomas Earl of
Danby's Case furnishes an account of the manner of this Delivery: where
satisfaction may be had as to this matter.

Then he call it another great Lie, his saying that it was sworn the sixth of
Sept. following, when both himself, and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, assure, that it
was sworn the twenty seventh of September: I cannot but take notice here how
disingenuous the Observator is: for when he is willing to paum a Contradiction
upon the Deponent, he makes no Bones (I see) of ransacking this and the other
Trial, etc. and turning every Stone, to add strength to the Presumption: but,
when it is to do him even common Right, he will not so much as put his foot
over the Threshold. Now he must needs (sure) have read somewhere, as well as my
self, that the Deponent first swore the Original Copy of the Narrative before
Justice Godfrey on the sixth of September, (probably) and after That,
transcribed with his own hand, and swore diverse others of them in the like
manner, and according to the date that this Printed One bears. Thus much I
conceive to be sufficient for the resolving of this doubt: but whether it be
the true, or only Reason of the Differences of these Dates, I have neither
means nor leisure to be rightly informed. Thus we may see that the Observator
is more unfortunate in his endeavors to detect these pretended Lies, than he
will needs have the Deponent to be in timing them. But now I must take the
freedom to observe two trips upon the Observator himself. 1. Himself and Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey assure, etc. he says; when the Deponent affirms no such
thing; his Affidavit bearing date the twenty seventh of September, and his
Attestation before the Council the twenty eighth. 2. Whereas he refers to fol.
62 of the Narrative for the assurance aforesaid: if he had but put on his
Spectacles again he would have found it (in my Book at least) only the sixtieth
folio. The Gentleman, it seems, for all his big words, is no more infallible
than his Neighbors: and consequently no otherwise to be respected. But yet,
all the world could not hinder him from grounding barely upon these Surmizes, a
Salute to the Deponent: Thus. By this (says he) your Reader may guess what
sincerity he is to expect from you in the following Narrative, of which he
meets so little in your Address to him. Indeed (and indeed) your writings like
the Cadmaean Brood (most Learnedly hinted) fight against, and ruin one
another: They are like Chymaeras (most profoundly Pedantick still!) which being
composed of Contradictions (O how happy were he, could he but spy 'em once! one
part destroys the other. The man's resolved to throw dirt enough, (I see)
thinking if some of it stick not, (none of it will) the devil's in it: as no
doubt he is.

SECT^ V.
THIS third Chapter of his, promises a Discovery (like the former no doubt) of
the Lies contained in the seven first Sections (or) of the Narrative, which
comprize the Deponents Informations from Spain. Against 1. he raises two
Objections (page 10.) the first, that Strange (in Attest. G. page 50.) denies
the writing of the Letters there mentioned. He does well; for why should he
himself administer unnecessary occasion to be suspected for a fool, when it is
only his Knavery, that is here the subject of the Controversy? And also for
that Attest. C. (page 45.) protests it to be contrary to the Jesuits Customs
for many to sign Letters together with their Provincial. Now because he desires
that this may be taken notice of, for that the same mistake (he says)
freqaently occurrs; I will, in this place, observe so much upon it, as not to
need troubling my self any further with it, when it falls in my way hereafter.
He speaks as if the Jesuits Customs were as unalterable as the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, and as if it were equivalent to a sin against the Holy
Ghost for any of their Religious in the least to swerve from the Institutions
of their Founders. But this is not so: for even the Franciscans themselves, who
pretend to a greater strictness than the rest in this particular, have yet made
so bold with the Rule their Patron left them, as to expound the severity of it
into a consistency with, and indulgence of their Ease and Convenience, upon
sundry accounts. I shall instance only in Two of the grosser sort. S. Francis
enjoined all the Children of his Spirit to go Barefoot: but they, finding
themselves hereby in danger of catching cold, or of taking harm by Thorns,
Snakes, Sharp Stones, and the like, moderated the Rule (as Erasmus tells us) to
an allowance of their going half-shod: saving however the dignity of the
Prescription by a Synechdoche, which takes that part of the foot which is seen
naked through the Shoe, for the whole. Again. He also forbade them to receive
any money either by themselves, or by others. Now they soon experimenting the
Inconvenience of This, took the liberty to change, not receive into, not touch.
So that they take no money but with their Gloves on, or wrapped in a Clout, or by
their Proctors, which (in that case only) they will not allow to be their own
act and deed. But these thick-Scull'd Evasions are not worthy of the Wit and
Finery of our Mercurial Jesuits; whose smooth and subtle Glosses upon the Text
of Loyola are so many and so notorious, that it would be superfluous to recount
them: so that I rather choose to enquire into their Treatment of the Holy Gospel
it self. In the Indies, and in China, where the Belief of a Crucified God is
accounted Extravagance, every body knows that it is their custom there to
smother the scandal of the Cross, and preach only a Glorified, not a Crucified
Jesus Christ; and that they allow the Christians to commit Idolatry, by warrant
of a pretty invention of theirs, which is, to hide under their Clothes an Image
of Jesus Christ, and so, by a mental Reservation, direct to It those public
Adorations which they render the Idol Cachim Choan, and their Keum Fucum. And
for their Doctrine of Probabilities, which has rendered them so infamously
famous all the world over; eight and forty of the modern Casuists, viz.
Villalobas, Conink* Llamas, Achokier, Dealkozer, Delacruz, Vera Cruz, Vgolin,
Tambourim, Fernandez, Martinez, Suarez, Henriquez, Vasquez, Lopez, Gomez,
Sanchez, De Vecchis, De Grassis, De Grassalis, De Pitigianis, De Graphatis,
Squilanti, Bizozeri, Barcola, De Bobadilla, Simancha, Berez, De Lara, Aldreffa,
Lorca, De Scarcia, Quaranta, Scophra, Jedrezza, Cabrezza, Bishe, Dias, De
Clavisio, Villagu^, Adam a Manden, Iribarn, Binsfeld, Volfangi a Vorberg,
Vosthery, and Streuesdorf, do lay down these as Fundamental Maxims, that, to
deny absolution to a penitent who walks according to a probable opinion is a
sin in its own nature mortal; and that no Judge or Civil Magistrate, in this
case, ought to condemn any such. And then unanimously declare, that it is
lawful for one man to kill another, to prevent a Box of the ear, or a Blow with
a Stick, or for giving him the Lie or any way Reviling him: For a Religious Man
to kill him that lessens his Reputation, or only threatens so to do; as also
any woman that he has abused, if she go about to discover what passed between
them; or any man that takes him in the act of making him a Cuckold: To say Mass
while he is under a mortal sin, if he has taken money to that end, and, after
he has received money of one man to say Mass, to take of another as much as
that part (a Third) of the Sacrifice which belongs to himself amounts to: For a
man to defend his honor against one that would rob him of it, by charging such
a person with a Crime he is not guilty of, or by killing him; and not Him only,
but even the Witnesses produced by him, nay, and the very Judge himself, when
he cannot be otherwise diverted from oppressing the innocent: To procure
abortion before the Child be quick in the Womb, to save a Maids Life or
Reputation: to fight Duels; or to kill him that takes our Goods from us, even
though he run away to avoid it, it they be of value: For a Son to steal from his
Father, or a Servant from his Master, if their Services be not recompensed as
they think they deserve; for a Tradesman to use false weights: a Judge to take
Bribes; an Vserer, Extortion; a Priest to buy a Benefice, (without being guilty
of Simony) tempt Women, and commit Adultery: And that the Clergy are not
subjected to secular Princes, nor obliged to any obedience to the Laws, even
though they are not any way contrary to the state Ecclesiastical: that no Penal
Laws are obligatory in point of Conscience; that it is no sin for Subjects to
refuse paying Taxes, or submitting to a Law that has been duly proclaimed: that
a man prescribed by a Temporal Prince may not be killed out of his Territories;
but one outlawed by the Pope may be killed in any part of the world; because
his Jurisdiction extends over all; that as well in Judgment as out of Judgment
a man may safely swear with a Mental Reservation, without any regard had to the
intention of him who obliges him to swear; that it is not Adultery to abuse a
married woman, if the Husband consent to it; that a man may be saved in any
Sect or Heresy; that an Infidel is not obliged to embrace the Christian Faith,
though all his lifetime, and even at the hour of death, he believe it to be the
Right; that it is no sin or irreverence against God to address himself to him
in devotions, under an actual inclination mortally to offend him; and that
there is no necessity that a man ready to die, should, in order to the
receiving the Remission of his Sins of God, have a true desire to reform his
Life, if God should spare it him a while; and that he may obtain it by the
absolution of a Priest, though he be in such a disposition, as to matter of
Repentance, that if he were but confident he should live any longer, he would
neither confess, nor quit his Sins at all, etc. From this Taste, of these
peoples Morals, extracted out of their own Writings by one of their own Church,
(the Author of the Mist. of Jesuit.) a Body may reasonably and charitably
infer, that not this now in question, (if such a one there really be) nor any
other Prescription (how sacred soever) will be at all regarded by a Jesuit, if
it stand in opposition to his Interest. But alas! this custom is so far from
bearing a stamp of Loyola's authority (though in truth, it were all a case to
them, and Us too, if it did) that it seems it is only a By-Law, superinduced to
serve a particular occasion, and (with diverse others of the like value) is
observed or neglected at the Provincials pleasure, who in all such cases is
unaccountable in his Doings. Besides that it is haughty, irrational, and in
twenty respects impracticable. Nay, and though it were not all this; yet would it
be of no sort of avail to them in any Court of Justice; it amounting to no more
than if one of them should there allege his Vow of Continence to invalidate a
positive Oath that he was taken in the very act of a Rape. As to the
Attestation (C) (over and above that it is not of credit, as being made by none
but Jesuits) it only pretends to make it a custom, and is not positive that it
was ever put into practice -- What the Deponent himself has to say to this
suggestion, I am wholly ignorant; yet am prone to believe that he is able to
give full satisfaction upon the point; till that be done, what is above
delivered may perhaps be deemed sufficient to raise a reasonable suspicion of
its Sincerity.

His second Objection (or Lie, if you please) against this same Section has not
one Syllable or Circumstance to support it self upon, but only his own bare
word; this I find he is very free of at every end and turn; but here especially
he squanders it about at such a profuse rate, that it looks as if it were done
on set purpose to have it thought that he values it no more than the dirt under
his shoes: passing it for (more than any body, in reason, is able to
undertake) a man's motions and behavior the whole year round. Did he but mean
either modestly, or well, he would certainly be more circumspect, and not give
understanding and indifferent men such frequent occasions of commiserating his
Levity and Weakness. Why should he be so childish as to make himself
responsible for this and the other bodies integrity, hand over head, and at a
venture: or to fancy that sober Heads will give any sort of heed to him, though
he does? But we must (out of meet charity) allow of Garassus's Apology for him.
When great Wits (says he in his Summary of Truths, part 2. p. 419.) are
delivered of some excellent Work, they are justly recompensed with public
Acclamations: but when an ordinary Ingenuity takes a great deal of pains to do
somewhat that amounts to very little, or nothing at all, (like this pretended
Vindication) and so consequently cannot lay claim to any public applause; that
his labor may not go without reward, God gives him a certain personal
Complacency, which, without an injustice more than barbarous, cannot be envied
him. Thus does God, who is just, give the very Frogs a certain satisfaction in
their Croaking, etc. Now I am content, that he should hug himself for this his
elaborate production; provided he do but keep within compass. But if he will
needs (and with so little reason too) advance at every turn to a lofty and
magisterial superciliousness; take up with nothing less than an authority, at
pleasure, to shuffle upon the world his own Whims, and Sophistries, for
Oraculous Inspirations, he ought not to take it ill if he be flouted and
contemned for his labor even to the degree of questioning an otherwise
probable Relation, merely because no creditabler a man than he is found to be
the avoucher of it. In short; let his pretenses be what they will, he must
excuse me for telling him, that I am not yet able to find any good cause to
trust him further than he may be seen. And yet nothing can stay him from
reasoning thus strongly upon Sect. 2. If (says he, page 10.) there were no such
Letters, (as he will have it there were not, and the other swears there were)
they could not be broke open at Burgos. This Booby's Play they would never
endure in a Protestant; why should we heed it then in a Papist?

He labors to make Sect. 3. speak four Lies, after this manner. 1. He alleges
that the twelve Students there mentioned were actually sent by the Rector or
Vice Rector only; (but not a word against its being done by the joint consent
and concurrence of the other persons also, named by the Deponent.) not
forgetting to say over again, that all their Patents had but one name a piece
to them. 2. That the (ordinary) Oath of these Colleges does not press the
renouncing of their Allegiance, but only obliges to peaceable demeanor, become
Priests, and return into England. By this Confession you may see they do yet
swear them to be Traitors, ipso facto; for they are not to be told at this time
a day, that for an English Man to take orders at Rome, etc. and come over again
after he has so done, is High Treason by one Law. And I would fain know of him
too, whether they might not add such Clauses to the Old, or so frame a new
Oath, (to be taken as the condition of their admittance) as might best tend to
the advancing and securing those great and extraordinary Designs, that it
appears they had then in agitation against us? But upon this point he is as
Mute as a Fish. Let it be yet further noted; that in the latter part of this
(which (I suppose) the Observator thought too hot or too heavy to be meddled
with) the Deponent seems to expound this renouncing of their Allegiance to be
only a disclaiming of the Oath of Allegiance, which Daniel Armstrong called
Heretical, Antichristian and Devilish. It was also the work of two Jesuits,
some time since, (their Books are in Print) to endeavor to prove it such: and
a Letter of a much later date, ( May 24, 78, or 9,) written by another Jesuit
(one Pracid) to Sir T. G. (to be found in his Trial fol. 35.) has this
remarkable passage in it, I have a Letter from our Superior at London, wherein
he declares (alleging authority) That the Oath of Allegiance cannot be taken
as it is worded; adding, that three Breves have formerly been sent from the
Pope, expressly prohibiting it: and in the Third it is declared damnable to take
it. And yesterday, we had a Letter communicated amongst us, sent by Mr.
Middleton (now at Paris) to his Friends here, containing the Attestation of of
all the Sorbon Doctors against it: adding, that whosoever here in England give
leave, they deceive the People, and are contrary to the Whole Catholic Church.
There was also a Meeting some years ago, of all the Superiors both Secular and
Regular, wherein it is unanimously declared that it could not be taken, etc.
Now if this be so; what can be imagined more probable, than that they should
oblige their Novices, upon their Entrance, to disavow an untoward Oath, of
which they have so ill an opinion? 3. (and 4 too) He would have us believe that
no body is bound to take any Oath at all till after a years abode there. But
this is purely confident talk; and confutable by sundry experiences: beside
that extraordinary times (such as those were) do necessarily require
extraordinary Methods and Impositions.

In Sect. 4. the Observator pretends to the discovery only of two Lies, viz. 1.
he denies that the Letters brought by D. Armstrong were subscribed by more than
the Rector. This Attest. C. would have believed: but it is only the old Story
over again; and has been spoken to already. 2. That their Contents were
treasonous; laboring to make it out that they were not, by the Attest. D, K,
O, Q: ( page 45.52.54.55.) Now as to Attest. D, whoever is ambitious of seeing
a Panegyric upon the perfections of the Holy College of S. Omers in
particular, drawn up by their own dear hands in so ambiguous a phrase, that it
looks more like a common place, or instructions for their young Missionaries to
govern themselves by, when they should be called before the Bench here, than
any Paper of Solemnity and Credit, and as like that of Valderma (in his
Canonization of Ignatius, page 10.) upon the Society of Jesus in general as
ever it can stare, viz. [The foundation of the Society of Jesus (says he) bears
date with the critical minute of the miraculous Conception of Jesus Christ,
when there became a personal Union between our Humanity, and his eternal
Divinity. This was the first Society that ever God instituted among men, and
whereof the first College was the Womb of the Blessed Virgin -- The Apostle S.
Paul (1 Cor. 1.9.) makes mention also of the Society of Jesus, God is faithful,
by whom we are called unto the fellowship or Society of his Son Jesus Christ.
And 1 John 1.3. That our Fellowship or Society may be with the Father and with
his Son Jesus Christ. Hence it appears (says Arturus) that there was such a
thing as the Society of Jesus extant even in the Apostles times; and therefore
the erection of it is not of late, as Sadeel satyrically insinuates.] I would
recommend this same Attestation D to his perusal: where he shall also find some
of the preciousest Plants of this Heavenly Society, denying point blank the
Treasons charged upon them, by the Deponent and no more. Bless me! will these
men never be said: but still run on amusing the People with their Impostures
and Impertinences? Why, even this very Trifle was offered to the Court at the
Trial of the Jesuits, and there rejected as an Evidence most ridiculously
incompetent, and of such a nature too, as it was not doubted but that twenty of
the like might have been had upon easy terms. The Attest. K and O are of
somewhat a worser strain (if possible) than the former; being only bare
Negatives, and that too, neither upon Oath, nor before a Magistrate; no more
than are Attest. G, S, T, etc. page 50, 56. And Q is rather a Reference than an
Attestation,; and runs all along in the Third Person; which would be enough to
render suspected the Truth of all the rest, were it not that the Observator is
so ready to become answerable for all his Brethren, even without a probability
of consulting them. Never sure was there so much folly and confidence seen or
heard of before! for should simple Denials come once to be admitted for proofs
of Innocence; farewell all Conviction of Criminals, and Courts of Justice; and
mankind would be turned into one great Den of Thieves and Robbers, that might
spoil, plunder, murder and ravish without control. And yet this, and not one
jot more than this is all that comes of the Observator's promise ( page 4.) to
prove irrefragably what he advances, with such evidence, that unless his
Adversaries shut their Eyes very hard, they shall see their innocence, and the
wrong done them.

Upon Sect. 5. page 11. he trifles at the same confident and extravagant rate,
affirming that neither F. Suiman nor any other (mind that!) ever heard of any
such News. And Sect. 6. stands charged with two Lies more, which he endeavors
to make out just as idly as he has done the former; only he recommends
Attestation L ( page 52.) to consideration: and the substance of it is this;
(for it has not yet been taken notice of:) That a Public Notary averrs that
the Rector and Procurator of the College of S. Alban swore to him, that the
Deponent came thither on the eleventh of June, and went not thence till Oct. 29
following; because they found it so specified in their Day-Book (which can
speak as they would have it beyond peradventure!) Thus they would fain
insinuate that he never was at Madrid, as they had before done, when that
pretense might be of use to them, that he was not in England. But how can it be
expected that these People should boggle at any Asseveration, who have had the
confidence, not only in Print, but in open Court too, to avouch for the actions
of a Criminal, a whole Twelve month together. But he is not yet ashamed (I see)
of his so many childish and spiteful Inferences; for even here he is got to his
old Haunt again, and tells the Deponent (believe it who list) that unless he
were in two places at one time, he could not be at Madrid. His Notes upon the
seventh Section are still the same indigested Fopperies over and over; and
therefore I shall pass them by, all but his Attestation R ( page 55.) which
intimates that one B. L. (or Basil Langworth) made Oath before the Bailey of
Watten, that the Deponent had accused him of Treason (the Man's Conscience was
not at all skittish, it seems!) but he on the other side protested, that in so
doing he lied in every particular: only he recollected himself that he was at
the Congregation in England, in April, 1678; though he forgets not to allege,
that others by him named were not: the Observator then steps in, and assures
that the Magistrates of Watten put to this Protestation the Seal of their
Lordship. This way of arguing is so gross and brutish, that it were time lost
to insist upon a formal Confutation of it: and yet though I do already in a
manner despair of meeting with fairer play in the whole Libel, for once
however, and use it not, I will take the pains to trace him patiently, and step
by step, thoroughout all his Fegaries. Section eight is found fault with: 1.
For that the Deponent there styles P. P. H. de Corduba Provincial of New
Castile, though the Observator will have it that there is no such Province in all
the Society. Now he does not make him (that I can see) Provincial of New
Castile, any otherwise than as it is an Appendix to the Old; the Jesuits in the
Former being (he will grant) under the Jurisdiction of the Latter. So that here
again we meet with palpable Prevarications: but I can very well forgive him;
for the Motives were great. 2. Because he says he was sent from Valladolid,
November 3. when as the Abstract of an Attest. (M, page 53.) of one Juan de
Sandobal, I know not what Jocky of a Muleman, that, (though a Spaniard yet) it
appears, could speak as good English as any Jesuit of 'em all, pretends to
inform the contrary. But how sleevless soever this Pretext may be deemed by
reasonable men; yet he himself lays mighty stress upon it, and (according to
custom) sarcastically bobbs him with being very unfortunate in timing his
Depositions. 3. (and Lastly) And because R. S. disowned the writing of any such
Letter, as, in this Item, he is accused of; if Attest. G may be believed. But
that we have remarked upon already. To these he tacks a few of his Reasons, to
evince the Improbability of All; but those so shallow and untoward, that they
fall foul upon one another; and have also been answered in other Books. And
thus; after some superficial Smatterings about a wandering and uncertain Rumor
concerning Don John of Austria, he puts a period to his weighty Quibbles upon
the Third Chapter of his Division of the Narrative.

SECT. VI.
HIS Fourth Chapter, (which he intitles Lies delivered from Sect. 9, to Sect.
27. Containing what he heard and read at S. Omers) starts two Lies in Sect. 9.
1. He denies that Strange penned such Letters. 2. And if he did, that many
Jesuits subscribed them. Here we meet with nothing new; saving that he sets
upon clearing the Jesuits from writing about poisoning, shooting, stabbing,
etc. of Kings, by delivering a Hear-say-story, that all their Letters of
several years had been found and perused by Authority, and not one word found,
insinuating any such thing: page 12. An Assertion so notoriously untrue in both
respects; that only to say I hear the quite contrary, is, in my opinion, a
sufficient answer to it. As to his Observations upon Sect. 10, which endeavor
to represent the Deponents Journey to Paris, as a Fiction, they are no other
than what have already been urged in a Court of Justice; and there (and in
diverse Prints too) detected and slighted as adulterate, and invaluable. Neither
can any other reason be given for his inserting some malicious and groundless
Reports concerning Don Juan and the Loure, (Hear-says being no Legal Evidence)
but that it was done purely to lay the heavier Load of Scandal and Calumny
(Favors that he is wonderfully lavish of) upon the Deponent.

It were unjust, even at this time a day, to lessen this Gentleman's excellent
knack of making and ferreting out Lies at pleasure; but now he catches them by
whole Couvies and Little Hundreds; smelling no less than half a dozen in Sect.
11. ( page 13.) which he makes out thus. 1. You never returned from Paris
(speaking to the Deponent, having never been there. 2. Never was such a Letter
written. 3. No English Jesuit ever dealt with Scotch Presbyterians. 4. Nor
Irish Papists disposed to rebel. 5. Nor any Black Bills prepared. 6. Nor way
made for the French landing. Here Is a Man of Mettle for you, now! Can any thing
in nature be imagined more demonstrative or infallible than such a bold and
menacing Positivity? High and Low, Great and Small, Mad and Sober, Wise and
Weak, must needs stand corrected and converted by so substantial and undeniable
an Evidence. But if any Logical Heretic of them all will needs be so
presumptuous as to whiffle against this New Jesuitical Way of Fending and
Proving, that it falls not within Mood and Figure; let it be beaten into his
Noddle with a Bullet that these Seraphical Sophists are not to be limited to
Pedantick Rules and Prescriptions, how sound and rational soever. But to
proceed. Four Lies more are detected in Sect. 12. The first is, about the time
of Whitebread's being made Provincial. This was objected to the Deponent at the
Trial of the Jesuits, but would not hold water. The second is grounded upon a
supposition of the first's being true; and therefore must needs stand and fall
with it. The third he makes to be a Lie, because the person accused told him so
it was. And to prove the fourth, he betakes himself again to the Jesuits
Customs; fortifying it (upon a hard pinch) with somewhat that looks like a
reflection upon the Fathers for keeping from Church, lest they should be
defiled and profaned with the Scholars Devotions.

Two of the three Lies that ( page 14.) he picks out of Sect. 13. are only the
old pretenses about many Jesuits hands, and Whitebreads being Provincial. The
third (being a denial of such a Letter to have been written) he seeks to make
good by his own Mother-wit, and by Attest. E, which speaks thus much; that upon
finding, that the Deponent had charged the Fathers at S. Omers with sundry
Treasons, and heinous Misdemeanors, they the said Fathers had asked one
another whether they were guilty or not; and all answering, No, they resolved
jointly and unanimously to swear that they are, and will be (every Mothers Son
of them) innocent of what has been, or shall be alleged against them by the
said Deponent: and conclude (pray note it, for it is the very Cream of the
Jest) with hoping that he, having been so clearly proved perjured in so many
points by this their Protestation, will find no credit (no, by no means) in the
rest. These Gentlemen ought not to take it ill now, if I say that those must
have better eyes than mine are, who can discern (for all this) either the least
color of a Proof on the one side, or of a Perjury on the other. As to his
Collateral and corroborating Reasons; in the upshot they came only to an
expostulation with the Deponent, for representing the Fathers in England so
good natured and complaisant as to let their Treasonable Letters to P. de la
Chaize take in, and be read at S. Omers, before they reached his Reverences
hand: this is a much more probable reason for their being directed to call in
there, in their way to Paris, then his suggestion that it could only be done
out of a complemental respect to the Deponent. Against Sect. 14. he opposes
first that it is not usual for the Jesuits to make any Ordinaries (only an
Equivocation upon the word, I believe) even in Catholic Countries. There,
indeed, they stand mightily upon their Pantoffles; but in England they are
content (we find) to govern themselves by the very Letter; becoming all things
to all men that by all means they may gain some. 2. That the Provincial gives
no Offices by Patent. This by sound experience may be proved to be a great
Untruth; only he will salve it again, if put to it, with a Collusion taken,
either from the ambiguous signification of the word Patents, or from their
giving to the same thing a different Appellation: Little Arts that the Jesuits
are perfectly well versed in! But for all this pother, at the very next breath
he so far over-shoots himself, as in a manner to confess all that just before
he had solemnly denied; and puts forth an Apology in Rhetorical Garb, in
justification of the Act; which being interpreted according to the Jesuits Key,
speaks thus. If the Provincial, out of mere charity, did send one to bring such
Souls from Newgate into Purgatory, as by themselves or Friends were able to
contribute toward their being prayed out again; or, (according to the sense of
the Narrat. fol. ult.) to suborn Felons, through hopes of Pardon or
Transportation, to turn Papists, and then put such as they found fit and
desperate, upon Firing Houses, Plundering, and other wicked and mischievous
Designs: no Body but such an Atheist as the Deponent would blame him for it, he
says; so conformable to right Reason, etc. is the Proceeding.

To the latter part of this Item he again objects ( page, 15.) that, though the
Orders there spoken of were actually given (as he seems to grant) yet so many
Jesuits were not concerned in the giving of them; the Provincial being one and
all in such Cases: the S. Omerian Attestation also declaring it unlawful for an
Inferior to subscribe with his Superior; who is still endewed with a portion of
his Fatuities Infallibility, sufficient for the guidance of his Flock in the
path he would have them walk in. O the spiritual Pride and Vanity of these
despicable Creatures! How abject must needs be the condition of those that lie
under the lash of such tyrannical Taskmasters? The Irish Monks of late that
were obliged to lick up their Superiors Spittle, could not but be highly
privileged Subjects, compared with them. What need we any longer wonder at
their stickling so vehemently for Arbitrary Principles, when we find by their
own Confession, that every individual Nest of these Hornets is a compound of
the most exquisite Tyranny and Thraldom imaginable? Or that Loyola should choose
Cavete vobis Principes for his Motto; when all his Rascally Followers do thus
ambitiously strive to vye with, and ape Crowned Heads even in the most supreme
Points of Regality? Had it not been their aim to endeavor at any rate ( Dolus
an Virtus?) to render the Narrative suspected of Fiction, they would never sure
have discovered a Secret that (true or false) reflects so odious a savor upon
their Society. True is the Saying too, Quos Deus vult perdere, dementat. 2. A
Flam of his own contriving. For though beyond peradventure Whitebread was at
least Provincial elect at the time here in question, yet the words [Thom.
White, as Provincial, writ them.] (The Letters) are none of the Deponents, but
only foisted in by the Observator himself to stop a gap. No Respects or
Obligations whatsoever can bind a Jesuit (I see) when they come once to work
against the Grain; for now he undervalues the dear and famous S. Omers it self,
in point of Epistolary Conveniences, only to hook in by the Head and Shoulders
this venomous Scoff upon his Adversary (page 15.) viz. As the Loadstone draws
Iron, (says he) so you drew all correspondence to you. But he is a very
thick-scull'd Jesuit that cannot find means of corresponding for the
embroiling of Kingdoms, be he where he will. As to Sect. 16.1. He produces
Attest. E, K, and Q, to make out that there never were any such Letters
written, as are there mentioned. These Pretenses have already been examined,
and found to be so far from True and Honest, that they are not so much as Legal
Evidences. 2. He will have this and the preceding Section to interfere. But
that must not be granted him; for the Deponent is positive rather in the
speaking of the words, than in the receipt of the Letters here in dispute. But
then he adds, that the Day-Book makes him to have been at Watten that day. All
this is mere Childishness. But who can blame a drowning man, if he catch at
Twigs, Straws, or any thing that comes next to hand, and gives but the least
hope of keeping him above water.

Next, he tells us in down right terms ( page 16.) that there never were any
such Letters penned, as the seventeenth Section speaks of; calling it a
Transcendental Fiction to have many Jesuits writing (the Deponents word is
subscribing) the same Letters. Section 18 he makes to be a Lie, because the S.
Omers Jesuits called it so: Section 19 for the like reason. After the same
fashion (saving that he bobbs the Deponent upon his Father's account) he
dispatches the twentieth Section. And says that the twenty one, twenty two,
twenty three and twenty fourth Sections are only cold Cabbage served up again:
laboring to Possess the People that there never were any such Letters in being
as are there particularised, because they were not to be found after they had
been burnt, or otherwise made away.

His Remarks upon the twenty fifth Section are only 1. A backside Complement
to the Popish Clergy. And 2. a Repetition of his thread bare pretense, that no
bad Letters of theirs could ever yet be produced, that had many Jesuits hands
to them. The twenty sixth Section he would fain have to be thought a Fable; 1.
By averring that no living mortal ever heard of the Contents of it, before the
Narrative came out. 2. By quarrelling the Deponent for making Whitebread so
ill-natured, as to impute Pickering and Groves failing of dispatching the King.
to negligence, rather than to what they alleged for themselves, want of
opportunity; and so partial too, as to correct the simple, Bigoted Priest with
Stripes; and the sullen stomachful Ruffian only with Reproofs. This was a true
Jesuit, that could so exactly mete to each, according to their strength, and
yet keep them firm to their Party. Then he gives the Lie to all the particulars
of Sect. 27 (that of the Consult or Congregation only excepted) his own word,
and a flat Negative being his only authority for so doing. Such strong Proof
cannot but produce wonders sure.

SECT. VII.
HIS Prefatory Speculations upon the Consult, (or Congregation) are only a
Recapitulation of what the Jesuits alleged upon that Subject, at their Trial:
and he plainly confesses as much; leaving them to answer for, and make out the
truth of it as well as they can; whilst himself goes on with his Lies; which in
Section 28, he pretends to find as many of, as words; and proves them first by
a Repetition of the Childish and extravagant Pratings of the S. Omers Lads at
Langhorn's Trial. 2. By Attest. F, ( page 48.) which is only an opposing
Testimony to Testimony, and that too in a most confident and inconsiderate
manner. He next falls to his Criticisms, and endeavors to raise some
fantastical Scruples; but finding that they answer themselves, he passes on to
another Branch of this Section, out of which he would fain pick three Lies
more: he might with as much ease have made them three hundred; for he brings
nothing but the breath of the Parties concerned to support them. Then he
forgets old and new Style, in the question of the Consult; and denies the
Deponent to have been there; formalizing so notably upon the probability of
that Journey, that I cannot forget the Proverb, A fool may ask more questions
in one hour, than a wise man shall be able to resolve in a whole Age. As to the
last part of this same Section, he disowns 1. their meeting at the White
Horse-Tavern; for this reason, that several of the Consulters told this
Observator, they knew no such Tavern in the Strand. 2. Their dividing into
Clubs; for that in that case their Resolves would have been, ipso facto, void.
His Attest. F is more modest a great deal; as admitting the Lawfulness of such
a Proceeding, and only denying any Proposition of that nature to have been
made. Then he finds fault with him for making them to busy themselves afresh
about the King's Death, when it had been resolved upon the year before, and
Agents hired accordingly. As if their many Disappointments in that particular
had not been a sufficient incitement to their laying their heads together
again, for a choice of more proper Method and Instruments to effect it. But do
but mind how clumzily he curvets upon this occasion: When I consider (says he,
page 20.) our Nation capable to be imposed upon by such ridiculous Stories, I
am half-ashamed to own my self of it. Indeed a Traitor and an Englishman are
direct Contradictions. He concludes all with squabble about the Deponents
return to S. Omers, grounded only upon his own supposititious Premises: and
with this confident expression, page 21. There is not one word related by me,
which will not be deposed upon Oath, when required. This is but the Proze of
what his Fellow Laborer in the Cause (the Poetical Ridiculer of the Plot) in
New Narrat. of the Plot, p. 1.
Rhyme Doggerel, (though upon another occasion,) delivers thus; The truth of my
Story, if any man doubt,
We have witnesses ready to swear it all out.


I find the Observator endued with so excellent a faculty of inventing Lies,
and proving them when he has done, that I shall as soon take his word in this
case, as any man's living. This little Remark thus over; by joint consent, we
have done with the business of the Congregation.

SECT. VIII.
THE sixth Chapter promises a Relation of what happened, from the Deponent's
return to S. Omers, till he left the place. The Contents of the Sections 29,
and 30 are infallibly false he says, because the persons there charged would
not own themselves guilty. A like Answer he shapes to Sect. 31. Then he
quarrels Sect. 32, because the Deponent does not in one and the same time and
place report all and every the occasions of his leaving S. Omers in June;
confesses ( page 22. in his Rejoynders, to Sect. 32.) they gave him four pounds
to bear the Charges of his Journey; chews over again his former absurdities
touching his not being in Spain; and strives to invalidate his rational account
of the manner of his dismission from S. Omers; by opposing to it an improbable,
extravagant, but impudently malicious Flam of their own devising; which it
seems, he was once of a mind might have served well enough for a general
Answer; but upon second thoughts) and a fit of good nature, finds himself
concerned to be more particular, tho to never so little purpose.

SECT IX.
AND thus comes on his seventh Chapter, comprizing what the Deponent relates
since his return to London, concerning Jesuits, from Sect. 33, to Sect. 53,
inclusive. But upon Sections 33, and 34, we meet with nothing material; only
the old miserable pretenses of the Jesuits denying all, and an odd kind of
Inference from their keeping him bare of money, that they never made him privy
to the Treasons which he has now discovered. Of the very same strain are his
Answers to Sections 35, 36, and 37, ( page 24.) and have already been
discussed. Upon Section 38, he makes a question whether, if any Jesuits had
been designed for Holland, they would have acquainted the Deponent with the
receipt of those Orders from Whitebread. He confutes Sections 39, 40, and 41, by
opposing again a simple, verbal denial to a positive and affirmative Oath. And
excepts against Section 42, ( page 25.) because the Letters there mentioned are
not producible; expostulates with him for the Commotions he has raised here, by
discovering their Rogueries; and minds him of his danger. His Reply to Section
43, comes to thus much in effect, that no Jesuits were sent into Scotland,
because he (this Observator) knows them not, he seeks to evade the stroke of
Sect. 44. by disclaiming all correspondence with De la Chaize; and cavils at
Section 45, without so much as knowing, why, or wherefore.

Section 46, ( page 26.) will not down with him. 1. Because Wakeman was
acquitted. 2. For that Pickering confessed nothing at the Gallows. And 3.
Because the Jesuits that the Letter there specified is charged upon, find
themselves concerned to disown it. What think you now? Are not all these sound
and undeniable Evidences? But he goes on: and returns to Sect. 47, only a
spiteful Reflection upon a converted Jesuit; which will bear an Inference to
this purpose, that the Deponent being neither a Fool, nor a Madman, was scarce
looked upon as fit to wipe their Reverences Shoes, whereas the other being
(upon the Observator's Character of him) completely both, was readily adopted a
Brother of the Society. He objects to Section 48, that there is no Heath of the
Society; but presently recollects himself that there is one Heath (the Deponent
never said there were two) that has ( he says) been at Liege, ever since Jan.
1678. To Section 49, he opposes an improbable and uncharitable supposition, and
the weakness of the Executed's denial to the Validity of the Deponents Proof.
He dispatches Section 50, by repeating the pretense of Ireland's being at such
a time in Staffordshire: the truth of which allegation was ever justly held
suspected, and at length solemnly impeached upon Oath. And thus, with denying
their own Ciphers; (page 27.) stroaking Jennison the Jesuit; scoffing at the
Deposition of an intended Massacre; and perverting the Deponents words to make
them speak Smith, a Jesuit; (for want of better Arguments) he passes over
Sections 51, 52, and 53, and concludes this his Seventh Section.

SECT. X.
THE eighth Chapter undertakes to treat of What the Deponent relates concerning
Jesuits, and others; from Sect. 54, to Sect. 81. inclusive. And so he falls to
telling us that Sect. 54 is a ridiculous Lie, for this weighty reason among the
rest, that all of it is false. He thwarts 55, and seeks to save their own
Bacon, by setting his Teeth at his Brother Jack: and then takes upon him (under
a show of kindness) to advise the Government: but such Hints are as
unnecessary, as insincere; for that is not about to wink of either eye; as
knowing full well that let them never so much affect Jacob's Voice, their hands
still are (alike) the hands of Esau. Against Sections 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61,
62, 63, and 64, he only produces ( page 28, 29,) point blank denyals; Clamor
and Calumny; malicious Surmizes; a detection of the irreconcilable Fewds, and
ambitious Jarrs betwixt his own Party, and the Dominicans; invidious
Presumptions; and scandalous and unmanly Taunts and Forgeries. Which (according
to all judgments) are apparent Symptoms of his own dishonesty, and of the
badness of the Cause that he has undertaken to defend.

Next, he charges 65 ( page 30.) with as many Lies as Periods; and so with full
cry runs over again the old Tales of the Deponents never having been at Madrid,
etc. with all their appertenances; and calls upon him, at the price of his head
and credit, to produce the Letter he there speaks of. But, yet in the rear of
this his Squadron of weak and wild Denyals, may be found a squinting Quaere,
that, had he been well advised, he would never have inserted; it amounting upon
a reasonable construction, to little less than a tacit confession of the whole
Charge. For; If the Lord Archbishop (otherwise Titular, Usurping Prelate) of
^uam, or that Jesuit (Suiman) being Subjects; (No; they have traitorously
renounced that Subjection, by becoming Feudataries to the Pope) of the King of
England, waited on, and proffered their service to his Majesty's Ambassador,
they did but their duty. (They Will find themselves mistaken.) And if his
Lordship received them civilly (he has no reason to con them Thank, for crying
Roast-meat, however) having no direct order (The man you see is as intimate
with his Lordship, as if they were Cater-Cozens) to the contrary; I hope none
are so barbarous (I know many that are so honest) as to blame him for it. But
that there ever past any intimate correspondence (O, have a care of that: for
Hanging follows Confessing) chiefly [The man's Conscience flies in his face,
and spoils all; for these Qualifications, Ifs and Ands, are a contradiction to
Attestation A, ( page 42.) where his Grace swears outright that he never made
unto, or heard from the most excellent Lord Sir William Godolphin any public
or private discourse concerning any Religious (or lascivious) matter
whatsoever, nor concerning the Government, or State of Affairs in England,
Ireland, or Scotland; -- nor received from any person any Letter or Paper
whatsoever, directed unto, or intended for the said most excellent Lord, etc.]
relating to any public concern, it is absolutely false; forth mighty reason
abovesaid. This passage speaks plain enough, without the assistance of an
Interpreter.

He rather cavills at, then disproves or opposes 66, ( page 31.) but yet
pretends to see he knows not how many contradictions in it to what the Deponent
has elsewhere delivered: and so makes his Triumph as upon a certain Victory;
demanding, How came his Patrons (the King, Parliament, etc.) to let them (the
pretended Contradictions) pass abroad uncorrected, but that in this God blinded
them, that they might remain to Posterity an everlasting unanswerable Proof of
the Injustice of their Judgments? This is a pretty round Complement. And I see
too, that a Jesuits Spectacles can magnify or lessen (even to annihilation)
according to the respective aspects of their Interests: for let the places
which he here will have to stand so much at Daggers drawing be duly compared
and examined, and my word for his they may soon be made Friends. But a Jesuit
will still be a Jesuit; and None so blind as they that will not see. In Sect.
67 he only says there are six Lies, and that is all; for he puts us to take his
word for 'um; which truly is but a very slender evidence; to say no worse on it.
He endeavors to weaken the credit of Sect. 68, by inserting a malicious and
irrational Fable, which he pretends to have been Conyers's account of what
passed betwixt the Deponent and himself in Grays-Inn-Walks: pressing it with as
much confidence, as if he would prescribe to Reason it self, and tie the whole
world to an implicit Belief in his Figments.

He continues in the same jocular, and abusive mood, throughout Section 69,
making himself wonderful merry ( page 33.) with the Deponents great days work
on the two and twentieth of August, here in controversy; and discovering his
own notable proficiency in the laudable and useful Faculties of Calumnyating,
Falsifying, and Burlesquing. Now it is impolitique for a body to show his
Teeth, when he cannot bite; and by this time one may, without breach of
Charity, conclude the Observators Tongue to be no slander. Beside, I examined,
as strictly as I could for my life, the Items of the Narrative that he makes
thus familiar with; and shall dare to say (all that this Frolicksome Gentleman
has insinuated to the contrary, notwithstanding) that I have not been able to
discern any thing in them, that may give the least affront to Reason and
Probability. He only trifles upon Sect. 70, and against Sect. 71, produces his
old naked and unsatisfactory Fopperies.

At Sect. 72, ( page 34.) he makes a wonderment, and so passes it by. Upon Sect
73, he miserably betrays his want of Honesty, Prudence and Conscience, by
witnessing to Impossibilities. To Sect. 74. he contents himself with his bold
Negatives; and pretends a Concern for the Nations welfare, very much (in his
opinion) disturbed by the Fanatics: and though contending for this Section to be
a Lie, yet allowing it to be at least a Profitable one, if made use of
according to his own Direction.

All that is remarkable in his Notes upon Sect. 75. is his informing the
Deponent, (Page 35.) how he should have worded it, to have made it acceptable
to the pretended) Catholics: Now though I suppose he is not over ambitious of
such a Favor, yet he will needs have it that he has committed a grievous Sin,
in not casting a Figure to hit upon it. In Sect. 76. he would fain be nibbling
at a Contradiction; but finding he can make nothing on it, out of mere vexation
he falls most bitterly upon Sect. 77, terming it Such incoherent Nonsense as
never came from any man in his Wits; and all this only for Representing
Whitebread as a Person able (when his Zeal was in tune) to lift up his hand,
and give the Deponent a Box of the Ear for having betrayed him, as he called it.
Yet finding this Exception to want weight, he is once of the mind to let it
pass, but however catches at it again, before out of his reach, for slandering
the honesty and prudence of the Provincial, with a matter of Truth. But beside
that he was no great Conjurer, even at the very best (if a body may take
measure of his Abilities, by the manner of his Defense) it is no wonder neither
that that black malice (to apply the Observators own words) that appeared in
him, (upon sight of the Discoverer of his Treasons) and common sense, or the
use of Right Reason, should be inconsistent in the same mind: God darkening the
understanding, when man leaves his will to the workings of malilce, etc. He
next proceeds (according to custom) to set up his own adulterous Pratings
against this sober Account of the Deponents. But in the delivery of them makes
such unhappy slips as by dint of Argument could never have been extorted from
him, and are far from advantaging his Cause. So true we see is the old Saying,
A Liar had need have a good memory. But he winds up all with laying it home,
that because Whitebread was taken napping, by neglecting to endeavor his
escape till it was too late, therefore Posterity ought to conclude him
innocent. Now I am afraid that, for all this weight of Reason, they will prove
a little Refractory, and hardly be brought (by fair means, at least,) to answer
expectation in this particular.

Sect. 78. He thinks in his heart is an incredible Lie; but yet makes a shift
to pick this sorry comfort out of it, that others (the Dominicans, etc.) have
been as great Fools and Knaves as the Jesuits: He quarrels at Sect. 79, because
he conceits the Deponent to have been less courageous and resolute, upon his
over-hearing a Pack of Jesuits positively resolve the sending of him out of
the Land, and torturing him to a confession of the Accomplices in his
Discovery; than he had approved himself two days before, when Whitebread only
threatened to send him back to S. Omers, and, presently eating his words again,
promised to restore him to his favor. From Sect. 80, he takes occasion to twit
the Deponent with his Gallantry; spitefully insinuating as if he had been a
Coney-catching, and not afraid of the Jesuits, when he should have gone home to
his Lodging. I am not willing to trace the Observator through all his immoral
Descants upon the Frailties of Flesh and Blood; or to obviate this false and
scandalous Innuendo of his, with a true Relation of the Amorous Adventures of
the mettlesome Fathers, Keymash, etc. But yet I cannot but upon this occasion,
call the bonny Jesuit to mind, who, being not long since apprehended somewhere
about Clerken-well, had taken out of his Pocket (upon a search) a Memorial, not
only of the number of the Women (three in a day sometimes) that he had
accompanied with, but of the very hours also, nay, the critical Minutes, of his
doing them reason. So scrupulously exact, it seems, he was in the business of
Venerial Pleasures -- Then he falls to questioning him upon the matter; gives
him a grain of charitable allowance, and pretends to stumble upon a
contradiction, which no body can see but himself. Upon Sect. 81, he accosts his
Opponent thus: Your work (says he) ( page 38.) is not yet done: some Jesuits
are yet alive, and the world begins to be weary of shedding their innocent
blood, to satisfy your desire of Revenge: which is an antidote against your
poison. This is only intended as a modest Complement, through the Deponents
sides, to the Justice and Excellency of that Government, for which he has
elsewhere pretended so much value and concern. But I have all along observed
that this mighty man of Buffoonry has ever wit at will, when he has a mind to
turn the Question into a Night-Cart: nay, and he must also go some other way to
work than has yet been thought of, to convince the world, that their Blood is
so innocent, as he most audaciously speaks it to be. Next, he stomachs it
highly, that any man should be so presumptuous as to call Ignatius Loyola a
Fool, when the precious Deza has given this glorious Euloge of him: God has
been pleased in these latter times, ( says he, page 12. de Canoniz. Loyolae*)
To speak unto us by his Son Ignatius, whom he has made Heir of all things; to
make whose Praises consummate, there needs only the addition of this word, By
whom he made the world, etc. P. Rebullosa, thus, Ignatius is by God so placed
in the Church (says he) as if he were the Corner Stone of that sumptuous
Edifice; whence we might justly say that there is no Stone, (that is, no
person) which in respect of value, and greatness of merit, is any way
comparable with our Ignatius, etc. And the dear Valderama this, When the Pope
(says he, page 48.) had looked very earnestly on the hands of Ignatius, he
would find no other Inscription or Impression therein, than that of the name of
Jesus. (His Holiness was well skilled in Palmistry, it seems) Whereupon he
said, The Finger of God is here; I find nothing in these hands, but the Finger
of God. And again, It is not much to be wondered at (says the same Valder page
51.) that Moses did very great miracles; for he wrought them by the unspeakable
Power of the Name of God engraven in his Staff: nor is it any more that the
Apostles did so many wonders; when all was done in the Name of God. But that
Ignatius should, with his own Name written in a piece of Paper, do more
miracles than Moses, and all the Apostles put together, etc. That, that indeed
should raise in us an excess of admiration for him, etc. Then he goes on, in
the same place, instancing his Miracles, thus: Father Ignatius has a great
tenderness and assistance for Women in Labor. [Because a careful and vigilant
Shepherd will not be far from the Ewes that bring forth; according to that of
Isaiah, He shall carry the young ones; (that is to say, Have a care of those
that bring forth) that he may receive the wool and make his advantage of the
Lambs] And to effect this, there needs no more than the putting of Ignatius's
Name, written, upon the woman in danger; for at the very sight of that Name the
blind recover their sight; the handless their hands; the lame their feet; nay,
it dissolves the Stone in the Reins, and make women have an easy Delivery,
etc. No Body can deny sure, that this is giving the devil his due to the full.
And therefore if all of it be true, the world must needs grant that the Bishop
of Rochester was to blame, if he ventured to call this Holy Founder of theirs a
Fool, as Nevil said he did; if profanely Romantic and Apocriphal; (but I
forget my self that it is accounted no less than a sin against the Holy Ghost,
the bare questioning of it) then [ -- Debite moveat cornicula risum, furtivis
nudata coloribus] call him Fool, Knave, or what you will, and welcome, Sirs!
But he shuts up all his Tiltings upon this Chapter, with making his Honors to
the Bishop of Lincoln, and casting a Sheeps eye out of a Calves Head at the
Presbyterians.

SECT. XI.
IN this Ninth Chapter of his, which threatens to speak of the Commissions
given to Noblemen, he looks up to Fol. 58, (otherwise 61,) of the Narrative;
and there blames the Deponent for not filling his List of Conspirators with the
names of more persons ( Lords, Gentlemen, etc.) than he could call to mind at
the time of the drawing it up. Then he is angry because they are charged with
receiving their Commissions; and vows he will not believe it; till the Deponent
shall be able to produce one of them, or the parties concerned acknowledge
themselves guilty. Next, he questions the probability of the whole, purely out
of a scruple to grant the persons that gave out these Commissions for all
Offices as well Civil as Military, in a Country that, by a Holy War, or more
Holy Massacre, they had designed to make their own, by such practices, to have
been guilty of an attempt that is not to be paralleled, but by that of Lucifer
to be like God. He concludes this branch of his Argument with formalizing upon
the Ordinary Power of a Superior of the Society; but speaks not a word of those
their Extraordinary Motions and Emanations of Zeal, that refuse to be bounded
by any Laws or Obligations, divine or humane, when the good of the Cause
requires matters to be carried on in so brisk, and elevated a strain.

But now, when he comes to talk of the Persons receiving these Commissions
(page 39.) he utterly loses all Patience, and manfully undertakes for their
Loyalty, even to the fourteenth Generation; he admires, reasons, puts cases,
calumniates, bespatters, reviles, prevaricates, calls him a Liar from his
Cradle, and tells of as wise a man as the Observator himself (though he would not
name him for a world) who having read the Narrative with the Jesuits own
Spectacles, pronounced thus judiciously upon it, that either what Homer and
Ovid writ of their Gods, or Aesop of Beasts, were no Fables, or the English
Conspiracy was a Fable. This notable Conclusion smells so strong of the
Scholar, that it is pretty tolerable, in being only three hundred thirty three
Else and half nail wide of the Mark. Then he very cleanlily bewrays his own
Nest, will needs have this Country to labor under a reprobated Sense, for
suppressing their Religious Cony-berries, gives it up to the Devil for
believing the Plot, backs the Anathema with a Text, (These. 2.10, 11.) to make
it go down the better; and then after a Present of a matter only of half a
score Lies at a clap, as a supplement to those delivered in the Body of his
Observations, (all which are left to be made good by time, and at his better
convenience,) he forgets not, at Parting, to encourage the Criminals in their
Obstinacy, because their telling the Truth would be the means of freeing them
from their Imprisonment: [Veritas (says he) liberabit vos, Joh 8.32.] And he
thinks it is much better for them to be where they are, than get their liberty
upon terms so disadvantageous to Holy Church. They are much to blame, sure, if
they take not his Counsel.

SECT. XII.
THE Tenth Chapter he entitles, A word of Advice to the Deponent. And upon a
right interpretation, it comes to thus much, in short; (for having purposed
Brevity, unnecessary expansion in contraction would be a Paradoxology) that
after he has clawed himself a little, for having so cleverly proved his Party
innocent, as above; made honorable mention of the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs,
[with whom (it seems) the world is well amended (in their opinion at least)
since the time of penning their Notes upon Ireland's Trial; but his Lordship is
too wise, and too honest, to regard either the Frowns* or Flatteries of such
Miscreants, as never will keep faith with any, longer than it stands with their
convenience so to do:] spared no pains to represent him as black as Hell, by a
course of Forgeries and Impostures of a prodigious nature, and by fathering
upon him such impious and atheistical Expressions as could never have been
uttered, but by the most obdurate and accomplished of Villains; he falls, at
length, to laying both Law and Gospel to him; and then craving his mercy for
slandering him, advises the New-moulding of the Narrative, according to the
tenor of these his Notes, upon it, and beseeches him to recant, promising him
in that Case the easiest Seat in all ( Fools-Paradice, or) Purgatory. Then,
after he has minded him to do what he does quickly, because, the Parliament
being upon the point of sitting, he fears he shall not then have leisure to
admonish him thus friendly over again, and for that his Recantation will
otherwise come too late; he shuts up all ( page 42.) with this cordial
Profession, that if he has the good hap once more to bring him over to their
Lure, he shall think his Labor in compiling this admirable Piece, very well
spent, and have his hearts desire. He never spoke a greater Truth in his whole
life; and there is an end on it.

THE CONCLUSION. SECT. XIII.
THVS am I now got through a Maze of as much Weakness, Calumny, Passion, and
Malevolence, as I do remember my eyes ever yet to have beheld under so pompous
and solemn a Pretense; so that if in the precedent short Remarks there shall be
found any thing excusably Light and Superficial; I may fairly plead,
nevertheless, an unwillingness to combat with Shadows, and trouble my self and
others with an enlargement upon every Repetition, that occurred, of the self
same crude and indigested Fopperies; the extreme Poverty and Barrenness of the
Text it self, that would neither bear nor deserve a more serious and elaborate
discussion; and a deliberate Preference of the Comical Style, in point of
Argument and Morality, to the Observators course, and slovenly Language of
Rogue, Rascal, Liar, Villain, and the like. This or that, indeed, was all the
Choice I had left me: and yet in my opinion this Loose Garb is not altogether
unagreeable neither, how necessary soever; in regard the Subject of the Contest
is not of that vast importance, that Bloody Noses may rationally be concluded
the Consequence of it: for I do not understand the present question to be the
certain and absolute Truth; [That having already been pronounced upon, and
determined by the Supreme Authority of the Nation; which, tho it cannot be
guilty of doing any thing hand over head, pretends not however to a positive
Infallibility, but ever perseveres to cultivate the laudible ingenuity of
confessing and correcting the unsoundness of any Judgment that time and better
Light shall have convinced of Error.] But only whether or no, in the common way
of Reasoning and Thinking, there be not ground enough to avouch the Deponents
Narrative, for undoubtedly probable and real, all that this Observator has been
able to produce to the contrary notwithstanding. Now how much I have done
toward the putting this matter out of Dispute, I must leave to the world to
judge: only desiring this to be taken along, that if the chief aim of that
Party in dispersing their numerous and venomous Libels were not, at any rate,
to amuse, and impose upon the People, but that they really believed that the
Contents of all, or any of them were of an intrinsic value, weight and
integrity, competent to abide the Test of a Legal Scrutiny, and to contribute
the least Mite toward their Compurgation; they could not fairly be presumed so
entirely ignorant, or regardless of their interest, as not to hold it their
concern to keep what they have to say for themselves as secret as possible; in
as much as by divulging of it, they ipso facto become Felones de se, and
capacitate their Adversaries to beat them at their own Weapons.

True it is, that the Observator lays such great stress upon his Attestations,
(the Groundwork of his Superstructure, built with untempered Mortar;) as to
think it worth his while to acquaint us, ( page 59.) where (at S. Omers) the
Originals, or authentical Copies of them, are deposited, and to be seen. But
why did he not rather tell what Language they are written in? and yet now I
think on it, that is not a half penny matter neither; for no body but Fools or
Madmen would ever have made such a quarter about a parcel of Baubles, that are
of no more avail, in foro legis and rationis, than the obsolete Relics of
Thomas a Beckets foul Socks, Handkerchers, and Anitergia. But not to have it
suspected that my business is only to find fault, and that nothing will please
me; I propose thus: Let them but duly prove by the Oaths of such sober,
creditable and conscientious Protestants, nay, or Papists, as would be
vouchsafed a hearing in any of their Courts; such as stand not directly charged
already (the Case of the Authors of their slievless Attestations) or. as the S.
Omers Scullian, Tailor, or the Valladolid Muleman, etc. are not Hangers on of
their respective Colleges: Let them but prove in this manner (I say) that the
Deponent never was at Madrid, at Paris; or that he was beyond Sea, when he
swears he was in England; (for these are the three main points) and in the very
moment of their doing it* I will believe they have been served with very hard
measure. Till then* they must hold me excused, if I give no more heed to their
incessant Yawling, than to that of a Ravenous Curr, when cudgelled for
attempting to worry Sheep.

THE END.
ERRATA. Page 3. lin. 4 for Villains read Villainies. p. 5. l. 13. f. came r.
come. p. 6. l. 2. dele of. p. 8. l. 24. d. all. p. 9. l. 36. f. casts r. costs.
p. 12. l. 23. f. some r. same. Ib. l. 26. f. looked r. look. p. 18. l. 40. f.
prescribed r. proscribed. p. 21. l. ult. r. Valderama.


