AN ACCOUNT OF A FIGHT Between the French and Irish, FOR Refusing to admit the
French to be Governors of CORK and WATERFORD in Ireland. IN A LETTER from an
Officer in Ireland, to his Friend in London.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

SIR,
YOU know Cork for its Harbor and considerable Strength, has been looked upon a
place of such moment and concern, that the Earl of Tyrconnel secured it one of
the first in the Southern Parts of the Kingdom, and committed it into the hands
of Major General Justin Maccarty, as to one whose Interest in that Country, and
Resolution for K. James's Cause, had rendered the most qualified person for such
an important Command, he took possession of the place as Governor; where he
acquitted himself with so much moderation and evenness of temper toward the
Protestants there, that those poor People found that Protection from him, which
many others had been deceived in the expectation of from some of their Great
Officers: This generous Demeanor not suiting the Instructions which Monsieur
D' Avaux had received from his Master, the French King, he so far prevailed as
to have one of his Countrymen, called Monsieur Lanoo, put into the
Major-General's place, publicly declaring, That it was not consistent with His
Christian Majesty's Interests, that such a Key to the Kingdom as that City is,
should be in other hands, than those whose endeavors to extirpate Heretics
might give demonstrations of their sincerity to the Cause. Well fraughted then
with Directions, Lanoo takes his Journey toward Cork, where being admitted, he
produced his Commission to the Major General, telling him, That he expected an
immediate Resignation of that place unto him, for the French-man's use:
Maccarty having been always looked upon with an esteem suitable to his Merit,
and not used to such Demands, could not receive them without some surprise, but
recollecting himself with a great deal of briskness, which is natural unto him,
he told Lanoo, He knew himself as capable of such a Trust as any Frenchman
whatever; and that he would maintain that Garrison with the last drop of his
Blood, for His Majesty's Service, and that seeing how such new Commissions were
obtained, he did not think himself obliged to take any farther notice of them;
and this he told Monsieur was his final Resolution. The Frenchman th^s ba^ked
in his expectatio^^, grew angry, and used such expressions to the Governor, as
obliged him to demand that Satisfaction of him, which he might expect for such
an Affr^nt: He told him, the Garden was (...) place where they might suddenly,
and privately end the Difference; and if he fell by his Sword, he might then
produce his Commission; and at once take possession of the place, and be
secured ^^om any Affronts which might be put on him by the People: Lanoo
accepted of the proposal, and to it they went, but Maccarty was not used to be
overcome, and still maintained the same Character, by wounding and the
disarming Monsieur, who having received his Sword from the Governor, lest Cork
with all the have and privacy he could to hide his Shame, and to return the
Ambassador an Account how he had sped his Commission.

The manner of this Adventure was immediately spread through the whole Kingdom,
and has so animated several other Gentlemen, as to make them oppose themselves
to the open designs of the French, which we may believe by the following
Account, of the Earl of Tirone, who being Governor of Waterford, shut the
Gates of the City against one Desoigniers, who went with a Commission to be
Governor there, and after another manner then Lanoo, had demanded the Keys of
Cork, for he carried with him four hundred Men, but making his approaches to
the Walls, he found the Gates shut against him: And some Soldiers on the
Walls, commanding him to Retreat, if he would be out of the Danger of their
Shot; for the Governor was resolved to continue that place in King James's
Hands, by securing is from the French Designs, which they so plainly saw into,
that they justly apprehended the approaching Slavery, which such Practices were
like to draw upon them.

What the consequences, Sir, of such Divisions will be, I leave to your own
Judgment; only this I will add, That the Kingdom which is divided in itself is
like to fall; and this Prophecy I assure you I have heard above fourteen years
ago in Ireland, That the day would come, when the Irish should weep over the
English Graves; which I believe is not at this time untrue, since they now
begin to find, that those Aids which the French King gives them, are like those
which the Wolves in the Fable sent to secure the Sheep, likelier to become
their Devourers than Guardians; whence we may reasonably hope, that when those
long expected Succors are sent from England thither, those misled People will
discover more effectually their Resentments of the French Politics, which they
so much apprehend already, and the Felicities and Enjoyments which they found
from the English Protection, by an Opportune Declaration for them, which we
cannot expect, how violent soever their Inclinations be thereunto, until by
their approaches they more powerfully influence, and enable them to return
again to that Government, which a misguided Zeal has occasioned them to reject,

I am, Sir, Yours.

LONDON: Printed: (...) Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey.
1689.


