AN ACCOUNT OF Dr Assheton 's PROPOSAL (As Improved and Managed by the
Worshipful Company of Mercers, London) for the Benefit of Widows OF Clergymen
and Others;

By Settling Joyntures and Annuities at the Rate of Thirty per Cent.

Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might: for there is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave whither thou go, Eccles.
9. 10.

Plead for the Widow, Isaiah 1. 17.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1699.

An ACCOUNT OF Dr Assheton's PROPOSAL, etc.
TO Relieve poor Widows of the Clergy, is a truly Charitable Work. But to find
out some Expedient, whereby the Poverty of such Persons may for the future be
prevented, is a more desirable Undertaking.

In order to which good Design, the Occasions of such Poverty must first be
inquired; and how it comes to pass, that the Relicts of some Churchmen are
exposed to so much Want. Which being distinctly known and considered, we shall
then better be enabled to apply the Remedy.

And, First, Several Church Livings (being Impropriate) are of so small a
value, that the Incumbents are scarce able to Subsist, much less can they
expect to make Provision for Posterity.

This is indeed a very sad Truth. And though there is a way to redress this
Grievance, yet it is too big for our present Thoughts. And therefore,

Secondly, It must further be acknowledged, That some Churchmen who have
competent Preferments, do not yet make over-plentiful Provision for their Wives
and Children. And the cause seems to be this:

These Gentlemen, though otherwise well Descended and of good Families; yet
being younger Brothers, or the Sons of such, they have seldom any Estates in
Land; but according to the Custom of our Country, either a Sum of Money, or
some yearly Annuity for their Lives: The Effects of which being usually
expended in a Chargeable Education, when the necessity of their Affairs does
incline them to Marry, they cannot expect considerable Portions with their
Wives, because for want of real Estates, they are not in a Capacity to settle
Joyntures upon them. Hence it too often comes to pass; That a free and generous
Way of living, a scanted Portion, and a fruitful Wife (who brings a Charge
without a Competency to maintain it) do so entangle his Affairs, that our
honest Churchman is not only disturbed in his Thoughts, diverted from his
Studies with perplexing Cares, but also is so clogged with the Necessities of a
Family and other Expectations, that his Widow is many times left in a very
mean, if not indigent Condition.

If therefore such an Expedient can be found, whereby Clergymen may, upon easy
Terms, settle competent Joyntures upon their Wives; if, for instance, they may
be enabled to secure them Thirty per Cent. to be yearly paid during their
Natural Lives; This would not only take off the Reproach of Steepl^house
Joyntures, but would also encourage that Hospitality which is an Ornament to
their Profession. They may then be obliging to their Parishioners, Charitable
to the Poor, and may live without Distraction. And though their Death should be
sudden and unexpected, yet their Wives are competently provided for. The very
Thoughts of which will compose their Spirits, raise their Parts, and make the
whole Course of their Lives comfortable and easy to them.

And not only Churchmen, but also all other Orders of Men may receive the
Benefit of this Proposal.

There are several Physicians, Lawyers, Merchants, Traders, etc. who, during
their own Lives, are either Men of competent Estates, or have the Credit to be
thought so: and consequently their Wives are suitably maintained. But at their
Deaths, their Wives (as well as those of the Clergy) are sometimes left in a
mean, if not indigent Condition.

For as a Churchman's Preferments are only for his Life; so neither can a
Physician Practice, nor a Lawyer Plead in the other World. I have therefore
sometimes wondered, why the Clergy should be upbraided with Steeple-house
Joyntures: Since the Wives of other Professions, are in this respect as liable
to be exposed as the Clergy.

For as the Clergy (who are of a Generous Disposition) do too often Live above
their present Preferments; so Physicians and Lawyers do sometimes yearly expend
to the utmost of their Practice. In such Cases (which too often happen) it must
needs be acknowledged a great Advantage to such Persons, to have 30, or 60, or
90 l. per Ann. Settled upon their Wives, by way of Jointure or Rentcharge, in
case they survive them.

Nor is this Proposal less useful to Traders, than to Men of Professions.

For though Trade is a Gainful, yet it is an hazardous and uncertain way of
Living; Wherein the most Sober, Sagacious, and Industrious Person may without
his own fault, be sunk and ruined by the miscarriage of others.

The Falseness of a Partner, or Treachery of a Correspondent, with many other
Accidents, may blast him in a moment.

And though he may make some tolerable Shift to Trade on (as we phrase it) and
may keep his Shop open, even during his Life; yet since he lives only by his
Credit, it hence unavoidably follows at his Death, that his Wife (who was
ignorant of his Intrigues) instead of her Thirds (the only Jointure settled for
a 1000, or 1500 l.) is sadly entertained with the surprising News, That All is
seized.

Now had this Person immediately after his Marriage, when his Portion was
Received, or at any other time when he flourished in Money, had he, I say, then
Paid in Three, or but Two Hundred Pounds to the Mercers Company; what a
seasonable Support would the Effects of it have been, to his now poor
disconsolate distressed Widow?

From these Premises it appears, That the Advantages of this Proposal (even to
All Orders and Professions) are not to be doubted. But the chief Question is,
How these Joyntures can be secured? What Security shall be given to the
Subscribers, that their Widows shall not be Defrauded, but that the Joyntures
and Annuities here promised shall be punctually paid them?

This is that which for many years did exercise Dr. Assheton's Thoughts.

For though he was encouraged by several knowing Judicious Persons (whom he had
consulted, and to whom he had communicated his Proposal) that the Design was
Practicable; yet where to fix it, or how to provide such a Fund as might secure
the Subscribers, was a matter of some Difficulty, not only to himself, but also
to the Undertaking.

As to Himself, He was fully convinced, not only of the Trouble and Charge in
managing such a Work, but also of the hazard to his Reputation if it should
miscarry. For the generality of Men are very unjust in their Censures, and will
allow nothing to be well Designed, that shall want Success.

However, he did resolve to go on; and if possible, to finish what he had so
long Projected.

His First Address was to the Corporation of the Clergy. Who indeed received
him with the greatest Kindness and Respect; But withal Declared, for Reasons
not now to be repeated, that they were not capable to accept his Proposal.

His next Application was to the Royal Bank of England. Where he did not doubt
of sufficient Security for the Subcribers. But for some Reasons, which are
obvious to Men of Business, this Royal Bank, at present, is not so Modeled, as
to manage this Proposal.

Though thus far disappointed, yet Dr. Assheton was not Discouraged. And being
admonished, that a City-Company was very capable to Undertake his Proposal: And
that the Mercers was the Best, both for Management and Revenue, he immediately
applied himself to that Company. And having first waited upon the present
Master, (whose known Worth, and inclination to promote Charitable Designs, gave
him great encouragement of Success) he next attended the Wardens, and several
others of the Members.

After some time, a General Court of the said Company was held, on Friday the
11th of November School. Where Dr. Assheton's Proposal was read to the said
Company. And the Doctor being then asked, what he had further to say; he
Replied to this Effect, viz.

He was very sensible, that Wise men, who are not apt to be imposed on, do look
upon Projects with Caution, and at a distance. And therefore he was not so vain
as to expect, that this Proposal should be unanimously received, after one
single Reading, at a General Court. For the Reasons of such an Undertaking are
not always obvious, but require some Thought and Application of Mind. He
therefore humbly moved, That a Committee might be appointed, to consider and
examine the Reasons of the Proposal, together with such a Method, as should be
thought most Expedient for the Management of it. Whereupon a Committee was
appointed to consider of the same, and what Security the Company could give to
the Subscribers.

The which Committee (after several Meetings, and Discourses with Dr. A^sheten)
made ^^eir Report to another General Court the 23 d of December, School. Which
Court having read the Report of the Committee, d^^ suspend their Resolution of
the same for that time. And another General Court was appointed to be held the
13th of January following, that so all the Members of ^^^ said Company might
have time to consider ^^ the said Proposal, and the Report of the Committee
thereupon; that so they might the better be enabled to give their Resolutions
in the whole Affair. And at this Third and Last General Court, the Company did
accept of the said Proposal. And did Publish and Declare their Acceptance in
Manner and Form following.

By the Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of the MERCERS, at Mercers-Hall
in Cheapside, London, the 8th Day of February, School.
THE Reverend William Assheton, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of Beckenham in
Rent, and Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Ormond, having out of a Charitable
Design, for the Maintenance and Relief of Widows of the Clergy, (which very
frequently are left in a poor Condition when their Husbands dye) employed his
Thoughts to consider of a Way for their Relief and Support; and thereupon
thought of a Proposal, in which he includes also others beside Clergymen, viz.
Physicians, Lawyers, Merchants, Traders, or any other Persons that shall
Subscribe the Sum of 100 l. or more, during the Time of their joint Lives; in
case the Husband shall die, and leave his Wife a Widow, that then there should
be paid her, during her Life, the Sum of 30 l. a Year per Gent. free of all
Charges; at the two usual Feasts of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, and St. Michael the Archangel; and that the Sum to be Subscribed should
be limited to 100000 l. And in case the Wife dye, during her Husband's
Lifetime, the same to go to the Benefit of those that did undertake the same.

The said Reverend Dr. Assheton considering w^here the said Subscription-Money
might be lodged safely, and reasonable Security given for the due Payment of
the Widows, did think it could not be better secured than in the Hands of the
Worshipful Company of Mercers, London; and did at a General Court of the said
Company, held on Friday the 11th of Nov^mber School, make this Proposal to the
said Company, who thereupon appointed a Commi^tee to consider of the same, and
what Secu^i^y the Company could give; which Commit had several Meetings
th^reupon; and having had several Discourses with Dr. Assheton, and acquainted
him what Estate they had to settle for Security, being clear rents, 2888 l. 8
s. 10 d. per. Ann. (besides the Payments by the Benefactors to be paid out of
the same;) which, by a moderate Calcuation would yield, when the Leases come
out, above 13500 l. per Annum clear, as aforesaid; And the said Dr. Assheton
judging the same to be reasonable Security, the said Committee made their
Report to a General Court the 23d of December. School. Which Court having read the
Report of the Committee, did suspend their Resolution of the same for that
time, and another General Court was appointed to be held the 13th of January
following; that so all the Members of the said Company might have time to
consider of the said Proposal, and the Report of the Committee thereupon; that
so they might the better be enabled to give their Resolutions in the whole
Affair; And at the said General Court the Company did accept of the said
Proposal. And do hereby publish and declare,

1. That in case 100000 l. shall be subscribed and paid in to the Company in
such manner as i^ hereafter mentioned; The said Company do undertake to pay
unto the Widows of the Subscribers, according to the aforesaid Proposition, 30
l. per Cent. per Ann. free of Taxes and Charges, at the two usual Feasts of the
Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and St. Michael the Archangel.

2. That for better Security of the Payments, as soon as the said 100000 l.
shall be Subscribed, the said Company will settle and convey in due Form of Law
the Lands, Houses and Estate before mentioned, in Trustees, for the due payment
of the said Annuities.

3. That all married Clergymen, and other married Persons, (Except as hereafter
is Excepted,) that inhabit in the Kingdom of England, and do not exceed the Age
of 60 Years at the time of the Payment of the Money, and receiving the
Company's Bond, and are then in good and perfect Health, and have Subscribed
any Sum not less than 50 l. nor exceeding the Sum of 300 l. in case they die in
the Kingdom of England, and leave their Wives Widows, the said Widows shall
receive, as beforementioned, the Sum of 30 l. yearly for every 100 l. so
Subscribed; and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Sum, as
beforementioned.

4. That every Person at the time of his Subscription (which shall be made in
Person) shall express the Place of his Abode, the Name of his Wife, and his and
her several Age in such manner as is hereafter mentioned.

5. That no Person that goes to Sea, nor Soldier that goes into the Wars, shall
be admitted to Subscribe to have the Benefit of this Proposal, in regard of the
Casualties and Accidents that they are more particularly liable to.

6. That the Book of Subscriptions shall be laid open at Mercers-Hall on or
before the First day of March School, and shall continue to the 24th day of June
1699, (in case the 100000 l. be not Subscribed sooner) and Members of the
Company shall attend to take the said Subscriptions on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and
Fridays every Week during that time, between the Hours of 9 and 12 in the
Forenoon, and 3 and 6 in the Afternoon.

7. That as soon as the said 100000 l. is Subscribed, public Notice shall be
given in the Gazette; and all Persons that have Subscribed are then, within 30
Days next following, to Pay in the Moneys by them Subscribed, at Mercers-Hall
to the said Company, for which purpose, Members of the said Company shall
attend on the Days and Times aforesaid.

8. That on the Payment of the Mone^* the Person shall have a Writing under the
Seal of the Company, acknowledging the Receipt thereof; and engaging, That if
his Wife be left a Widow, she shall receive the Moneys in proportion to his
Subscription a^ before specified, but unless the Money be actually paid within
the Time limited, the Widow to have no Benefit by the Subscription; and at the
same time the said Person Subscribing, shall give a Bond to the Company, That
in case his Wife shall dye before him, to give notice to the Company thereof
within one Month after her Decease.

9. That any Widow that shall have Right to receive any Annuity by this
Subscription* shall give notice of the Time of her Husband's Death to the
Company within one Month after his Decease; and when she comes to receive the
Benefit of this Proposal, shall bring a Certificate, Signed by the Minister,
Churchwarden or Churchwardens, and Parish-Clerk of the Place where he^
Husband died and was buried, if her Husband was not a Minister; but if her
Husband was the Minister of the Parish where he was buried, then to have the
Minister's Hand of the next neighboring Parish; and the other Hands as
beforementioned.

10. In case it shall happen that any Man who has Subscribed, shall voluntarily
make away himself, or by any Act of his, occasion his own Death, either by
Duelling, or committing any Crime whereby he shall be Sentenced and put to
Death by Justice; in any or either of those Cases his Widow to receive no
Annuity, but upon delivering up the Company's Bond, to have the Subscrip^ion
money paid to her.

11. In case any Person that shall Subscribe shall not pay in his Money within
the Time limited, such Person's Subscription shall be esteemed null and void,
and the Company may admit any other Person, duly qualified, to Subscribe in his
stead.

The Form of the Subscription.
12. I A. B. inhabiting in the Parish of (...) in the (...) of (...) do
Subscribe and Promise to pay (...) Pounds on the Terms beforementioned, for
the Benefit of (...) my now Wife, Aged (...) Years, the Daughter of (...) of
(...) in case I dye before her.

The Obligation of the Company.
13. WE the Wardens and Commonalty of (...) Mystery of the Mercers of the Ci^^
of London, do acknowledge to have Receiv^^ of A. B. Inhabitant in the Parish of
(...) in the (...) of (...) the Sum of (...) Pounds, which he has Subscri^^^
for the Benefit of (...) Aged (...) Years, the Daughter of (...) his present
Wife; And we ^^ promise and oblige our Selves, and our Succes^or^, in case the
said A. B. shall Dye (Except in su^^ manner as is Excepted in the General
Proposal) before his said Wife, and leave her a Widow, ^^ pay unto her, during
her Life, the Sum of (...) Yearly, free of all Charges, being 30 l per Cent.
per Annum of the said A. B. ^^ Subscription, at the two usual Feasts of the
A^nunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, a^^ St. Michael the Archangel: The
first ^aym^^^ to be made on the first of the said Feast-days t^^^ shall happen
six Months or more after the Dece^^^ of the said A. B. she producing this
Obligat^^^ and due Certificates of her Husband's Death. ^^ the which Payment we
bind our Selves and ^^ Successors firmly by these Presents. In Testimony
whereof, We have hereunto affixed the Seal of the said Company the (...) Day of
(...) Anno Dom. 169

14. The Bond to be given to the Company,
To be of the Penalty of the Sum Subscribed.
The Condition to be as follows:

WHereas the above-bound A. B. has Subscribed and Paid to the Wardens and
Commonalty of the Mystery of the Mercers of the City of London, the Sum of
(...) for the Benefit of his present Wife (...) the Daughter of (...) and
Received an Obligation from the said Company for the due Payment to his said
Wife, of the sum of 30 l. per Cent. per Annum, in case she survives him, during
her Life. Now the Condition of this Obligation is such, That in case his said
Wife shall dye before him, if he the above-bound A. B. shall within 30 Days
after his said Wise's Decease, give Notice to the said Company of her Death,
under his Hand and Seal, and deliver up the Obligation he had from the Company;
and also if the said A. B. shall remove his Habitati^^ or Dewlling Place, and
shall give Notice thereof ^^ the said Company within 30 Days of such his
Removal, with the Name of the Place and Par^^ to which he is removed; And in
default of N^tice to be given as aforesaid, Then, if the sa^^ A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall pay One Pound per Cent. of his
Subscription-Money for every Month he shall delay so to do; That then this
Obligation to be void, and of no effect, or else to remain in full force.

THIS General Proposal, now Published by the Company, is so plain and
intelligible, that I will not pretend to Paraphrase upon it. But shall only
take notice of the Security here Proposed. Which if some Persons shall think
too small, they are desired to consider the Nature of the Estates to be Settled
and Conveyed.

Here is a Rent of Two Thousand Eight Hundred and odd Pounds per An. Proposed
as a Security for One Hundred Thousand Pounds.

Indeed were this Estate of 2888 l. per An. now Rented at its utmost Extent,
it is then undeniable the Security is not sufficient. But when it is considered,
That it is an improveable Estate: And that this 2888 l. per An. will in time be
worth above 13500 l. per An. And when it is further considered, That the 100000
l. now to be paid in to the Company, by their prudent Management will presently
meliorate, and improve this their Estate: I say, When these Things are duly
considered, no Intelligent Person can pretend to be dissatisfied with the
Security here Proposed. Especially when it is further declared, That no
Subscriber is obliged to Pay in his Money, till he is fully satisfied with the
Security. Which is to be Settled and Conveyed in due Form of Law, as the Ablest
Council shall advise and direct.

I shall only add (which indeed is necessary in this Selfish Projecting Age)
that as Dr. A^sheton did not Project this Proposal for his own Private
Advantage, but does sincerely design a Public Good: In like manner, the Worthy
Members of the Mercers Company have undertaken to Manage this Proposal, not
from any prospect of Advantage to their own private Persons, but only out of a
Generous Design to make the Company more capable to answer the End and Reason
of their Charter. Which is, To Establish and Manage Public Charities. And
thereby to enlarge their Capacity of Doing Good.

And having often considered the Thing, I presume to declare,

That the Company of Mercers, by Accep^ing and Managing this Proposal, will do
^ greater and more Public Good to the whole Nation, than they could pretend to
do b^ founding an Hospital for Widows in eve^^ County of the Kingdom. And my
Reason is this; Because it is a much Nobler Chari^^ so to support any Person,
as to prevent hi^ from being Poor, than it is to Relieve the same Person when
he is actually Poor.

FINIS.
Books lately Writ by Dr. Assheton.
A Conference with an Anabaptist, Price 12 d. A Theological Discourse of Wills.
12 d. A Discourse of Deathbed Repentance. 6 d. A Vindication of the B.
Trinity. 12 d. A Discourse against Debauchery and Profaneness. 2 d. A
Conference with an Atheist. 2 d. A Discourse against Drunkenness, Cursing, and
Swearing. 2 d. A Method of Daily Devotion. 2 d. A Method of Devotion for the
Lord's Day. 2 d. An Exhortation to the H. Communion. 2 d.
These are the Prices single. But cheaper to those who are so Charitable to
give away Numbers.


