AN ACCOUNT OF MARRIAGE OR The Interests of Marriage considered and defended,
against the unjust attacques of this Age.

In a LETTER to a FRIEND.

Essig. Amor. Quid dixi? nemo moritur, nemo vivit suo nnmine. London Printed by
B. G. for Allen Bancks at the Sign of St. Peter at the West end of St. Paul's
1672.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Am the Person to whow the following Letter was writ, and I am the Publisher
of it; no man is obliged to give a reason of such actions; I only had an
inclination to show thee some of our divertisements, who are not men of the
town: I confess, those glorious Persons have sufficiently run us down, by
continualy supplying the World, with accounts of admirable Adventures, whilst
we cannot possibly invent a taking Mode for our virtue, and grave tempers: we
must take our fortune, till the Round brings such things again into esteem; We
will not appeal to thy justice for a sentence to our advantage, we know in what
nature the address is made, and we ignore not their captivating arts; this is
not the first Age will be recorded for contemning virtue, though the
extravigancies of such an humor, are only extant now. We have yet in our
disgraces this satisfaction left us, (which we hope our Generous Adversaries
will not deny us) that when experience, and time, have disabused the foppish
Youth of this Generation, they will more revere the practice, and discretion of
their Fathers; when their gallantry's will be as much despised, as our virtue
now. I will say nothing for the following papers though I have both a Justice,
and a Friendship to satisfy upon that account, but a thousand Elogies will not
incline a man to approve that which is against his humor, and one alone is
superfluous, where the subject is agreeable; If thou do not like it, I cannot
help it, thou may possibly sometimes have spent more time, and money for an
ill humor. If it is not suitable to thy intrigues, reserve it for thy
Children, who may possibly prefer it, before the follies of their Fathers
practices.

Farewell.
AN ACCOUNT OF MARRIAGE.
I Did not think Sir, that when we entertained our selves with the little
modern Philosopher* you would after have demanded those things from me in
earnest, which were then our divertisement; but since you have been so
inclined, I obey you readily, both, as I should blush to re^use any
satisfaction to a Person who has so grandly obliged me, and also as I have a
repugnance to abandon my declared Opinions: But I hope you consider, that you
demand these things from a young man, who is incapable of doing right to so
grand and so important a Subject; and one besides, who can furnish the
discourse with no experiencies of his own: but I know your ingenuity and
candor are too great to expect a sufficiency from a man he has not about him;
neither do I believe that you want any motives to assist you in your just
resolutions: he that knows your love, also knows the object of it to be so
glorious, and so accomplished, as hardly to be equalled within the compass of
our Isle for excellent qualities; and I very much question, whether the most
hardy of our Gal^ants, did they every day converse with those beautiful
endowments which she possesses, would not willingly despise the Gallantry of
contemning Marriage for such an enjoyment, and even be contented to be
virtuous, rather then not be happy; no one will condemn you for such a design,
nor decree your reason to submit to the fantastical definitions of the
Malmsbury Philosopher. But since you will be amorous, and serious too, as you
have received the pleasures of the first from your Mistress, so you shall now
receive the entertainments of the second from your friend: but yet I must
before hand tell you, that as in Pictures, so in so considerable draughts of
humane interests and affairs, there must needs be wanting those graces and
lovelinesses, that no description nor account can reach; and we can only lay
the colors, and a simetry of parts, whilst the sweetness, and the charm, are
above the reach of pens. It will be necessary Sir (to keep your thoughts
together) to pursue a method, and to decline the hunting mode of writing, now
in use, of running remarques here and there, as the fancy of the Author leads
him. Marriage is our Theme, and the justness, necessity, and advantages of it,
the considerations to be enquired into; and we cannot raise this superstructure
upon a better foundation then the Divine Declaration in Genesis 2. 18. where it is
said, It is not good that the man should be alone: In which appears, that when
the inferior Creatures had their beings for the use and service of man, then
was he himself created as their Lord; and when he was made, and had received
his Dominion, his glorious Creator judged something wanting very important for
the happiness and pleasures of man, and that was a Help-meet for him; It is not
good that man should be alone: He had then Heaven to converse with, Earth ^o
govern, Paradise to be his nome, and the pleasures of an Innocence copi^d
fairly from his Maker; and yet in the possession of all these things* he was
alone.

First, He was alone in Paradise, that could not regale him equal to a virtuous
love; Empire and command were not so Noble as the affairs of a practical
virtue: Adam was entertained with the freshness of a youthful world, to whose
beauty he paid not then the tribute of his sweat and labor; he enjoyed only a
pleasant spring, but those delights were not equal to the society of a woman.

Secondly, He was alone in the possession of his Innocence; Adam was perfect,
and so wanted not to be happy, but the degrees and consummations of it, which
were designed him in the affairs and interests of M^rriage; and the Standard of
happiness by which it was measured, was not then a life of quiet and repose,
but a power and sufficiency of communicating virtue and excellent qualities;
and I shall represent to you how much* Marriage furni^hed mankind with that
ability, by which will appear the Evidence of the Divine Assertion, it is not
good that man should be alone: Some of which particulars, if they should not be
comprehended in the direct intention of the words, they shall yet all be
genuine to the nature of the thing.

First, It was good to perpetuate Generations, and the variety of Ages; from
this has sprung all those that have filled the world; it laid the foundations
of glorious and sacred Churches, of vast and puissant Empires, gave births to
successful and flourishing Arts* by that has the Church been furnished with
Martyrs, and men famous for their Piety; it has s^ot up Stars to heaven, whose
zeal and holiness did shine among the dark vices of the world, where they now
sparkle in spheres of Eternal light and love: To this we owe the original and
excellency of Learning, which has taught wisdom and civility to barbarous
Nations; he was once rocked in the Cradle, whose Philosophy and Science after
traveled to the confines of night and day; an indulgent Mother on her Lap
first bound the tender head of a famous Conqueror, that after wore the Laurels
of so many Victories. Whilst ambition, war, and distempers still emptied the
world, Marriage supplied it with other inhabitants. When by the death of some
excellent person the world has been deprived of great advantages and blessings,
some others have rose up, and equaled, if not excelled the v^rtue of their
Fathers: When Countries have been widdowed, and drooped over the loss of an
indulgent Prince, they have had restored in a Successor the freshness of their
withered joys. When Moses was dead, Joshua the son of Nun takes the Conduct of
Israel, and leads them to the conquest and possession of the promised Land:
When some holy man, who by his convincing conversation, and his heavenly
admonitions, propagated and increased the Church, is taken to his triumph
above, God is pleased to open another Flood and spring of light, which though
it may be of a different emanation, yet it serves those holy ends the other
did: Moses excelled for meekness, David for sincerity, Job for patience, and
Daniel for courage and magnanimity; yet all these declared the same duty,
honor, and obedience that we owe to God* Saint Paul was admirably learned, S.
Peter affectionately plain and earnest, Apollo sweetly eloquent, and all
assisted in the propagating and confirming the same glorious Gospel. Elijah
when he was mounted his Fiery Chariot, and through the Regions of the Sky
traveled home to heaven, yet left his Spirit and his Mantle with Elisha. When
Israel lost their mighty Parents, yet the favor of their God continued with
them, and the blessings of Abraham's Faith was enjoyed by after Generations; and
so power has been furnished with Successors from Marriage. The Assyrian Empire
was succeeded by the Persian, which being supported by a slender virtue, fell,
and on its ruins rose the Grecian; which was after broke to pieces by the
violence of its Administrators: then rose the Roman, the best built and
supported, and of the largest extent, spreading its wings over the face of the
whole ^arth; having maintained (the Votaries of sacred Religion excepted) the
bravest and most generous virtue, the most useful and pleasing arts that to the
memory of man are known: But this Empire, so well maintained, and so strongly
supported, by little and little de^li^ed, till at ^ast it lay neglected and
despised in the languishing arms of Austria. In after Ages several Princes
affecting that glorious Title spent much blood and Treasure to gra^ifie those
vain hopes, but with little success. So has learning been successively
maintained. Plato left some excellent knowledge, with many fantastical
opinions: Aristotle endeavored better demonstration, but yet with that, left
some Lordly Propositions, and barren terms. Then the followers of Learning
^anged themselves into several Sects, troubling the World with idle quarrels,
and disputes. The Philosophy of Greece, was capricious, and affected, but when
it traveled to Rome, they made it more sociable, and of a more pleasing
conversation: one Age wro^e and disputed, another practiced and convinced: From
those times the adventures of Learning have been various, and not easily
abridged: Thus have several Ages had several rencounters, and variety of
action, all of which have been furnished with Administrators, from the Marriage
bed.

Secondly, It was good, as it was a model of the after Governments of the
World: the dominion of a Parent in his Family, is a true representation of the
government of a Virtuous Prince, who is the Father of his Country; men in this
mirour might see the agreeableness of power, and Empire; and with better
inclinations might become obedient to an universal Head, whilst they plainly
could see the advantages of order and subjection in particular Families, had
there been no distinction in Societies, in which, by the respect and obedience
paid to some persons, the advantages of Rule might have been p^rc^ived and
approved, men would never have been will^ng to have parted with the most
extravagant parts of their liberty, but all desires of Sovereignty had been
opposed, as injustice and tyranny, but by Marriage, and the issue of the bed,
men had within themselves a Lordship, and Dominion, and the quiet and
advantages of that, evidently appearing, the intention of some excellent
person, and his desires to protect Countries, and Provinces, and be their
universal Head, and Parent, was not received with that scorn and aversion, as
they would have been, had there not been those advantageous Presidents: And I
know not how to be^ieve, that all the Dominions of the Earth were founded in
absolute Tyranny, and that they had at first no design of the good of Nations,
which was accidental, and found necessary, for the security and quiet of power,
since it is impossible, that any Country can enjoy peace, riches, or profit
without the Superiority of some or other.

Thirdly, It was good, as it brought in the grand foundation of the peace and
quiet of Kingdoms; for this (yet with no injury) fixes a man to a settlement,
and a contented condition of living, who, if he should obey the force of no
other Arguments, yet the just consideration of his Family, and Relations, would
dispose him to peace, and subjection, many men are sometimes tempted to be the
Instruments of fatal disorders to a Nation, whilst they have nothing to
suffer, but themselves in the calamities of ill success; few are so brutish, as
to have no regard to the welfare and condition of those they love; who would by
treason, cut from his Children a brave estate, and leave them poverty and the
reproaches of his crime to inherit: and though some have broke through all
these considerations, and neglected their dearest interests, yet that does not
disprove the force they usually have upon our minds: it is providing for those
that come after us* that makes us industrious, and sometimes peaceable, and
virtuous too: What man would not be shook, and feel some remorse in his
designs and projects of ruin, when he has a loving Wife leaning on his
bosom, and innocent Children hanging about his knees; but he that lives alone,
what design soever he drives at, he receives none of these regrets, and
remorses; but setting all things in himself, cries, Let the world stand and
fall with me. And I am of the opinion, that the unmarried lives of the Romish
Priests, has been the cause of great calamities, and disorders in Kingdoms;
men who have too much leisure, and too little dependence on a common interest,
will freely play away their own share in any Kingdom, by its ^uin and
destruction, whilst there are so many cloisters in other places, to protect
and receive them, their Guardians and Superiors throwing about these fatal
Firebrands, and In^endiaries to inflame and trouble the World, who, if they had
a Family, and an interest settled to mind, would take a great deal less
pleasure in the disorders of Christendom. Marriage makes men look upon the
peace and prosperity of the World, with more concernment and pleasure than
those, who care only for themselves, and their present satisfaction.

Fourthly* It was good, to have the honor* and delight of a hopeful issue,
nothing was esteemed of old, a greater aggrandizement than many children, the
issue of a lawful bed, the promising youth of a child, returns a reputation to
the Father, and many men had been forgotten in the Histories of Ages, had not
they not been the Parents of Children, that were famous: Every Parent receives
an honor by the virtues and celebrated qualities of their Children; it is an
honor considerable enough, to have been the root that bore flowers, whose
fairness and sweetness were pleasant to the whole world: Nor is the delight any
thing inferior; if the excellent endowments of a Stranger are pleasing to us
(as they doubtless are to every ingenious mind.) What must be the
accomplishments of those, whom we have brought into the world our selves to be
the Parents of those that may prove successeful instruments, for the
instruction, and reformation of the Church, for the peace, and advantages of
their Country, are blessings and contentments not to be equalled by little
things: and the actions of many men, that have lived in the World would have
none of the reputation they have yet acquired, if it had not been for the
consideration of their Family; next to the interests of Religion, nothing is so
noble, so good and commendable, as to prosecute in ways of justice and honor,
the interests of their Family; in the pursuit of which has moreover been
raised, all or most of those glorious Triumphs of virtue, courage, and
industry, that the world has known; for who, only for the flashes of a short
Fame, would with the hazard of his own life, have altered the Government of
Kingdoms, have added remote, as well as neighboring provinces, to the tribu^e
of his Throne? who would have exposed himself to the various accidents of the
deep, and have sought unknown treasures in Countries barbarous, unconquered,
and remote, if he had not hoped to have left them as the patrimony of his
Family: Thus on death beds, have great as well as serious men, left such
excellent instructions to their Children, of keeping up the honor, and
greatness of their names, as if the interest they should take in it remained
beyond the Grave: Agripina doted so much on the imperial dignity of her Son
Nero, as to cry out, occidat, modo imperet. Let me die so he may reign.

Fifthly, It was good, to perpetuate the memory and dignity of virtue, it is
true, it sometimes happens, that a Son is not only unlike his Father; but so
different, as to be a shame and reproach to his memory; but yet usually the
great qualities of the Parent lives in the Children, having the advantages of
their example and instructions, and at least if their virtue is much weaker and
fainter, yet supported by the Fathers memory, it becomes strangely useful,
beloved, and respected in the world. The children of some men, that have been
the Authors of great benefits, and good offices to Countries, and Nations, have
served many great and happy occasions in the world, who yet have had no great,
merit of their own to boast of* Nothing is so much idolized nor respected by
the generality of people, as a mighty name, and a virtue possibly in it self
much the greater, that is found in a person not famous, cannot do those things,
which the bare reputations of some persons is able to perform: In the civil
wars of France, the Authority of a Prince of the Blood, would easily hush those
commotions and produce that obedience to discipline, which all the courage,
arts, and persuasions of inferior Captains could never do.

Sixth^y, It was good to enlarge the Sphere and establish occasions of
practical virtue. He that is married has more compass, and a larger field of
action; he usually procures more benefits to the World, at least more
substantial and better grounded. He that is alone lives to this Age, but he
that is married (by the force of imbraceing causes) lives to that Age which
stands next the worlds last calenture, and burning fit. Pompey did not only
fight himself for the liberty of Rome, 'till he was it is greatest, and mighty
Sacrifice, but left those gallant Sons, who bravely endeavored to revive it,
when saint and dying. The practical virtues that belong to the affairs of this
life, is they are more, so they are more considerable in the married state;
Speculation, however pleasing to some tempers, yet if it be not altogether
divine, is a thing of little advantage, especially to the world, and that is
the measure of every excellent quality, the advantage of the general World:
Infinite thinking, that designs no other benefit, but the private satisfaction
of him that is busied in it, is but an ingenious sort of idleness; and
moreover, the mischief the world has received by those strange opinions
invented by men, who enjoyed a perpetual vacation from affa^rs, remains too
great a reproach of idle speculation: the thoughts of men are perpetually
working, and wanting the entertainments of good, and useful objects pursue
pleasant and agreeable idea's* that were never yet altered by action, and which
are equally unprofitable to themselves and others, but he that has the
interest^ of a Family to mind, bound^ with those happy limits the^
extravagancies of his fancy^ and the province he has to manage consists in mos^
things of the best virtue, and most practical advantages* ihat are found in
humane society; how many glorious actions, and instances of bravery of mind
have took their original from the calamities of a Parent, or the distresses of
a Child; and without doubt the world had wanted the greatest part of its
illustrious Presidents of virtue, had not the affectiones and tendernesses of
these relations, ^een the motives and powerful ^nducements to them. Many ^ndeed
(but unjustly) cry out of marriage, as a condition ^f care and perplexities,
and ^elebrate single living, for ^t's freedom and repose; but first let us ask
them, who ever ^ound in a mortal state that ^^anquility they have preten^ed to
admire? who can ^how us that condition of ^^fe under the Sun, that is ^ven and
undisturbed? if marriage has cares, it has no more than other conditions, ^ut
then let us tell them, that ^t has advantages, blessings and ^ocieties, that
they have not ^ttained; if they can show us the life of some rude Philosopher,
that in his retirements from the world boasted of quiet, and repose, we can
show him many examples of glorious men, living not one^y contentedly, bu^
admired, and beloved, in the ties of Matrimony; spreading their useful
qualities over the universe, whilst the Stoic has permitted his virtue to
droope and wither, in the shade of his own humor* besides difficult and hard
acquests are the triumphs of virtue: The mind shines with no luster at all,
that has not heen brightned by difficult affairs; owing (as the body) ^ts
vigor and strength to ^otion, and labor: moreover the triumph is the ^weetest
that is purchased with the most industry; ^he ambitious looks on those
acquirements with ^ontempt, that are easily got, and loves the highest steps,
because it is the hardest com^ng there: and such motives ^ave we received from
above ^o procure advantages to the world, that nothing relishes ^etter to the
mind, nor is ^eceived with greater esteem and applause, than difficult
^ervices: so that to speak ill of marriage, out of a humor of repose and
sluggis^ness is ^o own the greatest repr^^^^ and scandal in the world.

Seventhly. It was good, to have a mind vigorous, and constant in the circles
of Ma^riage. Virtue loses it is luster and strength, when it is loosened by
various entertainments. Marriage gives the thoughts a home, and an employment
that would else be traversing the ends of the Earth: neither shall we find any
men of a more manly gallantry, and a nobleness all of a piece, as amongst those
who have been happy in their marriages, and great lovers of the interests of
it. Some men may have exceeded in politic arts, and the stra^agems of
conquests, but (...) very much question, whi^her ever any age^ (in the Heathen
world) brought ^orth any thing Superior ^o, or more beloved than the virtue of
Pompey, and Bru^us; men not only religiously prizing the married ^tate, but
such as were blessed with the society of those women, that for returns of love
and gallantry were famous to all ages. We choose friendship, as a field for
virtue to reap advantages in, and none but retired, and treacherous natures,
will be without the pleasures of that, but without all question, that
friendship is the noblest, bound in the surest ligaments, and penetrates more
the recesses of the heart, that is commenced in marriage, than any took up on
other scores: Some are pleased to cry down that Sex, as foolish, and unfit for
the conversation of men; but they seem in that too much to overvalue
themselves* and to set strange prizes on their own worth; what if there are not
found women, whose heads are filled with the crabbed notions of Philosophy; who
have no great insight into insignificant, and unsociable arts, the knowledge of
these things could consti^ute nothing, but barren* and ridiculous Friendships;
that which is more generous, more pleasant, and useful, is as well to be found
in that Sex as in our own.

Eigthly, It was good for the education of mankind: This bred men at first to
modesty, respect, and subjection; taught the mind the sense of shame, and the
fear of vice: besides it laid an obligation on Parents to look after the
education of their Children; for if there had not been such an Institution, in
which it was both our duty, and our reputation too, to look after our Children,
the issue of many in the world had been neglected, and perished without a name,
or any considerable acquirements: But now those men who have strangely overcome
and worn ou^ the impressions of what they owe to God, and their ow^ affections,
yet are so carefu^ of their reputation, as to educate their children i^ those
ways by which the^ may live with credit, an^ be capable of serving the
Commonwealth; Had no^ Marriage been instituted when the lustful youth ha^
satisfied his appetite, 'ti^ likely he would have abandoned the wretched Mothe^
with her Infant, to the rancounters of various sorrows; and the children of the
Great, and the Noble, had been rocked in Cottages, and all their days followed
the Plough, but now there are sacred Channels cut, in which one stream of blood
perpet^ally runs, from one Generation to an other.

Ninthly, It was good to prevent the inconvenienc^es and extravagancies of a
rambling love. What disorders and distractions had there been in the world, if
an impetuous and lawless appetite had been subject to no conduct; the fancy
placing it self on any object pleasing and agreeable to it, had presently
transported the owner to all manner of violent actions for the obtaining of it;
Cities had been consumed to ashes, houses left desolate, or filled with groans,
only for the ravishment of a beauteous prey; the affairs of the State had been
neglected, or readily wounded, for the acquirements of an idle love; for such
is the violence of that passion, and such its extravagancies, when it is taught
no moderation by Religion and excellent Laws; the power of Conquest had been a
sufficient title to the objects we had covered, and we had no felt no remorse,
to have taken them from between the arms where they had spent many years in
endearments of love: no Nation could have flourished, nor have been successful
in its affairs, if a wanton flame had thus consumed the manly temper and vigor
of the youth; or if their passions had not transported them to such violent
actions, yet the gentlest concernments of those flames had made them incapable
of serving the Commonwealth, and the interests of Humane Society; and what with
running to public houses of lust, the contriving secret Cabals, and private
assignations, had took up all that time with which they should have served
their Generations: Whilst they had followed these designs, ill humor,
restlesness of the thoughts, and inconsiderate actions, had been the necessary
companions to them; therefore there was great wisdom in that Law amongst the
Jews, that none should live unmarried after such an Age. All wise and prudent
Nations knew they should have little order, and less industry, where the
affairs of an idle passion possessed the hearts and heads of their Subjects.
Marriage more inclines the mind to serious, and necessary business, then the
wandering lusts of Stews and Concubines; and even in those Countries, where
Polygamy, and many Loves have been allowed, the serious, and the wise, are
grown weary of their liber^y, as producing those distractions as unfit the mind
for other things: besides, there are the prejudices the body receives in those
fatal distempers, that bring rottenness, ^pain, and infamy. which are left to
Posterity; and its not to be doubted, but that the next Age will curse their
Fathers, for leaving them poverty and rottenness for their Patrimonies.

Tenthly, It was good to have the society, of a Sex that should once be the
passage of the Son of God into the World; and that was of a Virgin too, though
not deflowered, yet betrothed: that man as he had once reproached that Sex, as
the first yeilder to that temptation, which ruined mankind, so they might
receive a benefit, and an advantage by it, that might make them forget the
memory of former injuries: Did She present us with the fruit, the eating of
which lost Paradise, and an innocence more sweet and agreeable? from Her Womb
rose the morning of eternal redemption, spreading its light and blessings over
the World: Man has no reason to nourish ancient resentments, that has her for
the companion of his virtuous Love, whose aboades the veiled Divinity did not
dispute.

I know nothing can be objected to all this, but that of St. Paul he that lives
unmarried does best, to which it is easily answered: that that, as some other
things in the Scripture, were chiefly calculated for that Age, as a time of
great persecution, and calamity to the Christian Faith; then were the powers of
the World armed against the Doctrine of Christ, and the professors of it, were
forced to remove from one City, and Country to another, and to live with great
difficulty, and those especially who were the Ministers, traveled to Regions
distant and far remote, to plant the Christian Doctrine; and it was more
convenient for them that were continually in journies, in perils, on the Land
and Sea, to have small and little Families. But many things may not be so
proper for some times, that are both convenient, and necessary for others: and
it was but just, that some of the outward advantages, as well as the lives
themselves, of some Persons, should be yielded up, to the important
considerations, of propogating and confirming the Gospel: so our Savior
speaking of the severity of those calamities, that should make their visits to
the last ages of the world; pronounces a ^^ae lactantibus, and parturientibus,
per illos dies; when nevertheless, those were not only the necessary, but most
excellent affairs of humane life. If upon all these considerations, Sir
marriage appears so convenient and necessary for the World, they must have
slender pleas who admire unsociable and solitatary tempers; no man was to be
taken up with the contemplation of his own excellencies, like that fantastic
Youth, who made love to, and dyed for himhimself, the only way to take a right
view of our own good qualities, is to see them in other mirrours, to have them
drawn by those advantages and benefits we communicate to others: he that
gathers all his great endowments into his own breast, and keeps them there,
like Roses that grow in deserts, he dies uncommended, and uninjoyed. But less
Sir have they to say for themselves, who contemn and reproach marriage;
scrupling not all, to despise so sac^ed, an institution* and yet into such an
age we are fallen, where it is reckoned not only innocent enough, but a
peculiar piece of gallantry, and good breeding, to divert our selves with holy
wedlock, thinking that ridiculous, that was confirmed in Innocence and
Paradise, certainly they make strangly bold with God, and Religion: they have
struck our of the Calenders of all respect, men grave and serious, thinking
nothing so comicall, as that man that obeys the power of virtue; but we will
not wonder at it* whilst we see them throwing all Religion, and all the
prudence of their Fathers out of the World. They have found out a new wit, and
a new discretion of their own, and will be obliged to none of their Ancestors,
and those who first taught them to speak sense, they will not n^w allow to
speak sense themselves. The World might yet allow them their Province, but they
will not be contented with it, nothing will serve their ambition, but to rule
the universal monarchy of wit; all the Regions of several arts, must pay a
tribute to their power. But we ought first to understand their sufficiency,
before we permit them so proud* an usurpation! their chief strength is
Drammat^q^e Wit, to which are added their Courtship, their dresses, and their
oaths: and yet this is the learning and the wit, that must cry down^ sacred
Religion, and these the prodigious parts that must basfle the experience of so
many generations? without doubt, never any age was so much abused by such
unknowing Pretenders. But this is part of a digression Sir, since our discourse
ought only to lead us to examine their sentiments of marriage, and the justice
of them: which we shall now do. It is not sure because they live chastely and
severely themselves, without the society of a woman? nothing less! their
aversion, for the Pales and fences of marriage, is because they love their
ranges, and a vicious chase: they despise the society of a virtuous wife, that
they may gad abroad to seek Love, spending their wealth, their strength, and
their time, in the embraces of a Stronger, their heads and their hearts, are
perpetually full of new designs, of debauching innocent Virgins, of
dishonouring the marriage bed of their friend, and of ridding themselves of an
enjoyment of which they are tired: neither is it their earnestness of serving
their Country, that makes them neglect marriage; no all their time is spent in
their dresses, their Courtship, and their pleasures; it can be nothing but
their violent inclinations to vice, which are assisted from below, that makes
them do this injustice to sacred things: and it is strange to consider, that
those who have no better characters should yet win any thing upon the tempers
of men: they are those who as they prodigally spend the estates of ancient and
noble Families, so they will in all probability, leave the next generation
nothing but sorrows, distempers, and french consumptions, neither are they
content with enjoying a wild liberty, and to bring into contempt those things
that have so long worn the characters of honor and respect, but they endeavor
to remove all reverence to Religion out of the world; not only owning, but
triumphing in Atheism; having in contempt the persons of those that would
instruct them, such a Sect of Philosophers the Christian world could not show;
and we may think, that it had not been troubled with them now, had they not
been the forerunners either of its dissolution, or some Times of dreadful
events: the glorious Creator of the world, when he permits to be owned, and
practiced, principles so fatal and pernicious to all Religion, all Laws,
Interests, and societies in the world, forewarnes us of mighty revolutions: and
I am apt to believe, that they have reached the highest steps, that the
baseness and the degeneracy of man can go; it is impossible any age should be
more wicked, or triumph more in their vices, and their crimes. But there are
others besides these Dons that do injuries to marriage, especially those.

First who spoke of it with little respect; thereby begetting strange fears,
and prejudices in the minds of the Youth, if there are those whose
inclinations are for a single life, and they live in that with chastity, and
discretion, no one ought to accuse them for such a manner of life, but why
should they mock at all practices that are contrary to their own? such ^leight
discourses I know will weigh very little with wise and prudent persons, but
unexperienced Youth, is apt to be affected with things confidently delivered,
though there be some times little sense in them; if they have a mind to
exercise their wit, let them choose a subject more agreeable to the interests
and the complexion of mankind; and let them think it to be a little rude to
reproach the practice of their Fathers, and the greatest part of the world,
which they do in speaking against marriage. Never any age had more trifling
gallantries than this has, and* yet none was ever more in love with them; great
capacities were of o^d, serious, modest, and unaffected; but now* he that ownes
a little wit, makes such a noise with it, as to disturb the quiet and the
serious affairs of the world. But there are those, who have done greater
injuries to marriage and they are,

Secondly those who dishonor it by their own practices. If we should here
examine all those several things, that prove a discredit to that condition we
should undertake a task too long and difficult, since there are so many little
affairs, which (like the small heads of Rivers) by the covered adventures of a
long course, open themselves at last in great floods of discontents, and
injuries: there are causes of injustice in marriage, that pretend a privilege
from disputes; but this we may say with freedom enough, that the indiscretions
alone of many in this condition have been the causes of considerable
miscarriages, and that not in the first choice, but after management; and as it
sometimes happens in greatest Empires, that an injury done to an inconsiderable
person, (as lately in Muscovy,) has, through unknown ways, produced effects,
as have shook the puissance of those Empires themselves. So little pieces of
imprudence, have been the first causes of great discontents in marriage* and we
may plainly see, that as in all the concernments of the whole world, if there
had been, but half that discretion, and prudence in the management of them, as
there has been of other pretenses, the world had known much more repose,
satisfaction, and prosperity, than it now can show; so if those in the state of
marriage, had trusted more to such safe indowments, than to their little
gallantries, and pretended sufficiencies, we had seen fewer instances of
ill-betrothed pairs. Many presume upon their own good qualities, or trust too
much to their being loved, even whilst they withdraw the causes of that
affection. Others love to railly with imagined injuries, not taking right
measures of the tempers they so accost. Some expect, that the comforts and
blessings of marriage, should cost them no industry and prudent management.
Others give causes of real wrongs, by foolishly hunting for imagined: and much
of the scandal, that lies upon that Sex, is originally owing to the folly of
Husbands: without doubt, the smallest disgusts, and weaknesses in families
should be concealed from the whole world, and therefore the first prudence,
distinguished mankind into particular dwellings, that none might be witnesses
of such things, which are often increased, and r^vell'd into greater quarrels,
when they are known and revealed. There art others, who assist themselves to
the ruin of that virtue, they ought to maintain; the mind is not a thing hard
and impenetrable, but subject to the impressions of what stands next it; and
many by their own folly, unperceiveably create those inclinations, in that
relation, which may in time prove fatal to their repose; and it happens often
privately, as in public converses, where that virtue, which was strong, and
perfect, in places of serious, and modest living, has insensibly declined (and
unperceived by the owner) where amors intrigues, and vices are publicly
owned; and that conversation, which is the Mode, those inclinations do they
embrace, who have an interest in it. This does not deny, but that many persons
of great virtue, may live amongst those who are vicious: but we speak only, of
what is general. Others are too careless of their love affairs; and I scruple
not at all to affirm, that though jealousy is a very ill thing, yet a prudent
conduct and care, is absolutely necessary for the preservation of virtue: I
understand not those, who call neglects of this nature, a good disposition and
much love, since those are much greater, that endeavor to remove temptations
from the valued object, then to expect unseasonably a victorious virtue in the
midst of assaults. Sir, I have pointed at but very few of those things, that
prove the first grounds of discontents in marriage, and so by consequence of
the reproaches are flung upon that condition. There are besides a thousand
more; some that might be named, and others that are better concealed. But there
is one thing that proves the greatest ground of after discontents, and that is
imprudent choices: either unsuitable to our humors, education, condition, or
affairs; this indeed is a very great prejudice to marriage, but ought not to be
reckoned, as a discredit to that condition; since, though our Creator has given
us useful, happy, and agreeable institutions, yet our own follies, and want of
brains, is a reproach to our selves alone: if we by indiscretion,
covetousness, or other vain inclinations, will throw our selves into strange
unions, we ought to bear the scandal of inconsiderate fopps; and not expect
that the prudence, or lovely order of things, should be broken, to repair our
weaknesses; marriage is free from the miscarriages, that follow the actions of
these men. Besides the most excellent enjoyments of humane life, are the most
nice, and critical; and where the advantages are extraordinary, an ill
management must needs make the prejudices the same: and the greatest justice
these men can do the world, and the greatest prudence, and nobleness they are
capable of showing, is by an invincible discretion, and patience, to do right
to that condition, their first follies had wronged. We have now inquired of
discretion; next we may celebrate Religion, as a foundation of virtuous unions.
This should have been the first, but the other has a larger sway; yet if this
had the power it ought, all would be happy loves; but the degeneracy of Man has
thrust it out of these, as well as other affairs: yet without this, it is
possible, that Time (if no other accidents should happen may bring decays upon
the strongest passions; and neglects may taken the S^ate of Love; but this adds
a perpetual greeneness, and freshness to Love; this is used to carry those
tendernesses, and endearments to fifty, and threescore, that were known at
twenty; and it is the greatest, and most sure conservor of Love. There are Sir,
two things, that may pretend an interest in this discourse. Divorce, and
Poligamy* to the first, we may say in short, that it is (one case excepted)
forbidden by unanswerable Scriptures: and the best prudence of Mankind: for, it
would be the inlet to the greatest disorders, disingenuities, and
extravigancies that the World could know. And for Poligamy, it is enough to
discredit it, that the first institution of the married life, and that in the
possession of all the advantages and pleasures, that innnocence, and Paradise
could bestow, was but of two; which proves the divine intention and the
original benefits, and happinesses of that state, to consist in one Love:
besides the practices of the new Testament: and the inconveniences of the
contrary, in Countries where it is allowed, where nothing but an insatiable,
(not quenched but inflamed by variety) and furiously sottish lust, reigns in
the generality; and amongst the wise, there are either the perplexities of
unreconcileable domestique quarrels; or else that liberty laid down, for the
pleasures of repose, and contentment. And now Sir, after we have been so long
serious, it is agreeable to our Youth, to divert our selves, with opening the gay
and pleasant scenes of Love, and describe a little the felicities of that
passion: it would be but just, something to loosen a mind bound up to grave
and serious considerations, by celebrating a love, that has so large a Dominion
in the Earth; but I consider Sir, that this is the province of greater men, and
our Masters the Gallants, will not allow us this freedom; as they alone
pretend to make Love, with glory, and success; so they alone will record their
adventures: besides we cannot furnish the harangue with ends of French, without
which paint Love cannot look beautifully; we submit to them, and as we cannot
ma^e Love, so we cannot relate it so modishly as they. Unhappy Albion whose
beggarly, and scanty language, is not able to contain, nor render pleasing the
mighty conceptions of thy Youth, but they must borrow dresses from their
neighbors, for their victorious passions: yet the capricio of thy Fortune is
something strange, whilst it is scandalous to beg an Alms at a Romans door,
(to whose Gallantry thou yet have owed so much) but a high reputation to cringe
and bow, to a leight Monsi^ur, unty thy faultring tongue, and let no greatness,
Gallantry, nor felicity of thy own, be too big or too happy for thy
expressions. But this is something pedantical, and against the humor, in
short, Sir, I have furnished you with the serious considerations of Marriage:
the amorous you must take from the Age, or rather from your own Love, in which,
as you will be better furnished, than from our Gallants, so it will be an
entertainment, and an account, more perfect, and agreeable, than this of

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

FINIS.

