An ACCOUNT, of Major General KIRCK, And LONDONDERRY; WITH A Geographical
Account of the River he Sailed down, and the Various Forts on it, Perticularly
that of KULMORE.
Lycensed, according to Order,
THE Mouth of the River of Londonderry, lies about West and by South or West
South West from Kintyre in the Highlands of Scotland, and is not above Fourteen
or Fifteen Miles distant from it. As you Enter it upon the West is a Fort
called Green-Castle, but is of no Importance, the River being so wide there
that they can easily go in without the reach of this Castle: About Seven or
Eight Miles above it lies another called Red Castle, but is of as little use as
the former, the River likewise being of that Breadth there, that no Shot can
reach them from this Fort. Above this, about Three or Four Miles distance is
another called White-Castle, which is Situated between a quarter and half a
mile from the River, which is of as little use to hinder Landing as either of
the former; for though the River be Narrower than at the former Two, yet it
being at that distance from the River cannot hinder the Entrance of any Ships.
Betwixt this Place and the going in at the Fort of Kulmore is shallow Water, so
that no Ships of any considerable Burden can Enter but about the Springtide;
and therefore, though the Major General has Entered the Mouth of the River above
Ten or Twelve Days ago, yet upon Sounding the Depth of the River he found,
that he could not safely go in, till such time it is High Water, unless he was
resolved to strand his Ships. The Fort of Kulmore is about Three Miles from
Londonderry, but it is not of such Importance as Papists and other Disafected
Persons would make the World believe. For in the time of the late Irish
Rebellion (since which time the Fort has had no additions of strength that we
hear of) when the Town of Londonderry was Blockt up as straightly as now it is,
and when there were not above 500 in Garrison in it, and endured a Seige of
above Six Months, Coll. -- was sent to reinforce it with one Regiment only, he
was forced to wait for the Springtide, before he could pass the Fort of
Kulmore; though in the mean while the Beseiged keept Correspondence, by sending
in the Night time some Persons that could Swim well down to him, who brought
Intelligence back from him again to the Town till such time as he had Water
enough to carry his Ships over; at which time, though he had but one Man of War
in his Company, and there was a Chain over the River by Kulmore, yet he easily
broke the Chain, and passed that Fort without receiving any considerable
Damage. And no doubt the Beseiged keeps as good Correspondence with the Major
General now, as those did then; and he having Four Men of War in his Company
will Enter with less Damage then they did.

The Town it self lies higher than the Land within Shot of it, and is for the
most part surrounded with the River and Boggs, so that they can easily defend
themselves a considerable time against the Enemy. It has Four Gates, Butchers
Gate, Ferry Gate, Bishops Gate and Ships Gate. In the middle of the Town is the
Marketplace, where is likewise the Guild Hall of the Town. It is sufficiently
Planted about with great Guns for Annoying their Enemies: It has Provisions
sufficient, there having several Ships got in thither within these Four Weeks
from Scotland; so that we need not doubt, but what by the strength of the Town
and the Valor of the Inhabitants (which has been sufficiently demonstrated by
the great Havoc they have made, as well of the Greatest of their Officers, as
of the Private Sentinals of their Enemies) it will be able to hold out till
such time as the Major General shall get in with his Soldiers, Ammunitions and
Provisions for its Relief.

POSTSCRIPT.
The Scotch Letters Advise that they have further Confirmation of Major General
Kirk's continuing in the River that leads to Londonderry, in expectation of a
further supply, that is prepairing for him, in order to force his Passage into
the Town, That the Town Perseveres in its Noble and Vigorous Defense, that
their Provisions holds out very well, having Husbanded what they received from
thence to the best Advantage.

London, Printed for J. Meeks, near the Bolt and Tunn in Fl^et-street, 1689.


