AN ACCOUNT OF DUNDEES Rendezvouse, AND THE FRENCH, and IRISH, LANDING Place IN
SCOTLAND. Viz. The North, and West, High-Lands, with an Acount of the CLANS.
Licensed,

July 17th, 1689.


LOchaber, the present Retreat of that Rebel Dundee, was Originally and
Properly called Abre, which according to the Judgment of the Learned Buchanan,
signifies a Harbor, for that the Sea comes in there into a large Bay, which
resembles a standing Pool, or rather a Lake; whence those of the Low-Lands that
speak English, call not only that Bay of the Sea, but likewise the whole
Country round it, improperly by the name of Lochquhabre. It is bounded with the
Deucaledonian Sea on the West near to the Shire of Ross, on the North
Baldenoch, and Port of Murray on the East, and part of Athol, Broadalbine, and
Lorn from the South, to the South West Parts; yet a Country as fertile as any
in those Parts, producing plenty of Corn and Pasture, and very pleasant, by
reason of shady Woods, and store of Rivers, and Springs, It is as plenteous in
Fish as most Countries in Scotland, as well River Fish as Seafish. It has
ridges of almost inaccessible Mountains along it; so that it is an easy matter
for a few Persons to defend themselves there against a great Number af Persons
who are Ignorant of its Avenues. It has been for many years a Nest of Thieves
and Robbers, who used to go in Bodies together, into several of the
Neighboring Countries, and drive away all their Cattle, and take with them
what they could easily carry.

And because some People here are at a loss, when they meet with the Word CLAN,
I shall briefly inform the Reader, that the Import of that Word is no more than
Family, or Tribe; and the Chief of it is Worshipped by the Inferior sort of
People, as if he were a Demi-god. And indeed formerly they had great reason to
stand by him, for if he was Attainted of Rebellion, all his Vassals and Tenants
were forfeited with him, as if they had been guilty of the same Crime, though
they were never so Innocent of it. But the Convention of Scotland has of late,
(to their unspeakable Commendation,) Repealed that Act as unreasonable, which
has prevented a great many's going in to Dundee, who, had the former Act been
in being, would have been necessitated to follow their Chief, seeing they had
no other ways to preserve their Estate, but their Chiefs overcoming his
Enemies. And this may well be supposed to have been the reason why none of Duke
de Gordon's Vassals and Tenants joined him, they being mostly Protestants, and
so by that Act of the Convention freed from all the hazard of being forfeited,
which they were formerly under, upon their Superiors being declared a Traitor.

The most considerable of the Clans that joined him, were the Macklenes, and
the Mackdonalds; the former, it is well known, have lived in Rebellion and
Robbery for a great part of the late King Charles's Reign. And as for the
latter, they are all, or most, Roman Catholics, and it is well known, they
would do any thing to advance Mother-Church's Interest. But it may not be amiss
to give a brief Description of these Two Islands, which these Two CLANS
possessed. The Mackleans Live in the Isle of Mut, it is toward the Southermost
parts of Lockguhabre, is Twenty Four Miles long, and of the same breadth; it is
Craggy, and very Fruitful in Corn; it has many Woods, and great Numbers of
Deer, and a safe Harbor. On the West it has Two Rivers that abound in Salmon,
with others smaller, and Two Lakes, in each of which is an Island with a Castle
in it. The Sea runs in it, and makes Four Bays, all which are well stored
with Herring. This Island lies not far from Argile-shire, which is a Barren
Country, and bad for an Army to subsist in.

The other Island, in possession of the Mackdonalds, lies off of the Northern
parts of Lockguhabre, it is called the Sky; that is to say, a Wing; but by the
Ancient Scots it was called Skianack, i. e. Winged; for that the Promontories,
between which the Sea runs in, represent Wings displayed. It is the greatest of
all the Islands about Scotland, being Forty Two Miles in length, and in some
places Eight, in other Twelve, in breadth; it abounds in Mountains, and these
with Woods, and the Woods abound in Pastures; the Valleys are Fruitful of Corn
and Cattle, and especially with Horses. It is Watered with Five Rivers that are
replenisht with Salmon, together with several little ones. The Sea entering it
makes many Bays, Three great ones, and Thirteen smaller, which afford plenty
of Herrings. It has likewise a Lake of sweet Water, and Five Castles.

For the rest that joined him, they are very inconsiderable, and Persons who
have no Principle at all, but only that they may have occasion to Plunder the
Countries where they come, it being the delight of many of those sort of People
to Plunder the Countries where they Live; and were never so sevearly looked
after, as in Oliver's time, though it cost him some time, and more Men, before he
could Reduce them. They are all in general a Barbarous sort of People, and have
little or no sense of Religion, and if any, it inclines to Popery; they have
much the same Language with the Native Irish, there being no greater difference
betwixt them, than betwixt the English and Scotch Low-Landers.

They are Persons that will not stand the shock of a Battle in their own
Country, because they know how to make their escape by those Avenues where
strangers cannot so easily follow them, especially Horse; and as for Foot, few
are able to pursue them, they being very swift in Running.

We doubt not but we shall quickly hear of their Defeat; for the Earl of Argile
is gone from the West High-Lands with a Detachment of their Majesty's Forces,
and a great Number of his Vassals and Tenants to Hem them in on the West.

LONDON, Printed for W. Brown on London-Bridg, 1689.


