AN ACCOUNT OF AN ATTEMPT Made upon the Person of Mr. Arnold,
ONE OF His MAJESTY'S Justices of the Peace FOR THE County of Monmouth.
IN Bell-Yard, near Temple Bar; upon Thursday, the Fifteenth of April, between
Nine and Ten a Clock at Night.
NOt to trouble the Reader with Prefaces, which are so much Exploded by the
Wits of the Age, I cannot but take Notice of an Excellent Observation made by a
Worthy and Ingenious Divine of the Church of England; who Discoursing
concerning Papists, expresses himself thus: I doubt not, but Papists are made
like other Men; Nature has not generally given them such Savage Dispositions,
but their Religion has made them so: I am loath to say it, and yet I am
confident it is very True, That many Papists would have been Excellent Persons,
and very Good Men, if their Religion had not hind'red them, if the Doctrines
and Principles of their Church had not perverted and spoiled their Natural
Dispositions. And in relating some of their Meritorious Acts of Treason and
Murder, designed by the Papists, and applauded by some of that Party, the same
Excellent Person speaks thus: Good God! That any thing that is called Religion*
should so perfectly strip Men of all Humanity, and transform the Mild and
Gentle Race of Mankind, into such Wolves and Tigers. And this is the Exact
Character of a Papist; and least we should forget what they are, they daily
give us fresh Occasions to satisfy us, that they are still the same Men, and
that no Favor nor Kindness on our Parts, can alter their cursed Natures, nor
secure us from their Designing the utter Destruction of any that dare appear
against their Villainous Contrivances: And this we have a new Instance of, in
the following brief Account, as it is related by the Inhabitants and Neighbors
in and near the Place where it was Acted.

Upon Thursday the Fifteenth of this instant April, John Arnold, Esquire one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Monmouth, was at a Tavern
with some Persons of Honor, near Temple Bar; and going from thence he had
occasion to pass through a Place called Bell-Yard, near Chancery Lane, between
Nine and Ten a Clock the same Evening, toward his Lodging in Fleet Street; as
he was going along, he observed Two or Three Persons to follow him, which he
supposed to be his own Servants; but coming nigh a little Lane, called
Jack-a-Napes Lane, one of these Persons stepped before him, and threw a Cloak
over his Head; and dragging him a little out of the way, threw him down; and
instantly Three Men fell upon him, and with their Swords or Daggers,
endeavored to Murder him, stabing him in the Head, Breast, and Arm, and run him
quite through the Side; but finding their Weapons met with some Opposition,
they swore Dam 'um, he wore private Armor, or a Coat of Mail, or words to that
purpose; whereupon one said, God Dam the Dog, Cut his Throat, or to that
effect, which one of them Immediately endeavored to do, kneeling down upon him,
and cutting him from one Ear to the other, and likewise up to his mouth in a
most Horrid manner, yet happily missed his Windpipe; one of the Villains said,
Dam me ye Dog, now Pray for the Soul of Captain Evans. This Evans it seems
being a Jesuit, who was lately Executed for High Treason in the County of
Glamorgan in Wales, and who sometime before his Apprehension had threatened to
Pistol the said Mr. Arnold; One of them attempting to give another Wound to Mr.
Arnold, struck one of his Companions into the Leg, which made him swear God Dam
me, you have Wounded me; While they are proceeding in their bloody Purpose to
dispatch him, it happened that a Gentleman having occasion to send his Servant
out, and the Villainy being Acted very near his Door, the glance of the Candle
it is thought affrighted them, for they Immediately fled, and Mr. Arnold Crying
out Murder, several of the Neighbors came in and found him there weltring in
his own Blood, who desired they would help him to his Lodging, which was at the
Post House in Fleetstreet, where he now remains.

He has received no less than Seven Wounds from the Hands of these Cursed
Villains: One in the Throat, one in the Head, two in the Arm, two in the
Breast, and one in the Side; and yet it is very much hoped that through Gods
Assistance he may escape with his Life, though no question the same Fate was
designed for him as was for that Worthy and never to be forgotten Gentleman Sir
Edmundbury-Godfrey.

One of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, who Lives near that Place, having an
Account of this horrid Fact, was pleased to take a particular Information of
all Circumstances, and humbly presented it to His Majesty, who was extremely
concerned at this Villainous Attempt; and his Majesty was further Graciously
pleased to order one of his own Chyrurgeons to Visit Mr. Arnold: and upon
hearing the whole matter in Council, His Majesty was Graciously pleased to
Order, that the Lord Mayor of London, and the Justices of Peace of Middlesex,
and City of Westminster, do cause diligent search to be forthwith made within
their several Jurisdictions for the said Persons, or any of them, or any that
did incite, encourage, or set them on to make this Attempt: And for an
Encouragement, his Majesty is pleased to promise an Hundred Pound to any who
shall Discover or Apprehend any one of the said three Persons, or any who did
incite them thereto; and if any of the three Persons, shall Discover his
Accomplices, His Majesty is Graciously pleased to promise him his Pardon for
the same, besides the said Reward.

John Arnold Esquire is known to be a very good Protestant, and a strong Opposer of
the Plots and Designs of the Papists, and has been likewise very Instrumental
in the Discovery of the late horrid Conspiracy; and we may therefore Reasonally
suppose he was marked out for Popish Vengeance, and that this cursed Attempt
came from their Hands, as their words at parting seem very much to confirm,
bidding him Pray for the Soul of Captain Evans, who was lately* Legally
Condemned, and Executed as a Jesuit; so that it seems Papists can take up any
shapes, (and both Captains and Cobblers) as well as Act the greatest Crimes for
advancing the Catholic Cause.

The occasion of Mr. Arnold's being in London, was (as has been often
Published) about an Accusation of one Master Herbert in Monmouth-shire,
concerning some Transactions in that Country; and Mr. Arnold had now brought
several Witnesses from thence, to make good the Accusation, and the Cause was
ordered to be heard the very next Day, that is the Sixteenth Instant before his
Majesty in Council: Now by Reason of some Words uttered by Mr. Herbert, a while
before, and other Circumstances: Mr. Herbert was ordered to be taken into
Custody; and we hear that notwithstanding this misfortune upon Mr. Arnold,
there will be a hearing of the Cause by Council of both sides at the time
appointed.

In the mean time let all good Protestants beseech Almighty God to Discover and
bring to Justice, these, and all other our Cursed, Popish Adversaries, who
design the Destruction of his Majesty and his Protestant Subjects, and the
overthrow of our Religion and Government Established, and to this let all the
People say,

Amen.

