An Account of Rock-Salt from the 25th of December. 1699, to the 25th of December.
1700.
Bushels Gall. l s d Rock Entered and Delivered in Cheshirc -- which Duty was
paid 3 s. 4 d. per Bushel, at 75 l. each Bushel, or secured by Bond at nine
Months. 246142 -- Duty 41023 13 04 Rock Exported, part of the Sum above, which
Duty was all drawn back and discharged by so much of the first Bonds given for
the Rock. 19053 -- Duty 3175 10 00 Rock Melted and Refined at the Works in
England and Wales. -- 208641 7 Duty 4773 12 11 Which Duty was discharged by the
Drawback allowed, and satisfied by so many of the first Bonds given for the
Rock. And the Salt made from the Produce of the Rock melted, was subject to the
same Laws and Duties of Salt made from Brine. Rock Rest as Balance at the
Works, -- for which the Bonds are out and will be discharged if the Rock shall
be melted, by the Draw-back, otherwise must be paid. 18447 1 Duty 3074 10 05
246142 41023 13 04

This is the Account of Rock, ( viz. all that appears) if more was used this
Year, it neither paid nor secured any Duty.

Hence appear some Inconveniences and Uncertainties to the Revenue.

First, If Rock be used in Specie, there is 19 l. allowed in each Bushel.

Secondly, That Allowance is to the Refiner, which (if melted in Seawater)
produces a much greater Quantity.

Thirdly, The whole Charge allowed for Officers is lost, as is plain by
showing, that whatsoever Duty was paid from Salt refined, would have been paid
from Brine Salt; we never use more or less than there is occasion for,
therefore whatever is paid for the one is rebated for the other.

It Is demonstrable that 56 l. Rock melted in fresh Water makes 56 l. of Salt,
but 75 l. is allowed the Refiner as Parr with 56 l. to the Maker from Brine:
Therefore the Account of last Years Refining compared with Brine stands thus,
for 70788 Bushel, which the 19 l. over made more, the Revenue was lessened
11798 l. besides the Charge of Officers.

It is to be known what the 12 d. per Bushel (paid before the use of the Rock
Salt) amounted unto, and would give light into this Secret.

What is exported of it, hinders the Manufactory of so much Salt at least, if
not double. But if not permitted to be dugg'd, no Frauds could be made.


