AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. Blunts late Book, ENTITLED, King William AND Queen Mary
CONQUERORS, Now under the Censure OF THE PARLIAMENT.

London, Printed in the Year, 1693.

An Account of Mr. BLUNT's late BOOK, etc.
ROyal Prerogative is a subject of that nice and tender Quality, that it is
undoubtedly an unpardonable Presumption for any common unhallowed Pen to touch.
It Is not the Pretensions of Zeal and Loyalty that takes up the Pen, that can
apologize for the Bold Hand that guides it, any more than Zimri that held up
the Ark. If an Examination of the Fountain and Boundaries of Supreme Power fall
under any Cognizance, it is unquestionably in the Legislative Body. The opening
the Cabinet of such Records belongs to their Hands that keep the Key. If
therefore the forementioned Presumption, even simply considered, is an Offense
of that high Nature, certainly the Transports of that mad Scribble that outruns
all the Bounds of Truth and Reason; and Launches into those unaccountable
Mistakes and Frenzies, as utterly to destroy the very Fundamentals of the
Constitution, must deserve a double Lash. A more notorious Instance whereof has
not been matched in the late Licentious Pamphlet that has made such a Noise in
the Town, of which not only the Author but Licenser have fallen under the just
Displeasure of our worthy Patriots in Parliament assembled; a Rebuke so proper
from 'em, in a Cause where Their own and the Nations Honor is so highly
concerned, and which deserved a Repremand from no Less a Hand than Theirs.

It Is the Boldness of that hardened Piece that we presume in some few Remarks
to examine; a Piece which certainly nothing but Infatuation (Infatuation the
Pen-man's best Excuse) could dictate. For besides the egregious
Unreasonableness of the whole Foundation of that Discourse, it is absolutely
impossible the Author in his Right Wits should ever hope that such a subject on
such a Basis should please any thing Living, himself only excepted.

For instance; Suppose it in the favourablest Sense, a well-meaning Loyal
Harangue, with both these fair Aspects, viz. First, as intended a Court-service
to Their Majesty's, by fixing the Crown upon their Heads by so formidable a
Right and Tenure as That of Conquest. And Secondly, Settling the Peoples
Obedience in a firm and duteous Resignation to the Sovereign Authority; founded
on that Claim and Possession: Yet both ways has the Author instead of the least
gaining his Point, utterly lost his Aim.

For Example, He is so far from caressing Their Majesty's in it, that it is
possibly the coursest and most disrelishing Compliment (to give it no worse
Name) he could have picked them out, in writing them Conquerors. That way of
Acquiring a Crown being the remotest from their Thoughts from the first Step
toward the Revolution, and through the whole Course of their Accesses and
Advances to the Throne. The Prince's Declarations all utterly abjured any such
Pretension; nor indeed were the Forces he brought over a competent Strength for
the least Shadow of such an Attempt. And though it is true, several contributing
Providence, to our never to be forgotten Happiness, all conspired to enable
the Gratitude of England to reward their Champion and Deliverer with the
Presentation of a Diadem; yet I am certain in his proudest Triumph (pardon the
Barbarity of that Epithet) he would have taken it very disdainfully to have
been saluted with the Address of the Thief to Alexander, viz. to be Entitled
that Greatest of Robbers, however otherwise glorious Name, a Conqueror. No;
thanks to Heaven, a softer and gentler Coronation Glory, Oblation and Gift, not
Rapine and Violence, incircled that Brow.

Non Rapit Imperium Vis tua, sed Recipit.

And if after all this, thls doughty Penman has endeavored to lay so
ungrateful a Load upon the Royal Shoulders, he has made the most mistaken Piece
of Work on it that Folly and Ignorance could ever be guilty of; at least if
intended as a Favor.

Nor indeed is his intended popular Service herein a much more welcome
Obligation, For

First, Here Is the whole Glory of England totally eclipsed for ever, when a
poor handful of 14000 Men, such wonderful Victors, could make so entire a
Subjection of the little-hearted Great Britain with so much Ease, and so small
Trouble.

It Is possible if such a Feather would stick in the Hoilanders Caps, there would
not want that Vanity in some of our Hogan Neighbors, that partly in Respect
and Favor to their Royal State-Holder, and a little in pride to themselves,
would perk up and plume with such a Title, As Third William, the Second
Conqueror. And yet as matters stand, so much to the contrary, and so far from
such a Thought, I fancy, there is not the poorest Dutchman, even in his very
Ale, but has long since learnt better English; though our Enthusiastic
Englishman this sober Author, has pleased so wilfully and so strangely to
forget himself, and his Mother Tongue.

This State-Casuist little considers what a Blow he has given to the whole
English Army, provided they are of that opinion as to join with him in
Glorifying their Majesty's with his Attribute of Conquerors. For their Martial
Memorials will furnish but a poor homely Record, viz. That 25000 not one of
them durst strick a stroke, nay, so many of them run off to the Prince of
Orange; for all this Submission and Desertion, to a Conquer or, is downright
Dread and Terror, no Kindness and Inclination, which are only due to Guests and
Friends. It Is well for him, that the Parliament by way of Civil Magistracy
have taken him into Consideration; for were he under Martial Judgment, I would
not run his Gantlet, for twice the honor of being Author of his Pamphlet.

Nay the Parliament themselves are not much in his Debt, I mean as to any over
great kindness owing for Civilities received from him; for he has made bold to
put a damnable Slurre upon the whole Convention of England: For at his rate of
Faith, or Front rather; (for we hope he believes better things) they were all
very impertinently busy, in bestowing of Imperial Crowns upon the Prince of
Orange, when God knows they were his own before. For if he claimed by Conquest,
having before that time the whole Power, every Fort, Town, Stengh, etc. through
all England in his hands; and consequently the Universal submission of the
Nation in yiedling all to this to him, the whole Royal Regalia of Conquest
being then already his own, the Conventionary Donation was but Triffle and
Mimickry: Nay, Their Majesty's themselves are a little overseen (if like our
Author I may make so bold with them) in Commencing their Anniversary of their
Reign from the 13th of February.

In short, the Confusions arising from his Hypothesis are too numerous to
recite: All that we can think worth Commendation in it is that he has made His
Majesty doubly a Conqueror. For First belike he Conquered King James, and then
himself: For notwithstanding all the peculiar claims and privileges of
Conquest, he has entirely waved them all, and has sat down contented with a
plain English limited Monarchy, without assuming the least Jewel of Conquest
for adorning his Diadem.

It Is true our Author bound himself to a more modest Circle in the notion of
Conquest, his position being confined to this narrow Compass. viz. That King
William Conquered King James, but not the Nation; and that therefore he
acquired a Title to all the Rights of King James, but not to any Rights of the
Nation. That King James had a Right to Govern this Natton, but by being
Conquered he lost that Right, and in short, King William won it. The business
therefore of this short Paper is to fadom and examine the depth of this
Position, being indeed the Grand Thesis of the whole Book.

Now to begin with the Incongruities in the very Foundation of his Discourse:
For to Conquer a King and all his Rights, and those Rights being granted to
entend to his Government of his Kingdom, and yet to make that distinct and
wholly separate from the Rights of the Nation, is so near to a contradiction
that nothing possibly can be nearer, the Right of Governing over a People being
at least their highest and dearest Concern, and the Conquest of that Right, and
the Latitudes of Power annexed to such a Conquest, being undoubtedly their
tenderest and nearest Consideration.

Well, as great as it was, King William conquered all this, which in every
vulgar Apprehension, was conquering as much as King James had to lose; a very
fair Prize, let me tell ye, for by Birthright, and all the ties of Succession,
his Right extended to the Supreme Administration of three Realms, as far as the
Landmarks of Law reached in the Rule and Sway of a limited Monarchy: A goodly
Conquest, the Peoples unconquered Rights remaining, being only Duty and
Obedience to their Sovereign Conqueror accordingly, which how far agreeing with
the Circumstances of Their Majesty's Accession to the Crown will soon be
examined.

If King James his Desertion upon all the Premises suggested by this Author,
viz. That, seeing the Peoples Universal Inclination for, an Adherence to the
Prince of Orange, Theirs and his Armies total Defection and Revolt, the Forces,
Strengths, Garrisons, all things committed and yielded up to the Prince, and
consequently, all the Regalia of Conquest invested in him; and that thereupon,
looking upon himself as a vanquished Prince, he fled before the Conqueror, left
London, and retired to Feversham in order to make his escape from Subjection,
and being there taken Prisoner, attempted, and succeeded in his second escape
at Rochester, etc. If all these Premises, I say, Intitule our present Sovereign
to the Style of Couquerour; by the same parallel Reasons urged by this Author,
I will as strongly prove, that there never was a Change from the Lancastrian to
the York, or from the York to the Lancastrian Line, in all the Successions from
the Conquest, but every such Change equally might challenge the claim of
Conquest.

For first, we must take it for granted, (and therein our Author agrees with
us) that every possessing Yorkist, or Lancastrian Prince was lawfully King,
more especially if his Right was confirmed by several unbroken Successions in
the same Descent and Family. And if so, undoubtedly, whatever contesting
Dispute lay between the red and white Rose, the Non-possessing Family had all
their Pretentions swallowed, and silenced in the Possessors prevaling Interest
and Title.

Hereupon, supposing the possessing Lancastrian-Prince dies, as soon as the
Breath is out of his Body, the whole Regalia, the Imperial Claims are all, ipso
momento, in the nex Lancastrian Heir: (for in that Sense the King never dies)
and therefore, such Heir as rightfully King, upon the starting up of a York
Branch into the Throne, which cannot be done, but as the Prince of Orange's
Case, with the total Bent and Bias of the Peoples Inclination or Concession at
least. (for what Motives or Reasons persuaded, it matters not) Here Is the
Lancastrian Right Heir, and as Heir, now rightful King of England dispossessed:
And whether the Case exactly quadrate in all particulars with that of King
James, viz. That the thus Dispossessed Abdicates, flies the Kingdom, or absconds
in it, at least, he utterly runs before the prevaling Prince, and Volens
Nolens, quits all Claim, to the possessing Arm of Power, perhaps more entirely
in that point than King James has done. Nay, all this too (to parallel
Circumstances yet a little nearer) possibly after tougher and longer Disputes
then the Two Battles urged by the Author for Preliminaries to the Prince's
Victory, viz. The Skirmish at Wincanton, where Thirty of the Prince of Orange's
Men defeated Seventy Horse, and Fifty Dragoons under Sarsfield; and the other
at Reading, where another Party of the Prince's killed Fifty of King James' s
Dragoons. Now, I say, if such Circumstances as these are enough to make the
Alienation of the Crown a Conquest, how many Crowned Heads since First William
must write Conquerours! Nay, not in England only; for the whole Chronicles of
all Nations would be swelled with Revolutions that with full as much Reason
would fall under that Denomination. For instence, The present King of Portugal
may with full as much Right justify the Title of Conqerour, his elder Brother
his Predecessor, being unfortunately Delirious, and thereby guilty of
Mis-government, was by the People and the States of the Kingdom, removed, and
expelled from the Throne, and the younger Brother planted in his Seat, and not
only made Possessour of his Brother's Kingdom, but of his Brother's Wife the
Queen too.

And what matters the distinction between King James and the Portugal King's
Misgovernment,, one through a crazed, and the other a Religious Frenzy, let it
suffice both of them were laid aside, both their Subjects abandoned and
deserted them, both were equally forced to Abdicate, and consequently both
their Successors might claim an equal Title of Conquerours, only with a little
Advantage on the Portugal's side: For had our Author been his Historian, he
must have added one little Jem more to his Diadem, then he has done to King
William's, for as belike King William only conquered King James, the King of
England, but not the People of England, the Portugal Conqueror, in the like
Conquest, out-shot him a whole Bows length, for he conquered both King of
Portugal and Queen too.

In short, the extravagant Follies, and ridiculous Absurdities from such an
Hypothesis would be endless, for granting King William was justly entitled
Conqueror from that Hour he had King James in his Power, under Restraint and
Subjection, as our Author terms it; by the same parity of Power and Subjection,
there is never a civil Broyl or most unnatural Rebellion, to instance too many,
where Kings have been often in the prevailing Subjects Power, but during that
Mastery the Subjects, by his way of Reasoning, might style themselves Royal
Conquerours: For though as our Author distinguishes in our present Sovereign's
Case, by the long recited Plea of Justice in his entering the Kingdom with an
Armed Power; yet, in the forementioned Rebellious Inurrections, the Prevalence
os the Sword, whether in a right or wrong Cause, may equally pretend to
Conquest: This I am certain the French King makes no such Distinction, and his
very Enemies are pleased to write him Conqueror even in the vilest of his
Triumphs, the very Towns and Acquisitions he has bought with his Levidores, and
Conquest at best, how strong soever a Title, is not the most sparkling Crown
Jewel.

But to leave this remoter Discourse, I shall come to one entire and utter
Confutation of our Author's whole Chain of Argument. The Prince of Orange was
not properly the Conqueror of King James even in his own Restriction and
Limitation of Conquest, viz. The Conqueror of King James, but not of England.

For Example, after King James had looked upon himself as a vanquished and an
abandoned Prince, as he terms it; and therefore, whither out of shame of
standing a too critical Enquiry into his Male Administration, or detected
Intreagues, refused the proffered Retreat of Ham House; or out of any other
Fear or Motive, deserted his Kingdom, and fled, and escaped into France; yet
even then was not the Prince of Orange, in his highest Power, any way King
James's Conqueror; for instead of his being Conquered, it then lay in the
Breast of the whole People and Community of England, in Convention assembled,
to have recalled him back again, (that is, if so minded) to have treated him
still, as King of England, to have received and refixt him again on his Throne
on such and such Terms and Articles of Security, for better Administration, and
future Amendment, if any such could have been hoped or expected, and the Prince
all the while (though invited over by them, as their Deliverer) so far from
claiming Conquest, or being his own Chooser, by Virtue of any such Pretension;
that on the contrary, it lay wholely in the Peoples Breast, how far their
Gratitude would reward their Protector of their Religion and Liberties.

So that upon the up-shot, If King James was Conquered, 'twas by his own
fearful or wilful running away from his Kingdom, whereby the People Seizing his
quitted, abandoned, and relinquisht Crown into their own then Rightful
Possession, by such Disertion and Relinquishment, made a generous and grateful
Present of it to their most Honored Champion, then fully and lawfully empour'd
to accept so Glorious a Gift; insomuch, that if, according to our Author's
Notion, there be any thing of Conquership in the Case, to Humor our Author's
Fancy, it lies between King James, and the Victorious Convention; for King
William and Queen Mary have the least, or rather no part at all of any such
Claim or Challenge. And if there were any such thing as Conquest in the Case,
alas, the Conquering blow was not given till the Convention was pleased to
declare, the Imperial Crown of England was for such and such Causes devolved
into theirs and their only Hands, and as such they were pleased to dispose it,
where and to whom, as their indisputable Will and Pleasure seemed Meet and
Reasonable.

So that, to draw Matters toward a Conclusion, our Author has involved himself
in the most unaccountable Labyrinth and Confusion, from his Chimerical
distinction of Conquering King James, but not the Kingdom of England, which
strictly examined, is little more than just nothing. For, How did he Conquer
King James? Yes, he frighted his Person out of his Kingdom; (that is, if his
own conscious terrifying Faults did not do it for him) but as to his Crown,
Title, Kingship, Royalty, those he conquered not; all those were purely and
wholly the Concession and Grant of the People, and no ways his own Atchivement
or Acquisition. So that, to sum up the whole, in stiling our Gracious
Sovereigns, King William and Queen Mary Conquerours in our present
Circumstances, he has given them a Title of neither Honor nor Service, for
they hold both by a stronger and fairer Claim, derived from the Original
Fountain of Power, the universal Donation of the People under the Possession
and Devolution aforesaid, etc.

And thus this unhappily started Notion of Conquest-Tenure must not only be an
ungrateful Theme to the Nation, as so notoriously derogating from the Glory of
their own Act and Deed, the aforesaid Donation of the Crown; but likewise, be a
nauseous and irksome Apprehension to the English Peoples Constitution and
Kidney, who are not possibly overfond of such a Qualification of Imperial
Majesty reigning over them; and therefore, our Author has very unfortunately
managed so untowardly an Argument, intended for the indearing and inducing a
more Zealous Devotion and Obedience to their Majesty's, from so weak and so
unattractive an Invitation, as the Title of Conquerours.

This Gentleman, take the whole Mass of his Discourse together, I must do him
that right, has a very honest Meaning. He has made it his Business to assert
the Right of their present Majesty's in as vigorous a Manner as the warmest
Zeal and Affection could Inspire, has thoroughly evinced from his Positions laid
down.

That King James has totally lost his Right to these Kingdoms; and therefore,
if he comes again with an Army, he is to be looked upon by the Subjects with no
other Eyes than any other Invader, but is to be resisted by them. Our Fleets
and Armies, without any scruple of Conscience to weaken their Hands, may and
ought to fight as becomes Valiant Men, in the defense of their present
Sovereigns, and their Country; and that not only against the French King, but
likewise against the late King James, if he should come along with a Fleet, or
head an Army against us.

But after all, as there is no occasion or want of the Claim of Conquest,
either to strengthen their Majesty's Interest, or weaken the Pretense of his
Enemies, under what Name or Class whatever. All this Duty to the one, and
Resistance against the other, are equally, if not more strongly enforced from
that softer and gentler Royal Right, invested and lodged in Their present
Majesty's, from the forementioned clearer Fountain of Power.

FINIS.

