AN ACCOUNT OF Oliver Hawley AND John Condon, Who were Executed at TYBURN, On
Friday the 2d. of July, 1686, For Robing His Majesty's Male, near ILFORD, in
the County of ESSEX.
WHereas R -- A -- Oliver Hawley, and John Condon, were on Tuesday the 22d. of
July, 1686. Tried at the King's Bench* Bar, for Robing the King's Male, on the
12th. Day of April last past, at or near Ilford, in the County of Essex, and
upon full Evidence, found Guilty of the said Robery; together with one John
Smith, not yet Apprehended; it has since pleased his most Gracious Majesty to
extend his Royal Mercy to R -- A -- in Granting him his Reprieve, who continues
still in Newgate, in hopes of his Majesty's farther Clemency.

I shall not pretend here, to give any particular Account of the Life or
Character of R -- A -- as being an Object of the King's Mercy; not doubting but
whatever former Faults he may have Committed, the influence of so much Royal
Grace and Favor showed upon him, may be a means of that solid Conversion,
which may regulate his future Actions, as to make the remainder of his Life,
atone for his past Follys and Offenses.

My present Business therefore, is to give you some knowledge of Oliver Hawley
and John Condon, the present just Sufferers for this Notorious Robery.

The more Eminent of which Malefactors Oliver Hawley, Aged at his Death about
Thirty Years, was by Birth an Irishman and accordingly received his Education
in his Youth in his Native Country, till about Ten Years since, through some
unhappy Misdemeanors, Committed there, he was Compelled to quit Ireland, and
take Sanctuary in England, where being in Kent, and living to that height of
Expenses, which the Pockets of his Relations were not well able to support, and
for the maintenance of which, it was very much suspected he must have used no
very honest Course of Life, as was soon after made manifest; for in a a little
time after he Robed a Farmer, that lived on the back side of Windmill Hill,
near Gravesend in Kent, of 9 l. and upwards, for which, he was Apprehended and
Committed to Maidstone-Goal, and for the said Fact received Sentence of
Condemnation: Never the less, through great intercession, he obtained so much
Remission of his Sentence, as to be Reprieved from Death and Transported to
Jamaica. But truly, that Country agreed so little with his Constitution, that
he made a shift in a very short time to get home; and to divert the Danger of a
too early appearance in England, he went over into Flanders, and enter himself
a Soldier, under the late James Scot, then at the Seige of Mastricht; however,
this Honorable Employment, being not extraordinary much in his Element, he
continued not long in that service, for growing in League with one of his
Comrades, they Confederated together, and Committed a very Notorious Robery,
and afterward (as Brothers in iniquity are not always the strongest Friends) a
Quarrel arose between them, in which, he made a shift to Kill his said Comrade,
and so very fairly, by way of self preservation, he took Care to avoid a double
Danger, that threatened him for both those Crimes, by flying to Bourdeuux, where
being safely Arrived, he had Recourse to a never failing Tallent of his, viz.
good Words and hearty Protestations, and thereby wrought himself so far into
the Favor of a Master of a Ship then bound with French Wines for England, as
to select him for his peculiar Friend and confident, Caressing him before, and
also during his whole Voyage at no common rate of Civility, bearing his whole
Charges, and supplying his whole Wants for bare asking for: For all those many
and signal Courtesies; no sooner was the Master of the said Ship Arrived in
England, but the first Return of Gratitude from the said Hawley, the Snake,
that Patron had so generously warmed in his Bosom, was instantly to inform the
Commissioners of the Custom House of the said French Wines, then imported
contrary to Act of Parliament; by this means the whole Cargoe was seized and
condemned, and the poor Master of the Vessel utterly Ruined and undone. Upon
this, he got into some Business about the Custom House, and being in some
Credit from this preferment, he soon after, with some other fellow servants of
his own Quality, went down the River to attend the coming in of some Ships then
expected, and accordingly they went aboard of an East India Merchant, where a
certain Lady was on Board to buy some Rarities, wherein the said Hawley did her
some little service, for which she gave him a Guinea. But Hawley, upon further
search on his Majestys Account in the said Ship, took occasion to be bribed to
a Connivance, by a present of Silks made to him, (for indeed, a person so
notoriously false before to his Friend, would not be over apt of being
extraordinary true to his Prince;) but his fellow searchers suspecting Hawley,
made bold to open the bundle of Silks (which he pretended was foul Linen) and
thereby detected his Corruption, for which being complained of, he was turned
out; the loss of which Employment put him to hard shifts, but by a sudden fetch
of Wit, he applied himself to the aforesaid Lady, and very cuningly telling of
her a false ground of his Expulsion, he representing to her, that the Receipt
of her Guinea, and not his own Bribery, was the occasion of his turning out,
intercession was made for him, and he regained his admission into his place;
upon this, some of his Brethren resenting this false insinuation, and not
over-well likeing the Behavior and Principals of the said Hawley, got a Copy
of his former Conviction for Robery in Kent, and were just upon craving
Judgment thereupon, but Hawley being timely Alarmed at the Prosecution against
him, very prudently withdrew, and kept himself hid, till he got himself into a
Free-Pardon, during this time, having heaped together no little indignation and
malice against his late Prosecutors; he took occasion of venting his Poison and
Spleen, by swearing against a very great Number of them, how justly, or
unjustly he was their Accuser; God only that knows the Secrets of men's hearts
can truly judge; however, he so far strugled up in the World again, that he at
length got into Employment again, in Essex

He was in a Creditable and profitable Station, when he entered into this
Combination of Robing the Male, being thereby the better informed what Sums of
Gold the Jews and other Traders into England do almost daily import into this
Kingdom, however, as far as the Office he was in contributed to his privity and
knowledge hereof, his own Avarice ('it is certain) was the main instrument of his
Ruin; when not contented with so credible and competent portion of Worldly
Happiness as his Place with honesty might have supplied him withal, he durst
imbargue in so notorious a design, as has justly pulled down, not only its own
vengeance along with it, but also that Arrears of Punishment, not till now
paid, for all the transgresions of his former lewd and enormorous Life.

As to his behavior in Prison since his Condemnation and nearer his day of
Execution, his deportment has all along appeared very aerie and unconcerned; and
as for what Audit he may have made with God before his departure, is wholly
unknown; his Religeon whatever it were,, I shall not meddle with it.

The other person John Condon, Condemned and Executed with the said Hawly, was
a Native of Ireland also, but the Transactions and Conduct of his Life, have no
way been so remarkable, nor indeed is there any particular of that Note, worth
recounting here; let it suffice that as this Relation consists of nothing but
very great Truths; we have informed our selves of nothing more relating to the
said Condon, than that he somitime since kept a Chandlers Shop almost over
against the Fountain Tavern in the Strand, near the Savoy.

His behavior in Prison has been much different from that of his fellow
sufferer, having had some remorse for his so great offense.

On Friday between Ten and Eleven of the Clock in the Morning, they were put
into a Cart at Newgate and conveyed to the place of Execution, where being
Arrived, were (making no Speech at all) Executed according to Law.

FINIS.
This may be Printed, R P. the 2d. of July, 1686.

London; Printed by E. Mallet, next Door to Mr. Shipton's Coffee-House near
Fleet-bridge, 1686.


