Christian Charity TO Poor Prisoners, especially those for DEBT, Communicated
in a Letter, by a Gentleman to a Poor Prisoner, his Friend in Prison in London,
June 1694.

Matthew. 25.^6. -- I was in Prison, and ye came unto me. LONDON, Printed for
Eliz. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall. 1696.

Christian Charity to Poor Prisoners, especially those for Debt, communicated
in a Letter, by a Gentleman to a Poor Prisoner, his Friend in Prison in London
June 1694.
CAptivity and Imprisonment cannot (as I humbly conceive) but be accounted in
Reason, in the number of the greatest and sorest Evils of this Life to Mankind,
therefore not unfitly represented in those two Verses following, which I have
long since met with.

A Prison is a House of Care, a Place where few can thrive,
A Touchstone for to try a Friend, a Grave to Men alive.
For Man doubtless is a vigorous active Being, Created for Action and Business,
for Society and Conversation, yea, to have intercourse even with the whole
World; and this is no wonder, considering with Seneca their Divine Original;
therefore those Restraints which a Prison puts upon Men's natural appetites and
desires in those outward Concerns of the World, must needs be apprehended by
Man, as a very great Evil and Affliction, and in truth very burdensome to
Mankind.

Now to be Instrumental somewhat to alleviate this weighty Affliction of a
Prison, and to make it (if not easy) yet portable and comfortable, in some
measure, but further also very advantageous and beneficial to the Poor
Sufferers, especially, as to the Improvement of their Minds, and conducive to
their Eternal Welfare in the other World, as it is the main end of this
intended Discourse; so it will (I humbly conceive) be no contemptible piece of
Charity, and what God may accept from him, who is not in a Capacity for the
other external Charities to the Body, and therefore hopes it may find a
favorable reception with God, and with all honest and ingenuous Minds.

It is most true what the Scripture speaks, Heb. 12.11. That no Affliction or
Chastisement for the present seems joyous but grievous, but yet afterward
yields the peaceable fruits of Righteousness, to them that shall be exercised
thereby, that is (as I humbly conceive) who shall be so affected with their
sufferings as to cause them to break off their Sins by true Repentance, and to
see to the well regulating of their Lives; when they can say with good David,
Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy
word, and verse. 71. It is a good thing that I have been afflicted, that I might
learn thy statutes, and verse. 75. I know O Lord that thy judgments are right,
and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me: For then we may say truly, O
blessed Prison! the shackling and fettering of the Body; when it becomes a
means of the freedom and enlargement of the Soul and Mind, and to be thereby
freed from the greatest Captivity and Slavery in the World, the Drudgery and
Bondage of Sin and Satan; making us become the Servants of God, the Favorites
of Heaven. This Blessing would make you to be free Prisoners indeed, and give
you cause to rejoice and triumph in your sufferings, and say, O blessed Prison
and Confinement! which caused me to consider of my ways, and to become serious
and wise, to think of God, and to consider my self, and to make my Peace with
Heaven, and to make it my business to store my Soul with Grace and Virtue, to
capacitate me thereby for Eternal Happiness hereafter; for (as a late worthy
Author discourses) since Man was Created for a supernatural and divine end; so
the Life which disposes to that end is divine and supernatural, according to
that Maxim in Philosophy, that the end and the means ought to be proportioned,
and of one and the same order.

And now may I not say? that none but a Fool or a Madman, but would desire
that his Afflictions and Imprisonment might be thus blessed to him, and made
thus advantageous for his Eternal Welfare? (even a greater advantage than
Joseph had from his Imprisonment in Egypt.) To the promoting of which great
end, may I present to your view those great benefits and advantage you may make
by your Confinement to a Prison?

As first, your Imprisonment has freed you from many Temptations, that usually
attended you in your Trade and worldly Employments; for as Solomon tells us,
Ecclesiast. 27.2. As a nail sticks fast between the joining of the Stones, so
does sin stick close between buying and selling.

2. You are in a present afflicted and suffering Condition, and it is usually
observed, that the eye that sin shuts, pain opens; for if ever Men will be
serious and consider, and be wise, it must be under sufferings. And this in
truth is God's end in sending them, as the beforementioned Scriptures, with
many others testify. That Holy Father St. Austin therefore says of himself;
Periissem nisi periissem (i.e.) I had perished and been undone for ever, had I
not been sorely afflicted in this Life; for as another speaks, Afflictio domat
cupiditates, ex erat fidem, Coronat patientiam (i. e.) Affliction tames and
subdues our lusts and vices, quickens and exercises our Faith and Trust in
God, and Crowns our Patience.

3. By your Imprisonment, you have the great advantage of Time and Leisure for
consideration, reading, meditating, and performing your private Devotions,
which in the midst of the encumbrances of the World in your secular Employments
and Trading here in this Life you could not enjoy, for as the Son of Syrach
speaks, Ecclus. 38.24. The wisdom of a learned Man comes by opportunity of
leisure, and he that has little business shall become wise. Now consider these
advantages you have from your Prison, and make these wise uses of them: More
especially make use of your time and leisure in searching after Wisdom as after
hid Treasure (as Solomon advises, Prove. 2.4. For indeed the Cause of all
wickedness in the world arises from want of consideration; men will not be
brought to it. It is observed by our Divines, that inconsiderate Men are wicked
Men; therefore let your Afflictions make you serious, wise, considerate; and
let your Sufferings bring you Home, as they did the Prodigal Son to his Fathers
House. Labor to improve your mind in necessary knowledge and in virtue, and
now ply your Devotions; the Throne of Grace in Heaven stands open to you,
although you are never so close a Prisoner, and you may rest assured, if your
Prayers are qualified as they ought to be, and come from an honest and upright
heart, you will receive rich returns from Heaven; for as Porphery a wise
Heathen speaks, viz. all wise Men in all Nations -- have been very diligent and
frequent in Prayer. And as St. James advises us, James Chap. 5. verse. 13. Is
any man afflicted let him pray, etc. And you may there say, as that honest
Heathen in Plutarch Hermogenes did, that the Gods which knew all things, and
can do all things, are so much my Friends, and so highly concerned for my
Welfare, that I am never a Night or Day out of their watchful Providence, but
whatever I do, I have their assistance, and whatever I design, their direction.
And then what further cause will you have to bear your sufferings with
patience, and say with the Philosopher Epictetus? In these things which seem
hard and grievous to me, I do (says he) thus dispose my self; I consider they
come from God, and I do endeavor not merely to submit but to assent to him in
his dealing; not only out of necessity, but out of choice. Let not a Man take
upon him (says he) to reprehend Providence, it is best for a Man to bear what
he cannot amend, and to follow God (by whom all events are disposed) without
murmuring. Let us (says he) bespeak God as Cleanthes did; let the great
Governor of the World lead me into what condition he pleases, I am most ready
to follow him, though it be sighing, and suffer that as an evil wretched Man,
which I ought to bear as a good Man, with patience and submission. Thus you
may, I think by your virtuous conversation, make your Prison a place of
comfort, yea of rejoicing; as it is said the Philosopher did in his homely
Cottage, who said that the Gods, the Heavenly Spirits were there with him. And
a truly good Man will be easy and cheerful under sufferings, for he in truth
has always great Reason to be so (as honest Socrates is said to be) for Holy
David exhorts and encourages him to it, Psalm. 33.1. To rejoice in the Lord.
And St. Paul also, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Rejoice evermore. And indeed a virtuous and
good Man, has more Festivals and Holy Days, then any others whatsoever; for it
is only sin that in truth interrupteth our Peace, and spoils the Harmony of the
Soul. Make (in your Prison) therefore your Peace with God, set your Accounts
even between him and your Soul, and thereby get that Peace of a good
Conscience, which passes all understanding; which made Paul and Silas to sing
at Midnight, when their feet were in the Stocks and in Prison. And that blessed
melody in singing Holy David's Psalms, would far better become Prisons, than to
hear among Prisoners that Language of Hell, Swearing and Cursing, profane
Singing and Roaring, that daily Music of our Prisons. It is far more
reasonable and fit to make that wise use of your worldly losses which that
Merchant of Athens is said to do, who when the News was brought to him of the
loss of his Estate at Sea, made this good Conclusion from it, viz. That now
Providence he saw would have him turn Philosopher, so let your outward loss of
your Estate be made up by you in virtue and goodness, those greater, better,
and surer Riches which you can never loose without you will your self.

And thus I hope I may easily persuade you to avoid the securing two Prisons to
your selves, two Hells and States of suffering, one here in this Life, and the
other hereafter, having with Lazarus your evil things, and a State of suffering
in this Life; it very much concerns you to secure to your self a future happy
State in the other World. And may I not say truly, that in several respects,
our Prisons have somewhat a resemblance of Hell? by reason of Debauchery,
Profaneness, and Wickedness there practiced daily by the Prisoners, as
Quarrellings and Contests, Swearing and Blaspheming, but also their own
Conscienees also tormenting them (if their Keepers are so good natured as not
to play the Devil with them by cruel and hard usage sometimes also) for
certainly, many of them must needs have (without true Repentance) an
uncomfortable, yea dismal prospect of their ill-spent lives, their folly, or
frenzy, either carelessly, or prodigally, spending their Estates, and ruining
themselves and their Families, their Fraud, Oppression, and Injustice in their
former trading and dealing in the World, with the many sufferers occasioned by
them, and their unability to make satisfaction to those they have so wronged;
the Reflection upon which (with their present Sufferings and Wants) must needs
I say (without a hearty Repentance) be like so many Devils continually
tormenting them.

And now may I further here Caution you against these two Disadvantages, or
rather Temptations that you have attending your Condition. The first is that of
bad Company, a Place where it may be said, Men like Birds pent up in a narrow
and straight Cage, defile one another by their bad Conversations. As to wicked
Company, one therefore gives us this advice; to avoid them as you would avoid
the Plague, as also further says truly of them, they are so dangerous, even as
a mad Dog, a Viper ready to burst with poison, therefore be sure to avoid them
as you love your Souls. The next I caution you against, is the temptation of
Idleness, and want of Employment and Business (which you are in some measure as
it were forced upon) which (as a great Divine has told us) does even tempt the
Devil to tempt us, and fasten his suggestions upon us; which made St. Hierom
give this advice, semper boni aliquid operis facito, ut Diabolus te semper
inveniat occupatum. (i.e.) Always be doing something that is good, that the
Devil never find thee idle. Therefore if you have no way of employing your
selves in your Trades and Callings, you may probably find opportunities of
employing your selves in performing friendly Offices to your Fellow Prisoners,
who may stand in need of your help and assistance; as also there is honest and
lawful Recreation and Diversion which Religion allows to us; but (as one well
says) he has no such Reason to complain of his want of employment, who has a
Soul and Mind to adorn with Knowledge, Virtue, and Religion; and a Soul to save
from Eternal Misery and Ruin.

In the last place let me propose to you, that advice a worthy Divine has
given us. That is (says he) as much as a Man is able, to keep up and maintain
a constant cheerfulness of Spirit and lightsomeness of heart, for (as he says)
the heaviness of the mind (as one of the Ancients is said to express it) is the
worm of the mind, which eats up his Parent that brought it forth; and he
further tells us, that cheerfulness causes the Soul to dwell in a wholesome
and sweet enclosure; it enlightens the mind, it encourages the heart, it adds
Wings to the Affections; therefore he that forbids it to our Souls, keeps out
the welcomest Guest, and the best Friend that nature has; this cheerfulness
(says he) exceedingly becomes good Souls. Avoid (says he) sadness under the
notion of seriousness. In short (says Seneca) it is a Masterpiece of skill to
draw good out of evil, and by the help of Virtue, to improve Misfortunes into
Blessings. It is the mind of Man that makes him rich (says he) in a Desert or
Prison, etc. And he concludes thus, all I desire is, that my Poverty may not be
a burden to my self, or make me so to others.

This short Essay, I have made toward your relief and help, under your
sufferings, which I hope may find acceptance with you, it being only to
persuade you to make your Afflictions medicinable, as to the improvement of
your Mind and the Eternal welfare of your Souls, which doubtless is your great
Interest and Concern, as also to direct you to a cheerful comporting with your
present Condition of suffering. And if I may be any ways instrumental herein,
in any kind, to the benefit or advantage (if but of one poor Prisoner) I shall
not repent my pains herein, but account it a sufficient recompense, and give
God the praise; without whose Blessing our endeavors signify little. And to
all I have said may I add my hearty Prayers for you all, that God would make
useful and beneficial to you, your present state of suffering and affliction;
more especially for your Eternal Welfare. And also that God would open the
hearts of your Creditors, to deal Mercifully with you, and that the hearts of
the Rich might be enlarged, to communicate to your necessities. And may I
further recommend to your use, the following excellent Prayer, composed
heretofore, by the Reverend Dr. Patrick, Dean of Peterborough, in his Book
called the devout Christian published to the World, Anno 1684. Page. 61.

A Prayer of a poor Prisoner for Debt.
O God who art present to us in all places, and have regard to the sighs and
groans of the miserable, who humbly implore thy pity and compassion toward
them, vouchsafe to look graciously upon thy afflicted Servant in this place,
which is most desolate and comfortless, unless the Light of thy Countenance
shine upon me: I confess I have too much abused the liberty which I formerly
enjoyed, and did not so carefully improve as I ought to have done, those happy
opportunities which therewith were put into my hands. Many ways, I am sensible
I have offended thy Divine Majesty (here says he acknowledge the particulars
of your sins) for which I am heartily sorry, and acknowledge my self infinitely
indebted to thy goodness, that I am not plunged into the depth of misery, to
bewail my sins in the bottomless pit. I thank thee, O Lord, with all my Soul,
that I am not shut up in the place of outer darkness; and that I have any hope
to obtain the benefit of the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus; in whose Name
I beseech thee to pardon me, and likewise to sanctify and bless these
straights wherein I lie, to the freeing of my Soul from the bond of all
Iniquity, and the restoring me to the glorious liberty of thy Children; help me
seriously to follow the direction of thy Providence in this restraint, and now
that I am so much alone by my self, to descend into my own heart, and to search
to try my ways, and unfeignedly to turn to thee my God.

Enlarge my Spirit more than ever, now that my Body is confined, and in fervent
Prayer for thy divine Grace, and in cheerful Thanksgivings for the innumerable
Blessings that I have received from thy bounty, and in tender pity and
commiseration of the sad condition of all distressed People. And be pleased to
touch the hearts of my Creditors also, with a sense of my miseries; incline
them to accept of what I am able to pay, and make me willing conscientiously to
satisfy them to the utmost of my Power.

In the mean time, bestow upon me the blessing of a contented Spirit, help me
patiently to endure the inconveniences of this Place, and preserve me from the
danger of all the Temptations, which I meet with in it especially from seeking
a remedy of my sorrows in the pleasures of Intemperance, or evil Company, or
any profane Mirth whatsoever. Be thou my comfort, O God, my exceeding Joy, and
the full satisfaction of my Soul in all Conditions. And when thou art pleased
to deliver me from this place, and to restore me again to my desired freedom: O
Lord make me ever mindful of my Vows, wherein I am now forward to bind my self.
Dispose my heart then to be so sensibly affected, with the least of those
mercies, which formerly I have little regarded; that I may never forget to
praise thee, even for the benefit of a sweeter Air, then now I enjoy; and to
acknowledge thee in the night season upon my Bed, and to thank thee for the
coursest food; and especially, I may rejoice to go again into the great
Congregation, to praise thee with the most ardent love, for all spiritual
blessings in Christ Jesus.

Preserve in me also a grateful Remembrance of the kindness of my Friends and
Neighbors, especially of those Persons, to whom I stand particularly indebted,
when by their Charity I shall be released. And whatsoever loss they sustain by
my Poverty, Good Lord, make it up abundantly to them and theirs, out of thy
rich Grace and Mercy: Requite their Love with Plenty and Prosperity in this
World and give them the Reward of eternal Life and Glory in the World to come,
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Collect for the third Sunday after Trinity.
O Lord we beseech thee mercifully to hear us, and grant that we, to whom thou
have given a hearty desire to Pray, may by thy mighty Aid, be Defended and
Comforted in all Dangers and Adversities, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Lord hears the Poor, and despises not his Prisoners, Psalm. 69.33.
Farewell, I am your assured Friend, P. A.

ADDENDA.
But where any ones Suffering and Imprisonment is truly for Righteousness sake,
how comfortable must needs be a Prison to them? And I need say no more for
their Support and Comfort, then to put them in mind of that great assurance
given them from the mouth of Truth it self, their Lord and Master the Blessed
Jesus, and their Judge at the great Day of Doom so long before determining
their Case, Matthew. 5.10. Blessed are they which are persecuted for
Righteousness sake for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

FINIS.

