An ACCOUNT OF Mr. Francis Charlton's Surrendering himself to the BISHOP of
OXFORD, As also a Copy of the LETTER Sent by the Bishop to Madam Charlton,
touching the same; dated the 2d of August, 1683.
ON Wednesday the 1st of August, 1683. As Mr. Francis Charlton was upon the
Road coming to Oxford from the Western parts of England, one Mr. Herbert a
Justice of the Peace of Oxfordshire meeting him on the Road, fancied he knew
his Face, and riding up to him asked if his Name was not Mr. Charlton, which he
not readily owning Mr. Herbert told him that was certainly his Name, and he
being in the Kings Declaration he must carry him before a Justice of Peace, for
tho himself was one, yet it was not proper for him to take his Examination.
Then Mr. Charlton owning his Name told Mr. Herbert that he was going to
Surrender himself to the Bishop of Oxford, to which Mr. Herbert answered that
he must give him leave to wait upon him thither, which Mr. Charlton agreeing
to, they went together to his Lordship the Bishop of Oxford, where being come
Mr. Herbert gave his Lordship an Account of what passed upon the Road as
aforesaid: And Mr. Charlton acquainted his Lordship of his intention of
Surrendering himself to his Lordship. Then Mr. Herbert taking his leave of his
Lordship left Mr. Charlton in his Lordships custody. The same Night his
Lordship sent the Letter annexed to Mr. Charlton's Lady in London, as also
another Letter to Mr. Secretary Jenkins, and upon his Lordship recieving an
answer from Mr. Secretary, Mr. Charlton was brought Guarded on Saturday to
Windsor, and on the same day he was brought to London.

A Copy of the Bishops of Oxfords LETTER to Mrs. Charlton, August the 2d 1683.
Madam,
YOUR Husband Mr. Charlton, having for some time withdrawn himself, came hither
Yesterday, and desird me to signify to the Secretary Sir Leoline Jenkins, that
he had put himself into my hands; which accordingly I have done. Mr. Charlton
being apprehensive what reports may be spread, and of the trouble that might be
occasioned thereby, desired me to give you this plain Account and to assure you
of his Health and Confidence in his Innocence. He does farther desire you not
to be angry with his Son that he did not signify these Intentions to you
beforehand, he being Obliged by absolute Command to the contrary. Indeed I
think this course which oury Husband has taken, is so much to his Reputation
that I can not think it matter of trouble to your self, or any of your, or his
Friends. I remain.

Madam, Your most Humble Servant, Jo. Oxon.

London, Printed by G. C. in Thams-street over against Baynar'ds Castle. 1683.


