AN ACCOUNT OF Saint Sebastian.

prospect of the castle of San Sebastian, Spain A PROSPECT of the Castle of St
Sebastien from the South and Groundplott of the Town and Harbor:
D the Harbor or Mole E the Peer Gate F the Pa^age Gate G the Market place H
the Town house and Magazine L ye hor^




AN ACCOUNT OF Saint Sebastian, IN Relation to their GOVERNMENT, CVSTOMS and
TRADE. With a Draught of the Place.

By one lately come from thence.

LONDON: Printed by Hugh Newman, and are to be sold by A. Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1700.

AN ACCOUNT, etc.
SAint Sebastian in the Province of Guiposcoa, in the Kingdom of Castile, is a
free Town, in manner of a Republic; subjected to the Crown Castile, on
Conditions approved on by the Kings of Spain: And in all their Writings, they
style it,

The Most Noble and Most Loyal City of Saint Sebastian.

The Kings of Spain, have given them this Title for services they did the Crown.

The Province of Guiposcoa enjoys great Friviledges, and do not obey the Kings
Orders, when that which is required of them, is contrary to the Privileges and
Liberties of the Province. Which is Governed thus,

Every Year there is a Convocation or Assembly, whether every Town does send
their Deputies to Concert Affairs relating to their County or province. Their
Meeting is in four different places by turns, and they are called.

Saint Sebastian, Toloza, Aspeytia and Ascoytia.

The head or chief of such that are chosen for the Governing this Province, is
a Judge Called Corrigidor, who is as Lord Lieutenant of a County, or Intendant
of a Province. It Is to him the King sends his Orders to be Executed in the
County. Besides this Corrigidor, There is chosen for the Governing the said
Province a Deputation (so called by the Spaniards) consisting of several
representatives of the several places in the said Province, who have Power of
refusing the Kings Orders served to them by the Corrigidor, if that any such
Orders or Commission presented them are against the Rights of the Deputation,
or places whom they represent; But if the Kings Commission or Orders to the
Corrigidor, does not contradict the Rights of the Deputation, they let him put
them in Execution to the full. For Example,

When the King asks of the said province to supply him with a certain number of
Men, either Landmen, or Seamen; The Corrigidor serves the Kings Orders to the
Province and acquaints the Deputation: They tell him they are a free People,
and that they cannot oblidge any Inhabitant to leave his Family to serve the
King: But when they find that the demand is not against their Liberties and
Rights, they are so civil to give the King leave to order Drum to be beat, and
they will not oppose it; otherwise they do as in the Case of the Corrigidor
Duke Corsano a few years ago, who requiring of this province of Guiposcoa, and
in particular of the City of Saint Sebastian, some things contrary to their
Privileges (which I shall not mention) They presented their Leij Secundo, or
Charter in one hand and a Sword in the other, with Orders to him in four hours
to leave the Province, the Duke was fain to scowr for it.

The Government of the City of Saint Sebastian, whose Magistrates are chosen
once a Year, about a week before Christmas, is thus.

There is about an hundred Electors, who must be qualified as you will hear
hereafter (for no body can be of the Government of Saint Sebastian, nor of the
province, nor indeed of the least Village, till he has proved his Higuidalquir,
Viz. (That he is Noble).

Their Magistrates are chosen thus.

There is a great Silver Bowl, into which is put confusedly all the Electors
Names: The first eight that a Boy (like one of our Blew Coat Boys) takes out,
are those who are to be Alcaijde, Subalcaijde, Syndect, Magistrates and Jurates
for the following Year.

These eight Name every one of them, one to be Alcaijde and Subalcaijde, the
first two of these eight, the Boy takes out, are Alcaijd and Subalcaijde, the
first Alcaijde, the second Subalcajde, and so after the same manner of the
Syndect and other Officers.

Notwithstanding this fair way of choosing their Magistrates, there is Faction
and Interest made to get in their friends into the Magistracy, they are
generally very poor, dispising Industry and Arts; and when they come to Govern
or to be Alcaijde, have opportunities of exacting even upon their own people as
well as strangers, and which they make no scruple of doing in the face of the
World. I could relate several particulars to my Knowledge, but that I should
expose them too much: and indeed, it would hardly be believed that such tricks
and little things were practiced in Spain, where every one from the highest to
the lowest, value themselves on their Families, Nobility and Punctilio's of
Honor.

In order to be thus qualified to get into the Government (as I said before),

They must be Noble.

Their Nobility is thus, not to have had any of their Kindred a Jew, Moor,
Turk, or Heretic.

And to prove this, the Person that would be of the Government, presents a
request to the Province of Guiposcoa, in which is explained his intention, and
asks to be a Cavallero Dillegenzero, Viz. That his Birth and Estate may be
enquired into, in order to his being made a Nobleman.

The Province or Town orders their Syndect, whose business it is to enquire
into his Family (and for which he has a Pistol a day) to go to the place of his
Birth along with him, and there take both private, as well as public
informations of his Family, which afterward he reports to the Province or
Magistrates of the place, where such a one would be of the Government; if the
report is allowed, the Cavallero Dilligenzero, is declared Noble.

Besides these qualifications already mentioned.

There is one yet very remarkable and without it, if they were descended from
Caesar's or Achilles Race, they cannot be Noble, Viz.

If they live, or are to live in Town, they must have a House of their own, or
else they must have Land enough in the Province whereon they have two Thousand
Apple Trees, or whereon they may raise two Thousand Apple Trees, and then the
Cavallero Dilligenzero, is admitted and made Capable of being admitted into the
Government. No Man can be Noble by his Wife, or by her Estate:

The Town of Saint Sebastian, is seated, as you see by the Draught, on the
South side, and at the bottom of a high Hill of Freestone in a square form, the
Town is hid by the Hill as you make toward the Land and is not to be seen,
till you are in the Road.

There are two Gates, that of the Peer, and the other that is called the Passage
Gate, from which, goes a Road to Passage, a Noble Harbor; There is a Horn work
with a Ravelin before it that covers the Passage Gate, and but very ordinary
and in ill repair, and out of all due Proportion.

The Castle upon the top of the Hill stands prettily, a Noble Prospect from it
all along that part of the Bay of Biscay, from Cape Martinchauco to Arkason and
Cabritton in France. The going up, or access to this Castle is difficult, which
adds to the strength of it, and I think all that can be said justly of this
Castle is this, and that is all Although the Spaniards are extreme Proud of it,
and quote you Charlequin, who said in Praise of it (if you will believe them)
that if he should loose all Spain, and had only the Castle of Saint Sebastian,
he would recover it.

The Castle was blown up by the Magasines taing fire, but is now rebuilt and in
good repair; all the Water in the Castle is rain Water, which is Conveyed into
a Well by Leaden Pipes from the Roof of the Guard Room, and Barraques, which
are indeed very fine and capable of Lodging two Thousand Men Conveniently.

The Garrison at present, consists of a Sergeant and six Men, which by
detachment from the main Guard (which does not consist of above twelve, besides
a Governor, Captain, Lieutenant and Ensign) is relieved every day by the like
number, and by sometimes a lesser. The Soldiers are all beggars, and if a
stranger refuses to give them something, they contrive to do him mischief.

There are two Platforms mounted with Guns, I suppose designed to secure the
Harbor and Play on Ships that would force themselves into the Road, they are
too high to be of any use to them, as well as the Castle for this purpose.

In the mouth of the Harbor there is a Hill called Saint Claire, where there
was three months ago a Hermit of the order of Saint Francis, who tells twenty
Legends and Stories, and helps to fill the Casks with Wine, as he mud live by
begging, so the Poor old fellow will be every day as drunk as a beggar; for
this reason they say, they turned him out of his. Cell, but it is believed
rather it was to make room for one that is now there, a Gentleman of a
considerable Estate in the Kingdom of Castile, for reasons, he has his Estate
Men from him, and is confined to this Island as a Hermit, to beg his Bread for
fourteen Years, and then returns to his Estate again: The Church and Clergy
enjoys his Estate in the mean time.

All that Dye Heretics are buried here; when the Corpse is carried out of Town
to be wafted over to this Island to be Buried, the Mob of Men and Women follow
Insulting over the Corpse, Crying aloud, He goes to Hell. The Hermit has the
benefit of the ground on his Island and sells it as he thinks fit.

To give the Clergy their due, they are not so troublesome to strangers when
they are sick and a dying, although Heretics, with their extreme Unction and
Wafers as in France.

The coming into the Road, and over the Bar of Saint Sebastian is difficult,
unless with a leading Wind, a great Rock lies under Water in the middle of the
Bar.

But to run no hazard, the Pilots will force themselves on board of you, which
is commendable enough if it was not on design to impose upon you, and make one
pay what they please and no help for it, nor no Justice done if you complain.
The Consul and Merchant strangers residing at Saint Sebastian, have brought
them to some better reason and to Composition, but for all that, it is still as
they please, every Fisherman looks upon himself as good as Signior Alcaijde
himself; So that a Man must sit down under all affronts and hardships and be
quiet.

Their way of living at Saint Sebastian.

People that are of the better sort and distinguishable, after having enjoyed
the Music of Serenading little before day, they get up and drink Chocolet,
without which they would not stir abroad if their house was on fire, then they
take, both Men and Women, a great deal of pains with their hair, dress
themselves and go to Church, they and their Priests understand what they Pray
to God for much alike, for not one of twenty of their Clergy understands Latin.

After Mass the Men go to the Peer, where they tarry till eleven of the Clock,
then they go to the middle of the Town called the four Corners, where they stay
till twelve, after it has struck, if it was to save the Town they would not
stay a minute longer, and oftentimes break off in the middle of a Story or
sentence, to go home to their Olio. The first thing presented at their Tables
is a Chocolet Cup of Soup, or the gravey of meat boiled and Bread crumbled into
it, served upon Earthen Platters, then comes the Roast Meat, then the Boiled,
and at last the desert.

They give this reason of bringing the Roast Meat before the Boiled (which
seems plausible enough) the best of the Boiled Meat say they is in the broth,
and there is more substance and nourishment in the Roast than in the Boiled,
for that reason, this would pass if they did not spoil their Roast Meat and
Fowl by over-doing of them, and Roasting them dry as they do their Boiled Meat,
by Boiling it to Pieces.

But most People think it is rather in opposition to the rest of the World, for
they show it almost in every little thing else; Syder they have cheap, and
abundance of sweet Apples very large all round the Country. The Corn of the
Country is Indian Corn and no other, with Wheat they are supplied from the
Sound and sometimes from Barbary, and often from England; They have been so
hard put to it this last Year, that they have been forced to make Bread of
Chestnuts, which is the reason they are Prohibited to be Exported. They have
extraordinary good Rabbits of Navar and Wild Fowl plenty, their Pigeons are
much esteemed, and their red Partridge of Arragon, are excellent and large.

Fish they have plenty and of good sorts, if they will be at the pains to catch
it, and if the Sea, (which with a North-West blowing wind flies high on the
Bar, and even up almost to the top of the Island Saint Clair, about six hundred
Foot) will permit; the Sea oftentimes in the Harbor flies to the top of the
Walls forty Foot high and more.

When the Fishermen come from Sea with their Boats, their Wives are sitting on
die Peer with their Husbands Cloaks and long Spadas, or long Rapiers, the
Husband walks in State into the Town, and his Wife carries the Basket of Fish
on her head to the Market place and sells them. Billings-gate Language and
Noise is nothing to what the Fishermen and Apple-Women make at Saint
Sebastian, they are always Quarrelling and will Cuff heartily, and will not be
friends under a Week. Their common language is Basque, which is as much
different from Spanish as Welsh from English.

Their Houses are Lofty and Stately, only covered with Pan-tiles, and because
of great unexpected Squales of Wind which happen here often, they lay great
stones on the Pan-tiles to keep them fast, sometimes both Stones and Pan-tiles
are fetched down by Storms of Wind, and their streets being narrow, it is
dangerous then to walk the streets. Their rooms are large, but only one Chimney
in a House of five rooms of a floor, and four or five stories high, and that at
the top of the House. They live all Winter in the upper Stories to enjoy the
benefit of the Sun, and in the lower Rooms in Summer. It is very hot here, the
reflection of the Sun from the Castle Hill on one hand, and from the Sand in
the Vale on the other, is the cause that it is hotter here than in many places
of a more Southern Latitude. Their Beds are finely Carved and Gilded, but very
hard to lie on, their Curtains, are of Linen Laced at every half yard broad,
but not wide enough to draw round the Bed, they have few or no Glass Windows,
only Latices, their Beds stand all in Alcoves.

Merchant strangers unless Married with a Spanish Woman, have not the Liberty
to hire Houses, but must get one of the Town to hire them, and live in it with
him, and they generally go snacks with the Merchants in their profits.

From Dinner they go to sleep till two or three, and then go out of Town
between die Horn-Work and the Town Wall, there they tarry all the Afternoon,
either Playing, or looking on those that play at Tennis and Ninepins: Their
Tennis Court is in the open Air and rough Paved, yet they are very expert in
tossing the Ball.

In the Winter they pass their time till eight of the Clock at Night in private
Houses, or at an Assembly, where every one that comes in, Pays six pence; he
may either pick up a party to Play at Cards, or sit and see others Play, and
Talk, and Call for three or four Glasses of Wine; if they stay beyond eight,
the Mayor sends his Algosins, and makes Money of the Company, as well as of him
that entertains them after such an hour. Sometimes the Clock strikes eight when
it is but seven, if the Mayor wants a little Money.

The Men are very tight in their Spanish Garb, their long Spadas, their silk
stockings and slashed shoes; the Women modestly and odly attired, all of them
go Veiled, their Vails very large, gathered at the bottom in such a manner,
that as they walk their Vails sit as full blown about them as the Sails of a
Ship before the Wind; their petticoats are proportionable, and the Ladies, who
generally all sit on the ground or floor, have such an address when they sit
down to sling their Petticoats out in a round, that modestly speaking, they
take, up more room than any Millstone in England does in circumference, and the
Wind gathered under their Coats by the turn they make, is so long of getting
out, that by degrees as their Coats fall, they find a cool breese that is very
refreshing to them in so hot a Climate: They seldom stir abroad, the better
sort but to Church, and even then without a great deal of Jealousy of an ill
natured Husband; they have pretty Faces, black Eyes, and would look about them,
as Women do in other Countries if they durst.

The Priests are the only happy Men that enjoy the Ladies Company; Who are
about eighty in all, their revenue is but small, they live merry lives, eat and
drink of the best, in private Houses, where they are always welcome, few or
none of them, but have three or four Children and no reflection on them.

When a Priest would lay with a Woman, he obsolves her from the great scruple
Women make of Whoredoms being a great sin, he tells her he will take that sin to
himself; as for the other scruple that Women have of loosing their reputation
and spoiling their fortunes, there is no such thing amongst them, for if a Man
gets a Woman with Child, that does not pass for a Prostitute, he is only to
keep the Child and give the Wench a Portion (if she has nothing of her own) who
Marries and is not a bit the worse looked upon.

Women have another advantage in this Country, for after they are Contracted
and all matters settled, and the day of Marriage agreed on; she has the Liberty
to desire her Bridegroom to come and show himself a Man: and if she does not
find him to her satisfaction the Contract is void, and she is a good Maid still.

They bring up some of their Young Women to Play on the Spanish Harp, for which
they let their Nails grow so long that it looks strangely.

They do not allow of any Bawdy Houses, but every street, in a dark Night,
serves their turn, and he must look to himself that disturbs them, or spoils
sport.

Every Sunday and Holiday, the ordinary sort of them have a Dance on the Market
Place, thus,

There are three Drums and Pipes, the Drum Major who has the bigest Drum, which
is about the bigness of a child's Drum, is the common Hangman; there they
whistle with one hand, and beat their Drums with the other, till there is a
Ring made, when one of the nimblest of the fellows goes into the middle of the
Ring, a shows his Activity, takes out of the Ring a Wench, she her Mate, and so
it goes round; the first fellow leads the brandle, and all Dance and show their
Parts for an hour. The Coopers, who are numerous here, on Saint Andrews-Day
their Patron, go a Maskquerading all Day, and Play twenty tricks ridiculous
enough, and would not work that day for any reward, but they make it up at
other times, for they are at work before day.

The Country all round abounds with Oak, proper for the Staves, and Chestnut
Trees, of which they make the Hoops, for Cask; there is also great Numbers of
Cask made in the Country, and at Passage, and brought to Saint Schastian empty
on Mules.

There is near to the Town the Convent of Saint Austin, a Nunnery of Women,
where there is to be seen the Corpse of a Woman dean hundreds of years ago, her
Arms, Legs and Face, appers as full as if she had been Buried but yesterday;
she looks Tawny, and I believe has been served Mummey-like; when they were
digging the Foundation of this Monastery they found this Corpse, which they pray
to.

The chief Trade of the Town is Iron, Wine and Oil.

Their Iron Mills are near to the Town, and their Iron Bars are brought to the
Town on Horses or Mules, on Crooksaddles to the public Magasine, which is
under the Town, Hall, where constant attendance is given for receiving it out
of the Country, and delivering and weighing it to the Buyer. Our Tin Men in
Cornwall are here supplied with their stamps, and other Utensils for the
carrying on their work.

All other Merchandises, except Iron, are drawn on Sledges, by two Oxen, in and
out of the Town.

They deal somewhat in train Oil and Whalebone, they have some Ships that go to
the Northward a Whale fishing, besides they catch some in sight of the Castle;
and in order to this, some Months in the Year, they hire a Man that looks out
continually from the top of the Hill, betwixt Saint Sebastian and Passage, who
when he sees a Whale or Bottlenose, makes a sign to the Castle, the Sentinal
from the Castle advertises, by his Bell, the Town, immediately the Fishermen
upon that go forth to the Prey; There was a Botlenose, about the bigness of
that which was brought up to Greenwich, brought in to Saint Sebastian in
November last, out of whom they got a great quantity of that which they call
Sperma Ceti; the flesh was boy led to Oil.

They have also some Trade to Newfound Land, but with that sort of Fish (
Cabelau they call it) they are better supplied from other Nations than by their
own Ships.

The great quantity of Pilchards caught on the Coast of Galicia, is a mighty
help to this part of Spain, of which they are great Lovers, and are in more
esteem with them than Herrings.

But the more remarkable Trade of the Town at present, and that which brings
most Money to the Town, is the Wine Trade.

The late War with France, from whence we were supplied with their excellent
Grave Medoc and Pontack Wines, occasioned our Parliament to put such a great
Duty on French Wines, and other Liquors of the Growth of France; that Merchants
have looked out how to be supplied otherwise, that they may pay easier Duties;
and luckily they have light upon a spot of ground, Called the Spanish Navar, of
which Panplone, Ablitas and Villa Franka, are the chief Towns, that affords us
as good Wines as any French Wines; and the Spaniards of late both at Saint
Sebastian, Passage, Fonteravia and Guitaria, finding such a demand for Wines,
and considerable profit by them, have improved their Vineyards to so great a
degree, both in quantity as well as quality of good Wines, that their
improvement equals, if not exceeds that of Portugal; which before the War was
not able to furnish us with above three or four hundred Pipes in a Year, and
now there is above ten Thousand Pipes a Year Imported from thence, which
appears from the Custom House Books.

This will not be allowed by some, but it is very true: one shall fee at Saint
Sebastian Mules by hundreds Loaded with Wine in Hogskins, three skins upon a
Mule containing ten Gallons each, come every day into Town (Sunday not
excepted) all this is unloaded in the Magasines and sorted, and next day put
into Cask, the Mules carry away the empty skins into the Country for more.

This is not only done at Saint Sebastian, but also at Fonteravia, Passage, and
Guitaria, from these places they come to Saint Sebastian in Barques, and Bargo
Longos, (because of the Convenience of Sea Carriage) in Cask, and are Lodged in
Merchants Cellers ready for the buyer.

The truth of all this is so well known in England, from the care the
Commissioners of the Customs took, in sending over two of their Officers to
examine into the truth of it, and from some Trials at the Exchequer Bar, that it
cannot be further questioned.

Besides, for all wines Shipped off from Saint Sebastian, the Masters of Ships
are obliged to take Certificates from the Mayor and Consul, as a sufficient
Testimony that their wines are of the Growth of Navar, in his Catholic
Majesty's Dominions, given under the great Seal of the

Most Noble and Most Loyal City of Saint Sebastian.

And undesigned by their Sworn Matter Cooper, Signior Nicola and his
Assistants, that the very Cask are made by them.

FINIS.

