An Account of Some Particulars IN THE TRIAL OF Mr. Ed. Fitz Harris: In
Westminster Hall, June 9. 1681. Where he was Found Guilty of HIGH TREASON.
Together with a BrIef RELATION of the TRIAL of Oliver Plunket The Popish
Primate of IRELAND, at the same Place, the day before: who was likewise found
Guilty of HIGH TREASON.
THIS morning about Nine a Clock the Court sat, there being the four Judges of
His Majesty's Court of King's Bench present, and the Jury being impanell'd and
Sworn, Mr. Fitz-Harris was soon after brought thither, and his Wife being in
the Court, desired the favor to stand nigh her Husband, which was granted her:
Then an Indictment of High Treason was read against Mr. Fitz-Harris, for
conspiring the Death of the King, and the overthrow of the Government, and
stirring up His Majesty's Subjects to Sedition and Rebellion, by contriving and
publishing a Dangerous and Treasonable Libel.

Then the Witnesses were called, and Mr. Edmund Everard being first, gave a
large and full Account of this Treasonable Design of Mr. Fitz-Harris, with
several very considerable Circumstances, to demonstrate the reality of his
Testimony.

Then Mr. John Smith, one of the Discoverers of the late horrid Popish Plot,
was called, who confirmed what Mr. Everard had said, giving an Account how by
Mr. Everard's means he was placed in a convenient Room, where he and Sir
William Waller heard Mr Fitz-Harris endeavor to persuade Mr. Everard to engage
in several Treasonable Practices, and that a notorious Libel should be
dispersed abroad, to raise a disturbance between the King and his People.

Sir William Waller was next called, and spoke several things to the same
purpose; and it did appear, That this Libel was to be disposed among His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, that it might seem they intended to disturb the
Government, and that these Papers being sent to them, soon after other Persons
should have followed to have searched them, and before they had had time to
discover them to a Magistrate, should have seized those Libels about them; and
that these Gentlemen were to have been prosecuted as Authors or Dispersers of
Treasonable Libels against His Majesty and the Government.

Sir Philip Lloyd was likewise called into Court, and two or three other.

The Kings Witnesses having concluded their Evidence, and the Libel being read
over in Court, and compared, and several Paragraphs of a very high and
Treasonable nature, which, were inserted into the Indictment, being remarkt;
The Court were pleased to tell Mr. Fitz-Harris, That he had now Liberty to make
the best Defense for himself, he could, and that he might have such Witnesses
called as he desired; wh^ thereupon nominated first Dr. Oats, who accordingly
appeared, and declared what he had to say, but not upon Oath no more than the
rest, since it is not allowable in behalf the Prisoner; Then Madam Wall, who
belongs to the Duchess of Portsmouth was called, and Mr. Fitz-Harris asked her
several questions about Two Hundred pound which he had received by Order from
the Duchess, Mr^s. Wall said, That if the Court desired it, the Duchess her
self would come thither, who thereupon Ordered, That she should appear, which
she did accordingly, in a very short time; and it was alleged that the money
given, was only upon the Account of Charity, and toward the relief of his
Necessities* his Father having suffered very much in his Estate in the late
Wars.

Colonel Mansell Mr. Sherriff Bethel, Mr. Sherriff Cornish, and diverse others
were likewise called into Court, and Mr. Fitz-Harris asked them several
Questions.

The Lord Howard of Escrick, was then called into Court, who spoke very largely
to several things, and gave an Account that Mr. Fitz Harris had been with him
diverse times, and persuaded him to come to Court, and that particularly Mr.
Fitz-Harris came to him the day before the late Lord Viscount Stafford received
his Sentence, and persuaded him to give in his Opinion That the Lord Stafford
was Not Guilty, which he told him would be very acceptable; But the Lord Howard
was pleased to answer him to this purpose; That if the nearest Friend or
Relation he had were so Guilty of High Treason as he judged the Lord Stafford
to be, no man should be more forward to bring him to Justice than himself.

Then Mr. Fitz-Harris added some other things in his own Defense, which being
ended, Mr. Attorney General first, and then Sir George Jeffries summed up the
Evidence, showing the notoriousness of the Treason whereof he was Guilty, and
what a World of Miseries these Practices might produce to the Nation, etc.
After which the Judges perticularly gave their sense of the Heinousness of the
Crime; and that the Jury should take special Care, that the Blood of the King
and Kingdom should not fall upon their Heads.

The Foreman of the Jury, then desired; as we hear, to be informed by the Court
whether they could safely give their Verdict in the Case of Mr. Fitz-Harris,
since the late House of Commons at Oxford, had passed a Vote, that he ought not
to be Tried, but before the House of Peers in Parliament? The Court told them,
they ought to take no Notice thereof, and that now they were by Oath obliged to
determine the business before them, and that they should have made this
Objection before; And one of the Judges was pleased to say, That a Vote of the
Commons had no more Obligation upon them then a Letter from the King, which
they were not bound to take any notice of.

The Jury then Withdrew, and after about half an hours Consultation among
themselves, they returned into Court, and being demanded whether they were
agreed in their Verdict, they Answered, Yes; and that the Prisoner was Guilty
of High Treason.

The Court then broke up, and Mr. Fitz-Harris, accompanied with his Wife, who
was Extremely concerned at her hard Fate, was Guarded back to the Tower by
Water, and, it is thought, will in a day or two receive his Sentence at the
same place: together with Oliver Pluncket the Popish Lord Primate of Ireland,
who was Tried there the day before for High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of
the King, Introducing Popery, and delivering the Kingdom of Ireland to the
French King, to which purpose he had received and paid several sums of Money,
and was to raise many Thousands of Irish, who were to join with the French
King, upon his Landing, and that an Haven was appointed to that purpose; There
were five or six Witnesses against him, who proved the Treason positively upon
him, and though he had all the liberty he could desire to make his Defense, yet
he had very little to say for himself, only he pretended that those Witnesses
which he designed shoudl appear on his behalf were in Ireland.

But this Allegation was thought altogether Frivolous, by reason he has had so
long time since he has been in Newgate to send for them over; so that upon the
whole matter, after a very short Consultation, the Jury brought him in Guilty
of High Treason.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtiss, on Ludgate Hill. 1681.


