An ACCOUNT of some few of the Exploits of Don Thomazo Pharmacopola(alias
Deputy L -- m) hastily collected against his Name-sake's Day; for the
Edification and Information of the honest Inhabitants of Bishopsgate-Ward.
(The First Part.)
TO begin, 1st. He invaded the Charter of London, in signing an illegal Warrant
to Lieutenant Colonel Quiny, to bring a Company of the trained Bands to
Guildhall, to keep the Citizens from coming to swear the Sheriffs that were
duly elected, viz. Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois. And having thus invaded the
Charter, he next voted for the Surrender of it, and was of that Committee of
Common Council in Sir W. P's Mayoralty, in the Year 1682. that drew up an
Address to the King, to submit all the Privileges and Franchises of the City of
London to his Majesty's absolute Disposal; and pursuant to it, he went in a
Coach with six Horses to Newmarket, to lay the same at his Feet; and expected
to have been Knighted, for his Treachery, in betraying the City; but the Fool
came home without the expected Feather in his Cap, to his great Grief and
Trouble: yet in the last Common Council the City then had, he did, to the last
Breath, strongly insist upon the gratifying of the King, according to the
former Address, with the Surrender of all our Liberties and Privileges, and to
submit to all the villainous Regulations that Jefferies and his fawning
Creatures should impose upon us.

2dly. He went to King James with a Catalogue of those Men that he thought
would be fit Tools for Parliament Men, to take off the Penal Laws and Test;
amongst whom, he himself being one, was put up as a Candidate, and was troubled
that he lost it. And he owned publicly, and gloried in it, that he had picked
out such Men as King James was extremely pleased with.

3dly. He was one of that bloody Jury that murdered Alderman Cornish, and Mrs.
Gaunt; and was one of Mr. Culliford's merciful Jury, that gave but 100000 l.
Damages to the Duke of York, against him, though not a Farthing Damage proved.

4thly. He carried Goddard (Sir Samuel Dashwood's Beadle) in a Coach to the
Lord Nottingham's Office, (so that the Deputy and the Beadle were Companions)
to inform, contrary to their Oaths, against Capt. Foster, and Mr. Norcot, two
of their Fellow-Citizens: Whence will arise this Query, Whether or no the
Deputy be not guilty of Subornation, if he paid the Beadle's Coach-hire?

5thly. He was more than ordinarily zealous in the late Common Council, against
the Liberties and Franchises of the City, when he pleaded so strenuously
against the Freemen of London, and would have had the Foreigners to have had
equal Privileges with the Citizens, in all Elections of Common-Council-men, and
Aldermen; contrary to his Oath, as he was a Freeman.

6thly. He promoted and signed a scandalous, false and groundless Petition
against the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Pilkington, late Lord Mayor of London,
consisting of seven Paragraphs, with no less than six notorious Falsehoods in
it; and which directly struck at our present legal and happy Settlement in the
City, as most evidently appeared to the Present Parliament.

To conclude for the present, I query, Whether he that was the principal Engine
in the Arbitrary and Illegal Management of the Ward of Bishopsgate in the Year
1682, and afterward of the surreptitious procuring an Act of Common Council to
divide the said Ward, by false Insinuations and Suggestions, (as has publicly
appeared since before the Common Council, by whose Act it has been lately
reunited) whether he be a fit and proper Person to be elected again, to be as
it were a sole Manager of the Affairs of that Ward, I submit to your serious
Consideration; and whether, if you elect him, it is not in effect to make your
selves Parties, and to justify him in all his public Crimes.

The present Hurry of Business will not permit the adding the second Part at
present, but it may be expected upon the next occasion.

Adieu.

