AN ACCOUNT Of the Affairs of SCOTLAND, In Relation to their Religious and
Civil Rights.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Rich. Baldwin in the Great Old Baily,
near the Black Bull. 1690.

An Account of the Affairs of Scotland, etc.
SIR,
I Will comply with your desires, in giving you a view of the Scottish Affairs,
and before I make particular Answers to your Questions, I will lay open the
whole matter of Fact which has occurred in the Meeting of Estates, in their
Majesty's Acceptance of the Crown, and the Instructions given by His Majesty to
his Commissioner for holding of the Parliament, that you may be the better able
to make a Judgment how far His Majesty has made Concessions to satisfy the
Minds, and ease the Grievances of that Nation, by his Offers in his
Instructions, to quite Voluntarily these Advantages which the Crown has
insensibly got over the People ever since the Union of the two Kingdoms,
whereby Scotland is as much in the Power and Mercy of their Kings, as most of
the Nations in Europe, by a Legal Constitution, and the Consent of the People
in Parliament.

It may be then Surprising if this great Opportunity has not been Embraced,
and these offered Concessions turned into perpetual Laws. But the Ambition of
some, and the Selfish-Designs of others has Obstructed the Happiness which
that Nation could only expect from this Revolution, and have kept it under the
Power of these severe Laws and stretched Prerogatives which His Majesty was
willing to have parted with.

A considerable number of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland did attend His
Majesty in his Expedition for Britain, and many more having Met him at London,
they did Address to his Majesty, then Prince of Orange, to Assume the
Government, till the Meeting of the Estates, which they desired him to Call.
The Procedure in that Meeting was with a great deal of Discretion and Dispatch,
till the Country was put in a posture of Defense against an Invasion they had
reason to apprehend from Ireland, and till the Instrument of Government was
finished, which is almost in the same terms with that of England.

Upon the Eleventh day of April last, the Estates did Proclaim their Majesty's
King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, King and Queen of Scotland, with all the Joy and
sincerity that could be Expressed, the same day their Majesty's were Crowned in
England.

Upon the Eighteenth day of the said Month the Estates did proceed to the
Consideration of some Grievances to be Represented to his Majesty, which they
humbly desired might be Redressed to his Majesty's first Parliament. The
Instrument of Government does contain what the Estates did Assert to be the
Peoples Right, and the several Facts condescended upon are declared Illegal,
and the highest Violations of Law, for which the Throne was declared Vacant.
The Grievances do acknowledge the things complained upon to be Legal, but that
the Laws introducing or allowing them are grievous, and therefore there was
necessity of applying to the King for Rescinding and taking off these Laws.

Upon the Twenty Fourth of April, all the Grievances were concluded, and three
Commissioners, being one for each Estate of the Kingdom, were dispatched with
the offer of the Crown to their Majesty's.

Upon the Eleventh of May, the Commissioners did present a Letter from the
Estates of Scotland to his Majesty, which was Read first, then the Instrument
of Government, then the Grievances, and last a Desire from the Estates to be
turned into a Parliament. The King Answered the Commissioners in these Terms.
When I engaged in this undertaking, I had particular Regard and Consideration
for Scotland, and therefore I did Emit a Declaration for that, as well as to
this Kingdom, which I intend to make good and effectual to them. I take it very
kindly that Scotland has expressed so much Confidence in Me, and Affection to
Me; They shall find Me willing to Assist Them in every thing that concerns the
Well and Interest of that Kingdom, by making what Laws shall be necessary for
the Security of their Religion, Property and Liberty, and to ease them of what
may be justly grievous to Them. Then Their Majesty's took the Coronation Oath,
and within some few days the King declared his Pleasure for turning the Meeting
of Estates into a Parliament at their own desire, and he did Nominate the Duke
of Hamilton his Commissioner, and upon the Thirty One day of May, His Majesty
did Sign his Instructions.

Upon Their Majesty's acceptance of the Crown, all Commissions, Gifts, and
other Writs Superscribed by the King, must of necessity be Docueted and
Counter-signed by His Secretary of State; The King made choice of my Lord
Melvil for that Office, a person who could never be induced to act in the
Public, during the former Reigns, who had been Forefault, and forced to
abandon his Relations, and Native Country, and flee to Holland, where, and in
Germany, he remained seven years; of whose Integrity and Sufficiency the King
had good proof abroad, and of his sincere Inclinations for the Interest of
Religion, and His Majesty's Undertaking! It was likewise necessary for His
Majesty to have an Advocat, and He did name Sir John Dalrymple, one of the
three Commissioners which the States had so much recommended, and considered,
as to Signalize and Entrust Them with a Matter of the highest Credit and
Reputation, as the offer of the Crown, and receiving the Coronation Oath; The
rest of the Offices His Majesty did not supply, that He might have more
opportunity to know who were Habile, and Deserving Persons for these
Employments. Hitherto Matters were Managed with Calmness and Concord; But now
when the other Offices of Honor and Profit began to be Disposed on, many who
formerly did pretend to be behind with none for their Zeal, in their King and
Countries Service, they quickly forgot the sense of their Deliverance, and that
Duty and Gratitude they owe to their Deliverer. It had been moved in the Grand
Committee of the Meeting of the Estates, that it might be specially Provided in
the Instrument of Government, That the King should not have Power to Name the
Judges, Privy Counselors, or Officers of State, but with Consent of
Parliament; This Motion was universally Rejected, and thrown out with
Detestation, as an unreasonable Incroachment upon the Monarchy; and there were
only three in that whole Meeting, who did favor the Proposal, of whom, some
have worthily Retrited themselves, by owning the Kings Right in this Point,
when it was afterward called in question; but what was universally Considered
as an intolerable Invasion on the Royalty, when there was no Government, has
been since owned for Law, and a Matter of the highest Importance; this
alteration of some men's Sentiments, fell out Critically at that period, when
the King came to dispose of the Honorable, or Advantageous Posts of the State,
then every man began to value himself, and to believe he was better Judge of
his own fitness for these Offices than the King, whose Right it is to Dispose
on them; and thus our pleasant Scene is turned into Confusion, and some who
doubted of their Interest to be preferred by their Princes Favor to that Share
and Interest in the Government they designed, they run about, hoping to force
Him to take them off, for fear of their mischief, whose Actings show they
resolve rather to disturb that Peace which is not yet well Confirmed, to
Embroyle the Nation, Shake the Throne, Hazard Religion, and all to a
Revolution, than fall short of their pretensions; as if they had said, Flectere
si nequeo superos acheronta movebo; and they have endeavored to Amuse the
unwary multitude, with the specious Pretexts of Law and Liberty; and that their
Grievances are so far from being Redressed, that there are new Invasions made
upon them, and so instead of taking their Relief, which the King has offered
to all the Grievances represented by the Estates; they fall upon new
Complaints, not formerly pretended to, nor thought just, or worthy to be
insisted on, for which some have Addressed to the King with great peremptoriness,
hindering their Native Country from receiving the benefit of the Concessions,
which His Majesty offers in His Instructions. But that I may not seem to impose
upon you in this matter, I will fairly set down both the Grievances, and the
Redress offered by His Majesty, in the Instructions to His Commissioner, with
some short Notes, that you may better understand the nature of the Grievances,
and the Fullness of the Relief that is offered by the Instructions; and in
regard the Instructions contain more things than the Grievances do, such as the
turning the States into a Parliament, and the like, they do not follow the same
Method, or Answer the number; therefore I shall repeat every Article of the
Grievances, with the particular Instruction relating to it together, and then
come to your Questions.

Article. First Grievance.
THe Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland do Represent, that the Committee of
Parliament, called the Articles, is a great Grievance to the Nation, and that
there ought to be no Committees of Parliament, but such as are freely Chosen by
the Estates to prepare Motions and Overtures, that are first made in the House.

This is answered by the second Article of the Instructions.

Instruction Second.
YOU are to pass an Act for Regulating the Articles, to consist of Twenty four
Persons, besides the Officers of State, whereof Eight are to be Chosen by the
Noblemen of their Estate, Eight by the Barons, and Eight by the Burrows, out of
their Estates; and in case of the death of any of these Persons, that Estate,
out of which the Person Deceased, shall supply the same. These are to prepare
Matters and Acts for the Parliament, but not to exclude the Parliament, to take
any Matter into their Consideration, though it has been thrown out, and
Rejected in the Articles, and all former acts, specially the first Act,
Parliament first, Session third, Charles the Second, inconsistent herewith, are
to be Rescinded.

The Parliament of Scotland does consist of three Estates, who all meet in one
House, and by the ancient Laws and Custom of that Kingdom, there was a select
number of Persons Chosen out of the Three Estates, who with the Officers of
State, were called, Dominiad Articulos, because they did prepare Articles, or
Proposals, and Framed Acts, which were brought in to be Considered in
Parliament; And this Committee for Articles has been as Ancient as we find any
Records of Parliament in that Kingdom; and the Officers of State were always
Members. The great Weight in the Mannagement of Affairs, was committed to this
Committee: And in Ancient times, after the Articles were once Constitute, the
Parliament did Adjourn to a certain day, till all things were prepared by the
Articles, which were to be proposed in Parliament.

The Policy of that Kingdom had introduced, and maintained this Constitution of
the Articles, upon weighty and solid Reasons, as 1o. To preserve the different
Interests of the Three Estates among themselves, the several Estates having no
Negatives in the Parliament; for though one State were entirely opposite, the
plurality of the whole does Determine and Decide; And the Estates not being
equal in number, a greater State Combining, might overthrow the Interest of
another, especially since the State of the Nobility being increased at the
Kings Pleasure, there are at present as many Lords in Scotland, as do equal, or
exceed the number of the Commissioners for Shires and Burrows together: As
also, the number of the Royal Borrows may be increased at the King's Pleasure;
But the Shires remaining the same, the Estate of the Burrows, which has the
greatest part of the Property; and visible Estate of the Nation, they may have
the fewest Votes in the Parliament: But in the Articles, every State has an
equal number, whereby in the Projecting, and Framing of the Laws, each State
has an equal Interest. 2o. All the Estates meeting in one House, and there
being no Negatives in the Parliament of Scotland, a sudden Vote would put the
Kings of Scotland to this strait and difficulty, either to consent to a Law,
whereof they might be ignorant as to its Design and Framing, or else to refuse
the Royal Assent, and so a Breach or Difference were Stated betwixt the King
and People, and there could be nothing more expedient for preventing these
Inconveniences, than the Choosing of a select number for each Estate, who with
the Officers of State for the King, did Prepare, Digest, and Adjust all Matters
which were to be brought in to the Parliament.

In the Parliament of England there are two Houses, and their Forms of
Proceeding are slow and Cautious, whereby the King may understand whatever is
under the Deliberation of the one House, before it come to the other, and by
Conference betwixt the two Houses, Matters use to be Adjusted before they come
the Kings length for the Royal Assent: But in Scotland, the Procedure is quick,
and the Forms of Parliament are Expedit and Summar; besides the Temper and
Genious of the Nation, which is ready, (not to say, Praefervidum Scotorum
Ingenium) whereby Matters of the greatest Importance may be Stated, and
Determined at one Sitting in the Parliament of Scotland; And therefore as
Matters in England do proceed by Bills from the Houses to the King; so in
Scotland, Business did Commence from the Articles, in which, both the King and
People had their shares of Members.

Of late there has Excesses and Abuses crept in to the Articles, both as to
the manner of their Constitution, and Power of Prelimiting the Parliament. And
since the Year 1633. The Bishops did choose Eight Noblemen, and the Noblemen did
choose Eight Bishops, these did choose Eight of the Commissioners for Shires, and
Eight of the Commissioners for Burrows, who with the Officers of State, made up
the Articles; by this method, both the small Barons and Burrows were excluded
from any Interest in choosing the Articles, and they had not so much as a Vote
in choosing these persons who were to Represent their particular Estates in the
Articles. And it being the King's Prerogative to name all the Bishops, in
effect the King had the sole Power, or Influence to make the whole Articles.
2o. Instead of a Preparatory Committee for Ordering all things that were to be
brought to Parliament, the Articles did assume a Power, that what they once
rejected, could not be brought in to plain Parliament: But yet by the express
Act of Parliament foresaid, the 1. Act, Sess. 3. Parl. 1. K. Charl. 2. The
Articles is Constitute in the manner abovementioned, to be a perpetual Law in
all time coming, which was justly represented as a Grievance to the King; but
there is not the least mention of Officers of State, though that point was
spoken of, and under Consideration in the Meeting: by this Instruction the King
did most Graciously and Fully Redress these Errors and Corruptions of the
Articles, by allowing every State to choose its own Representatives, and
Declaring that the Articles shall not have Power to Pre-limit the Parliament,
but that even these things that have been rejected in the Articles, may be
brought in, in plain Parliament, whereby the interest of the Estates are equal
and entire, and the Parliament can never be imposed upon, nor precluded.

It might have been expected, that so Gracious a Concession from the King, and
His parting with so important a Jewel, should have satisfied every man, that
the King designed no Arbitrary Power, and that He verified that Clause of His
Letter to the Estates, That he would never put His Greatness, or the Advantage
the Crown had got, in the Balance with the True Interest of the Nation; Yet
this Concession did not please, but some men insisted, That there should be no
Articles, or constant Committee at all; having now taken up a prejudice against
the Name, as well as the Excess of the Thing, though the Grievance calls it the
Articles, and mentions not one word against a constant Committee; But now they
would make an Inference from the Custom of England, though the Constitution of
the two Parliaments are totally different. And next, they did Object against
the Officers of State, though this was no Incroachment, or Corruption, but they
were Members of the Articles in the most Ancient Constitutions; And these last
hundred and fifty years, the Officers of State are named together in a Column
by themselves, as distinct supernumerary Persons for the Interest of the Crown;
and as the Officers of State are not mentioned in the Grievance, so the meaning
of the Articles cannot be extended to reach them, for they being Supernumerary,
and for the King, are not to be chosen, nor can represent any State of the
Parliament, because they are Members of Parliament, as Officers of State, and
are called and ranked, though they be but Gentlemen, before the Commissioners
for Shires and Burrows.

It cannot but appear a great Extremity, that whereas by the present standing
Law, the King has the whole Power and Influence in making the Articles, that
in an instant, He shall be reduced to have no Interest at all; and whereas
every Estate has an equal share of Members in this Committee for preparing
Things to the Parliament, the King shall have none for Him; and every Body
knows what Advantage may be made in the Framing and Wording of an Act where the
Matter may be plausible, and it were hard that the first Notice or
Advertisement the King or His Commissioner might have of a Law designed, were
to hear it Read and Voted in the House, and so be put on a sudden to give His
Consent, or interpose His Negative after the Parliament has engaged themselves
by a Vote, this Rock Our Ancestors have always shunned: and there never was a
Vote in the Parliament of Scotland before this time, till the Matter was first
subjected to the King's Consideration, and that His Commissioner was previously
Instructed, or knew it to be agreeable to the King's Inclinations: And there
being a Law standing, that all Matters to be determined in Parliament, must be
first brought into the Articles, till that Law be Repealed, at least these
Votes which were pressed in the Address were both unnecessary and preposterous.
But the King was so far from taking any occasion of Displeasure, that he did
Conced a further step by an Additional Instruction, Dated at Hampton Court the
Fourth day of July last, which the Commissioner Read in Parliament.

WILLIAM R.
Additional Instructions to Our Right Trusty, and Right Entirely beloved Cousin
and Councellor, William Duke of Hamilton, Our Commissioner.
1. BY the Second Article of your Instructions, Dated the Thirty One day of May
last, you was empowered to pass an Act for regulating the Committee, Called the
Articles, which were to consist of Twenty Four Persons, besides the Officers of
State; Notwithstanding of which, These are to Authorize you, to pass an Act for
them to consist of thirty three persons, besides the Officers of State, whereof
Eleven to be chosen out of every Estate, according to your former Instructions,
who are to prepare Matters, as is therein expressed, not excluding the
Parliament to take Matters into their Consideration, though it has been
rejected in the Committee, nor to prevent their moving of any thing, and
regulating of (...) to them, and the said eleven out of every Estate to be
chosen Monthly, or oftener, if the Parliament think it fit, and all former Acts,
especially the first Act Char. 2. Sess. 3. inconsistent with this, are to be
Rescinded.

2. You are to pass what Acts shall be proposed for settling the
Church Government, according to your former Instructions.

3. You are to pass an Act, Rescinding all Forfeitures past against any of Our
Subjects, either in Parliament, or Criminal Court, since the first day of
January 1665. which shall be thought fit by the Parliament to be Rescinded:
Likewise you are to consent to what Our Parliament shall propose for
Restitution to be made of Fines, or Compositions for Fines, or Forfeitures,
from those who had the Benefit of them, and you are to Rescind such Acts as
were made in the years 1681, and 1685, as are justly grievous.

Although the first of the above Instructions is not complied with yet, you are
to move the other two, and have them past before any Adjournment.

Given under Our Royal Hand and Signet, at Our Court at Hampton Court, the
Fourth day of July, 1689. And of Our Reign the First Year. By His Majesty's
Command, Melvill.

The King did hereby Consent, that the Articles should not be a constant
Committee as they are now by Law, but that the Estates might change their
Representatives as often as they please, so that they could not be packed nor
taken off by the Court, and that each State instead of Eight might choose
Eleven Members, whereby the Officers of State could never overrule or determine
them. The whole Number of the Officers of State extends only to Eight, whereof
the Lord Secretary is ordinarily at Court, and in this present Parliament the
King had but one Officer of State: But Concessions to persons that are not
resolved to take satisfaction, have never good effects. This Overture was
rejected, and some persons must have all or nothing. But all that are
indifferent must be convinced, that the King had fairly retrenched his Interest
in the Parliament, having not only consented to the Parliaments Abolishing of
the Bishops, but he was willing to have taken the Sting out of the Articles,
and secured the Nation for ever, that the Articles could never be packt, nor
the Parliament imposed upon.

Article 2. Grievance.
That the first Act of Parliament 1669, is inconsistent with the Establishment
of the Church Government now desired, and ought to be Abrogate.

This second Article of the Grievance is Answered by the Fourth Instruction,
thus,

Instruct 4.
YOu are to pass an Act, Establishing that Church Government which is most
agreeable to the Inclinations of the People, Rescinding the Act of Parliament
1669, and all other Acts inconsistent therewith.

By the Instruction, the King does entirely Remit to the Parliament, to
Establish what kind of Church Government was most agreeable to their
Inclinations, as the Representative of the People, without proposing
Qualification or Limitation. And because the Act of Parliament 1669, does
Recognize and Declare an extraordinary Power in the Kings of Scotland, without
Consent of Parliament, in relation to Ecclesiastical Affairs, whereby any
Government of the Church, Established by Act of Parliament, might be changed by
the King; therefore the King Condescends to Rescind that Law, and to pass from
the Prerogative of the Crown, as it is Established and Asserted by that Act,
whereof the Tenor follows,

ACT Asserting His Majesty's Supremacy over all Persons, and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical.
November, 16. 1669.
THe Estates of Parliament having seriously Considered, how necessary it is for
the good and peace of the Church and State, that His Majesty's Power and
Authority in relation to Matters and Persons Ecclesiastical, be more clearly
Asserted by an Act of Parliament; Have therefore thought fit it be Enacted,
Asserted and Declared, Iakeas His Majesty with Advice and Consent of His
Estates of Parliament, Does hereby Enact, Assert, and Declare, that His Majesty
has the Supreme Authority and Supremacy over all Persons and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical within this His Kingdom, and that by virtue thereof, the
ordering and disposal of the External Government and Policy of the Church, does
properly belong to His Majesty and His Successors, as an Inherent Right to the
Crown, and that His Majesty and His Successors may Settle, Enact, and Emit such
Constitutions, Acts and Orders concerning the Administration of the External
Government of the Church, and the Persons employed in the same, and concerning
all Ecclesiastical Meetings, and Matters to be Proposed and Determined therein,
as They, in Their Royal Wisdom shall think fit: Which Acts, Orders, and
Constitutions, being Recorded in the Books of Council, and duly Published, are
to be Observed and Obeyed by all His Majesty's Subjects, any Law, Act, or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. Likeas His Majesty, with Advice and
Consent foresaid, does Rescind and Annul all Laws, Acts and Clauses thereof,
and all Customs and Constitutions, Civil or Ecclesiastic, which are contrary
to, or inconsistent with His Majesty's Supremacy, as it is hereby Asserted, and
Declares the same Void and Null in all time coming.

Never did Law give a King such a Power, nor ever did a King part with such a
Law. There was an Act brought in and Voted for, Rescinding the Act of
Supremacy, it was not Touched, which cannot be Imputed to the King, there being
an express Instruction for Rescinding that Act.

Article 3. Grievance.
THat Forefaultures in prejudice of Vassals Creditors, and Heirs of Entail, are
a great Grievance.

This Article is answered by the Sixth Instruction.

Instruction 6.
YOu are to pass an Act that Forefaultures shall only be extended to what
Interest the Rebel had, and that innocent Vassals, or lawful Creditors, for
Debts upon Record shall not be prejudged, nor such Heirs of Entail, whose
Rights of Succession are established by public Infeftment.

The Laws of Scotland, in relation to Treason, are very many, and therefore
Forefaultures there are too frequent; the Feudal Laws and Customs takes place
in Forefaultures, and Treason being the greatest Ingratitude, the Rebels Fee
returns to the King, in that same condition that it was Originally given out,
without the burden of his Debt, or Regard to any Deed done by the Rebel, after
committing of the Crime, or to any Deeds or Alienations made before the Crime,
which were not consented to, or Confirmed by the Superior, and rendered Real and
Public by Infeftment; and not only Heirs of Entail are cut off from their hope
of Succession, for the Delinquency of the Fiar, but the Rebels innocent
Vassals, who are not Confirmed by the Confiscation of the Dominium Directum,
which was in the Rebel, the Dominium utile falls in consequence. There have
been so many sad instances of the severe effects of Forefaultures in Scotland,
to the Ruin of many Families, who had no accession to the Treason, that of
late, this single Concession would have been purchased by that Nation at the
dearest rate; but Courtiers and Ministers, who had hopes to make advantage, and
procure Gifts of Forefaultures, they have always resisted the good design of
Restricting the prodigious effects of Forefaultures, till now, that the King
has resolved, Never to consider his own Advantage and Greatness, in opposition
to the Interest and Ease of his Subjects: He has by this Instruction secured
lawful Creditors, whose Debts are not Collusive, but upon Record, and innocent
Vassals, though not Confirmed, and likewise Heirs of Entail, whose Rights of
Succession are not Private and Clandestine, and so might be antedated, though
they were truly made after, or in prospect of Rebellion; but where the Rights
are nottour and public, which must be Recorded in that case, even the Rebels
Heirs are safe, which is one of the most considerable and universal Favors
which could be done to that Nation.

Article 4. Grievance.
THat the obliging the Leidges to Depone upon Crimes against Delinquents,
otherwise than when they are adduced in special Process, as Witnesses, is a
great Grievance.

This Article is answered by the Tenth Instruction.

Instruction 10.
WE are satisfied that an Act should be past for securing the Leidges against
Inquiries, by way of Inquisition, but in respect of the present Juncture of
Affairs, this matter would be well Considered by the Parliament; and therefore
when the Terms of this Act shall be Adjusted, you are to transmit the same to
Us, that We may give you particular Instructions thereanent.

By the Custom of Scotland, any Person might be examined summarily, in relation
to other persons, against whom there was no Process depending, and without
confronting the Persons: And albeit such Expiscations did not amount to a
P^ation, except these Depositions had been renewed in presence of the Jury; yet
being taken upon Oath, in absence of the Party concerned, to suggest any thing
for clearing of himself, the private Informers became engaged to hold by what
they had once Declared, under the pain and disgrace of Perjury; by this
Instruction, which is fuller than the Grievance, His Majesty consents to secure
His Subjects from such Inquisitions: But in regard of the Machinations and
Plots which may be necessary for the Government to be discovered at this
present Juncture; therefore His Majesty does Remit to the Parliament to
Consider what is proper at this time, that they might fall upon some Temporary
Remeid, as the Parliament of England had done, in relation to the Habeas
Corpus, or Suspending the Commensment of this Law for some time.

Article 5. Grievance.
THat Assizes of Error are a Grievance, and that Juries be considered by
Parliament.

This Article is answered by the Seventh Instruction.

Instruction 7.
YOu are to pass an Act, either to take away Assizes of Error, or otherways
that they shall take place, as well against the Jury that Condemns, as against
the Jury that Assoilies any Panel.

By the Law and Custom of Scotland, the Criminal Judge does Cognosce and
Determine the Relivancy of an Indictment; and the Jury does only Consider the
Probation adduced, and give their Verdict, whether the Panel be guilty or not
guilty: And this is a singular Custom in Scotland, that when upon the Juries
Verdict, the Panel, or Party Accused, is Absolved, that Jury was liable to be
Conveened before a Grand Jury, and the persons might be found Guilty, as Temere
Jurantes super Assisam, for acquitting the Criminal; but in case they did
Condemn, the Jury was not liable to an Assise of Error: This has been
introduced in the simplicity of ancient times, when Juries were more prone to
Mercy than Severity; because it was presumed, no Man would pass upon a Jury
willingly to Condemn his Neighbor, if he did thereby expose himself: But in
the latter times, this has been found a great Inconveniency, and Juries may be
affrighted, and imposed upon to Condemn Persons, because the King's Advocate
may Protest for Assise of Error, in case they acquit, whereas they are secure
if they Condemn; and therefore the King has consented that the Parliament make
their own choice, whether they will take away Assizes of Error in all cases, or
if they will make Juries liable for Condemning as well as acquitting Pannels.

Article 6. Grievance.
THat the 18 Act of Parliament 1681. Declaring a Cumulative Jurisdiction, is a
Grievance.

This Sixth Article of the Grievance is answered by the Eighth Instruction,
thus,

Instruction 8.
YOu are to pass an Act, Rescinding the Eighteenth Act of Parliament 1681.
Asserting the Prerogative in point of Jurisdiction.

This Sixth Article of the Grievances, and Eighth Instruction, in Answer
thereto, will be best understood by the Act it self, to which they relate.
Follows the Act.

ACT, Asserting His Majesty's Prerogative in point of Jurisdiction.
September 16. 1681.
THe Estates of Parliament considering, That all Government and Jurisdiction
within this His Majesty's Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, does originally Reside
in His Sacred Majesty, His Lawful Heirs and Successors: And though His Majesty
and His Royal Predecessors have bestowed Offices and Jurisdictions upon
severals of His well deserving Subjects, yet these are not privative of His
Jurisdiction; They do therefore in a dutiful and humble Recognisance of His
Majesty's Royal Right and Prerogative, as to this Point; Declare, That
notwithstanding of these Jurisdictions and Offices, His Sacred Majesty may by
Himself, or any Commissionate by Him, take Cognizance and Decision of any
Cases, or Causes, He pleases.

Shortly after this Act, there was a Commission under the Great Seal, to the
Lords of Session, rendering their places Arbitrary, and ad placitum, in which
the Lord Stair, President of the Session, Lord Newbyth, and others were left
out; These the King has now restored to their places, according to his
Declaration; and even Heretable Jurisdictions were invaded, and not only
matters Civil, but the highest Points of Criminal Jurisdiction were committed
to Soldiers, and other persons, who were empowered Summarly to Execute to the
Death free Subjects, without any Formality of Process, or Jury, and many
persons were taken off that way, whereby the ordinary Legal Judicatures might
be rendered ineffectual; And the King had Power to Judge every Scots-man, either
for his Life, or Fortune, by himself, or such persons as he pleased to appoint,
and to Avocat Causes to be Cognosced by his Courtiers at Whitehall. This gave
the King the greatest latitude of Arbitrary Power imaginable, and more than is
practiced in any place of Europe; And when such Laws are once Established, in
favors of the Crown, we seldom see Princes willing to Renounce them, but only
to moderate the Execution in ordinary Cases, reserving always the Power and
Capacity to themselves: But by this Instruction, our King was willing to part
with this extravagant Power, and it is matter of Surprise that He was not taken
at His Word.

Article 7. Grievance.
THat the Commissariot Courts as they are now Constitute, are a Grievance.

This is Answered by the Ninth Instruction.

Instruction 9.
YOu are to pass an Act for Regulating the Abuses in the Commissary Courts, and
all other inferior Courts.

The Commissars were a most Ancient Constitution, the Nomination of them was
committed to Churchmen, but after the Reformation, the Bishops being excluded,
the Nomination of the Commissars did fall to the King; and after the
Restitution of Episcopacy in Anno 1606, the Nomination of the Commissars was
given to the Bishops, as their Officials, and they are the sole Judges in the
first Instance of Scandal, Matrimony, Divorce, and several other Matters, which
have always been reserved in the hands of the Clergy, as the Confirmation of
Testaments, and ordering the performance of the Wills and Legacies of the
Defuncts, and the Provisions of Relicts and Orphans. In this Grievance, it is
Represented, That there are Errors according to the present Constitution of
this Court, yet these Errors are not specified; nevertheless the King remits it
to the Parliament to Rectify whatsoever they thought amiss in this Court, and
the Instruction is much larger than the Grievance, for thereby the King Remits
it to the Parliament to Regulate all inferior Courts.

Article 8. Grievance.
THat the 27 Act of the Parliament 1663. Giving the King power to Impose
Custom at His Pleasure, upon Foreign Import and Trade, is a Grievance, and
prejudicial to the Trade of the Nation.

This is Answered by the seventeerth Instruction.

Instruction 17.
YOu are to endeavor to procure an Act, or Acts, for the encouragement of
Trade; and if the 27 Act of the Parliament 1663 be found inconvenient, it may
be Regulat, or Rescinded, and when the Proposals are Adjusted, you are to
transmit them to Us, that you may receive our Instructions thereaneut.

For the better understanding of this Grievance, I have set down the Act it
self.

ACT, Asserting His Majesty's Prerogative in the Ordering and Disposal of Trade
with Foreigners.
THe Estates of Parliament Considering, That during the late Troubles, diverse
Invasions were made upon the Royal Prerogatives of the Crown, and that in a
just abhorrence thereof, and in a due sense of the Happiness they enjoy under
His Majesty's Government, They are obliged on all occasions to Vindicate and
Assert the same in the several Branches thereof: And since the Ordering and
Disposal of Trade with Foreign Countries, and the laying of Restraints and
Impositions upon Foreign Imported Merchandises, is by the Law of Nations
acknowledged to be proper to, and Inherent in the Persons of all free Princes,
as an undoubted Prerogative of the Crown: They therefore in a Dutiful and
Humble Recognisance of His Majesty's Prerogative Royal, Do Declare, That the
Ordering and Disposal of Trade, with Foreign Nations, and the laying of
Restraints and Impositions upon Foreign Imported Commodities, does belong to
His Majesty and His Successors, as an undoubted Privilege, and Prerogative of
the Crown; and that by Virtue thereof, they may lay such Impositions and
Restraints upon Imported Foreign Commodities, and so Order and Dispose upon the
Trade of them, as they shall judge fit for the good of the Kingdom: Likeas, the
King's Majesty, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does
hereby Rescind and Annul all Acts, Statutes, Constitutions and Customs to the
contrary, and Declares the same void and null in all time coming.

This Grievance does acknowledge that the King has power by Law, to Impose
what Custom or Duty he pleases upon Foreign Trade, but it States the King in a
Legal Capacity, without Consent of Parliament, to exact as great Sums as the
Nation is able to furnish, for every Country needs something from another,
either of absolute necessity, or convenience, especially such Countries as do
not abound with Manufactures, and Artisens; and in the Northern Countries,
Spiceries, and Drugs are become almost as necessary as Air and Dier, besides
Iron, Wine, Pitch, Tar, and an hundred things, wherewith Scotland does not
furnish it self; and by Imposing such exorbitant Duties upon these; as the
French King does upon Salt, the Kings of Scotland might Supply themselves
without being beholden to Their Parliaments, and People for their Aids; and it
is impossible to suspect, that a King who is willing to part with this Power,
which the Law Declares to be an Inherent Privilege of His Crown, can be
uneasy to His People in any thing; and it is amasing, that since the effect of
this Law is understood, and has been acknowledged in the Grievances, how any
persons could be so cruel to their Native Country, as to obstruct the Relief,
which the King offered them in this Concession? And if this opportunity were
never renewed, how justly might this Age, and the succeeding Generations blame
them.

Article 9. Grievance.
THe not taking an effectual Course to Repress the Depredations and Robberies
by the Highland Clans, is a Grievance.

This is Answered by the eleventh Instruction.

Instruction 11.
YOu are to endeavor to procure an Act for an effectual Course to Repress the
Depredations and Robberies by the Highland Clans, and when this matter is
Digested, you are to transmit the Proposals to Us, that you may get particular
Instructions thereanent.

The Depredations by the Highlanders is certainly a great inconvenience to the
Kingdom, whereby the Inhabitants to the Low Lands are not only obliged to keep
numbers of armed Men to watch and guard the Passages and Descents from the
Highlands; but likewise to pay considerable Compositions to these Robbers, to
procure their Protection and Assurance, which the Law discharges, and this
Acknowledgment is called Black-mail, whereby these Thieves are sustained
without Industry or Virtue, who are hard to be reduced or brought to Justice,
because of the unaccessableness of the Mountains, and that Forces are not able
to find Subsistence there, nor march as far in two or three days in a Body, as
the Highlanders can do in one; and therefore the Grievance is just. But there
is no Method proposed for accomplishing the Redress: Therefore the King does
remit to the Parliament to consider, and digest effectual Courses for
repressing the Highlanders, which are to be transmitted to His Majesty, that He
may give particular Instructions to His Commissioner. Likeas in the mean time,
though the Parliament did refuse to grant a Supply, yet the King has
maintained a considerable Army upon his own Charge this Summer, and has
planted considerable Garrisons round the Verge of the Mountains, to secure the
Low-Grounds; and if His Majesty should withdraw, or Disband these Forces, which
He has not been able to pay, the Highland Clans being now combined in Arms,
and open Rebellion against the Government, they would quickly destroy that
Kingdom, and might raise such a Flame in England, as might have fatal Effects,
before it could be quenched.

Article 10. Grievance.
THat the banishing by the Council of the greatest part of the Advocates from
Edinbourg without a Process, was a Grievance.

This is Answered by the thirteenth Instruction.

Instruction 13.
YOu are to pass an Act that no persons be Banished out of the Kingdom, or from
any part thereof summary, without a Process.

It is not worth the while to trouble you with the Detail of this matter; But
you may think it strange how the Privy Council comes to be charged with it, and
it is acknowledged that it was a Grievance: now if it be not presently a
Grievance, how can it be Redressed by the King?

Besides, either the Sentence of Banishment was just or not; if it was just, it
cannot be quarrelled, if it was unjust and illegal, that is not a a Grievance
that must be Redressed by the making of a new Law, for the standing Law must
give Relief to every thing that is against Law. But here there was more
Resentment of single Persons, than Injury to the Nation. And though the King
might have slighted this Matter, being stated in that manner, that it was
incapable to be Redressed; yet he gently cover, and passes it over, that none
of the Grievances should want a satisfactory Answer, He condescends, that an
Act be made, that no Person be Banished without a Process, which is the Law
there already, and in all other Civilized Nations.

Article 11. Grievance.
THat most of the Laws Enacted in the Parliament 1685, are impious and
intolerable Grievances.

This is Answered by the Twelfth Instruction.

Instruct 12.
YOu are to pass an Act, Rescinding such Acts of the Parliament 1685, as are
justly grievous to the People.

If this Grievance had condescended upon the particular Acts, as it might, ^e
King had given particular Instructions to Rescind them: But this general (of
the most part) left them uncertain what Acts were mean'd to be impious,
intolerable, and grievous; and the King being willing in every thing to
satisfy his People, He has subjected the whole Acts of that Parliament to the
Power of this present Parliament, which must convince you, that the King had no
mind to evade the desires of his People, or to shift them off upon the
Generality of their Desires: But what they plainly desire, He gives a distinct
Instruction to it, and when they point at any thing which they do not
distinctly Express, He remits the whole Affair to themselves: and in this Case,
because there was no necessity of Adjusting Narratives, but only to Rescind
some Acts of that Parliament; therefore the King does not Require his
Commissioner to Transmit the Proposals, as in many other Articles, but
Authorizeth him to give the Royal Assent in this Matter, and in the Settling of
Church Government, and in Redressing of Fines, and restoring of Forfaultures,
which were the greatest Tokens of his Entire Confidence in the Parliament, and
that he did not Proceed Cautiously or narrowly with them. Who could have
expected such unsuitable Returns, that some Persons should press to proceed to
Votes in Matters new, not offered in their Grievances, without Representing to
His Majesty any thing of the Matter, before they were previously engaged, and
put the King to the necessity of a Refusal; as when His Majesty had opened the
Signet by His Proclamation, that Law and Justice might have its course, that it
should have been Countermanded and stopped by a Vote of Parliament, which the
World must have considered as the last Effects of the highest Jealousy and
Difference, to the Disreputation of His Affairs, and the Endangering the Common
Interest. But that you may have a Snatch of the Acts of that Parliament, and
how far our Great Men did Outvey one another to Depress the Nation, and Raise
the Prerogative, I have set down the Second Act of Parliament, by which you
will see that they have not rested in the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, but
for what I see, we own Active Obedience without Reserve, and yet I am told,
this Act passed with very few or no contrary Votes.

A Declaration and Offer of Duty by the Kingdom of Scotland, with an Annexation
of Excise to the Crown.
April 28, 1685.
THe Estates of Parliament now Conveened by His Majesty's Sovereign Authority,
Taking into their Consideration, how the Nation has continued now upwards of
2000 years, in the unaltered Form of our Monarchical Government, and
uninterrupted Line of 111 Kings, whose Sacred Authority and Power, has been
upon all Signal Occasions, so Owned and Assisted by Almighty God, that Our
Kingdom has been Protected from Conquest, Our Possessions Defended from
Strangers, Our Civil Commotions brought into Wished Events, Our Laws Vigorously
Executed, Our Properties Legally Fixed, and Our Lives Securely Preserved, so
that We and Our Ancestors have Enjoyed those Securities and Tranquillities,
which the greater and more Flourishing Kingdoms have frequently wanted. Those
great Blessings We Owe in the first place to Divine Mercy, and in Dependence on
that, to the Sacred Race of Our Glorious Kings, and to the Solid, Absolute
Authority wherewith they were Invested by the First and Fundamental Laws of Our
Monarchy; Nor can either Our Records, or Our Experience Instance Our being
Deprived of those happy Effects; But when a Rebellious Party, did by Commotions
and Seditions, Invade the Kings Sacred Authority, which was the Cause of Our
Prosperity; yet so far has Our Primitive Constitution, and Fundamental Laws
Prevailed against the Innovations and Seditions of Turbulent Men, as that these
Interruptions never Terminated, but either in the Ruin, or at least the
Suppression of those who at any time did Rebel or Rise in Opposition to Our
Government. And since so many Ages has Assured to Us, the great Advantages
that flow down to all Ranks of People from the happy Constitution of Our
Monarchy; and that all Our Calamities has ever arisen from Seditious Invasions
upon these Sacred Rights; Therefore the Estates of Parliament, for Themselves,
and in Name of the whole Kingdom, Judge Themselves Obliged to Declare, and They
Do Declare to the World, That they Abhor and Detest, not only the Authors and
Actors of all preceding Rebellions against the Sovereign; but likewise all
Principles and Positions which are Contrary, or Derogatory to the Kings Sacred
Supreme, Absolute Power and Authority; which none, whether Persons, or
Collective Bodies, can Participate of, any manner of Way, or upon any Pretext,
but in Dependence on Him, and Commission from Him; and as Their Duty formerly
did Bind them to Own and Assert the Just and Legal Succession of the Sacred
Line, as Unalterable, by any Humane Jurisdiction; so now they Hold Themselves
on this Occasion Obliged, for Themselves, and the whole Nation, Represented by
Them, in most Humble and Dutiful Manner, to Renew the Hearty and Sincere Offer
of their Lives and Fortunes, to Assist, Support, Defend and Maintain King James
the 7th, their present Glorious Monarch, and his Heirs and Lawful Successors,
in the Possessions, of Their Crowns, Sovereignty, Prerogatives, Authority,
Dignity, Rights and Possessions, against all Mortals: And withal, to Assure
all His Enemies who shall Adventure on the Disloyalty of Disobeying His Laws,
or on the Impiety of Invading His Rights, that such shall sooner be weary of
their Wickedness, than they of their Duty; and they firmly Resolve, to give
their entire Obedience to His Majesty, without Reserve, and to Concur against
all His Enemies, Foreign, or Intestine; and they solemnly Declare, that as they
are Bound by Law, so they are voluntarly and firmly Resolved, that all of this
Nation, betwixt Sixty and Sixteen, Armed and Provided, according to their
Abilities, shall be in Readiness for His Majesty's Service, where, and as often
as it shall be His Royal Pleasure to Require them.

And since the Excise of Inland and Foreign Commodities, Granted to King
Charles II. of ever blessed Memory, by the 14th Act of the Parliament 1661,
during all the days of his Lifetime, and Prorogat by the 8th. Act of the
Parliament 1681, for five years thereafter, will shortly Terminate. And the
Estates of Parliament Considering the Usefulness of this Grant, to support the
Interest of the Crown; Do as the first evidence of their Sincerity in the
aforesaid Tender of their Duty, humbly and unanimously offer to His most Sacred
Majesty King James the VII. their present Monarch, and to his lawful Heirs and
Successors in the Imperial Crown of Scotland: The said Excise of Inland and
and Foreign Commodities, expressed in the said 14th. Act of Parliament 1661, to
be Collected in the manner Prescribed by the said 8th. Act of the Parliament
1681. for ever. And His Majesty and Estates of Parliament, by the force of this
Act, have United, Annexed and Incorporated; and Unites, Annexes and
Incorporates the same to the Crown of this Realm, to Remain therewith in
Annexed Property, in all time coming. And in respect that the Alteration in the
method of Collecting the Inland Excise, from what it was by the Act 1661. to
that prescribed by the 8th. Act of the Parliament 1681. will require some time
to establish it in Collection. Therefore His Majesty, with Consent of the
Estates, continues the Collection Prescribed by the 14th. Act of the Parliament
1661. for the said Inland Excise, for six Months, from the first of May next
allenarly.

Art. 12. Griev.
THat the Marriage of a King or Queen of this Realm to a Papist, is dangerous
to the Protestant Religion, and ought to be provided against.

This is Answered by the Fourteenth Instruction.

Instruct. 14.
YOu are to pass an Act, that the King or Queens of that Realm shall not marry
with Papists, under this Certification, that a Popish Queen Consort, or the
Husband of a Sovereign Queen shall not be capable to enjoy the benefit or
advantage of any Provisions which the Law provides, or particular Contracts or
Agreements may have secured to them.

This is a most just Grievance, and at this Port much Mischief has been Landed
to these Nations, and a great Danger to our Religion in general. No Popish
Princes do Marry with Protestants, but all the Daughters of Popish Princes are
assumed into the Throne of Protestant Kingdoms, whereby the Royal Issue, to sad
experience, may be poisened with Popish Principles from the Mother and her
Priests, which is unavoidable, if a Papist can be a Queen. If the Grievance had
proposed any particular Remedy, the King would not have refused His Consent,
who is above all Suspicion in this Matter; and therefore the King has proposed
in His Instruction, to make a Law, Disabling the King or Sovereign Queens of
Scotland to Marry with Papists, as to which at present they are under no
Limitation by any former Law: and for a further Penalty to deter all Papists to
Marry with them, it was to be declared, That the Popish Husband of a Sovereign
Queen, or a Popish Queen Consort, should be incapable to enjoy any Provision or
Benefit, either by Law or Paction, during the Marriage, or after its
Dissolution; and if the Parliament could fall upon any further Securities, it
would be worthy of their pains to fortify this Passage yet further, which is
in so great probability to be Attacked, and has so great opportunity to sink
the Interest of these Nations, and endanger the Protestant Religion through the
World.

Article 13. Griev.
THat the levying, or keeping on Foot a standing Army in time of Peace, without
Consent of Parliament, is a Grievance.

This Thirteenth Article of the Grievances, is Answered by the Nineteenth
Instruction.

Instruct. 19.
YOu are to pass an Act against a standing Army in time of Peace, but so as
Guards, Garrisons, and necessary Standing-Forces may be continued.

By this Instruction, though the King has the Power, yet He is Content to pass a
Law against a Standing-Army in time of Peace, beyond His Guards, Garrisons, and
necessary Standing-Forces.

Article 14. Griev.
THat all Grievances relating to the Manner and Measure of the Leidges, their
Representation in Parliament, be Considered and Redressed in the first
Parliament.

This Fourteenth Article of the Grievance is Answered by the Fifteenth
Instruction.

Instruct. 15
YOu are to pass an Act, that the greater Shires of that Kingdom, such as
Lanark, Air, Perth, Fyfe, Aberdeen, and Mid-Lothian, and others where it shall
be found Convenient, may send three or four Commissioners to Parliament, that
the Representation may be the more equal.

The Parliament of Scotland is a Feudal Representation of the whole Nation,
wherein every bit of Land within the Kingdom is represented: The King, as
Leidg-Lord, Jur^ Coronae, is not only invested in the Kingdom, and has the
Dominium directum as Superior, as well as King of the whole, but likewise, has
the particular Patrimony of the Crown, and whatever falls to the King Jure
privato, by Succession, Emption, Excambion, or any other Title; and also what
befalls to him by Confiscation, or what is Caduciary, or where the King
Succeeds as Vltimus Haeres, nam quod nullius est Regis est. The great Barons or
Lords, they Sat in Parliament for their Lordships and Baronies, whether they be
Bishops or Temporal Lords: And by the Ancient Custom of Scotland, every
Freeholder, that is to say, (not as in England, he who is Seized of a
Proportion of Lands belonging to Him in Property) but he who Holds a parcel of
Lands in Capite, or immediately of the King, is understood a Free or
Noble-Holder in Scotland; and because the Divisions or Multiplication of
Baronies has rendered many of the Freeholders small, so that their Attendance
in Parliament was Chargeable and Burdensome to them; and it was a Disparagement
to the King's great Court of Parliament, that the Mean Freeholders should be
Pares Curiae with the Nobility or Peers; therefore the small Barons who do not
hold an Hundred Merk Land of the King, are allowed to send their Commissioners
to the Parliament, and the Barons of each Shire are allowed to send two or more
Commissioners to the Parliament. The Royal Burrows make up the Third Estate to
the Parliament; and each Royal Burrow does send One Commissioner but Edinburgh
which sends Two to Represent in Parliament, the Lands given out by the King
to their respective Burrows, to be holden of him Burgage, whereby unaquaeque
Gleba, every Bit of the Kingdom is represented in Parliament: But the Number of
the Lords being Increased at the King's pleasure, they are now become as many
as the Commissioners of Shires and Burrows, if they were all present, and it
has been the custom of our Kings to Erect Royal Burrows, as they think fit,
the Shires always remaining the same. The Commissioners for Shires, who do
represent the greatest part of the Property of the Nation, they are not
proportional in Number, and they have made many Attempts, that the Shires being
unequal in Extent, Value, or Number of Inhabitants, that therefore the great
Shires might be allowed to send more Commissioners, which is agreeable to the
Act of Parliament, to send two or more, that the Representation in Parliament
of the Nation might be the more equal. This Design has been always obstructed
by the Lords, or great Barons, that they might have more Votes and Influence in
the Parliament; as also, the Court has considered the Barons, as that part of
the Parliament, which could be least packed or influenced, being persons
generally of the best Sense and Substance, as being chosen by the rest of the
Barons to represent them: Therefore the Court has never favored this
adjusting of the Representations, having greater Influence upon the Royal
Burrows, who are weaker, and upon the Noblemen, who are generally more
necessitous, and so more easily brought over to the Sentiments and Designs of
the Court. But this King regarding Equity and Justice more than Power, he has
consented that the Representation in Parliament be rendered as equal as can be,
and that the greater Shires shall have a greater Number of Representatives.

Article 15. Griev.
THat the Grievance of the Burrows be Considered and Redressed in the first
Parliament.

This is Answered by the Sixteenth Instruction.

Instruct. 16.
YOu are to pass an Act, Ratifying the Privileges of the Burrows, and Securing
their Rights, in Electing their own Magistrates for the future, and that the
Burrows of Glasgow and St. Andrews shall have the Electing of their own
Provosts, Baillies, and Town-Council, as the other Royal Burrows of that
Kingdom have.

The Royal Burrows have a peculiar Interest in the King, for as Burghs of
Barony and Regality, are Incorporations belonging to Noblemen and Gentlemen, so
the Royal Burrows are in a particular manner the King's own Burrows, holding
immediately and directly of the King; and the Law does not allow the
interposition of any Nobleman, or Baron, to have interest in the Magistracy of
Burrows, but only such as are of their own Community: Of late, the Royal
Burrows were extremely incroached upon; and in the last Reigns, the Magistrates
of Burghs were nominat by Letters from the King, though by their Charters, the
Incorporation, and Town-Council had Right to choose their own Magistrates. His
Majesty, then Prince of Orange, in his Declaration for Scotland, takes special
notice of the Injury done to the Royal Burrows; and therefore, though the
Grievance in relation to the Purrows, be altogether general, yet His Majesty
hails an opportunity to redress and gratify them; and therefore he impowers
his Commissioner to make a Law, Ratifying all their Privileges, whereby the
Commissioner was obliged to give the Royal Assent to any thing that the
Parliament should determine to be the Right and Privilege of the Burrows. 2.
His Majesty offers to secure to the Burrows, that they shall never be invaded
for the future, and that they shall have the sole and free Choice of their own
Magistrates. 3. By the Abolishing of Episcopacy, the King being come in the
place of the Archbishops of St. Andrews and Glasgow, he had in their Right,
the Power of naming the Provost and Magistrates of these Burghs, whereby
Glasgow, though it be the second Burgh in the Kingdom, yet it has not the
ordinary Privileges of the meanest Burgh-Royal; and the King, to signify his
Gracious Intentions to the Burrows in general, he gives them all that is in his
Power, and allows these two Burrows to choose their own Magistrates; albeit some
have represented this Concession to be prejudicial to the Crown, and that it is
fit for the Crown, that the King retain in his own hand, the choosing of the
Magistrates of Glasgow, as an Awe-band over that numerous people, or that he
commit this Power to some great Family about them, who may keep that City in
order. 4. Trade being the great concern of the Burrows, the King has allowed
his Commissioner to pass Acts, one, or more, what the Parliament shall think
fit for the Encouragement of Trade, which give a sufficient Rise and Warrant
for Repairing the Royal Burrows, against any Invasions that had been made upon
their Rights in the point of Trade; so that they should not be obliged to pay
for a Privilege they did not enjoy: Here is a notable Evidence, how far the
most gracious Concessions of a Prince may be mistaken and slighted. The Royal
Burrows were abused by the Industry of some persons, and made believe, that the
King by his Instructions, had given them no Relief, and that he had not
regarded the Grievance, in relation to the Royal Burrows, upon this Imposture
they did combine in the Parliament, to refuse a Supply, to oppose any thing,
that was brought in, in pursuance of the King's Instructions, and to concur in
all the Votes that was brought in against him, which they did accordingly, only
a few Burgesses being excepted; and certainly, if they had understood the
King's Gracious Intentions toward them, they could never have been guilty of
such Transports against both their Duty and their Interest; and when they come
to be informed, it will oblige them for the future to be more cautious, not to
take up an ill Report, rashly to doubt their Sovereign, or destroy themselves;
and the Royal Burrows being further shamed to send up these same persons who
had abused them with an Address to His Majesty, desiring an Answer to that
Grievance which did concern them: His Majesty pitying their Innocence, gave an
Answer in Writing, that it might be sure to come to their Hands, signifying,
That he had remembered their Concerns very particularly from the beginning, and
that they had no reason to doubt his Care, desired them not to suffer
themselves to be further abused, to mistake their own Interest, but that they
might believe he would redress all the just Grievances of the Nation, and
specially of the Royal Burrows, in whom he owned a peculiar Interest. This
Goodness and Forbearance in the King, cannot fail to produce suitable effects
of Duty and Gratitude, and when the Burrows shall be sufficiently informed,
they will certainly take occasion to have a new Convention, and return his
Majesty an humble acknowledgment of their mistakes, and a dutiful sense of his
Favors, as well as the Concessions in his Instructions.

Now you see that the King has given a particular Gracious Answer to every one
of the Grievances; and besides these, there is an Instruction for the
Regulation of the Universities: And after all, the King concludes with a
general Instruction, If there be any thing else that may be necessary for the
good of that Kingdom, to be past into Laws: You are to acquaint Us from time to
time, with such Overtures, that you may be Authorized with particular
Instructions thereanent. This admits no Paraphrase, it was impossible for a
Prince to say more, this was a Catholicon for curing all the Grievances, that
either were, or could be represented; and what a strange Return was it, not to
transmit their Overtures, but to proceed to Votes, straiten and manacle the
Royal Authority, in its most necessary and undoubted Powers.

Since I have given you the Grievances and Instructions together, you are able
to Judge, and I do submit to your Judgment, whether my Reflections be Genuine
or no; and I shall conclude: That Nation lies under the pressure of most heavy
and grievous Laws. 2. The King has done all upon his part that was possible,
to render that Nation happy; and since he must be acquitted by all indifferent
Judgments, I will not give myself the trouble to tell you who are guilty, since
the Instructions are so full, the Ministers of State must be innocent.

By this time, I think you may be able to resolve your own Questions. 1. If the
King has done his part, and be not to blame, how comes the Majority of the
Parliament to be discontented? 2. Why did not the Parliament accept these
Concessions pro tanto, and turn them into Laws, and then ask what more they
thought necessary? 3. What is the meaning of so many Addresses, and
particularly, the last which is Printed? 4. Upon what grounds does these men
build their hopes, who do so pertinaciously oppose the King, and what may be
expected, whether the Presbyterians will join with them or not?

I must confess, your Doubts are highly reasonable, but they may be Resolved,
by what has been already clearly stated, and what I shall further tell you;
great expectation is a mighty enemy to Contentment, if there were less
selfishness amongst us, there would be more Satisfaction; people did expect the
return of the Golden Age, or the beginning of the Thousand Years from this
Revolution, and their Impatience is like to hinder them to enjoy what they
desire. The King can employ no more Actors than our Stage can hold: He has not
put any Stranger, nor any Scotch-man that served him abroad in any Scottish
Employment; if the Nation could make a larger Fond, no doubt he would be
willing to entertain more persons, for it is not likely the King intends to put
up any Scots-Money in his Pocket at present, he has allowed no multiplication
of Offices in one person, but by putting the great and lucrative Offices into
Commissions, there are twice as many persons employed in this Government, as
ever can be instanced in former Establishments.

In the whole Parliament of Scotland, for all this Noise, there are not twenty
persons, as I do verily believe, who are at bottom ill affected to their
Majesty's Service, and Government, but there are very many who have been
seduced, and have been imposed upon, wholly under gross mistakes, which have
transported them beyond the bounds of Discretion or Duty.

There are persons amongst us, who have their thoughts so much set upon getting
into the Government, and Lucrative Places of the Kingdom, that they are
resolved to disquiet the Government, and discontent the people, before they
fail of their pretensions, and they turn themselves into all shapes, and ply
every Wind to Deceive, and amuse the people; their influence is not so much
because they are able and leading Men, as that they are restless and implacable
Spirits; and they have gotten this ascendent over a great part of the
Parliament, two or three ways: 1. The most part of the Parliament have been
kept ignorant of the King's Instructions; and there was no Artifice wanting, to
possess every State and Person, that the King had refused Satisfaction, or
Redress to these points of the Grievances which were most material; and I know,
to my experience, that the Ministers, and also several Members of Parliament,
who came up here with the loudest Complaints, upon a sight of His Majesty's
Instructions, they were furprised and convinced: and the like success may be
expected throughout the whole Kingdom and Parliament, after a competent time to
be informed, and peruse the Instructions, and that they may return to their
former temper, and show that affection they had for his Majesty, and the
deference and submission to his Management of Affairs. 2. These persons who are
so insatiable for preferments and places, they did very dexterously start and
manage an unnecessary Debate, Whether or not the King was obliged by their
Offer, and his Acceptance of the Crown, to Redress all Grievances; and whatever
Conclusions they were pleased to draw from them, as their meaning, though these
be neither obvious nor expressed: and albeit it be very true, that the Grievances
are not obligator upon the King as they are represented, further than the King
in his wisdom shall find the things complained upon, to be truly prejudicial to
the Nation, and in so far as Father of the Country, he is obliged to give his
people relief; but their Majesty's were declared, recognized, and proclaimed
King and Queen of Scotland before the Grievances were framed, and so they could
be no Condition or Quality of their Right, but being humbly represented to the
King's Majesty from the Estates, to be redressed by him in Parliament; his
Majesty did not at all engage himself in any particular, but declared in
general, That he would Redress every thing that was truly grievous to the
Nation: Now while they manage this disingenious and weak Argument, Whether the
King be obliged to Redress the Grievances, they in the mean time have
endeavored to persuade the people, that the King has not at all done it, and
that he is so far from performance, that both he and his Ministers denies there
lies any obligation upon him, so that in this Revolution, the people do only
observe a change of Masters, but no ease of Burden, or Redress of Laws: now
after the publishing of the Instructions, this Imposture is so gross and
palpable, that it can no longer detain the people in ignorance. 3. When the
Parliament was willing to proceed according to the Instructions, and to have
settled their Church Government; these persons brought in always some new
Motions, which they did pretend to be necessarily previous; as first, they did
pretend the Articles was a preliminary; and therefore nothing could be done
till that point was adjusted: Next they did insinuate, that it was to no
purpose to settle the Church till first the State was purged, and all the ill
Men rendered incapable; for if ill Men were permitted to come in to the
Government, they might easily turn the Settlement of the Church round; and
thereupon there was a great struggle and debate, Whether Church Government
should be first settled, or the State purged by an Act of Incapacities, brought
in by the Earl of Mortoun; and it was carried, The Church Government should be
delayed and postponed to the purging the State; which may demonstrat, that
these Men had more the State than the Church under their prospect: Thereafter
the settling of Church Government being brought in, they started a fresh Hare,
and managed a Debate with great earnestness, that their Commissioners had not
done their Duty in the offering of the Crown, according to their Commission and
Instructions; and it was a second time brought to the Vote, Whether
Church Government, or the Exoneration of the Commissioners should first come
in. It was carried again, to delay Church Government; and several days being
spent upon that matter, it came to nothing, and was found to be pestered on
groundless Malice: Thereafter the Church Government was talked of; and then it
was pretended that so long as the Act of Parliament stood unrepealed anent the
Articles, nothing could come in legally to the Parliament, but from the
Articles: hereupon the King was pleased to make a further step, and he sent
down new Instructions, which the Commissioner did intimat in plain Parliament,
bearing his Majesty's Consent, that Church Government might be settled, Fines
and Foresaultures considered by the Parliament, either with Committees, or
without Committees, as the Parliament pleased; and in so far as concerns these
points, the King did pass from his Right, and consented that his Officers of
State should have no meddling in the matter, but remitted these matters
entirely to the Parliament; and this Concession being publicly intimat from
the Throne, it was openly asserted by Lawers and others, that albeit the King
did pass from the Articles, as to these points by an express Instruction to his
Commissioner, yet the Settlement could not be Legal, till either the Articles
were repealed, or a draught brought in to the Articles. Here I shall entreat
you to observe when these Men had no mind to bring in a matter, then the
Articles was so indispensable, that the King's Instructions was not sufficient
to warrant the legality of any matter to be brought into Parliament, otherways
than from the Articles; but when ever they resolved to have a matter brought
in, then there was neither necessity nor use of the Articles, but they durst
adventure to proceed in all these Votes contained in the Address, without ever
acquainting the King, or procuring an Instruction to his Commissioner, or
Tabling these matters before the Articles, which they would never allow to be
chosen, according to the standing Law: By this you may guess at the Ingenuity
of their Procedure, and if it were not tedious, I could give you many such
Instances; The Estates did apply to the King to be turned into a Parliament,
that no time might be lost by the Indiction of the Parliament; the King had no
sooner granted it, but a Committee of the Estates did Address to him to delay
the Diet of the Parliament, till some of them might come up (which was to
secure their Interest in getting Offices and Places in the State) which took
off the reason they had pressed to be turned into a Parliament, rather than
that a new one should be called. Likewise that Committee did take upon them to
give good Injunctions to the King, not to be hasty in disposing of Places, till
his Majesty might take Information from some persons whom they did recommend:
And accordingly his Majesty did neither at that time, nor till now, dispose of
any place, but what was absolutely necessary: And in the nomination of the
Lords of Session, the King did not design the whole number, but only Ten to
make a full Quorum, which might do all business while he were further informed
for naming the other Five. This was no sooner done then it was quarrelled as a
Nullity in the Nomination, because it was not complete. The King by three
several Instructions pressed the settling of the Church Government, and did
allow it to be done in any way they pleased, with Committees, or without them:
And sicklike, for considering Fines and Forefaultures; which was as often shifted
by those persons who offered the Address, and at last it was declared to be
impracticable; and yet they have the confidence to spend a great deal of their
Paper, complaining for the not settling of Presbyterian Government, and
restoring Fines and Forefaultures, as if the fault had lain upon the King, and
that he needed to be pusht to it, whereas they themselves have been the only
Obstructers. And I am credibly informed, that while they run about to amuse
every body, they tell those who are of the Church of England, to ingratiat with
them, that what they did in relation to the abolishing of Episcopacy, was
nothing of their own inclinations, but to comply with the King's Instructions,
who was engaged in that matter before he came from Holland, which is
sufficiently confuted by the Instructions themselves.

As to your second Question, you have great reason to wonder why a Prince
having made so great Concessions, they were not accepted by every body, and
that it had been a better season afterward to have demanded more. But the
misery lies here, if once the Instructions had been understood, and been
reduced into Laws, that must have given so universal a satisfaction to the
people, and procured so much affection and gratitude to the King, that all the
Addresses, Hopes and Endeavors had been in vain to creat Jealousy, and
maintain Faction and Mutiny: For the benefits and ease the Nation should have
received, would have been so sensible and fresh, that the Whisperer or
Backbiter would have found no place or admittance; whereas now the Nation
remaining under its Fetters, there being nothing done for its advantage or
satisfaction; every body is sensible of the misery it feels, but few can make a
Judgment of the Cause and the Author, and they have been easily imposed upon to
believe, that these who keep them in Slavery, are the Champions, and that he
who promised, and from whom they expected Relief, has deserted them: And to
make these surmises pass the more plausible, they give it out that the King is
pestered with ill Counselors, and that the Malignants, and these who ruined
the Nation formerly, are to be assumed into the Government, that they may act
their former part, or a worse over again; whereas almost all the Places and
Commissions are filled with persons as have either never been in the
Government, or have acted most inoffensively there.

As to your third Question, there came three Addresses to the King, one from
the Clergy, desiring their Church Government to be established; I am confident
upon the sight of the Instructions, and their application to the King, the
Ministers were convinced and satisfied that the King had done all that was
proper for him, and that it was their interest and duty to stand firm by the
King, and that their Party had no hopes or security under God, but in him.

There was another Address from the Burrows, desiring the King to give
Instructions in relation to their Grievance; I cannot say that their
Commissioners were satisfied, because they were men chosen out, and sent up
here upon another design than to take satisfaction, and therefore they got
their Answer in Writing; but I hope the Burrows do already, or shall shortly
understand how they were abused: Thus far they did only choice a Trasequing
Burgess, who might be concerned in the interest of that State, next day they
were Whidled to choice the two Lawers, whose errand was none of their business,
and yet they were to bear their Charges.

There was a third Address from a great many of the Members of Parliament, I
need not tell you what undue practices was used to procure and mendicat
Subscriptions, after the Parliament was up, and to very little purpose; for
except it had been to insult the King, as they have done in all the steps of
their management. Could an Address out of Parliament import more than a Vote of
Parliament? except it were to convince the King of their peremptoriness, and
that they were incorrigible, and that nothing was to be expected from the
Parliament, when it should meet again, tho I do not believe that the King needs
to fear this; for when the generality of the Parliament comes to be informed,
and shall see the Instructions, they will perceive clearly the selfish and
implacable designs of some men, and their false surmizes, that they will quit
and fall off from these men, and leave them to themselves, to double out their
pretensions for places, in which the Country has little concern. I need not
tell you the matter of the Address, since it is Printed; I shall make some
short reflections upon it. 1. These Votes which were so unseasonably brought
in, and so peremptorily pressed, have no relation to the Grievances. Now if
they had been of so great importance, why were they then forgot? And if they be
of less importance than the Grievance, why do they make such a bustle to press
in these points of less moment, and stop these things which are of far greater
consideration, which were first Tabled by a representation from the States, and
granted by the Kings Instructions? And its pretty odd to see men who make such
a noise about the Authority of the Grievances, that the King must satisfy
them, and yet when they please to bring in any little Overture, it must take
place, and justle out the other. 2. As to the Vote of Incapacities, it is
indeed a Vote incapacitating the King to employ any person in his service but
whom they please; for the Terms are so lax, and the Nation so universally
invovled, that there are few men of Business, Fortune, or parts, but they may
be reached, and most part of the Addresses themselves, as far as they are
capable they are guilty; but when a man turns upon that side, the most
abominable and monstrous faults are covered, whereas trifles are mustered and
magnified, if a man be on the Kings side. And I cannot forget the last Member
of the incapacities, that all who have obstructed the designs of the House,
after they came the length of Votes, shall be incapable of Public Trust,
though the Royal consent neither is, nor I believe will perhaps ever be
adhibited; so they are no Laws, but abortive Attempts, which never had a
precedent, and it may be will never have a parallel. 3. As to that Article
concerning the Session, I have already told you how it was thrown out by the
Committee of the Estates. I dare say to you upon my reputation, that there is
not one word in our Law giving the Parliament any power in Trial or Admission
of the Lords of Session. I shall refer you to two short Acts in Anno 1661, the
second and eleventh Acts of the first Session, first Parliament K. Chapter 2d.
Where the King's Right in this point is as clearly stated, as can be expressed.

These Acts are as follows,

ACT and Acknowledgment of His Majesty's Prerogative, in the choice of His
Officers of State, Counselors and Judges.
THE Estates of Parliament considering the great obligations that do ly upon
them from the Law of God, the Law of Nations, the Municipal Laws of the Land,
and their Oaths of Allegiance, to maintain and defend the Sovereign Power and
Authority of the Kings Majesty, and the sad consequences that do accompany any
encroachments upon, or diminutions thereof; do therefore from their sense of
duty, declare, that it is an inherent privilege of the Crown, and an undoubted
part of the Royal Prerogative of the Kings of this Realm, to have the sole
choice and appointment of the Officers of State, and Privy Counselors and
nomination of the Lords of Session, as in former times, preceding the year
1637. And that the Kings Sacred Majesty, and his Heirs and Successors, are for
ever, by virtue of that Royal Power, which they hold from God Almighty over
this Kingdom, to enjoy and have the full exercise of that Right: And therefore
the Kings Majesty, with Advice and Consent of his Estates of Parliament, does
hereby rescind all Acts, Statutes, or Practices to the contrair.

Follows the acknowledgment of His Majesty's Prerogative.

FOrasmuch as the Estates of Parliament of this Kingdom, by their several Acts
of the 11th and 25th of January last, have from the sense of their humble duty,
and in recognizance of His Majesty's just Right, declared, that it is an
inherent privilege of the Crown, and an undoubted part of the Royal
Prerogative of the Kings of this Kingdom, to have the sole choice and
appointment of the Officers of State, Privy Counselors, and Lords of Session,
etc.

I shall only tell you, that the Session is sitten down with as great
satisfaction as ever it did, and several of the most eminent Lawyers have
accepted, whose Practice was much better than their Sallaries; and you must
allow me to say, since they must know the Law, they are great fools if they be
not safe: And I am sure the greatest Lawers that did oppose this, would have
been content to have run the hazard of the Parliaments censure, if they could
but procured the Kings Commission, and would have parted with the Club to the
Boot, when they had got their own Staik. And as to that part of the Vote, that
the President should be chosen by the Lords, this did not concern the
Parliament, since the Lords did not complain: And the five last successive
Presidents are named by the King in the same manner: Besides, my Lord Stairs is
not made of new President, but restored to an Office whereunto He had been
formerly Admitted by the Lords, conform to the Kings Declaration, from which he
was unjustly thrust out: And withal, the Lords did unanimously by a Vote
acquiesce in His Majesty's nomination and reponing the President, and declared,
if the matter had been entire to themselves, they would all and every one of
them have chosen him; so this dust has been very idly raised. 4. I must again
take notice of that grief they express for the want of that Church Government
they themselves hindered to be established; and the design of the Address is to
Imprint in the apprehensions of the people, that the King is slow or backward
in that matter. 5. As to the Apology for not giving Cess, it is very pleasant,
they did not refuse it absolutely, but till some things were first exped which
might give them satisfaction; that is to say, they would give no Cess or
Subsistence for the Kings Troops, though they must quit the Country if he
withdraw them, till such time as the King shall renounce the remainder of his
Sovereignty: And I shall not say that he has been prodigal of his Prerogative,
but I am sure he has been so liberal of it, that it might at this time have
given contentment for once. It is needless in this case to remember either the
obligations we owe to our King, or the necessity we have of his Protection; but
I shall offer two things to show the ingratitude and foolishness of refusing
this Supply. 1. The King has expended above threescore thousand pounds upon
his Troops in Scotland, out of his own Pocket, for our defense, and in sending
Arms, Ordnance and Ammunition thither; and if he should abandon us this Winter,
the best part of the Nation would be forced to leave the Country. 2. By a
standing Law, the Parliament settled Eight Months Cess upon King James, during
his life time, which we paid pleasantly, for supporting that Government, was
it discretion to refuse the King four Months Cess, which is but 24000 Pounds
Sterling, which he was willing to accept, instead of demanding the Eight Months
during King James's life? And supposing that he had redeemed us from that Eight
Months Cess, as well as many other miseries, was it grateful or just to grudge
him one years Cess, for the relief of the rest? There was more heat in this
matter than consideration. 6. I cannot but admire their confidence, in
pretending to be surprised with the sudden Adjournment of the Parliament; most
men did wonder it sat so long, and every body knew it was to rise that Week;
that strange Vote in refusing four Months Supply after all the rest that had
passed, made it evident there was no better to be expected; and when they had
formerly refused to proceed upon the Instructions, how could any man think that
they should not be Adjourned?

As to your last Question, where these men's strength lies, and whether the
Presbyterians will desert the King, and join with them? I tell you plainly my
thoughts, these men play upon the Presbyterian Staik; and though the Sticklers
be persons who have little concern in Religion, or regard to Church Government,
and when Episcopacy was formerly abolished, and all the Laws establishing it
Rescinded, in consequence the Laws made at the Reformation, in favors of the
Presbyterian Government, were redintegrat and revived; the same might now have
been done, but thirsame Addressers did oppose it, and did add a Clause in the
House, declaring the Church Government was yet to be established, upon this
project, that if Presbytery were once established, they knew the Presbyterians
needed no more depend upon them; whereas the Presbyterians must either support
them, or else they will turn about and fall in with the Cavaleer Party against
them: for they Front to all Sides but to the King, and in the mean time they
render the Presbyterians jealous of the King, and tell them that the Civil
Magistrate likes always to have the Church in his power, and that the King to
oblige the Church of England, will in the end abandom them, whereas they are
willing to establish Presbytery in what terms they can desire, and to go the
length of a Covenant and League with the Dissenters in England. But after all,
I can hardly believe that the Presbyterians will be so imposed upon, and
whidled out of their Interest, by persons they know to have no concern for
Religion, but to raise themselves by it: And therefore I think the following
Considerations will secure the Presbyterians. First, All the Presbyterian Lords
in Scotland, who have been all along of that Persuasion, and have suffered for
it, have all to a Man stood firm to the King in this Parliament, against the
Club, and they are almost all actually employed in His Service. Now it is not
possible that any rational or sober Presbyterian will part with their old and
great Friends, who are able to do them good, for new Undertakers, whereof some
have been lately their Persecutors, and the Presbyterians have no safe retreat,
King James will neither trust, nor forgive them. Will they be Neuters, and
Associat again, as the Five Western Shires did in Anno 1650. when they refused
to join either with King Charles's Army, or Cromwels: This design was both
foolish and fatal, they were quickly broken at Hamiltoun. Secondly, I can
hardly believe that the Presbyterians will forget the regard the King had to
their sufferings, that he has revived and restored them, and will certainly
settle the Government of the Church of Scotland by Presbyters, and employ them
where they are capable, in the Civil Government, if they themselves do not
hinder him. For though I do not believe that the King either is, or should be
of a Party, yet their circumstances lies together, his success, and their
deliverance. For in Scotland, though we had Bishops who were Tools for the
Civil Government, and led Horses for the State, yet we never admitted Canons,
Service, or any Forms in our Church; so that even in time of Bishops the Nation
was Presbyterian: And whereas the Church and Bishops of England before this
Revolution, were standing in the Gap, and suffering; and the King in His Speech
to the Parliament, did avouch them to be a Bulwark to the Protestant Religion,
yet at that time our Bishops in Scotland, in their Address to King James, not
only pray for his success and prosperity in that Expedition, but they pray that
God may give him the necks of his Enemies, after they knew that the King, then
Prince of Orange was Embarked, and had set Sail for Britain. This may
conciliate a greater confidence and regard from the King to the Presbyterians
of Scotland, without giving any discouragement or displeasure to the Church of
England; For a Prince that has different Countries and Nations, may maintain
distinct Religions, and much more distinct Forms of Government, professing the
same Religion, without affecting or neglecting any man upon that account.
Thirdly, As it is duty and gratitude for the Presbyterians to stand firm by the
King, they lie under a suspicion to be difficile and uneasy under any
Government, and that their Principles are more suited to a Commonwealth than
Monarchy; they have now an opportunity to retrive and vindicate themselves from
these aspersions; and if they be such fools as to suffer themselves to be
seduced to quit the King for the Club, there are many that are now looking
after their halting, who will not be wanting to represent to the King, that he
has neglected a far greater interest, in looking after the Dissenters, whom he
could not manage. These and other such Considerations will certainly oblige the
Presbyterians to look to their interest, and foresee their danger, if they
should either lie by, or prove unkind: And if they do not support and sustain
this Club, it will fall to nothing, and the Nation will return to some better
temper, and see their folly, in not closing with the Kings Instructions. Sir, I
have been carried far beyond my design, in giving you an account of my thoughts
in this matter. But without further, I am,

Your most humble Servant.


