An ACOUNT of the Apprehending and Taking, OF Mr. John Robinson, and William
Criss, For the MURDER OF Mrs. Mary Robinson.
Particularly, How they were discovered by a Letter, from an unknown Hand, and
Seized in their Beds, this Morning at a Powder-shop, next Door to the
Talbut-Inn, near the May Pole in the Strand. With their Examination, and
Committment to Newgate for the same. With the manner of the said Barbaronu
Action, etc.
THE Barbarous and Inhuman Murder of Mrs. Mary Robinson in Shere-Lane by her
pretended Brothers being noised abroad. A Letter Yesterday in the Evening came
from an un-known Hand, to Mrs. Gilder's in Shere-Lane, signifying, that the
same Persons who had Committed that Barbarous Action, were both at a Powder
Shop next Door to the Talbut Inn over against the May Pole in the Strand. And
withal added that if they were not surprised that Night they would be gone
next Morning, upon which Mrs. Gilder Communicated the matter to some
Neighbors, who thereupon having Consulted with the Constable and watch near
that place, it was agreed to defer Seizing them till near 3 of the Clock this
Morning at which time, Entering the House they found them in separate Beds with
2 Women which they called their Wives and having Examined them and the People
of the House, it appeared that, they had been Lodgers there ever since August
Last, however, Mrs. Gilder being sent for, she positively declared that they
were the same Persons that were last in the Company of Mrs. Robinson, that
Night she was found Murdered, and that they went under the Notion of her
Brothers; and they making but very frivilous Excuses the Constable and Watch
secured them till near 10 of the Clock, and then they were brought before the
Coroner, in Bell-Yard near Temple Bar, where they were Examined seperately
insomuch that, they Confuted each other in their Answers; and thereby it
plainly appeared that they were both Gilty of the aforesaid wretched Barbarity,
though they seemed for a considerable time to deny it, whereupon the Coroner (who
the Day before had found it Wilful Murder) Committed them both to Newgate.

And accordingly they where Conveyed thither in a Coach, between Twelve and One
of the Clock, where they are to remain till the next Sessions, which is now
nearly approaching in order to be Tried, for the Abovementioned Barbarous
Murder, where no doubt but they will receive a reward suitable to their
deserved Crime.

We are just now informed by a Gentleman that knows both, William Criss, and
Mr. Robinson, that Criss was the real Husband of the Murdered Gentlewoman, and
that Robinson had Married Mr. Crisses Sister, so that they were Brothers in Law
as was at first given out: The decesed Gentlewoman's former Husband being own
Brother to this Mr. Robinson, and it is supposed that the only reason that
induced, Mr. Criss to perform this Barbarous Action was, because he had lately
Married another Woman.

The Account of the said Murder.
ABout a Week since, Mrs. Mary Robinson took a Lodging at one Mrs Gilders a
Hatters Widow near. Temple, Bar, at which time two Gentlemen whom she said was
her Deceased Husbands Brothers accompanied her, and they have since made her
several Vissits, she having one Girl with her not above 4 Years of Age: And on
Wednesday last being the 29th of November, the said two Brothers came again
about 8 of the Clock at Night, when asking to speak with Mrs. Robinson their
Sister, Mrs. Gilder told them she was in her Chamber, and thereupon gave them a
Candle and desired them to walk up two pair of Stairs to her, not in the least
suspecting any harm to acted by her Brothers, so that having the Lighted Candle
in their Hands they accordingly entered her Chamber where they found her in
Bed, and having been there about half an Hour, Mrs Gilder heard a strange
Blustling above, and at the same time, a kind of a Loud Screech or Cry,
whereupon going up to see what was the matter, she was met by the two Brothers,
who being asked by Mrs. Gilder what Noise was in Mrs. Robinsons Room.

Upon which they haistly put the Candle into her Hand, and told her that the
Child had been a little Untoward, but now it was pacified again, and for that
time she believed them, but seeing them make more have than Ordinary out at the
Door; she began to suspect they had Committed some Villainy, so that she
immeadiatly to satisfy her Doubts, knocked at the Mrs. Robinson Door, but she
not making answer, some of the Neighbors was called in, and in fine the door
was brok open, for it being a spring Lock the Murder, had locked it after
them, having got into the Chamber, they found Mrs. Robinson Murdered, in a
most Wretched and Cruel manner, her Neck and Threat being as black as a Shoe,
and and Sweld in y^ most terrible manner, so this it is thought they Strangled
her with a Rope, or her Garters which lay by her, the Child saying by her at
the same time having a pice of a Cake in its Hand, which it is supposed these
barbarous Vill^^s had given her to keep her from Crying; upon which the Child
was asked who had done that to her Mother, she replied that her Uncles had done
it, and had given her that Cake, to lie still without crying. What should
induce these Bretheran in Evil to commit such a barbarous and abominable Action
is at present ancertain; though most are of the Opinion, that they Murtiered her
to prevent the Payment of Go^^ which they owed her, it being to be paid the
next day, Mrs. Gilder having heard her say that she was to receive 60. l. of
her Brothers the next day.

Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for and Sold by John Green, in Fleet Street, 169^


