AN ACCOUNT OF THE Araignment, Trial and Conviction OF James Lord Preston* For
High Treason,
IN Conspiring the Death of the King and Queen, and endeavoring to bring in
the late King James, and B^tray the Nation to the French King.

AT THE Sessions House in the Old Bailey, on Friday and Saturday the 16 th. and
17 th. Instant; before the Lord Chief Justice, WITH The Manner of the Taking
the Lord Preston, Mr. Ashton, Mr. Elliot, etc* And an Account of the several
Treasonable Papers and Letters, that were found on Shipboard.

To which is added, Diverse* Remarkable Relations in the Life of the said Lord
Preston.

INformation being given, that the Lord Preston, and others, had designed to go
to the late King James in France, upon Dangerous Designs, and in order
thereunto* had hired a Vessel; for which, they were to give the Master a
Considerable Reward. Some Officers went in a little Sloop, or Yatcht, in Search
after them; and they coming on Board, seized the abovesaid Lord Preston, John
Ashton, and Edmund Elliot, Gentlemen; and with them diverse Treasonable Papers,
and Letters, etc. After they were brought on Shore* and Examined, they were all
three Committed to the Tower, where they remained till Friday the 16 th. of
this Instant January; which Day, early in the Morning, the above mentioned Lord
Preston, John Ashton, and Edmund Elliot, were Conveyed in three Coaches, with
Guards and their Warders, from the Tower to Newgate, and from thence, to the
Sessions House in the Old-Bayly; and being set to the Bar, they were Artaign'd
by the Names of Sir Richard Grahme Barronet (Viscount Preston in the Kingdom of
Scotland) John Ashton, and Edmund Elliot, Gentlemen, upon an Indictment of High
Treason, for Conspiring, Imagining, and Compassing the Death and Destruction of
the King and Queen, and the Subversion of the Government, and for Adhering to
Their Majesty's Enemies, by endeavoring to procure an Invasion of this Kingdom
by the French King, and Informing and Advising him, and other Enemies, and
Ill-disposed Persons, of the Times, Ways, and Means, how to effect the same,
and how they might Depose Their Majesty's, and cause Their Subjects to rise,
and raise War and Rebellion within this Kingdom: To which, they severally
pleaded, Not Guilty, and the next day, being Saturday the 17 th, Instant, the
Lord Preston only was brought to his Trial. He first desired, that his
Indictment might be read a third Time in Latin, then excepted against a great
many of the Jury, after which, the Jury was Sworn, Justice Peyton, Son of the
late Sir Robert Peyton, was Foreman. Then diverse Treasonable Letters were
read, three of which (by comparing of Hands and other Circumstances) were
proved to be the Lord Prestons, by the Oaths of two Substantial, and very
Credible Witnesses, that is, to be of his Lordships own Writing, in which
(among other Matters.) there were contained an Account of the Posture of our
Army, and Navy, the Names of the Commanders, and how they stood affected to
Their Majesty's and the Present Government, as also of some Lawyers, whom his
Lordship adjudged to be King James's Friends* In fine, a Project how to
overturn the Present Government, and Introduce the late King James and the
French King, and with them their two Darlings, Popery and Slavery; to all which
his Lordship made a very slender Defense, and did not so much as bring any one
Person to prove his Conversation; after which the Lord Chief Justice, very
Justly and Impartialy summed up the Evidence, which was very full and clear,
and the Jury going out somewhat above half an hour, returned, and brought him
in Guilty of High Treason.

This Sir Richard Gra^me, alias Lord Preston, being Viscount Preston in the
Kingdom of Sc^tland; is the Son of Sir George Grahme of Cumberland, being Born
within Seven Miles of the City of Carlisle, he has three Brothers, one of which
is Page to the late King James, and with him in France: a Second, viz: Colonel
Grahme was the late King James's Privy Purse, for whom Warrants of High Treason
are Issued out, he being fled from Justice; and the Third is a Divine. His
Father Sir George, was a Colonel in the Army of King Charles the II. and
Dying* left his Estate to the present Lord, considerably encumbred with Debts,
for the clearing of which, the late King James when Duke of York, was
considerably Assistant. He Married the Sister of the Right Honorable the Earl
of Carlisle by whom he has had several Children, to whom, and to his Lady by
Jointure, his Estate was made over long since. He was sent Ambassador by the
late King James, to the French King (in the Room of Sir William Thrumbal) and
after he had continued at that Court for some time, being recalled, the late
King James made him one of his Principal Secretaries of State, in the Room of
the Earl of Sunderland, in which Station he continued till the Abdication of
the late King, who then would have made him Viscount Preston, in Amounderness
Lancashire in England.

Certainly did Men but look to the Emergent Providence of God, toward His
Present Majesty from his very Infancy; they may easily see that he is the
Darling of Heaven and designed by God to do Eminent Service; and that
therefore, all the Plots and Contrivances* that the Wit and Hellish Policy of
Mankind can form against him, will be brought to naught; for as when he was but
a Child, he was by a Potent Faction, in a manner, turned out of all that ever
he had a right to, from his Noble Progenitors, so he was marvelously restored
to all, nay, to a greater Power than they enjoyed, and the Miscreants that
Injured him, brought to Condign Punishment. When he exposed himself (Codrus
like) to many Dangers, for the Safety, and Liberty of his Country; which
otherwise had undoubtedly been at this day Groaning under French Slavery, it
pleased God many times to preserve him, and by him his Country. And no less
Stupendous was the Providence that attended his Expedition hither, when he
came to Rescue us srom the Jaws of Death, and to deliver us from the
Antichristian, Egyptian Darkness, which overspread our Horizon; and how it
has pleased God ever since to defeat the Attempts of many Wicked and
unreasonable Men. Nay, What considering Man does not see the great design of
God in it? That Foundations are thereby laid for a beautiful Fabric of Peace
and Truth: While it has pleased God to set forth in their own Colors, a Party
of Men, who how strong retences soever they have made to Loyalty and
Peaceableness beyond all others, have been really our Incendiaries all along,
and have had a hand in all the Callamities that have befallen us; they all
along diging their Councils deep as Hell, and what by Violence, Importunity,
and Brazenfacedness, sticking at nothing that may carry on their Designs. And
when they have done all, like that Impudent Harlot in the Proverbs, they can
wipe their Mouth, and say, they are Innocent.

London, Printed for T. Collins* near Fleet-Bridge, 1691.


