All Account of the Apprehending, and Taking of John Davis, and Phillip Wake,
For Setting Dr. Sloan's House on Fire, to Robb the same, with their Committed
to Newgate. As also, The Discovery of 4 Persons, who Burnt the House of 'Squire
Aisleby, in Red-Lyon-Square, and Murdered his Lady.
Printed according to Order.

SOME Weeks ago, the House of Dr. Sloan near Bloomsbury-Square, was attempted
to be Broke open by several Notorious Persons; which to perform, they got over
into a back Yeard adjoining to the Fields, but having several times Endeavored
without success to force the Doors open (they being strongly Bolted and Secured
within) the said Villains, by the Instigation of the Devil, Immediately fixed
upon this Desperate, Terible, and Dismal Resolution, viz. to set the House on
Fire in several places, and by this violent method, to amaze the Family to that
degree, as to open the Doors; and then under pretense of Friendly assistance,
they were to rush in and Robb the House; but Blessed be God they are prevented
tho having cut several Splinters off the Door of the House of Office, and set
Fire to them under the Window, and Back Door of the Pantrey, which being of
thin and dry Deal-Boards, burnt with great Violence, and had answered their
wicked Designs, if Providence had so Ordered the matter, that the Lady was
awake, who smelling the Scent of the Fire, could not be satisfied till the
Servants were called up, upon which one of them going Down Stairs, and Opening
the Pantry-Door was almost Chok'd, with the Violence of the Smoke and Flame,
which by this time, had got great Advantage, whereupon being amazed, he Cried
out Fire, and their upon Alarmed the whole Family, who by the help of several
Tubbs of Water, which were happily brought in over Night in order to wash their
Linen (the Fire tho very Violent) was in a short time Extinguished; during
this amazing Disorder 3 or 4 Men were observed by some of the Neighbors, to
stand listening in the back Yard to make their Entrance, as soon as the Door
was opened; but seeing their Design were Frustrated, they Sheer'd off with all
the haist Imaginable, and so made their Escapes: And tho in order to their
being Discovered, Dr. Sloans offered a Reward of 100 l. to any Person that
would Apprehend either of them, yet they remained Undiscovered till last Week,
at which time as if the Almighty was more than ordinary offended with such an
abominable undertaking, they were Discovered, and taken after a strange manner,
viz. one of them being Surprised in Westminster for a Notorious Crime and sent
to the Gate House, he there in Order to get his Discharge, Discovered the
aforesaid Villainy, by whose Directions John Davis, and Phillip Wake, were taken
into Custody, and Carried before the Recorder, who Committed them both to
Newgate, on Saturday last.

And this Day we are informed that a Servant belonging to Squire Aisleby, has
made a Discovery of four Notorious Villains, who after having Murdered his
Lady, and Robbed the House, in Red-Lyon-Square set it on Fire, wherein she was
Burnt to Ashes, and same say the aforesaid Persons in Newgate, were Concerned
in that Cruel, and Inhuman Barbarity; and if so it was a Crime of such an
abominable Nature, as hardly ever was heard of in any Age, in regard a
Vertious, Harmless, and Innocent Lady, Expired in those Merciless Flames.

London, Printed by J. W. in Fleet Street, 1700


