AN ACCOUNT OF THE ARBITRARY, EXACTIONS, TAXATIONS, IMPOsitions, Excises,
Contributions, with other Assessements, which have been leavied in these late
Wars, out of the Associate Counties; viz.

Essex Suffolk Norfolk Kent Sussex Surrey Middlesex Hertfordshire.
Presented to the view of all those who wish well to their Country.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

READER,
I Present thee here with pars de toto, and will indeed serve pro toto, to a
judicious man to Calculate by. I know not thy temper, therefore cannot tell how
thou will accept of this little great Account cast up by me, if it goes against
thy stomach I shall know thee what thou art (for an honest man will embrace
truth, especially when it discovers so much falsehood and injustice) to which
end I took the pains, not caring how it disgests with thee, knowing the fault
to be in thy corrupted stomach, not in the meat, for I have herein used much
modesty and more truth, using the greater pains to bring it as near truth as
possible (I am certain I have not gone beyond it.)

Neither would I have thee altogether ruminate upon the sums only, but reflect
a little back to the Cause and Causers; The cause our sins, the causers our
selves; For who is there in the whole world has had such showers of blessings
poured on them? Insomuch that our Manna was loathed by us, our godly
gap-stopping Preachers rejected with their Doctrine, and willingly entertained
and hearkened to Factious Levites, thereby becoming a Seditious people and a
bewitched generation of Vipers, wholly given to War, Sedition, Strife,
Heresies, Rebellions, and what not? And for the upholding of it, remember how
ready we offered, not only our Estates, O but our Lives! yea, exposing
(without Gods great mercy) even our Souls in it to the mercy of the merciless
devourer of them. And now what may we expect less then lately has been, and
now is, besides what hereafter may be, if Gods mercy do not timely prevent it?

And that we may a little discern by a little, what and how much we have
justly drawn on us, behold and see our Oppression in this one angle (and but a
small one) of this Looking-glass (not so much to discover our own madness,
as the illegal proceedings of the Oppressors.)

And now to begin with our own County (for I would not in the least measure be
thought partial though I foul my nest) and the other seven Counties shall be
rated proportionably to this.

(...) had not settled in our climate which now we see is and ready to
overwhelme our whole Kingdom. So as we see the Electors as well as the elected
are in fault, neither ignorant yet both wanting in the executing of their
charge and duty.

The Kingdom stands in need of Parliaments, as well for the moderating of too
severe Laws, and the strengthening of those that have not power enough, as
redressing grievances and making new Laws, and yet what infinite Petitions
from the people to the Parliament lies in obsurity by them, as well for
particular as general wrongs, most occasioned by themselves, and yet not any
redressed, and why, because lawfully they can as well do the one as the other,
both illegal, (there Orders not being Acts, as appears by their requesting it
might be so)

As for those that concern themselves their leisure (or rather their charity
cannot permit their redressing of them. Could this land (nay the world)
parrallell this our gracious Sovereign for mercy and goodness in being as
ready and willing to redress as the people to complain, yea, preventing as
much as in His Majesty lay) the occasions of all future complaints as plainly
appears by the Acts He has passed in this present Parliament, sharing His
Crown, Honor, and Prerogatives with his people, And behold notwithstanding in
the possessing of this inch so freely given, how they have near gained the
whole ell by usurpation; how stiffely they stand to maintain the least
Privilege of their own (which has been graciously bestowed on them by the
King, and by them acknowledged by a remuneration of a lawful general Tax, as
all precedent Parliaments can witness) and how little regard they His
Majesty's Rights being so far from remunerating as they strive as much as in
them lies, to have the remainder.

Acts of grace from his Majesty first enacted are so lawful and binding till
repealed, and the King must repeal as well as enact, otherwise it remains a
Statute Law, then follows the act of his subjects remuneration, and then the
sovereigns free pardon.

But here I must needs take notice of one thing (and I think worthy the
hinting) that I have observed in former Parliaments; they have been so
honorable that in these acts of pardon they never moved their Sovereign to
exempt Murders and Treasons, I believe this will have both incerted, or as the
Judges use to say after there sentence past on criminal offenders, Lord have
mercy upon thee (which will stand a brand on both houses for perpetuity) from
(...) for Parliaments should proceed nothing but Piety and Justice, otherwise
why make we our appeal to them, they ought to crave grace and favor from His
Majesty to the people (of whom they are the representative body) of both which
we have from him received sufficiently, were we not wholly possessed with the
spirit of madness and folly, we very well hereby see that the diminishing of
the Crowns, power is augmenting of subjects bondage, we may then say with the
woman of Samariah help O King, and have as comfortless a reply, for what
redress or remedy can he give that is wholly divested of the power to give it.

The Writs (by which all Members are chosen and summoned) express that it is
to advise and Council with the King, and not to do or act (which by God
neither the Lands Law can they) any thing without him.

His Majesty cannot make a superintendent power, none, nor all more powerful
then himself,

If there be any make themselves so, it is a surrepted, not a delegated power.
The Laws declare the Title such deserve, and the punishment they ought to
have; Ambition, Pride, and Covetousness has but farthered a bloody Faction,
Theft a Civil Rebellion, In which I think, from the highest to the meanest
Family in the Kingdom not one of them has escaped from the loss of a Father,
a Son, a Brother, a Kinsman, or a dear friend, or Husband; which had not
hapened, had we taken Gods Law, and the Law of our Land for our Guide; and now
we do not blush to say (though with impious impudence enough) that it is for
the maintenance of our established Religion, and yet we see all so byased that
few or none know of what Religion they are of.

We have all seen the true Protestant Religion which has been sealed with the
blood of so many Martyrs, maintained by truly Orthodoxe and most Learned
Divines, and established by the wholesome Laws of our Land, Mauger the malice
and rage of the Church of Rome, and all other Schismatickes and Heretics, now
most impiously suppressed.

And now behold the just heavy hand of God on us, never bolder Treasons,
public Murders, open Sacrilege, Common Theft, and all Impiety reigning and
ruling without control, as if the way to heaven in all things were to disobey
the devil and our own lusts in nothing. The Israelites could plead want of a
King when every man did as it seemed good in his own eyes, we cannot plead want

(...)
