An Account of the Apprehending of the Treasonable Designs discovered in some
Papers found in the false Bottoms of two large Brandy Bottles, on the 21st. of
October, 1689.
Licensed

October 24th 1689. J. Fraser.



THE Security their present Sacred Majesty's now stand upon, and the Foundation
the Protestant Religion receives from their Administration, seems so established
that their Enemies are reduced to their last shift of Wile and Stratagem, under
the Covert of Disguise and Night to work their dark and hidden Designs against
Them. An Instance of which has very lately demonstrated the Subtilty and
Restlesness of that unsatisfied Party, which take as follows. The Lady Griffin,
Wife to the Right Honorable the Lord Griffin, A Lady that has some years layn
under the Affliction of Blindness, living in the Pallmall, employed one of her
Servants to bespeak two large Pewter Brandy Bottles containing five or six
Quarts each Bottle, with each of them false Bottoms; which when she had got
finished, on the twenty second Instant, late at Night, between the hours of Ten
and Eleven, she sent her said Servant in company with a young Page of hers with
the same Bottles to a strange Pewterer's living in Panton-street to get the
false Bottoms soder'd fast down upon the Bottles, in which Bottoms she had
caused a great Parcel of Treasonable Letters to be laid and covered with
Cotton: The honest Pewterer, surprised at the sight of two Bottles of that sly
sort of make, and the cunning Conveyance of private Things thus suspiciously
stowed in them, being likewise a little staggered at the unseasonableness of
the Time of Night when they were brought to him to be thus closed up, made bold
to satisfy his Curiosity by searching what lay concealed under the Cotton; and
finding them to be a large quantity of Letters, apprehended both the said
Servants of the said Lady, who were that Night committed to the Gate House*
(where the elder Servant now lies close Prisoner,) and the Letters he conveyed
to the Right Honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury Principal Secretary of State.
The Lady upon Inquiry after her is taken into Custody.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.


