AN ACCOUNT Of the Behavior, Dying Speeches, and Execution of Mr. John
Murphey, for High Treason; and William May, John Sparcks, William Bishop, James
Lewis, and Adam Foresith, for Robbery, Piracy and Felony; at the
Execution-Dock: On Wednesday the 25th of November, 1696.
Licensed according to Order.

TO give my Reader first a short Account of the particular Crimes that brought
these Unhappy Criminals to their untimely End; These five last Pirates are some
of the Crew of the Famous, or rather Infamous Captain Every, that committed
those crying and bloody Cruelties, in the East Indies, upon the Coast of
Persia, and the Kingdom of the Great Mogol; these most Barbarous and Inhumane
Wretches, having first run away with one of his Majesty's Men of War, called
the Charles, and dismissed all that innocent part of the Ships Crew that
refused to engage in their desperate Designs, immediately set out as Pyrares,
make their common Prey upon Friends and Foes, and rob all Mankind. Accordingly
they perpetrated those unheard of Barbarities, as such plundering and rifling
all the Vessels they met with, Ravishing and Deflowering the Virgins and Women,
and then turning them out naked, to starve upon shore, amongst Rocks and
Deserts. But above all, nothing was so horrid, as their Surprising a Ship of
the King of the Indies, where they first took away an infinite Treasure, most
inhumanely Ravished a Young Princess, and the test of her Female Train, and
afterward left the Ship disarmed and disabled, floating as a wreck upon the
Sea, with near a 1000 Souls on Board, thereby exposed to inevitable Starving.

This unparalled Outrage greatly prejudiced the Honorable East India
Company, the Grand Mogul demanding Satisfaction of them for this Depreduction
and Villainy.

After public Proclamation made for their Apprehension, several of them were
accordingly taken, and William May, Joseph Dawson, John Sparcks, William
Bishop, and James Lewis were brought upon their Trials on the 19th of October,
before the Honorable Sir Charles Hedges, Judge of the High Court of Admiralty,
together with the Lord Chef Justice Holt, etc. At which time, notwithstanding
Joseph Dawson frankly and heartily acknowledge his Crimes and pleaded Guilty;
however the sway (much to Admitation) whither out of Tenderness, in relation to
not full enough Evidence, or what other unknown Reason, acquitted them.
Nevertheless they were afterward brought upon a new Trial, and such full and
ample Testimony came against them; as that they received the just Sentence of
Death, and this suffered accordingly.

Capt. Vaughan and John Murphey, though their Crimes were much of the same
Nature, viz. For their Rapiness upon the Seas, yet their Arraignment lay
higher, viz. For no less a Crime then Treason; as that being N^tive Subjects to
the King, contrary to their Allegiance, they had joined w^^^ our French
Enemies, and committed Hostilities upon the Subjects of England. Upon their
Trials it appeared, that Captain Vaughan had received a Com^ from the French
King, as Captain of a Privateer; and that he with oth^^ ^^val Forces had
attacqued and taken his Majesty's Ship the Diamand. (...) and carried her Price
into France, for which Fact, both he and Murp^^^ received Sentence of Death, as
Guilty of High Treason.

After their Trials and Conviction, though they appeared very resolute before,
yet upon the certainty of their approaching Death, they behaved themselves with
a little more modesty, and some signs of a good preparation for another World.
They received the Favor of a considerable Time to prepare for Death, and being
this 25th of November all conveyed, ( Murphey being drawn on a Sledge) to the
Execution Dock, between the Hours of three and four, they were all Executed,
Captain Vaughan only being Respited from the present Execution to Suffer at
Tyburn.

Murphey appeared the most undaunted, though to give them their due they seemed
to be all Masters of as much Courage as was possible, at the sight of so
infamous a Death before their Eyes. Murphey being an Irishman, and a strong
Zealot for the late King and the French Interest, seemed to have little Regret
against his Cause, which he seemed to adhere to, to the last, but rather maimed
the Misfortunes of his Life, and other private Sins, which he thought might in
a high measure bring him to this fatal End, as judging those Errors of his
wicked Life more capital then the Crime for which he dyed.

William May, was much inclined to Penitence, and expressed some sense of his
shameful End, and of the more shameful Crimes that brought him to that
ignominious Death.

John Sparcks, likewise expressed a due sense of his wicked Life, in particular
to the most horrid Barbarities that he had committed, which though upon the
Persons of Heathens and Insidels, such as the forementioned poor Indians, so
inhumanly rifled and treated so unmercifully; declaring, that his Eyes were now
open to his Crimes, and that he justly suffered Death for such Inhumanity, much
more then his Injustice and Robbery, in Stealing and Running away with one of
his Majesty's Ships, which was of the two his lesser concern.

William Bishop, said but little, but owned himself as deep a sinner as the
others; and that his three years Roving upon the Seas, was now a very
Melancholy Thought to his Soul, and so much the more to consider the Brutality
of his Crimes, as being one of a more Barbarous Crew than the Generality of
Offenders of that kind.

Adam Foresah, was very Penitent, and truly owned that besides the Guilt of his
Offenses, and the present capital Punishment, his Wicked Life, attended with
the many Hardships and Hazards he had undergone in his Robberies, was little
less than a Punishment; for wickedness (let it prosper never so much) brings
great many troubles and afflictions along with it.

James Lewis acknowledged his many Transgressions, and particularly the Offense
for which they all dyed. In fine, they had all the Favor at the place of
Execution, of giving them time to offer up their necessary Prayers to Almighty
God: and then all suffered according to their Sentence.

London: Printed for T. Crownfield, in Cheap Side, 1696.


