An ACCOUNT of the BESIEGING The CASTLE of EDINBVRGH. Kept by the Duke of
Gourdon, Together with the manner of the Surrender thereof, On Thursday the
13th. of June. 1689.
ON Thursday Night after my Writing to you, there were a great many Bombs shot
off the South Trench toward the Castle, which did no great Hurt there, one of
which being somewhat short, fell into one of the Suburbs called Portsbrught,
which did a great deal of Harm to a Baker, by abusing all his Bread, Meal, and
other things, and hit a Man very ill on the Back, which may tend very much to
his hurt, and Burned the House; and the Night after there was another Bomb
shot, that by the Combustable Composition of the Powder and falling on the next
adjacent House, Burnt it: Likewise another Bomb being Poisoned and shot into
the Castle, fell into their Well, and has Poisoned their Water, which I
believe, will be the first means to cause him to Surrender.

The same day there was a great many Bombs shot against the Castle, as likewise
Guns from the Battery, which has torn some part of the Half Moon and
Counterscarp; and what hurt else they have done, we cannot as yet give an
Account, but sure not without considerable Loss.

The Duke of Gordon seems to be very angry at the loss of the Men that deserted
him, which I mentioned in my last, by firing small Shot down upon the Town, and
his playing very hard upon all the Trenches and Batteries, by reason of their
being called in before the Council, and have declared some things that does not
please him, and will tend much to his hurt, and Discovered some of them that
gave him private Intelligence, and do still, since the City has been in a
posture of Defense.

One Captain Young, who belongs to Major General Mackay with 300 of the new
Levied Men, has Defeated the Maclans and Macdonalds, although their Number
were twice as many, by sinking of two Boats and Killing 40 on Land, and put all
the rest to Flight.

From Inverness it is reported here, that a Scout Party of the Viscount of
Dundee came to Surprise Mackay, thinking to have found him Napping, but his
Scouts being likewise out, they were deceived, and were handled warmly by
Mackay, and two Gentlemen Killed, viz. one Jimes of Corkstoun and Kinaird of
Coulbin, but how many more we know not.

This day by Beat of Drum, there was a Proclamation throughout the City, for
all Persons that would be pleased to Enter into a New Company that the Town
will have to be Settled besides their Trained Bands, consisting of 130. Men
which are to have due pay; and before the 8th. Instant they will be Completed.

Tuesday night and Wednesday night, they shot a great many Shots from the
Castle upon the new Batteries that lie upon the North-side of the City; some
Soldiers out of which gives an Account, that there was three or four Killed
and several Wounded,

This Night there is a Sconce made at the upper end of the Town, nearest to the
Castle, which we believe will do harm to the Castle, and the Castle to the Town.

A Yatch arrived at Newport Glascow upon Clyde, from Londonderry on Sunday,
which brings the News of the Landing of Colonel Kirk's Men, being three
Regiments, they descending by the Fort of Kilmore, by the Irish, and the rasing
of the Siege of Derry is confirmed.

It Is said the Late King James's Forces are drawing a pace down toward the
North, and the Places about Balfast and Craig fergus are filled with Soldiers,
and more coming every day.

Friday June 7. This day arrived here an Express from Kintire, with the
Confirmation that I mentioned in my last concerning the Highlanders; and
further adds, That there were five Boats Sunk, and three Taken, with the
greatest part of their Clans, who were bringing over Men to Land here from
Ireland; and two Frigots belonging to Scotland continue Cruising on the West
Seas, to hinder the Irish Landing in Scotland.

It is reported, that Mackay has Blowed up the Wood in which the Earl of
Dundee is lying, and we hourly expect Intelligence of their Meeting each other;
but it is thought that Dundee will not Fight Mackay, although it is reported he
has about 3000 Foot, and 300 Horse; but what is his design, it is not known,
but we shall have to Morrow a more full Account.

On the 19th. of May there was a great Contribution gathered at the Doors of
the Meeting Houses, and on Sunday last at the Doors of the Regular Clergy
Churches, for the Subsistence of the Irish Protestants; at which Doors there
was a great deal of Money received, but was not distributed amongst them till
June the 8th. when the Lord Provost, Baliffs, Counselors and Deacons of Craft
thought it fit that they should have Succor out of the said Contribution, for
which cause the Provost and Baliffs has thought sit this day by Beat of Drum
to cause a Proclamation to be made through the Street to call all the Irish
Protestants to come and receive Money according as their Circumstances are,
viz. They that have Wives and Children, and more especially they that have had
Fortunes there, with the Proviso that they bring their Testificates with them;
which being done, they will get as much as either will Transport them, or keep
them here until they be in a Capacity to do for themselves.

There was this day some Soldiers Killed in the South Battery, and likewise
some Wounded, who were carried home from the Camp on Horseback to their
Quarters.

Clovers is said to have (by an Express this Night come to Town) about 3000
Foot, and 300 Horse, but would not as yet Fight Mackay. By the Glascow News we
have our last asserted, about the Sinking of the Birlins.

Monday 10. Our Northern Letters gives an Account, that Mackay finding he could
not get the Viscount of Dundee and his Highland Forces to desert a Wood wherein
he commonly made the Place of his Refuge, Mackay wrote to Colonel Ramsay, and
told him, that he intended to take the Flying part toward the Low Countries,
as if he had been afraid of Clover's Horse, but he did it on purpose to draw
him from that Strength that he had in the Wood; but the High-landers thought he
had Fled, and so pursued him, which when Mackay found, he called a Council of
War, and immediately it was condescended that he should Fight Clovers, which
accordingly was done; and in the mean time Colonel Ramsay got between Clovers
and the Wood, Mackay Charged on the Front, beating in his outer Guards,
dispersed many of his Foot, and has Killed and taken many of them, together
with his Page, Sumptar, Horse and Baggage, and other Provisions: He immediately
Fled with a small Party of Horse, and Colonel Ramsay is in Pursuit of him; and
likewise there are several Letters found upon his Page, in which is found out,
that there has been a private Correspondence betwixt some of the Commanders
that belongs to Mackay and Clovers, and they that have done it are taken and
put under an Arrest; and Gordon of Inglessay Hanged 14 of Clovers's M^n that
staid behind for Pillage.

This day there was by a City Marshal Condemn^d two Persons, the one Lieutenant
Hay, and a Woman in the Name of Cunningham, for Corresponding with the Duke of
Gourdon.

This same dny one Mr. Bruice a German and Roman Catholic, who has Resided
here this long time, and did bring in the Water to the Town of Edinburgh, has
been in Prison this Month past, but last night he went out of the Prison
without any Keys, and went to a House opposite to the Prison and called for a
Drink of Ale, and after he had received it, he went to Prison again without any
interruption; and then within an hour after, he coming down Stairs to drink in
the same House, he called at one of the doors of the Prison to one Mr. Bredie
to come out and take his Liberty, (he formerly being a Servant to the Earl of
Murray) but he denied to come out; so he went by himself and took his Mornings
Draught, and came back again to the Prison being before and all the Wards
Locked: The Man in whose House the said Mr. Bruice came to drink, did send in
the Morning for one of the Magistrates of the City, who going into the Prison
with several Credible Witnesses, did call for the aforesaid Bruice, and
Examined him by what means he got out and in to the said Prison, who told them,
That there was no Lock nor Key made that could keep him in if so be that he
pleased; upon which the Magistrates and Witnesses asked him by what means he
could do it; he desired the keeper of the Prison to Lock the Doors fast and he
would show it them; which being done, he came to the Door and struck it one
blow with his Hat, and immediately the Doors fell open; after that the
Magistrate said, that he would lay him in Irons; to which he answered, that he
did not value them, for he could break them in piec^^

June 13. T^is day the Duke of Gourdon Beat a Parley and set ou^ a W^^^^ Flagg,
and after Communing, a Gentleman went into the C^stle and passed the Centinals,
who are secu^^^ and Condemned by a Court Martial.

The same Night the Castle was Surrendered, and Lieutenant Colonel Mackay
entered it with 300 Fuzeliers, betwixt Eleven and Twelve a Clock at Night. The
particulars of the Treaty was as follows; That he would Surrender the Castle
upon Reasonable and Honorable terms, But desired to know whether he should
Treat with the Commanding-Officer, or with His Grace the Lord Commissioner?
This being answered, he desired an Honorable Capitulation, which was refused,
and Answer returned, that he should Surrender upon Discretion, to be disposed
of as His Majesty thinks fit; which the Duke accepted of; and accordingly he
and the whole Garrison Submitted and laid down their Arms, and opened the Gates
to receive Lieutenant Colonel Mackay; who are made Prisoners of War, to be
disposed of as His Majesty pleases.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Lustful Friar: Or the Tragical History of the Founder of Lincolnshire
Revived. a Poem by way of Burlesque. Sold by George Croom, at the Blew-Ball in
Thames Street, and most Booksellers in London and Westminster. Price 1 s.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Blu^-Ball in Thames Street. 1689.


