THE An Account of the Behavior, Confession and last dying Speech of Sir John
Johnson, who was Executed at Tyburn, on Tuesday the 23d. day of December, anno
Dom. 1690. For Stealing of Mrs. Mary Wharton, in Company of Captain James
Campbel and Archibald Montgomery, since fled.
O^ Tuesday Morning, about 11 a Clock, the Prisoner was conveyed in a Mourning
Coach to the place of Execution, attended by two worthy Divines of the Church
of England, as also by one Gentleman, who was his Friend, besides a Hearse to
bring back the Body, in order to its being interred: Being put into a Cart, out
of the Coach, he spoke to this effect,

Gentlemen, I suppose you are not ignorant for what I am brought here to dye,
which is for being Accessory or Consenting to the Stealing of Mrs. Mary
Wharton, in company of Captain James Campbel, and one Mr. Montgomery: But,
Gentlemen, I saw nothing in the whole Affair but what I thought was Justifiable
by the Laws of this Kingdom, yet it has pleased the Laws of this this Kingdom
to find me Guilty; which Laws I was before ignorant of, as to this Case.
Gentlemen, I shall not have time to talk of the Ignorance I have been bred up
in, I never was bred at Court, neither have I been a Scholar but a Soldier, and
indeed there is little Learning to be found in such who have been bred in the
Army.

Gentlemen, on Friday the 10th of November one Mr. Montgomery and Captain
Campbel, came to my Lodging, with an Hanch of Venison, and Mr. Montgomery told
me, That it was to treat one Madam Bierly and her Daughter, Persons that I
never saw before; yet I was persuaded by them to be a Witness to this Marriage.
Then we went to a Coffee-house. and drank two Bottles of Mum, but said nothing
material to this Point there, as I can remember of. Then we parted, and I met
them both at a Coffee-house near to Mr. Montgomery's Lodging at 6 a Clock at
Night, where was C. Campbel; a little after came in Mr. Montgomery, and clapped
his Hand on Captain Campbel's Shoulder, saying, The Business is done. Then
about 9 a Clock, or a little after 8, I do not know exactly, Madam Bierly's
Coach came and carried them away. Then Capt. Campbel called his Coach and 6
Horses, and ordered the Coachman to drive to Queen Street, and there it
stopped; and the young Lady was brought into the Coach, and she was very
Voluntary, Frank and Free, and began to ask Capt. Campbel, If he was the second
Brother of the Lord Argile? What his Answer was I am not positive, but she told
him, That she knew several of his Brothers, and that my Lord Argile was married
to the Duchess of Lauderdale's Daughter: And this made me think, That this
must have been with a Voluntary Consent, viz. to marry this Gentleman.

When we came to the Coachman's House (for I knew nothing where I was going)
Capt. Campbel led her up Stairs, and she went with all the Freedom that a Woman
could, or is possible to be expressed: Then they came before the Parson, and
the Parson declared in Court, That they themselves spoke to her, That there
should be no Force used, but that she did it wholly by her own Consent. Well,
when the Ceremony came to be administered, she spoke the Words with such a loud
Voice, that there was none in the Room but what could hear her: After this she
found some Fault with ^he Wed^^ng Ring, which was too big, says Cap. Camp^^^
(...), I will have it changed: No, says she, I will (...) for it is not lucky
to change Wedding Rings (...) after she had a Ribbon to make it less, and then
(...) put it on again. Then we ^upped; and after Sup^^^ the Parson said, It is
fit that we should pray before (...) go to Bed; she said yes, with all her
Heart, and the Parson mad^ (...) very good Prayer. After this we undressed the
^man, and by that time the Lady was in Bed we came in with him, and he went
into Bed to her; and after the usual Ceremonies upon these occasions were
ended, we left them, and indeed I saw nothing in her Deportment but was frank
and free, but for the inward Thoughts of her Heart, what they were I could not
tell. In the Morning she said that she rested very well: Then, I think, I did
advise her and the Company, That she should write a Letter to her Aunt, that
she might not take care for her; she took the Pen and Ink and writ these Words,

Dear Aunt,
Pray be not troubled nor take no Care for me, for I am very well with my
Husband Captain James Campbel, and in a short time I will bring him to wait
upon you.


Then Mr. Montgomery asked her, if she would dine at Pontacks; no, says she, I
had rather go to my new Lodging: Mr. Montgomery said, you had better go to
Pontacks. Gentlemen, I think here is none here but knows Pontacks, it is one of
the greatest Ordinaries in England. We took Coach about 10 or 11 a Clock, Mr.
Montgomery told her, That his Wife should come and dine with her; and, says he,
drive to Pontacks and I will be with you presently, and bring my Wife with me,
but he did not come presently, so Pontack asked us if we would have the Dinner,
because it would be spoiled; so we had it, and when we began to eat Mr.
Monrgomery came in, and made his Apology, that his Wife could not come.

All ^his while I perceived no alteration in her Behavior: So after Dinner
they went and took a n^ Lodging in Newgate-street, but I did not know of i^
(...) afterward; he was a great while gone; at last she (...) What, has Mr.
Montgomery left me, and will not (...) Wife come near me? and then she began to
be a lit^^^ concerned, but after she was better, and then we went to her Loding
in Newgate-street, and there was every thing in good Order, and we went to
Cards at L^tra-lue for 6d a Dozen; and then at Night it was ^^k'd her if she
would go to bed, and she readily consent^^ This was the second Night, and I
opened the Curtain and looked upon her, and saw nothing of any discomposure in
her, but an equal Satisfaction in both their Faces.

The next Morning my Lord Chief Justice's Order came out to take Mrs. Wharton,
wherever she could be had; then the Landlord told Captain Campbel of it, That
there was a Message came to him for his Wife: then it was after advised that we
should retire, and I put on my Clothes and came down Stairs; and found Captain
Campbel gone, and she was dressing her self, but I saw no Concern in her; then
I went to a Coffee-house, and smoaked a Pipe, and then came back again, and
found that she was carried away. And Gentlemen, take notice of this, pray now,
what she said to the Landlord before she went; It Is true, says she, that what I
have done is by my own Consent, but, however, I cannot love him, and therefore
will not live with him, b^^ I will not hurt one Hair of any of their Heads.
This the Gentleman, the Apothecary in Newgate street, told me himself. The next
Sunday after this I sent one Mr. A^^^^re to my Landlord's House (meaning the
Apotheca^^^s) to take me out some Linen out of my Chamber; and he told me,
when he came back, That there was none but the Maid at home: Then says I, I may
go the more safe, and ^ake out, some Linen my self: So I went to the (...),
and saw my Landlord and Landl^dy, who told (...) with all imaginable
Expressions Kindness, That I should be safe; but when I went in I was
immediately taken by the Constables there. This is the Truth as near as I can
speak it. Gentlemen, I tell you, as I am a Dying Man, that I never saw any
thing done by Force, neither was there any Intentions to force any thing upon
this Gentlewoman contrary to her own Inclinations: But indeed it is true I was
a Stranger to the Laws of England, which says, That an Accessory shall be found
Guilty as well as the Principal.

Here he stopped a little, the Divines speaking to him -- then went on.

Gentlemen, I had forgot one thing until these Reverend Divines put me in mind
of it: Mr. Montgomery told me, That he would assure me there should no Damage
fall upon me in the whole matter, when I was invited to the Wedding. I told
him, That if I thought there were any Evil Designs in it, I would sacrifice my
self before I would have any Hand in it.

Now Gentlemen, give me leave to give you a little Hint of the Hardships that I
have met with since my Imprisonment, though, by the way, I do not at all
reflect upon the good Constitutions of the Laws of this Land, nor upon the
King, Judges nor Jury, but only to some Passages that occurred upon my Trial.

First, When I was brought before the Judges, I subpena'd in Mrs. C. and her
Maid; who knew the thing before I knew of it, when I brought them in, as to be
Witnesses for me, they were immediately indicted and brought in as Criminals,
so that their Evidence could not avail any ways for me. And more, which is a
little hard, the Coachman was brought in, and they Acquitted him to bring in
his Wise a Witness against me, this is hard.

Now, Gentlemen, there is another Hardship, though not equivolent to this, When
Mrs. Campbel was sick, that was not taken notice of, but when Pontack was
brought to witness, That there was no Force at all used to this Lady, Pontack
(I pray God forgive him, I freely and heartily do) then said, That he saw a
Discomposure in her Face: which I take God to witness, that I saw no such
thing, and when this Man came in, he declared quite contrary: Nay, the Sergeant
at Law stood up and said, What? I warrant you are a Scotchman. Yes, says I.
Yea, says he, I thought so. So that I say, why should a Man meet with that
Hardship because he is a Stranger or an Outlandish Man? And I cannot call my
self an Outlandish Man because I am the King's Subject. I desire, Gentlemen,
that you would take this as from a Dying Mad, I speak it because I would not
bring a Disgrace upon my Family, and I desire that you would consider of all
the Trials that I have met with; not that I do (as I told you before) find any
Fault, or any ways arraign the Constitution of the Law or Justice of the
Nation, no I would not do that by any means.

And Sirs, in the Printed Papers they have wronged me, and have done me a great
deal of Injury in them, for they accuse me, that I should commit a Rape in
Chester: Who did this I know not, God forgive them.

I will declare the Truth how it was. I was going to the Castle at Chester, in
the Nightime, I found a Man and a Woman in the way, and I said to one of my
Footmen, That it might be that those were some of the Persons that had abused
my Sentry at their Posts, for my Sentry were wont to be much abused, this
provoked me to endeavor to seize this Man, but I could not catch him, then I
ordered my Sentry to take care of the Woman till Morning, lest she should be
one of them that did abuse my Sentries: The next Morning she told me. That the
Man ma^^ Suit to her to Marry ^er; but some time after, about a Week or 10
Days, as I remember, but it was a more considerable time than the Laws of
England provide in that (...) for the Law says, That if a Woman is ravished she
must cry out, b^^ this she did not do for many Days after, till I was gon^ to
London, and then she swore a Rape against me. When I heard of it I writ to my
Lieutenant to bring in proo^ that I never did any such thing to her: After
which (...) went to Chester, and finding it true, I ordered Post horses to be
made ready to come to complain to the King of the Injustice that I had done me
in this Case: The^^ she said, If she had a little Money to carry her to
Ireland, she would clear me in this Case, and declare the Truth; then I gave
her 5 l. to declare the Truth, which she gave under her Hand, and the next Day
I presented this to the Mayor, and I desired the Laws might be pu^ in execution
against her, but she was gone. Gentle men, this is Truth, concerning this Rape,
that I nev^^ had any Hand in such a thing.

There is another thing out that they have thrown upon me, and that is, That I
should be concerned i^ such another thing as this in Holland: Gentlemen, there
is one Mr. Sayers by name, Servant to one Mr. Swinford he was in the same Town
with me, in Vtrecht, 6 Months he and many more will justify me as to this,
That the World have injured me, and done me much wrong.

Gentlemen, I must now exhort you to be careful for the Salvation of your own
Precious Souls. Gentlemen, he that has been bred a Soldier has not lived so
strict to the Rules of Christianity as some other Men. I must confess, That I
have left undone those things which I ought to have done; and I have done those
things which I ought not to have done: But however, Gentlemen, le^ me entreat
you, yea all of you, That you would remember your latter end; I pray God that
none of you all may come to an untimely end; yet remember that you must come to
an End, your Time must have a Period. I bless God my Life and Conversation has
not been so odious and obnoxious to the World, nor, (I hope) in the Sight of
God, but that I have Considence in his Mercy; and I hope that those Divines
that have bee^ with me can justify, That there is nothing that has come from
me, but what has proceeded from a true and a penitent Heart; and I beg that
you would offer up your Prayers to the Throne of Grace for me, because no Man
can say that he does not want the Prayers o^ the Righteous, for God bids all
Men to pray and not to faint.

Well Gentlemen, he that made Heaven and Earth keep and defend you from all
Misfortunes, from the Power of Death and Hell, and then you need not fear, for
Christ is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to him, therefore offer
up your Prayers, not only for your selves, but for me who is a Dying Man.

Then the Ministers prayed with him, afterward he prayed privately, without
Book, for himself, then be read two Prayers out of a Book, entitled, A Form of
Prayer for Prisoners, and then he read the 51, and 10^ Psalms; then he prayed
again for himself, and afterward stood up, and put on his Cap himself; after
the Rope was about his Neck and fastened to the Tree, he took his final Leave of
all the Spectators in a most humble manner, recommending them to the Merciful
Protection of Almighty God, desiring the continuance of their Prayers to the
last Breath, hoping they would be so charitable as to join with him, because
the Prayers of the Faithful were of great Efficacy, and availed much.

And indeed in all his whole Deportment, from the Prison thither, end in the
time of his being there, he behaved himself with great Humility toward God,
and very exemplary toward all; which drew great Lamentations, and caused much
concernedness to appear in the Physiognomies of all that behold him.

After he had given the Signal the Cart drew away the Prisoner praying to God,
and holding up his Han^ s^ s^all time after she Cart was gone away.

LONDON, Printed for Langley (...) Fleet-bridge. 1690.


