An ACCOUNT of the Ceremonial at the CORONATION Of their Most Excellent
MAJESTY'S King JAMES II. and Queen MARY, At Westminster the 23 of April 1685,
In the first year of His Majesty's Reign.
THeir MAJESTY'S being come from Whitehall to the Palace at Westminster (where
the Nobility and others who were to go in the Proceeding, were assembled) came
down in State from the HOUSE of LORDS into Westminster Hall about eleven of the
Clock in the Morning; and being seated on the THRONE there, the SWORD of STATE,
the Sword CURTANA, and the two Pointed SWORDS, together with the GOLD SPURS,
were presented to His MAJESTY, and laid on a Table before HIM.

Then the Dean and Prebends of Westminster, (having before brought the CROWN
and other REGALIA in Solemn Procession from the Collegiate Church there,) came
up the Hall, and presented them severally to His MAJESTY, which being likewise
laid on the Table, were (together with the four SWORDS and SPURS) delivered to
the Lords appointed to carry them in the Procession, which began in this manner.

First, Drums and Trumpets, then the six Clerks in Chancery, Chaplains having
Dignities, Aldermen of London, and Masters in Chancery, four abreast, (in
which Order all the rest of the Proceeding went;) then Sergeants at Law, and
others of the long Robe, Esquires of the Body, Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber,
Judges and Chief Justices.

Then Children of the Kings Chapel, Choir of Westminster, Gentlemen of the
Chapel, Prebends and Dean of Westminster, Master of the Jewel-House, and Privy
Counselors not Peers.

Next two Officers of Arms, then Baronesses, Barons, Bishops. Two other
Officers of Arms; Vicountesses, Vicounts. Two Heralds of Arms. Countesses,
Earls. Two Heralds more; a Marchioness. Heralds of Arms; Duchesses, Dukes; Next
the two Provincial Kings of Arms, Preceding the Great Officers and
Archbishops. Then two Persons in Robes of Estate representing the Dukes of
AQVITAIN and NORMANDY.

Then the Queens Vice-Chamberlain and Lord Chamberlain, and three Noblemen
carrying Her Majesty's REGALIA; viz. The Earl of Dorset The IVORY-ROD, the Earl
of Rutland the SCEPTER, and the Duke of Beaufort the CROWN. Then the QUEENS
MAJESTY, assisted by the Bishops of London and Winchester, under a Rich Canopy
supported by sixteen BARONS of the CINQUE PORTS, Her Majesty's Train born by
the Young Duchess of NORFOLK, assisted by four Earls Daughters, followed by two
Ladies of the Bedchamber, and two Women of the Bedchamber.

Then the Noblemen who bore the Kings REGALIA, viz. The Earl of Ailsbury, St.
EDWARDS STAFF, the Lord de Gray the SPURS, the Earl of Peterborow the SCEPTER
with the CROSS; Next the Earl of Pembroke the Third SWORD, the Earl of Derby
the Second SWORD, and between them the Earl of Shrewsbury bearing CURTANA or
the POINTLESS SWORD. Then GARTER, between the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod,
and the Lord Mayor of London. Then the Lord GREAT CHAMBERLAIN single. Then the
Earl of Oxford bearing the SWORD of STATE, between the Duke of Grafton LORD
HIGH CONSTABLE, and the Duke of Norfolk LORD EARL MARSHALL. Then the Duke of
Ormond LORD HIGH STEWARD, bearing St. EDWARDS CROWN, between the Duke of
Somerset bearing the ORB, and the Duke of Albemarle bearing the SCEPTER with
the DOVE.

Then the KINGS MAJESTY, assisted by the Bishops of DVRHAM and BATH, under a
Rich Canopy born likewise by 16 Barons of the CINQUE PORTS, His MAJESTY'S Train
born by four Earls Eldest Sons, assisted by the Master of the ROBES, followed
by the Duke of Northumberland, CAPTAIN of the HORSE GUARDS, (in waiting)
between the Earl of Huntington, CAPTAIN of the BAND of GENTLEMEN PENSIONERS,
and the Vicount Grandison CAPTAIN of the YEOMEN of the GUARD; then the Lord
Churchil Gentleman of the Bedchamber, followed by Two Grooms of the
Bedchamber, the Yeomen of the Guard, closing the Proceeding. The Sergeants of
Arms went in two Classes before their MAJESTY'S, and the GENTLEMEN PENSIONERS
on each side the Canopies. In this Manner, their MAJESTY'S, Arrayed in their
ROYAL ROBES Furred with Ermins, the KING with a VELVET CAP, and the QVEEN a
Rich Circle of Gold on her Head; All the Nobility in Robes of CRIMSON VELVET
with their CAPS and CORONETS in their Hands, and the rest who formed the
Proceeding being Richly Habited or wearing their proper and peculiar Robes
proceeded on foot upon blew Cloth, spread from the steps of the THRONE in
Westminster Hall to the Steps of the THEATER in the Quire, from
Westminster Hall to the Collegiate Church of St. PETER in Westminster, (the
whole passage being Railed in) and Guarded with His MAJESTY'S Horse and Foot
Guards;) being entered the Church, and the Nobility and others all duly placed,
their MAJESTY'S ascended the THEATER and repaired to their Private Devotions on
the East part thereof, and then seated themselves in their Chairs of State.
Then followed the Recognition; and after an Anthem, the KING and QUEEN came to
the Altar and made their first OBLATION; and the Lords who carried the REGALIA
presented them at the Altar to be their deposited.

Then the Litany was Sung by two Bishops, which ended, the Bishop of Ely began
the Sermon; After Sermon, the King took the accustomed Oath; and Veni Creator
being Sung, and the KING Disrobed of his Mantle and Surcoat, He was Anointed
and Invested with all the Sacred Habits in King EDWARDS Chair; and the Crown
being put on just at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, all the People
shouted, the Drums and Trumpets sounded, and the Guns in St. Jamer's Park, and
great Guns at the Tower were discharged, and all the Peers put on their
Coronets.

The KING being Crowned, and having been fatther Invested with the Ring and
Scepters, He made his second Oblation, and being again seated in King EDWARDS
Chair, He vouchsafed to Kiss the Archbishops and Bishops; and Te Deum being
sung, He ascended the THRONE, and being Inthronized, the Archbishops and
Bishops did their Homage and Kissed the KINGS Cheek, and after them the
Temporal Lords did also their Homage, and severally kissed the KINGS Cheek and
touched His CROWN; during which time the Treasurer of the Household threw about
the Coronation Medals.

Then followed the CORONATION of the QUEEN, at which the Ladies put on their
Coronets, as the Lords had done before at the Kings; and Her MAJESTY having
received into Her Hands the SCEPTER and IVORY-ROD, was conducted to Her ROYAL
SEAT upon Her THRONE.

Thus their Majesty's being Inthronized, after an Anthem was sung, the
Archbishop ending with the Benediction, their Majesty's went in State into St.
EDWARDS Chapel, where the King being divested of St. EDWARDS Robes, and Arrayed
in His Royal Robes of Purple Velvet, the whole Company (except the Church of
Westminster) returned to Westmister-Hall in the same Order they came; their
Majesty's and all the Nobility wearing their Coronets on their Heads; and being
entered into the Hall were conducted to their several Tables to Dinner, which
were all ready furnished before their coming in. Only the first Course for
their Majesty's Table was served up with the usual Ceremony, the Lord High
Steward betwixt the Lord High Constable and the Earl Marshal Riding in before
it on Horseback; And before the second Course was served up, Sir Charles
Dymoke, the KINGS Champion, in Complete Armor, accompanied with the Lord High
Constable, and Earl Marshal, all on Horseback, performed the usual Ceremony of
the Challenge; After which the Officers of Arms Proclaimed his MAJESTY'S Style
in Latin, French and English, after the accustomed manner.

Dinner being ended, and all the Solemnity being performed to the great
satisfaction of their Majesty's, with all imaginable splendour and Expressions
of Joy, their Majesty's retired to Whitehal, and all the Nobility and others
departed.

Published by Order of the Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshal of England.

Printed by Thomas Newcomb in the Savoy, 1685.


