SOBER and SERIOUS CONSIDERATIONS: Occasioned by the Death of His Most Sacred
MAJESTY, King Charles II. (Of ever Blessed Memory,) AND THE Serious Time of
LENT, following it. TOGETHER, With a Brief Historical Account of the First
Rise, Progress, and Increase of Phanaticism, in England; and the Fatal
Consequents thereof. Now made Public, in tendency to the Peace of the Kingdom.

By a Gentleman in Communion with the Church of England, as now by Law
Established.

Pudeat, pudeat illos nomine tenus Christianos, quibus quod ad hanc rem
attinet, Ethnici rectius sapuerunt. Hiper. LONDON, Printed by John Leake, for
Luke Meredith, at the King's Head, at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXXV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE Lord DARTMOVTH, Master of the Horse to His
Present Majesty, etc.
My Lord,
YOur Lordship's favorable Reception, some Years since, of my Character of an
Honest Man, whether called Whigg or Tory, and Vindication of the Succession;
then presented by my particular order into Your Hands by the Bookseller, has
now emboldned me to affix Your Lordship's Name to this Serious, and (I hope)
Seasonable Discourse: The Design whereof, being the promoting of the Honor of
the Supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth, of True Religion and Virtue, of
Loyalty and Love to our Gracious Sovereign, of Truth and Justice, Unity and
Peace among us at Home, yea, throughout Christendom. Which therefore (although
but a small and mean Pamphlet) may humbly crave Your Lordship's Patronage: Be
pleased, however, to vouchsafe Your Lordship's Pardon to him, who cannot but
still persist in the Detestation of all Knavery and Dishonesty, whether Civil
or Religious; and endeavor to approve himself Faithful to GOD, affectionately
Loyal to his Prince, a True Son of the Church of England, in its present
Establishment; And therefore, as such, he takes the Boldness to subscribe
himself,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble and Devoted Servant, P. A.

SOBER and SERIOUS CONSIDERATIONS, Occasioned by the Death of His Most Sacred
MAJESTY, King Charles II.
ALTHOUGH I may say, in the words of a worthy Author, That in our times there
have been many good Books, which may be said to echo one another; this Age
being as fruitful in Words, as barren in Works, enclining to speak much, and do
nothing: Nevertheless in matters of Devotion, or Honor of God, (as the said
Author says) it is apparent, that a Man can never say too much, that which he
can never do enough; and that in so great scarcity of worthy Acts, we should
not be sparing of good Words. To which I may further add, That where a People
have been much corrupted, and poisoned with false, wicked and seditious
Principles, there is great need of sober, serious, and sound Discourses, to
rectify the said evil, and to prevent and hinder the mischief thereby
threatened to the Nation; for else wicked and seditious Principles will produce
(whenever opportunity is offered) wicked and rebellious Practices. Now, in the
way to serious and sound Considerations, which God by his Providence seems to
call upon us for at this time, it cannot be unfit, although by way of
digression, to commend the usefulness of the time of Lent; that time of
seriousness and consideration. The Antiquity whereof, as a late Author
observes, is such; It is like the River Nilus, we can scarce find the Head, it
being mentioned by Ignatius and Irenaeus, two of St. John's Scholars, by
Origin, who lived not long after them, by the Famous Council of Nice, where
they mention the forty days of Lent, as a thing known and long observed before
their time: as also, we have the Precedent of Fasting from our Blessed Savior,
and he enjoining the same as a Duty to his Apostles.

And certainly, no Man, who believes he has a precious and immortal Soul to
save, can make any doubt or question, Whether a Solemn time of Religious
Fasting and Abstinence, a time of calling our selves to an Account, a time of
Repentance and sober Consideration, can be unsuitable, but highly Advantageous
as to our Eternal Welfare: and therefore cannot look upon it otherwise, than as
an excellent and wholesome Constitution of the Christian Church, in requiring a
Religious Observation of Lent, in Commemoration of our Blessed Savior's
Fasting and Temptation; and accordingly, our Mother, the Church of England,
has excellently expressed the use of it in the Collect for that Sunday in
Lent. O Lord! who for our sakes did Fast forty days and forty nights; give us
Grace to use such Abstinence, that our Flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we
may ever obey thy godly Motions in Righteousness and true Holiness, to thy
Honor and Glory, etc.

We also know well, that the grand Reason and Ground of the prevalency of Vice
and Wickedness in the World, is chiefly and primarily from the want of sober
and serious Consideration; for this is an undoubted Maxim; That inconsiderate
Men, are wicked Men; for it must needs be so, when Men are led by their sensual
Appetites, which stick close to them, their Reason lies as it were asleep. It
had need be therefore awakened by serious Consideration; for if Reason be out
of Act, and Exercise, Sin will be committed. Now, how hardly are Men brought to
this necessary duty, of a serious view and reflection upon themselves, their
Lives and Conversations (especially if they be evil) and in order to their
highest and greatest Concern, the Salvation of their Souls, is too evident to
any considering Man; as if they thought their Souls were the vilest and worst
part of themselves, least worth regard.

Let us further consider, That it is found by Practice and Experience, (the
best Instructor) that the religious Observation of this time of Lent, has
proved to be a mighty restraint to Profaneness and Debauchery; yea, even where
men are most exquisite in wickedness. That it has been a matter of wonder to
Travelers, to see what an Appearance, at least, there is of Demureness,
Sobriety and Seriousness generally all men take upon them at this time: I shall
give it you in the words of a worthy Gentleman of our own Church and Nation, a
great Traveller and Observer in foreign parts; when speaking of Italy he says,
Sir Edwin Sands in his Europae Speculum.
That, notwithstanding their Vice, during the time of Lent, the People of all
sorts are much Reformed, no such blaspheming, nor dirty speaking as before
their Vanity of all sorts laid reasonably aside, their Pleasures abandoned;
their Apparel, their Diet, and all things else composed to Austerity, and a
State of Penitence: They have daily then their Preaching, with Collection of
Alms, whereto all men resort, and to judge of them by their outward show: They
seem generally to have very great Remorse of their Wickedness; insomuch as, I
must confess, I seemed unto my self in Italy to have best learned the right use
of Lent; there first to have discerned the great fruit of it, and the Reason
for which those Sages in the Church at first did institute it. Neither can I
easily accord (as the said worthy Author goes on) to the Fancies of such, as,
because we ought at all times to lead a Life worthy of our Profession, think it
therefore superstitious to have one time wherein to exact or expect it more
than other; but do thus rather conceive, that the corruption of Times, and
wickedness of Man's Nature is so exorbitant, that it is a hard matter to hold
the ordinary sort of Men, at all times, within the Lists of Piety, Justice and
Sobriety: It is fit therefore there should be one time at least in the year,
and that of a reasonable continuance according to the practice of all Men, (for
the Jews and Turks have their Lents) to constrain Men, how wicked and
wretchless soever, for that time at least, to recall themselves to some more
severe Cogitations and Courses; lest Sin, having no such Bridle to check it at
any time, should at length become headstrong and unconquerable in them; as
also to inure Men, though but to a bare show of Virtue, they might afterward
perhaps more seriously persist in it.Thus we have the Relation of the manner of
Observation of Lent in foreign parts, among the Romanists, with his Judicious
Comment thereupon.

Now certainly, we have as great Reason to be obliged to the strict Observation
of this time, as others, upon the Reasons aforesaid: For it is too evident,
Vice and Wickedness grows upon us and abounds, and had need have Restraints put
upon it, lest it swallow us up; and therefore (instead of making a mock at the
Religious Observation of this Solemn Time among the Romanists) let us learn
Virtue and Goodness from our Adversaries; and laying aside our Vanity and
Wickedness, let us become grave and serious; sober, penitent and reformed: For
shall it be said, when the whole Christian World are all solemnly sober,
serious, considerative, are humbling their Souls before God with Fastings and
Mortifications, and are upon their Knees before God, and frequent and fervent
in their Devotions, That we in England (that own our selves to be Reformed, and
better Christians) are taken up with our Jollities and Feastings, yea, our
Debauches and Excesses, and have not so much sense of our Sins, and
Transgressions of the Divine Laws, and our great Provocations of the Divine
Majesty, as to be so far displeased with our selves for the same, as to deny
our selves now and then a meals Meat, or at least somewhat of our Excesses, or
from our more pleasant food, in the sense of our great unworthiness, by reason
of our horrid Ingratitude in our many heinous Sins and Offenses against the
Supreme Majesty of Heaven; and thereby taking an actual Revenge upon our selves
for the same; or so far however, at least, as the same Abstinence may promote,
and further in us a solemn, serious Consideration of our Ways and Doings, the
state of our Souls, and may inflame and add force to our Devotions to God, both
in behalf of our selves and others; yea, the whole Church of God?

Let us consider also, of this outward Appearance, and Face of Religion; and to
be serious, although it be but for a time, what effect it may have upon us: Who
knows not, but it may somewhat make Impression on men's Minds, as to fall in
love and likeing of sincere and true Piety and it may in time prevail upon
them, to become honest and upright, and not only lay aside their Wickedness for
a season, but wholly abandon their Lusts: For this restraint for a time must
mightily convince them, That they have a power over themselves to restrain
their disordered and vicious Appetites for a time; and then, why not longer if
they please? It will also inure and accustom them to the duties of Religion,
and denial of their sensual Appetites; but, however, they are more worthy of
Commendation, and are doubtless less wicked, who thus far subject themselves to
Authority, than such who will not be persuaded to lay aside their sins for a
time, and who will observe no time of Humiliation of their Souls, and
extraordinary Devotions, and of Seriousness and Consideration. Especially, if
we consider how far a formal and hypocritical Humiliation of a wicked Ahab had
acceptance with God; as the deliverance of him from a temporal Judgment, and
that it should be suspended during his days.

Let us consider further: How highly Advantageous the Religious Observation of
the time of Lent may prove to such Christians, who are desirous, and will but
endeavor sincerely to set about the Religious Duties of this Holy Fast; of
Consideration, and serious Reflection upon themselves; of Reading, Meditation,
Fasting and Prayer, Repentance, by putting them upon this great Work; which, if
it were not imposed upon them, they would perhaps very carelessly and slightly
pass over, or possibly never find a time to apply themselves to these Duties at
all; and if it should be but only to lay aside our Sins for a season, as I
touched before: they being then estranged, and, as it weree, mancipated from
their Lusts and Habits of Sin for a time, and so far in a greater Capacity to
discern and apprehend Divine Truths, and the Excellency of Christianity, of
Virtue and true Goodness, and to taste of that present Felicity which is in the
very practice of it, (which if Men had but once a Relish of, they would
doubtless never return to live upon Husks with Swine any more) which else, by
the continual steam of their Lusts and Vices, while they wallow in them, would
be so blinded and infatuated in their Understandings, not able to know their
right hand from the left, not to distinguish between Light and Darkness, Good
and Evil; which, together with the Advantage to themselves of their
extraordinary Devotions for God's Grace to Assist them in their honest
endeavors, and then consulting at that time also a good Spiritual Director of
their Souls, for his ghostly Council and Advice, especially how to avoid the
occasions of Sin for the future, and to be armed against such Assaults as they
may meet with in their Christian Course; and how to frame their holy
Resolutions of Amendment of their Lives, so, that they may be successful to
them for the future, that they may vow, and perform their Vows to God. All
which aforementioned Duties, are doubtless the Christian Duties, as at other
times, so especially what this time puts us upon.

And as to such Persons as are truly virtuous and good, how pleasant and
acceptable must needs such a time be to them, a season of extraordinary
Exercise of Piety, Charity and Devotion, having this more Solemn time of
Consideration and Examination of their Hearts and Ways, their Slips and
Deviations from their Holy Profession, and making their Accounts even with God,
and en-enjoying his Favor (for as we speak in our Temporal Concerns, That often
and even reckoning makes long Friends; so without question, this is the best
way to keep friendship with Heaven) and humbling their Souls before God, in a
sense of their own Sins and Transgressions: And then, bewailing the wickedness
of the Nation they live in, and supplicating God for pardon; and more
especially, pouring forth their Souls in fervent and frequent Devotions both
public and private, in Reading, Meditation and good Conference, in renewing of
their Vows and Covenants with God, resigning themselves up to their Lord and
Master, the ever Blessed Jesus; and participating of that Blessed Feast, the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of their Crucified Savior, there receiving the
Pledge, Seal and Assurance of the pardon of their Sins, the Favor and Love of
God, and from that Blessed Feast of Easter, that time of Jubilee, run with
Alacrity and Cheerfulness of Heart (like the Sun in his Course) that Blessed
Christian Race, the end whereof will be an eternal weight of Glory; which will
as far exceed all our Thoughts and Hearts, as it now exceeds our Deserts.

Now, when these things are duly considered, none I hope will cry out with
Judas, What means this Wast? for can we take too much of wise, sober, serious
Consideration about our eternal Concernments (the principal Business of our
Lives?) And although good Christians do this at other times also, especially
before they approach the Holy Sacrament; yet, why not now also, more solemnly
and seriously, together with holy Abstinence and Fasting joined to it, (which
adds advantage to our Prayers) as it did to the Prayers of Cornelius? And some
Men may possibly be possessed by long custom in Sin, such a stubborn Devil, who
will not out without Prayer and Fasting, as our Savior speaks, Mark 9. and 29.
And by this means make this time highly Advantageous to us, for the promoting
of Piety in our Souls, and making Religion not only our Profession, but,
especially at this time, our Trade; which, indeed, ought to be the great
Business of our Lives, our greatest end and design we drive in the World.

Let us all now consider, That God Almighty, by his extraordinary Providence,
calls upon us to be serious, when the Cedars fall, and those who are his
Vicegerents, and are Styled by him, Gods on Earth do dye like Men; when he has
signified his Displeasure against us for our great Sins and Provocations, and
has bereft us (as it were) of the Light of our Eyes, and the Breath of our
Nostrils; deprived us of our late Gracious Sovereign, the best of Princes: But
yet nevertheless (in midst of Judgment remembering Mercy) has richly again
supplied that great Loss unto us, which nothing (but the furnishing us with
such a Just and Gracious Prince we now have upon the Throne) could have made up
to us; a Prince who has often (when a Subject) hazarded his Life for our Honor
and Defense; and has freely, of his own good Will and Pleasure, given us such
great Assurance of Confirming to us the present Establishments both in Church
and State; such a Prince (as, I have read, Plato discribes) Under whom we may
expect true Quietness and Remedy from all Evil; in whom, by Divine Ordinance
from above, there meets in one Person the Right Majesty of a King, and the
Mind of a Wise Philosopher, to make Virtue Governess and Ruler over Vice: for
Men (as he speaks) seeing the true Image of Virtue in their Prince, and in the
Example of his Life, do willingly grow to be wise of themselves, and do fall in
love, liking and friendship unto it, and do use all temperance and just
dealing. And thus the Divine Goodness, by the intermixing of Judgment and
Mercy, designs to break our stony Hearts, and seems to speak to us (as he did
once to the People of Israel) Oh! that there were such a Heart in them that
they would fear me, and keep all my Comandments always, that it might be well
with them and with their Children for ever, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. And therefore, have we
not great Reason now to be serious, and to consider our Ways and Doings, all
our great Sins and Provocations, and to abhor our selves in Dust and Ashes for
the same; especially, in consideration of that national Guilt that we lie
under; which cries aloud against us to Heaven?

Let us seriously consider, that general great Contempt of God and Religion,
which so much abounds in the Nation; as if we had lost that natural instinct of
a Deity, (if I may so call it) that Sense of God, which the Law of Nature has
impressed upon the Minds of all Men. Oh! the Atheistical Discourse, of wicked
Men, which we meet with in every place, their profane Merriment, drolling upon
God and Religion, the Sacred Scriptures; as if Men were resolved to defy their
Creator, and to hunt and chase God and all Religion out of the World? What a
general, most audacious Contempt of the Divine Laws, with a high hand, as if we
had no dependence on him, and were not his Creatures, and our breath in our
Nostrils; the great Contempt of his Ministers and Messengers, the Reverend and
Worthy Clergy of the Church of England? although our Savior says, He that
despises you, despises me. The great Contempt of his public Worship and
Service among us, as if he were an Idol, and not the Living God. Alas! if we
look into our Churches, may we not see (nay, how can we but see) in most of
them, the Abomination of Desolation, as I may call it; either horrid
irreverence in our Gestures and Behavior there, in those Sacred places, rather
many times like people at a play, than at their Devotions, trifling with the
things of God and Religion? or may we not see many times, the public Worship
and Service of God in the Churches, Celebrated and Performed almost to the very
bare walls of the Church, attended by the Poor, the Halt, the Blind and the
Lame? a few of the meanest of the People; especially if there be no Sermon to
Attend and Sanctify the Solemnity; and yet there being so many people among
us, who have their time lying so upon their hands, that they know not well how
to dispose of it: But this mischief was, I conceive, much occasioned from
erroneous and wicked Principles and Opinions of our late times of Usurpation,
as that we were not obliged to give God the worship of the Body as well as of
the Heart; and that it was very scarce, if at all, the Worship of God, without
a Sermon to attend it.

Let us consider seriously, those horrid Sins of Murmuring against our
Governors, speaking evil of Dignities, our Seditions and Rebellions against our
Sovereign Prince; and the sad and dismal Consequences of the same, in the late
times of Usurpation; the Deposing, Dethroning and Murdering of the Lord's
Anointed, and exposing the Royal Family to infinite Dangers and Hazards; the
Destruction of thousands; the Devastations, Misery and Ruin of the whole
Kingdom. Let us consider, with Horror and Amazement, the Insolence and
Wickedness of those Rebel Saints, whose very best pretenses were a more
desperate Affront, both to Government and Religion, than perhaps any Age or
Historian can parallel; but whose worst Practices were villainous, not only
beyond Example, but Belief; as a late worthy Author has observed: which Crimes
(it is much to be feared) are not yet expiated, although forgot; but cry aloud
to Heaven for Vengeance; especially, considering how many there have been among
us in this Nation, who were so far from Repenting of the said horrid
Villainies, that they owned and avowed those very Principles of Sedition and
Disloyalty, which promoted and were the cause of the same; and with audacious
Impudence, proceeding many steps onwards in the same Path of Disloyalty, and
toward the perpetrating of the same Wickedness again.

Let us consider also, of our Pride and Wantonness in Religion, our running
greedily into Errors, Heresies and Schisms, with the Consequences of them;
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Envyings, Murders; the
loss of true Religion, Peace and Unity: and how we have by this means clothed
Religion (and that which some would call the Protestant Religion) in a deformed
Dress, in a Fools Coat; made it Ridiculous, yea, Loathsome to all sober and
considering Persons in the World.

And therefore, now to make us sensible of the Wickedness of the late times;
and especially, considering there is a generation risen up since, who are many
of them ignorant of the same; I shall make a short Scheme, Draught and
Representation of the Rise, Progress, Fruit and Effect of Fanaticism and
Schism. We may understand, That there was a happy Reformation of Religion,
perfected and completed in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of Blessed Memory, by
the Wisdom, Moderation and Judgment of our Wise Reformers, the Reverend,
Learned and Pious Divines, the Bishops and Clergy of the Church of England in
Convocation Assembled; who proposed to themselves the keeping of the Golden
Mean, Reforming no farther from Rome than was fit, necessary and commendable;
and indeed, no farther receding from Rome, than she had receded from her self,
and from Antiquity; and therein doing no more than what had been the desires of
many others, famous and worthy Men, who nevertheless lived and died in
Communion of that Church; and what was thought upon good grounds, That other
Parts of Christendom, would have attempted and effected, if they could have had
a lawful Oppertunity and Authority for the doing thereof, as we had in England.
In short, as the Worthy Dr. Fearn truly states the Case of our Reformation in
England: We (said he) had just Cause to Reform, and so had our Adversaries, the
Romanists; We, in Reforming did what we ought; if they had done what they
ought, and had cause to do, no breach or division had followed. And further:
We, in doing what we ought, preserved the Faith entire together with Charity;
they would neither cast off their Errors, which clogged and corrupted the
Faith, nor retain, Charity; but cut us off (as much as in them lay) from the
Catholic Church: So that it is clear (says that Worthy Author) to whom the
Division must be imputed. Now we must understand, presently after the
completing of this happy Reformation of Religion, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
there arose a discontented and dissatisfied Faction, although curbed and kept
under by her, called a while after Puritans, which were (like Mothes in a
Cloth, eating and fretting the same) continually murmuring against the said
excellent Reformation; finding great fault with Government, Liturgy, and the
Reverend Bishops and Governors of the Church; instead of being thankful to God
for the same, and of their ready and cheerful Subjection (as good Christians
ought) to this Excellent Constitution. Yea, the said Faction did proceed to
repine and complain against the same, refusing to Conform to it, and so
continued to do all King James' Reign; abusing the Favor and Indulgence of that
good Prince, granted to them in the Conference at Hampton Court; increasing and
growing more numerous, by their pretenses to Piety and Purity of Religion, with
their frequent Sermons and Lectures (then superstitiously accounted the Main,
if not the All, of Religion; and then also, very much perverted and abused to
promote Faction and Discontents against the Ecclesiastical Government) until at
last, growing to a Head, about the middle of the Reign of King Charles the
First, they then arrived to the height of Boldness and Insolence; and by the
means of that black Parliament, 1640. (in the Choice of whose Members of the
House of Commons, that Faction had a great hand) together with the Rebellion of
their Brethren, the Scots; they became like an impetuous and overflowing Flood,
and carried and bore down all before them in the Nation: And, as the only pious
and godly People, and true Protestants, fit to Rule and Govern the Kingdom,
that Parliament (having by importunity and specious Pretenses, obtained of
their Sovereign, a Confirmation for their sitting as long as they pleased)
boldly then managed a War and Rebellion against their Sovereign: and when by
this means, this Nation (not to mention Ireland) had lain diverse years
weltering in Blood (God in just Judgment upon the Nation, suffering them to
prosper in their Wickedness;) they then seized into their hands all the Royal
Prerogatives, the Revenues and Lands, the Jewels and Goods of the Crown, the
Supports of the Royal Dignity; deposing, and most barbarously Imprisoning their
Liege Lord and Sovereign, Charles the First, of ever Blessed Memory, (who then
flying to his own Countrymen, the Scots, for Protection, was sold, and
Betrayed by them) and retaining Him in Prison in Carisbrook Castle in the Isle
of Wight, not suffering Him to enjoy so much as one of his Servants or
Chaplains to Attend Him: Then also forcing into Banishment the Royal Family, to
live upon the Charity of Roman Catholics; and what some Loyal Subjects in
England secretly conveyed over to them, with the peril of their Lives. That
Faction, then further proceeded on, to overthrow the Government of the Church;
to cast out Prelacy, as a piece of Popery; totally dissolved all
Church Government; sacrilegiously sold all Church Lands and Revenues; also
casting off, as Popish and Antichristian, the Holy Feasts and Fasts of the
Church; as Christmas, Easter, etc. turned Churches into Stables; also in the
mean time, all-a-long, miserably debauching and corrupting the Christian Sound
Doctrine; (as that wise Prelate, Archbishop Bancroft, charged them with, long
before, in his Survey of the Holy discipline. His words are these; That the
Puritans did pervert the true meaning, both of Scripture and Fathers, to serve
their own turn;) especially in these particulars following: Not to mention that
Opinion, of God's designing from all Eternity the greatest part of Mankind to
destruction, merely from the good pleasure of his Will; a Doctrine highly
dishonorable to the Divine Majesty. First, That we are saved by Faith alone;
when yet they saw this was so interpreted, as if they did define Righteousness
by the sole Opinion or Persuasion of the Mind, and did seclude good Works. That
we are justified by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, as if we
had fulfilled the whole Law our selves, and that we are clothed with this
Garment of our Elder Brother, and so accepted. That the Apostle St. Paul, in
the 7th of the Romans, 14 verse, to the end of the Chapter, speaks of himself
in his Regenerate State, and not as unregenerate, (the bravest Cordial for an
Hypocrite, that possibly could be.) That we are led by the public Authority of
the Spirit of God in his Word, common to all Christians: Hence says every
Sect, is the Word of God Pure and Sincere, according to the Sense of the Holy
Spirit. That nothing is to be admitted in, or about the Worship of God, but
what there is a direct Rule, and Direction for, out of the Scriptures; that all
things must be according to the Pattern in the Mount. That, provided we give
God the Worship of the Heart, it matters not whether we give him bodily
Worship. And that, bowing in the Church and Worshipping God and Christ, is
Idolatry, or at least Superstition and Will Worship. That Forms of Prayer are
unlawful, or at best, to be used as Crutches to such as are lame, and cannot
pray without them. That Schism and Sedition are very venial Sins, if Sins at
all; laying such a stress upon Preaching, (as to use the word of a Foreigner,
upon his coming into England) That our Religion was turned into All Preach,
Nothing but Preach; as if reading of the Scriptures, Prayers, Thanksgiving and
Praising of God, could not be the main of the Worship of God, except it were
accompanied with a Sermon. Most abominably neglecting to Celebrate the Holy
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, for several years together in many places;
discouraging and scaring Men from their Duties therein, by Preaching. That
Kings and Princes are entrusted by the People; and when they failed in their
Trust, the People might fail in their Duties to them; and resist and oppose
them, and call them to an Account for their breach of Trust; and, at last,
lawfully depose them. These with many others, abounded among them; thus they
profaned all that was Sacred: And further, proceeding and prospering in their
Wickedness, they fell soon after at variance among themselves, (many other
Factions arising out of the former) especially one great Faction, called
Independents; who then scuffled, with their Elder Brethren, the Presbyterians,
for the Government, (abominating Presbytery as much or more than Episcopacy)
got into their Hands, by the Assistance of the then Army, who (by Force) kicked
their Masters, the Parliament, out of Doors, (That Assembly being then justly
punished by God Almighty, in the same kind that they had sinned themselves, by
the Insolence and Rebellion of their own Servants and Soldiers) and only about
Forty or Fifty profligated Villains of the then House of Commons, the said
Army's Creatures, suffered to Sit and Vote in the House of Commons, were
declared, by the Power of the Sword, to be the Parliament of England, the
Representatives of all the People of England: By which pretended Authority, but
contrary to all Law, Justice, and Reason, yea, Common Sense, they proceeded to
the full height of their Villainy, (most impudently, under pretense of Law, and
for the Security of the Protestant Religion, and of the Godly Party, and the
Liberty of the Subject) disannulled Kingship, arraigned their Sovereign Prince
before their pretended High Court of Justice; condemned and executed him most
barbarously, before the Gate of his Royal Palace of White Hall; sold all the
Jewels of the Crown, all the Crown Lands and Revenues: and, having made his
Loyal Subjects Delinquents, forced them to compound for their Estates, and sold
the Estates of many of them. In short, thus killed, and took Possession; and
all this abominable Wickedness was committed under the Show and Face of
Religion, Godliness, Justice and Right. But, as One well observes; One of the
greatest Tragedies acted in the Life of Man, (which makes Curious Persons to
question, Wise Men to wonder, Good Men to groan, and the Wicked to Rejoice) is,
To see an Innocent Man oppressed by Color of Justice. But a while after, the
said two Grand Factions, the Presbyterians and Independents, (those Brethren in
Iniquity) falling again together by the Ears, they very soberly and seriously
killed one another, (especially at Dunbar in Scotland) where Thousands of the
Presbyterians were slain by Cromwell, and his Army; some of whom (as I was, at
that Time, credibly informed) in cold Blood, and after Quarter given, and the
Fight over. And afterward, innumerable Factions more arising out of the former
every Day, having run down all Church Government whatsoever, and every Body
being left to the Liberty of his own ignorant wanton Mind (and Conscience, as
they called it) every Man was left to do what was Right in his own Eyes, (there
being no King in Israel) there was nothing but Confusion among them; (saving
that, by a long Sword held over them, they were restrained from killing one
another.) All the Reverend Prelates of the Church of England, and most of the
Orthodox Clergy, then reputed and accounted either Papists, or Popishly
affected: Particularly, that worthy Man, Dr. Cousins, Dean of Durham, who was
forced to fly into France; who being so accused, was therein resolutely
defended by Monsieur Dailee, the Protestant-Minister at Charenton by Paris; who
writes thus over into England: Tuus Cosins, imo noster admodum probatur;
Bestiae sunt, and quidem Fanatici, qui eum de Papismo suspectum habent: They
are Beasts, or Fanatics, who count Dr. Cousins a Papist. Thus they were (good
Men) grievously persecuted and driven into Prisons, Dens, and Holes, or forced
into Banishment. Yet, of all our worthy Prelates, in midst of their great
Sufferings, and Banishment among Papists, I have heard of none of them, who
ever deserted the Church of England, in her forlorn Condition, but only Dr.
Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester: Who (as Bishop Gauden relates it) was, it seems,
by extremity of ill Usage, driven beyond his Pace, and something beyond his
Patience: For, thus provoked beyond all Measure and Merit, (as he thought) by
those, who much professed Reformation, (and yet much, in his Sense and
Experience, did deform and destroy the Church of England) it is no wonder, if,
dying and dejected, he chose rather to depart in Communion with the Church of
Rome, than to adhere to the Church of England; which (as Isaiah) he thought now
decayed, and dissolved at least. In this desperate State of the Church and
Kingdom, at last, (to complete this lamentable Tragedy) that Monster, Cromwell,
did ascend the Throne, and took upon him to be Lord Protector.

Thus, in short, (as a worthy Author expresses it) When a Flourishing Nation
had been embroyled in a bloody War, and as virtuous a Prince as ever sat upon
Throne, had been Murdered and Martyred, an Established Church had been
Plundered and Dissolved, and Fellow Subjects had been enraged against each
other, with implacable Zeal and Cruelty, and shattered into numberless Schisms
and Factions. And, (as the Pious and Learned Doctor Hammond has observed) When
the Declination of Christian Practice was, at last, so great among us, as to
tear up the very Root and Foundation, all Natural Moral Justice and Honesty;
and, in place thereof, to set up a New Body of Carneades his Philosophy,
instead of the old Heathen dry Principles of Integrity and Uprightness, that
one Law of Interest and Passion, and Self-Preservation. So that, (as Machiavel
thought) Religion would emasculate and enfeeble Commonwealths. We have more
reason to complain, (says he) That it has debauched and corrupted Lives; --
That Christian Men are the impurest Part of the World; That Sathan's after-game
has proved more lucky and prosperous to him, than his first Designment did;
That his Night-walks has brought him more Proselytes, than his unlimited Range
of going up and down, to and fro, over the Face of the Earth; That, as Sin by
the Law, so Satan by the Faith of Christ, has taken occasion, and so deceived
and ruined us more desperately, more universally, than by all the National,
Idolatrous Customs of Heathenism he has been able to do. And let us seriously
consider, That all this complicated Mass of Wickedness, (not to be paralleled
under the Sun) was committed and done in the Face of the World, by those who
styled themselves, and would needs be accounted the only Protestants of the
Kingdom.

Things being brought to this Conclusion and upshot; What an easy Persuasion
might prevail with sober and considering Honest-hearted Men in Exile, forthwith
to abandon and renounce this Protestant Religion, as a Religion to be abhorred
by all Men; as being as opposite to the true Christian Religion, and what
likewise (in truth) was professed by the Church of England, as Darkness was to
Light? And a great part, if not all this Mischief, arose, and was carried on
(as I humbly conceive, with submission to better Judgments) from a furious and
mad Antipathy and Averseness against Popery and Papists; which made them to
imagine they never could run far enough from Rome, until they came to Munster:
Where I will leave them, with their Fellow- Protestants, (if all such who are
opposite to Rome must be Protestants, as of late many in England would have
made them, and that by a Law also.) But, Alas! these abominable and horrid
Impieties, what honest and pious Heart can seriously consider of, and not
dissolve into Tears; and humbly and affectionately beg of God, not to lay these
Sins to England's Charge; but to wipe out the Guilt thereof from the Nation?
More especially, considering what a loud Cry innocent Blood, yea, the Blood of
The Lord's Anointed, has to Heaven for Vengeance; especially upon Fanatics,
and such as retain the foresaid wicked Tenants and Principles, which were
productive of all the said Villainies.

Let them further seriously consider Mr. Baxter's own Words, in his last Answer
to Bagshaw, page 30. cited by a Worthy Author: Nothing (says Mr. Baxter) that
I know of, in the World, does so strongly tempt some sober Conscientious Men,
to think Popery necessary for the Concord of Churches, and a violent
Church Government necessary to our Peace, as the woeful Experience of the Errors
and Schism; the mad and manifold Sects, that arise among those that are most
against them. To which purpose, the Worthy Dr. Parker (speaking of the
Phanaticks endangering Religion several ways) says thus: I know no other
grounds of Fear or Danger from them, unless this may prove one at last, That by
their wanton and unreasonable Peevishness to the Ingenious and Moderate
Discipline of the Church of England, they give their Governors too much Reason
to suspect, That they are never to be kept in order by a milder, and more
gentle Government, than that of the Church of Rome; and force them, at last, to
scourge them into better manners, with the Briars and Thorns of their
Discipline.

Let us further consider seriously, the abounding of Debauchery and Wickedness
among us at this Day, which can portend nothing but Mischief to us; the horrid
Oaths, Blasphemies, and Curses, that continually fly about our Ears, almost in
all Companies, and in every Place, more or less; yea, as we pass along the
Streets, enough to amaze us: What abounding in Swinish Drunkenness and Excess?
How have our Times curiously studied to find out variety of Liquors, to make an
Acceptable Sacrifice thereof to Bacchus? What Fullness of Bread, and Idleness?
what Intemperance, Gaming, Uncleanness, and Lasciviousness; and the Consequents
of these, Quarrelling and Duelling? having, as it were, lost the Sense of Good
and Evil, our very Natural Modesty and Shame, we are become impudent and
exquisite in Sin. And, which is most sad to consider, these are those Rotten
Bones, (as one has well observed) which would lie hid under the Painted
Sepulcher of Honor: These some would make the Accomplishments of a Gentleman.
The Learned Doctor Hammond observes, That many irrational Sins, through some
Local custom, have gotten the Reputation, not only of sinless and lawful, but
of laudable also; as Duelling, and in favor of Sins of Uncleanness: whereby it
is become a more creditable thing among us, To have been guilty of defiling and
invading another Man's Bed, than to be the Innocent Person which has been thus
robbed by the Adulterer.

Now, Let us consider seriously of these things, (as a Divine of our own has
well observed) How that Atheism and Enthusiasm are apart, and by themselves,
the most desperate and dangerous Causes of Misery, and Calamity, and Ruin to
Mankind: And that, when ever they should combine Interests, and join Forces,
what Government can withstand their Fury; in that there is no Wickedness, that
is necessary to the carrying on the Cause, that they will not undertake? Do we
not therefore stand in great need of Sober and Serious Consideration, and of
humbling our Souls before God in Dust and Ashes, for all these beforementioned
Abominations, and making our Peace with an offended Majesty; and, by frequent
and fervent Devotions, imploring his Mercies, and, in the Language of our
Church upon Ash Wednesday, say; Almighty and EverlastingGod, who hate nothing
that Thou have made, and do forgive the Sins of all them that are Penitent;
Create and make in us new and contrite Hearts, that we, worthily lamenting our
Sins, and acknowledging our Wretchedness, may obtain of Thee, the God of all
Mercy, perfect Remission and Forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord?And
further, to enlarge our Devotions to God; That He would please to bless and
prosper our Gracious Sovereign Lord, the King's Majesty, and his Gracious
Consort, and all the Royal Family: That He would furnish his Majesty's Royal
Heart with Wisdom, to go in and out before this great People, committed to his
Charge by the Supreme Lord of all the Kings of the Earth: That God would
support and strengthen him under that great Weight of Government, that now lies
upon his Shoulders, in the Governing of a Licencious People, very much tainted
with with Schismatical, Seditious, and Wicked Principles; which can be no
pleasing Task for any Prince to undergo: ThatGod would be pleased to direct and
guide his Counsels, and cloth his Enemies with Shame and Confusion; and, That
upon his Head his Crown may flourish.

And, in the next place, abhorring that which is evil, let us cleave to that
which is Good; for, I hope, we need not be exhorted, not to be again Authors of
our own Ruin: And that, as we cannot be so senseless, but abominate the horrid
Crimes aforementioned, and earnestly desire our own Welfare and Happiness; so
to lay aside all Murmuring and Discontent, all Schism and Faction, all Sedition
and Rebellion, to yield all Loyal and Faithful Subjection, to Our Gracious
Sovereign, the Lord's Anointed; according to the Pure and Sound Doctrine and
Principles of Christianity, of our Mother, the Church of England; whose true
Sons have (as one speaks) been ever found by Experience, to be Cordial Friends
to the Crown of England; and which Church, is the greatest Example of Loyalty,
that perhaps ever appeared in the Christian World: unto whom, let us submit our
selves, as the worthy Dr. Hammond admonishes us; His words are these; Uniform
Obedience is due from us, to the Commands of that Church, wherein we were born;
the Church of England; which of all others, in the Christian world, has most
adhered to the universal Church of the first, and purest Ages. Let us Conform
our selves therefore, to this best Constituted Church in the World; who has
kept to that Excellent Rule, Quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus receptum
fuit; and adhered to the Scriptures, and true Antiquity. Let us live peaceable
and quiet Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty; and adhere to our Holy Christian
Religion in all things; and make our Religion the great Business of our Lives:
For, Inter Christianos and Gentiles non tantum fides debet, sed etiam vita
distinguere; we ought to be distinguished by our Lives and Conversations, as
well as by our Faith and Profession: For this is most certain, That true Piety,
Virtue and Goodness, Integrity, Humility, Loyalty, and Peaceableness, are the
most proper Fruits and Effects of a well-instructed pure Religion, of a sound
Faith and Persuasion. As it is therefore, doubtless, the Great Interest of
Princes, to Protect, Countenance and Support the true Religion of Jesus Christ;
which is repleat with nothing but Humility, Fidelity, Justice, Wisdom,
Moderation, Temperance, Sobriety, Subjection, Loyalty, Peaceableness, Unity,
Love and Charity: So, also, it is their great Interest, to take care to
propagate among their Subjects, good and sound Principles of Religion,
Subjection and Loyalty: and to that end, That there be a total Suppression of
all erroneous and seditious Books and Discourses; and that together with the
Sacred Scriptures, and good Catechisms, there might be permitted none but sound
Tracts of Practical Divinity, well, and wisely composed, to come into the Hands
of their Subjects; according to which, there should also be constant Means, of
instructing all Men by Preaching; but more especially, the Youth and younger
sort, by frequently Catechizing them: This being well secured, it were no
matter, what became of a many Tracts of Religion current amongst us, if they
were committed to the Flames; which do but distract and disturb (many of them)
mislead, if not poison, Peoples Minds with bad Principles: and by those means
(in time) there might be made a happy Reformation of Men's Minds and Manners.

Let us in the next place consider, That it is the great Interest of Subjects,
to Copy out the Holy Christian Religion in their Lives and Conversations; and
then most of our great Complaints would without question cease; all Disorder
and Confusions be no more heard of in the World: If Men, whom the Most High,
has differenced from Beasts, by Rational and Immortal Souls, would not lay
aside their Manhood, their Reason, and degenerate into Beasts, and be led and
hurried by their Senses, Appetites, and Passions. They might, therefore, easily
be persuaded to entertain, what would certainy promote their True Happiness and
Interest; the Excellent Religion of the Holy JESUS, it being the great Design
of God, in sending his Son into the World, to promote the Welfare and Happiness
of Mankind, throughout the whole World. And can any one, not void of all common
Reason or Sense, think that ever God gave us Wise, and Understanding, Vigorous
and Active Souls, merely to animate Human Bodies; to Eat, and Drink, and Sleep
to gratify our Senses, our brutal Parts; to provide only for our Bodies; to be
mere Sensualists and Epicures; and to acquire and heap up Riches? Doubtless,
our Noble, Excellent and Immortal Souls were given us for more noble and
excellent Employment and End; to be raised up above these things, to be busied,
and taken up with the Contemplation of God, of our Glorious Creator, his
Excellencies and Perfections, and all his wonderful Works; to Adore, Love and
Honor Him in all that we are or have; That whether we Eat or Drink; or
whatsoever we do in Word or Deed, we should do all the Praise, and Glory of
God; and in all things, to be regulated by his Laws. Now shall we forget God,
and be more degenerate, than the Beasts which Perish: For the Ox knows his
Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib? To come more close to us, We, that own
our selves Christians, do we believe the Religion we Profess? If we do; why,
does it signify so little to us, as it does? Why, do we not live somewhat
answerable to it? Or, if we do not believe it, Why do we own the Profession?
Either we must be guilty of abominable Hypocrisy, or, of Atheism and
Irreligion: And once take away Religion, and the Sense of God out of the World;
you do, as it were, take the Sun out of the Firmament; you take away, the
Distinctions of Good and Evil, bring your selves to be Beasts, wallowing in all
manner of Filthiness and Sensuality: You reduce the World, into its first Chaos
of Confusion; destroy the Happiness of Man; overthrow all Rule, Order,
Government and Peace in the World. It has been found, by universal Experience,
in all Ages of the World, the great Peace, Happiness and Prosperity, which has
always risen to the World from Religion; and the true lively affecting Sense of
God and Obedience to his Laws, from the Exercise of Virtue and true Goodness.
And that on the contrary, when Atheism and Profaneness prevailed; that Men's
Lusts and Passions quickly disturbed the World, and overthrew the public Peace
of States and Kingdoms; brought in War, Mischief, Blood and Ruin, turning a
Fruitful Land, into a Barren Wilderness: For how is it possible that such men,
as are unfaithful to God, should be True and Loyal to their Sovereign, his
Vicegerent upon Earth? That such as are men of no Religion, men of no
Principles, and walk by no Rule, but are Slaves and Drudges to their Appetites
and Lusts, should ever, in time of Danger and Trial, stick fast to the Crown
and Government, and perform the Duties of Loyal and Obedient Subjects, and dye
for their Prince.

And, as for such among us, as have been led away, by the specious Pretenses of
Fanatics, in the simplicity and honesty of their Hearts, into the Schism and
Faction, (as I make no question, there have been some) let your Eyes be now
opened, and behold the prospect of your Folly, into which, you have been
miserably seduced by your Leaders and Guides; and, as you tender your own
safety, to withdraw from the Tents of Chorah, that State of Schism and
Antichristianism, as the Ancient Fathers accounted it. Come out of this
Babylon, and renounce, with Abhorrence, all Seditious and Factious Tenants and
Opinions; all disloyal Principles and Practices whatsoever, and return into
Communion of your Mother, the Church of England: For however invincible
Ignorance, heretofore, might extenuate your Crimes; yet now it will not, when,
it will certainly be no less, than Sin against Knowledge and Experience; it
will be wilful and affected Ignorance, shutting your Eyes against clear
Evidence and Demonstration; which will no more excuse you (notwithstanding,
your pretenses of Conscience) than it did the Jews, in Crucifying our Savior;
or those that killed the Apostles, because their wicked Consciences told them,
That therein they did God good Service. And it cannot but be matter of great
wonder, that after such clear and evident Discovery and Detection, of the
abominable Hypocrisy and Wickedness of Fanaticism, That ever there should
remain any one among us, at this day: Those, therefore, that still remain such,
must needs be looked upon, as having most prostituted and malicious Souls; who
are in Judgment, given up to a reprobate Mind; whose end is Destruction, as the
Apostle speaks. And it is a matter of great wonder, That there are so many in
our days, still to remain so sottish; as when they make use of the Rules of
Prudence and Discretion, in all their other Concernments; yet as to their
greatest Concernment, their Immortal Souls: they lay them aside, and every, or,
any pitiful Schismatic and Imposter; or any piece of Folly, Ignorance,
Peevishness, and Ignorance must serve their turn, be the Director and Guide of
their Souls: and yet, nevertheless, they will profess to believe, That Miracles
are ceased in the Church.

To persuade us all now to learn to be Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, to our
Prince and Liege Lord the King, our Gracious Sovereign; Let us consider, (as
one of late has well observed) That the Worth, Excellency and Providence of a
Prince, are not sufficient to make a Kingdom or Nation Happy: His Subjects,
ought to Contribute their Proportions also to it. Let us, therefore, abhor and
detest, and cast away those Seditious Principles of the late times; That we may
do Evil, that Good may come; and That a lawful Prince, may be withstood and
resisted, whenever they themselves shall judge, that Religion and Property is
invaded or in Danger. For, when these dangerous Opinions prevail among
Subjects, in what Circumstances must needs that Prince be, whenever an
Opportunity offers it self, our late times have sufficiently verified by plain
Demonstrations: Let us entertain therefore, in our Minds, the Honest Christian,
Loyal Principles of the Church of England: Let us be obedient Sons unto Her:
Let us be of humble, peaceable and complying Tempers; for this is an undeniable
Truth, That it is a far less Crime, to commit an Error on the right Hand; that
is to say, in a peaceable Compliance with just and lawful Authority, to promote
thereby, Order, Government, Peace and Unity: Than, on the left; that is to say,
to commit an Error, in disobedience to just Authority: in this sense, it may be
well said, Melius est Humilitas in malis, quam Superbia in bonis: For, as the
first proceeds from Humility and dutiful Subjection to Authority, and is the
Preserver of public Order, Government, Unity and Peace; wherein, the Welfare
of Mankind, principally consists in this World: So, the other, is the product
of Pride, Presumption and Insolence; and over-turns all Government, Order and
Peace in the World; and brings in nothing but Disturbances, Strife and
Contention, Rebellion, Blood and Ruin: and in short, if Subjects would be
Loyal, Kingdoms could not be miserable. But, I would not herein be
misunderstood, to plead for Sin in any case, for the obtaining the greatest
good; although, a Heathen once said, Iniquissimam pacem, justissimo bello
antefero; he preferred an unjust Peace, before a most just War: But this, I am
confident of, We cannot be innocent, whenever we disobey a just Authority;
except, the unlawfulness of the thing commanded, be as clear and apparent, as
our Duty of Obedience is. And for my own part, I would choose rather to run to
the utmost extent of what is lawful; before I would refuse Active Obedience to
a just and lawful Authority, either in Church or State: and I think I have the
Holy Christian Religion on my side, to justify me herein. And I am ready to
think also, that according to this Rule, all our Dissenters and Fanatics will
be Tried one day at the Great Tribunal; when their Proud, Ignorant, Pievish and
Froward Consciences, shall be no excuse to them.

It doubtless, therefore, very much concerns us to consider seriously of the
great danger there is in those no small Sins of Heresy and Schism, to such, as
are really and truly such. And we are more easily deceived in these kind of
Sins; in regard, Satan, herein, is notably transformed into an Angel of Light.
And such Persons, who are not so easily tempted to Intemperance and Debauchery,
yet, herein greedily swallow down his Baits; and spiritual Pride, that is ready
to attend such Men, as are free from Debauchery and Profaneness, many times
helps forward the Temptation; likewise the greatest Heretics and Schismatics
that ever were in the World, have had very fair outsides at least; I mean, of
good and pious Conversations. How much therefore, does it concern us to have a
great Care of that Sin, that attends such as are possibly otherwise good Men;
but, nevertheless, of all Vices, is one of the greatest and most pernicious:
For (as one well said) Whereas all other Vices proceed from some ill in us,
some sinful Imbecility of our Nature, This alone,arises out of our good Parts.
Now to let us know, what these Sins are, Calvin speaks thus in his
Institutes; They are called Heretics and Schismatics; who, making a Division,
do break in sunder the Communion of the Church, which, is contained in two
Bonds, viz. The Agreement of true Doctrine, and Brotherly Love; whereupon St.
Austin (says he) puts this difference between Schismatics and Heretics;
because the latter, viz. Heretics, corrupt with false Opinions the sincerity
of the Faith; and the former, viz. Schismatics, even where there is like
Faith, do break the the Bond of Fellowship. But yet, we are farther to
consider, to make an Heretic; There must be not only frror in Intellectu, but,
Pertinacia in Voluntate; not only Error in the Understanding, but Obstinacy in
the Will; for as St. Austin speaks; Qui sententiam suam, quamvis falsam atque
perversam, nullae pertinaci animositate defendunt; quaerunt autem cauta
sollicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati cum invenerint, nequaquam sunt inter
Hereticos deputandi: They that do not pertinaciously and stubbornly defend
their erroneous and corrupt Opinions; but with great Care and Ingenuity seek
the Truth, are ready to submit unto it when they find it, these are not to be
reputed in the number of Heretics, so true is that saying, that no truly good
Man, can be an Heretic, although he may be in an Error.

And to back what I have said, and to convince you of the Danger of Heresy and
Schism, let me present before you, in brief, what the Worthy and Learned Dr.
Hammond speaks in his Treatise of Schism. There is (says he) no one Vice,
which has fallen under so much of the Displeasure, and Correption, and and
severest Discipline of the Holy Fathers of the Ancient Church, as this of
Schism, and the Ingredients and Preparatives to it, have done. They judged,
That it was contrary to the Faith, even when it had not, in respect of
Doctrinal Points, any Heresy joined with it: That it was contrary to Charity;
yea, contrary to all the Advantages, that belong to a Member of the Church.
Quisquis ab Ecclesia segregatus Adulteriae jungitur, a promissis Ecclesiae
separatur, St. Cyprian. Whosoever is separated from the Church, is joined to an
Harlot; he is separated from the Promises God has given to his Church, from
the Benefits of Prayer, and the Sacraments: That it was as bad as Heresy,
according to St. Chrysostom: That there was never any Heresy in the Church,
which was not founded in it: That constantly it is forced, in its own Defense,
to conclude in some Heresy or other. All which, being put together, will be
sufficient (as the said Author speaks) to keep Men from being in love with the
Guilt or Company of Schismatics. But (says he) It is further branded with
these Super-additions of Terror, That there is scarce any Crime so great, as
Schism: Non esse quicquam gravius Sacrilegio Schismatis, St. Austin. Ingens
flagitium Schismatis Traditioni junxerunt, Optat. No Crime so great; not
Idolatry, not Sacrilege: That it has been under the peculiar Mark of God's
Indignation, as in Case of the Ten Tribes, and of the Samaritans, who are
ranked with the Gentiles, Matthew. 10. 5. and so in the Story of Core: That it is
the Anti-Christianism mentioned by St. John. Ab Ecclesia qui separatur
Haereticus est, and Antichristus, Prosper: He that is a Separatist from the
Church, is an Heretic and Antichrist. The worshipping and serving of the
Devil, Ignatius. And, in a word, so great a Crime, that it is not expiable by
Martyrdom, to him that continues in it, and has not repented, and returned
from it. Much more of this Subject, is every where to be met with in the
Ancient Monuments; and nothing of Alleviation to be had for any, who have not
the Excuse of involuntary Seduction of Error, or Simplicity, to plead for them:
And the surest way to do that effectually, to qualify them for that Plea, is,
To forsake their Course, to get out of that so dangerous a Snare. Nay, it is
further observable, how unsafe it has been deemed by these, for light and
inconsiderable Causes, to break this Unity; it being very hard, if not
impossible, to receive such an Injury, or Provocation, from the Governors of
the Church, as may make a Rupture or Separation excusable: And for the truly
Catholic and Universal Church of Christ, it is not, in St. Augustin's Opinion,
possible, that there should be any just Cause for any to separate from it; nor
consequently, Apology to be made for those, that on any (whether true or false)
pretended Cause whatsoever, have really incurred this Guilt. From which
Premises, thus acknowledged and undeniable, the Conclusion follows
irrefragably; That it is not the Examination of the Occasion or Cause, or
Motive of any Man's Schism, that is worth the producing or heeding in this
Matter: The one thing that is of force and moment, and, by Consequence,
pertinent to be enquired into, is, The Truth of the matter of Fact, whether
this Charge be sufficiently proved, or confessed; (i. e.) Whether he that is
thus accused, stands really guilty of Separation from the Church of Christ.

And he further describes this Sin of Schism: It is (says he) a voluntary
dividing, or a separating or receding of any Member, from the Unity of the
Body, (i. e. The Church of Christ); and so, that the Schismatic is he, that
divides himself from the Church of God, not that is cut off, or separated; he
that goes out, and with-draws, or recedes of his own Accord, not he that is
cast out by the Governors of the Church. But the Offender, or guilty Person;
who is therefore said to accuse, to cast, to condemn himself, throwing himself,
by his voluntary Recession from the Church, into that very Condition, into
which the Adulterer, and obstinate Offender is cast by the Censure of the
Church. And the said Worthy Author concludes nevertheless with this Caution:

But how desirable and valuable soever, an entire, inviolable Peace with all
Christians, with all Men, (together with the Approbation of our willing,
cheerful Obedience, and Submission of our Judgments and Practices to our
Superiors) must for ever be deemed by all true Disciples of Christ: Yet must
not the Purchase of this Treasure be attempted by the Admission of any Sin, any
more than the Glory of God might be projected by the Apostle's Lie.

Thus much I thought fit to Transcribe out of this Worthy Author. To which I
may further add Mr. Causabon's Excellent Rule, (taken out of St. Cyprian,
Epist. 69. as it is set forth by a late Author of our own) That whenever the
Pious People adhere to their lawful and true Bishop, they are God's Church;
insomuch, that whosoever separates himself from the Congregation, it cannot be
doubted, but that he is not in the Church. These things deserving the most
serious Consideration of all Men; but more especially, of our Dissenters; who
have very much Guilt of this sort lying upon them, it is very much to be
feared. As for their Pretenses of Conscience, St. Bernard will Answer them; Non
est Conscientia sine Scientia, nec verae si caeca: It is not Conscience,
without Knowledge; nor can it be true, if blind and ignorant. For, if Pretenses
of Conscience, that is to say, Men's stubborn and perverse Minds, (at the best,
their Weakness, and and affected Ignorance) must justify, and bear them out
against God's Law, against Lawful Authority; then it will be no matter, what
becomes of the Laws of God, when their Consciences must command, and bear Rule
against them: and those who killed the Apostles, because their Consciences told
them, That therein they did God good Service, shall be acquitted at God's
Tribunal at last. It therefore much concerns all our Fanatics to beware, and
be assured, That (without Repentance) their Damnation slumbereth not: if
possibly they escape God's Judgments, even in this Life; which, it is much to
be doubted, they will not; especially, when the Sin has become, in great part,
General and National: For particular Persons are to expect their Judgment and
Punishment in the other Life; but Nations, Kingdoms, and Societies of Men
cannot then be punished as such, as our Divines hold. And, in consideration of
the great mischief and danger in Schisms, and Rents among Christians; I mean,
such as profess to own that Name, in the Christian World: May we not,
therefore, well Pray earnestly to Almighty God, as our Mother the Church of
England directs us, for the Good Estate of the Catholic Church; That it may be
so guided and governed by God's Good Spirit, that all who profess, and call
themselves Christians, may be led into the way of Truth, and hold the Faith in
Unity of Spirit, in the Bond of Peace, and Righteousness of Life?

It cannot possible therefore favor of a Christian Spirit, or Temper, to be of
peevish, froward, contentious Spirits; but to study Peace at Home, in the
Church we live in: And, in the next place, it is doubtless our great Duty, as
Christians, not to be wid'ning the Christian Church's Wounds abroad; but
rather, earnestly to endeavor, if possible, to heal them, to promote the Peace
and Unity of Christendom: That all sober Christians, throughout the World,
might be united together: Although (in regard of the Lusts and Passions of Men,
and that there are so few sincere and true Christians in Christendom) it seems
to be a Work next to impossible to be effected; although, indeed, all good
Christians could willingly join with that Worthy Man, who said; Who would not
be ready, with the loss of his Life, to Redeem and free Christianity from that
horrid Scandal of Discord and Dissension? Mar. Bucer.

As for the Differences among Christians in the Christian World, I heartily
wish, they were less than they truly are at this Day: But this is most certain,
That by their Passions and Animosities, on all Hands, they are made greater
than they truly are; when we all agree in the main and principal Foundation of
our Faith, contained in the Three Creeds; that of the Apostles, the Athanasian,
and the Nicene Creed. This, one would think, should make us more kind and
treatable one to another; especially, not to damn one another to the Pit of
Hell and Destruction, as too many do. But in this respect, the Church of
England, by their Moderation, show themselves to be the better Christians; who,
to their Honor, abound in Charity to their bitter Enemies, the Romanists, and
allow unto them a possibility (though not without Difficulty) of Salvation in
their Communion; who yet have nothing in return for their Charity, but
Heretics and Damnation: But certainly, they very weakly and absurdly argue
from it, That therefore it is safest for us to go over to them. Just as if I
being in a tyte, well built, and sound Ship, should leave it, and go over into
an unsound and leaky Vessel; upon this presumption, That possibly I may, (with
hazard and danger) come safe to Land in the same. But certainly, we may better
argue with them, and say, Amend the apparent Leaks and Faults in your Vessel;
and if there be any Faults in ours, we are willing to amend them also; that we
may both with safety, and in Christian Love and Unity, accompany one another in
our Course for the Celestial Port; which we both porfess to intend, and aim at.
And to this purpose, let me present you with what the Worthy Dr. Brown, in his
Religio Medici, speaks to this purpose:

I have not (says he) so shaken hands with those desperate Resolutions,
(meaning the Romanists) who had rather venture at large, their decayed bottom.
than bring her in, to be new Trimmed in the Dock: who had rather promiscuously
retain all, than abridge any; and obstinately be what they are, than what they
have been; as to stand in Diameter, and Swords point with them -- And then
speaking of the Reformation, he says; As there were many Reformers, so
likewise many Reformations -- some angrily, and with Extremity; others calmly,
and with Mediocrity, not rending, but easily dividing the Community, and
leaving an honest possibility of a Reconciliation; which, though peaceable
Spirits do desire, and may conceive, that Revolution of Time, and the Mercies
of God may effect: yet that Judgment, that shall consider the present
Antipathies between the two Extremes, their Contrarieties in Condition,
Affection and Opinion, may with the same hopes expect an Union in the Poles of
Heaven -- It is, says he, as uncharitable a point in us, to fall upon those
popular Scurrilities and Opprobrious Scoffs of the Bishop of Rome; whom, as to
a Temporal Prince, we owe the duty of good Language. I confess, there is cause
of Passion between us; by his Sentence, I stand Excommunicated: Heretic, is
the best Language he affords me: yet can no Ear witness, I ever returned to him
the name of Antichrist, Man of Sin, or Whore of Babylon: It is the Method of
Charity, to suffer without Re-action. Those usual Satyrs, and Invectives of the
Pulpit, may perchance produce a good Effect on the Vulgar; whose Ears are
opener to Rhetoric than Logic: yet, do they in no wise confirm the Faith of
wiser Believers, who know that a good Cause needs not be patron'd by Passion,
but can sustain it self upon a temperate Dispute. The true Sons of the Church
of England, consider this, and that Passion and unnatual Heats and Transports,
never do advantage a Good Cause; and that Uncharitableness and much more
Cruelty, is unworthy and unbecoming Christians, and therefore, avoid them. But
Alas! their Adversaries, the Romanists (as if they were faultless, and had not
given just Occasion of Offense) Retort in requital, nothing but Damnation and
most bitter Reproaches: yea, brutish Revenge and Cruelty; which disingenious
Dealing, how much it has been to their Reproach and Dishonor, to the
disadvantage of their Cause, in the Christian World, I shall leave them
seriously to consider: For honest and ingenious Souls, are not to be imposed
upon by Club-Law, to receive for Articles of Faith, such Doctrines and
Opinions, which have no Foundation from the Scriptures, and the Ancient and
Primitive Church.

Alas! The great Disorder and Confusion, that is upon the face of the Christian
World, at this day, is not to be so much wondered at; if we consider, the
Corruption, the Wickedness, which abounds in the Hearts of most Men in the
World, which corrupts all things: Why therefore, should it not in process of
time (as it did among the very Jews themselves) corrupt and deprave the Holy
and Pure Religion of Jesus Christ? especially, in time of Prosperity (that like
Sunshine Weather, corrupts most things subject to Corruption, even the very
Humors of our Bodies) and breed Abuses in the Christian Church. Plenty and
Prosperity strangely prevailing upon Men's Minds, yea, sometimes the best of
Men; to corrupt them with Pride, Idleness, Covetousness: And by this means, the
Holy Christian Religion, came to be debased; to be corrupted both in Doctrine,
Worship and Government, and so to degenerate from its primitive Purity and
Integrity; and was made use of, as a Means and Instrument of acquiring Honor,
Splendour and Riches; and of promoting those great Vices of Pride, Covetousness,
Idleness, and Luxury: and this instead of making Men Virtuous, and Good, and
rectifying their Lives, and Directing them in the Ways of Holiness and Peace,
conducting them to Heaven. Thus, I humbly conceive, from the Pope's Primacy of
Order, arose the Supremacy of Jurisdiction; and from thence, Papal Tyranny,
packing of General Councils, corruption in Doctrine and Practice, with
innumerable other Mischiefs to the Church; the great dividing and endangering
Christendom, and laying it many times in War and Blood. And on the other hand,
how this Holy Religion of JESUS Christ has been miserably corrupted and
abased, by Sectaries and Fanatics? how has it been made absurd and ridiculous
to all the World, by their Pride and Folly, their ignorant Confidences,
Peevishness and Animosities? Who (out of a mad blind Zeal against Popery) never
could think themselves safe, and far enough separated from Rome, until they
fell into Religious Frensy; yet, would then notwithstanding, account themselves
Protestants; yea, the best of Protestants: and what a long train of dismal
Consequences there followed the same, the World can witness, and more
especially of late Years, we in England, as you have heard before. Oh! may I
therefore exhort us again, to bewail our Follies, and abandon them! to Renounce
all Schism, Contention, Fanaticism, that Plague of the Reformation, and living
virtuous and good Lives; and in Conformity and Subjection to our Mother, the
Church of England, her wholesome and Excellent Constitutions. Oh! Let us learn
this most commendable Duty from our Adversaries, the Romanists; who, are very
Respectful toward their Ecclesiastical Governors, and very Conformable to the
Constitutions of their Church; and abhor to do any thing that may prejudice the
Order, Peace, and Welfare of the same, in any kind (for which I cannot but have
a great respect for them, and in which, I shall endeavor to follow their
Example in the Church of England, wherein I was born, and for so doing they
cannot, I hope, justly blame me.) And although they are possibly led by a blind
Obedience, or Impicit Faith, as we call it, and are thereby many times misled:
yet their fault, arising from a diffidence of themselves, and obedience to
their Superiors, will be very pardonable, (especially of such as are born and
bred in that Communion) it being a fault on the Right Hand, and far less than
what our Fanatics, and Sectaries are guilty of; who out of Pride, Ignorance,
and Presumption, refuse Subjection to the Spiritual Governors which God has
set over them; and thereby break the Unity and Peace of the Church. Let us
therefore heartily pray, as our Mother the Church teaches us:

Almighty God, who show to them that be in Error the Light of thy Truth, to
the intent that they must return into the Way of Righteousness: Grant unto all
them that are admitted into the Fellowship of Christ's Religion, that they may
eschew those things that are contrary to their profession, and follow all such
things as are agreeable to the same; through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

I shall conclude, and say, sufficit tentasse; Let it suffice, I have done my
Endeavor in a good Cause. For certainly, if the Promotion of the Honor of
God, the Advancement of True Religion and Virtue; if the Promoting of Loyalty
and Fidelity, the Honor and Happiness of my Gracious Sovereign; if the
Detestation of Errors, of Atheism and Profaneness, Vice, and Wickedness, of
Fanaticism, Hypocrisy, Schism and Rebellion, and representing them in their
proper colors; if promoting the Peace and Happiness of the Church of England,
as now by Law Established, (the best Christian Church in the World) of Piety
and Unity amongst all her Members; if promoting the Peace of Christendom, and
more especially the Honor, Happiness and Prosperity of this Nation; yea, of
all his Majesty's Dominions; I say, if the honest endeavors of the same, be a
commendable and worthy Design, it is all I intend in the Writing, and now
making Public these (although sudden) yet serious Thoughts. Therefore I hope I
may meet with a pardon for the meanness, and unworthiness of the performance to
so good an end. And as for any one that shall find fault with my weak and
unworthy management, of so worthy, so good a Cause, it is no more than what I
do my self. Let him but be pleased to undertake the Cause, and manage it
better, and I assure him, I shall be so far from being offended with him, That
I shall be infinitely well pleased and rejoice therein, and return him my
thanks. And it is yet my Hopes, this Essay may animate and encourage eminent
and able Champions in so worthy a Cause; which, without doubt, is the most
excellent, most honorable, most worthy, the best in the World, and merits the
assistance of the ablest Heads, Pens, and Tongues that are extant among us.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Luke Meredith, at the King's Head, at the West
End of St. Paul's Churchyard.
AN Introduction to the Old English History; comprehended in Three several
Tracts: The First, An Answer to Mr. Petyt's Rights of the Commons Asserted; and
to a Book, Entitled, Jani Anglorum Facies Nova: The Second Edition very much
enlarged. The Second, An Answer to a Book, Entitled, Argumentum
Antinormanicum; much upon the same Subject: Never before Published. The Third,
The Exact History of the Succession of the Crown of England: The Second
Edition, also very much enlarged. Together, with an Appendix, containing
several Records, and a Series of Great Councils and Parliaments, Before and
After the Conquest, unto the End of the Reign of Henry the Third. And a
Glossary, expounding many Words, used frequently in our Ancient Records, Laws,
and Historians. Published for the Vindication of Truth, and the Assistance of
such as desire with Satisfaction to read, and truly understand the Ancient
English Historians, and other Pieces of Antiquity. By Robert Brady, Doctor in
Physic.

A Loyal Tear dropped on the Vault of the High and Mighty Prince, Charles the
Second, of Gorious and Happy Memory. By Henry Anderson, M. A. Vicar of
Kingsumborne in Hampshire.

The Songs of Moses and Deborah Paraphrased; with Poems on several Occasions.
Never before Published. To which is added, A Pindarick on Mr. L'Estrange.

A Dialogue between a Pastor, and his Parishioner, touching the Lord's Supper:
Wherein the most material Doubts and Scruples about Receiving that Holy
Sacrament, are removed, and the Way thereto discovered to be both plain and
pleasant. Very useful for Private Christians in these scrupulous Times. By
Michael Altham. The Second Edition. To which is added, Some short Prayers,
fitted for that Occasion; and a Morning and Evening Prayer, for the Use of
Private Families.

Two Treatises: The First, Concerning Reproaching and Censure; The Second, An
Answer to Mr. Serjeant's Sure-Footing. To which are annexed, Three Sermons
Preached upon several Occasions; and very useful for these Times. By the late
Learned and Reverend William Faulkner, D. D.

Rhetoricae Libri Duo: Quorum Prior de Tropis and Figuris, Posterior de Voce
and Gestu praecipit. In usum Scholarum postremo recogniti, infinitisque poene
mendis expurgati. Autore Carolo Butlero, Magd. Artium Magistro.


