AN ACCOUNT OF THE CEREMONY OF INVESTING His ELECTORAL HIGHNESS OF
BRANDENBVRGH; WITH THE Order of the Garter. PERFORMED At Berlin on the 6th of
June, 1690.
By James Johnston Esquire His Majesty's Envoy extraordinary to His Electoral
Highness, and Principal Commissioner. And Gregory King Esquire the other
Commissioner for this Investiture. With the Speeches made at this Solemnity by
the said Mr. Johnston, and Monsieur Fulks, Minister of State to his Electoral
Highness.
WE arrived here on Tuesday the 27th of May, Old style, with Mr. Johnston, His
Majesty's Envoy extraordinary; and Mr. King, Commissioner for the Investiture.
The The Elector came hither Post on the Saturday thereafter, from Coningsberg.
On Monday following, being the second of June, the Commissioners had a private
Audience; at which they delivered the Credential Letters and Book of Statutes;
after which they put on the Elector the Ribbon-Garter and George. -- They had
likewise a private Audience of Her Electoral Highness, of the Princess
Electress, and of the Margraff, and two other Princes, the Elector's Brothers.
This they did for the dispatch, and that they might have the freedom of going
to Court, and seeing the adjusting of the States, and the putting of all other
things in Order, against the time of the Solemn Investiture. But they could not
have a public Audience, nor could the Ceremony of Investiture be performed,
till the Elector's Court, and his Coaches and Horses should arrive; which
happened on Thursday night. In the mean time all other things were made ready,
and the next day, being Friday the 6th of June, was appointed both for the
public Audience, and the Ceremony of Investiture. The Commissioners were
willing that these two should be joined together, that no time might be lost,
nor the Elector's Journey to the Rhine stopped so much as one moment, upon the
account of the Solemnity.

On Friday morning the Baron of Shiarm, the eldest Privy Counselor, or
Minister of State (as they speak here) came from Court, accompanied with a
great many other Gentlemen, and particularly with Monsieur Bescat, (whose
Office it was to regulat the Ceremony) all in Rich Clothes, with six of the
Elector's Coaches, and six Horses in each of them, and carried the
Commissioners and their Retinue to Court; twenty four Trabants, or
Horse-Guards, walking along all the way on both sides of the Coaches: Not to
mention a great many of the Elector's Servants that did also attend them. At
Court they were received with Double Guards, and Colors Displayed, Twenty four
Trumpets, and two pair of Kettle-Drums sounding all the while. The
Commissioners Coach passed through the Inner-Court of the Castle; at the foot
of the Stairs the Commissioners were received by the Grand Marshal, with his
Silver Staff of Office: At the head of the Stairs they were met by the
Elector's Great Chamberlain, the Count of Denherff, and so were conducted to
the Elector's Chamber; all the Rooms, as they pass along, being full of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Court, and the Trebants making the Guard up the
Stairs, and along the two first Rooms.

From the Elector's Apartment, they went to an Audience of the Electrice, where
were all the Princes and Princesses of the Family, and the Ladies of the Court,
richly dressed: Then they were conducted to the Rooms where the Robes of Order
were before placed, where all things being in readiness, they went to another
Room near adjoining, in which his Electoral Highness was, and thence began the
Procession to the Great Hall, which is one of the noblest Rooms that is to be
seen any where, being above 100 foot long, and above 50 foot broad, adorned all
about with the Marble Statues of the Electors of the Family, and the Roof
richly painted. They went in this Order: First, The Nobility and Officers of
the Court in great number; The Grand Marshal and Marshal with their Silver
Staves of Office, being the last of them. Next came two belonging to the
Commissioners, one of them carrying the King's Commission, and the other the
Cap and Feather; then followed Mr. Gregory King in the Mantle of the Kings at
Arms, bearing the Habit and Ensigns of the Order on a Velvet Cushion. Next came
Mr. Johnston alone; and in the last place his Electoral Highness, attended by
the Prince of Anhalt, and the Grand Chamberlain.

Thus they went through a long Gallery (having the Trabants on each side) into
the Hall, and so into the Rails which divided the upper end of the Hall, that
was raised four Steps, making the due Reverences to the Sovereign's State; the
Electrice, with the Princesses and Princes Ladies, and public Ministers,
having before taken their places within the Rails.

The Elector being placed under his State, and the Robes being laid on a Table
near his Highness, the two Commissioners seated themselves in two armed Chairs,
and the Trumpets and Music ceasing, Mr. Johnston made a Discourse in English.
But not to oblige the Elector to stand, because of an hurt in his Leg, the
Expedient fallen upon was this; That in stead of four Discourses (as the Custom
is) two by one of the Commissioners, and two by one belonging to the Elector;
that one only should be made by Mr. Johnston in the beginning, and another at
the end of the Ceremony by Monsieur Fulks, one of the Elector's Ministers of
State. And therefore Mr. Johnston having put his two Discourses into one, and
having only told the substance of them in English, he presented a Translation
in High Dutch to the Elector, which he ordered his Chief Secretary to read; the
Elector and the Commissioners having stood during the pronouncing of the
English, but sitting when the Dutch Copy was read. Then they presented the
King's Commission to the Elector, which he gave to a Minister of state, who
(...) it to the Secretary to be read, the Elector and all others standing up;
which being again delivered to the Elector, his Highness gave it to Mr. King;
After which, the Commissioners having taken off his Highness'* Coat, Sword,
Belt, Ribbon George and Garter, Mr. Johnston invested the Elector with the
Diamond Garter, the Surcoat, the Sword and Belt, the great Mantle, the Hood,
and at last the great Collar and George, in the order as they were delivered to
him by Mr. King; who pronounced in Latin the usual Forms of Admonitions upon
Mr. Johnston's putting on the Elector each Ensign. Then they presented to his
Electoral Highness the Book of Statutes under the great Seal of the Order, and
he delivered them Letters certifying his reception of the Order, and containing
an Engagement to observe the Statutes with the usual Exceptions. These Letters
had already his Sign, and Seal at them, yet his Electoral Highness had a Pen
given him, and he made a show of writing his Name.

Next they presented him with the Cap and Feather, which his Electoral Highness
had enriched with Diamonds to the value of above 50000 l. one of the stones
cost above 10000 l.

Then Mr. King did congratulate his Electoral Highness, and proclaimed the
Sovereigns and New-Knights Titles, upon which the Trumpets sounded, and the
Drums beat, and Music played.

This being over, Mr. Johnston did also congratulate his Highness in in a short
Complement, and then Monsieur Fulks made an handsome Speech to the praise of
the Sovereign and the Order. This Speech was in High Dutch, that it might be
understood by the whole Assembly; and a Copy of it being given to Mr. Stepney,
Mr. Johnston's Secretary, he read it publicly, the Elector and Commissioners
sitting all the while that Monsieur Fulks spoke, and that the Copy was read.
Then they presented the Stars or Glories, and the Riboon of the Order; and
returning to their Chairs, the Drums beat, the Trumpets sounded, and the Cannon
round the Town was thrice discharged. Then the Elector and Commissioners
returned in procession as they came, and Mr. Norton, Colonel Norton's
Grandson, he had the honor to carry the Elector's Train.

A little after this, they came back to the Hall again to Dinner, where his
Electoral Highness and the two Commissioners only did sit at the Table, his
Highness being in the Robes, and the Court attending: The Elector began first
the King's Health; 2dly, the Queen's; 3dly (...) Knights of the Order; 4thly,
Prosperity to the English Nation; 5thly, Success to the Campaign. Mr. Johnston
began first the Elector's Health; 2dly, the Electorices; 3dly, the Electoral
Families; the Elector and Commissioners stood up, and the Guns were discharged
at every Glass. After Dinner the Commissioners were carried home in the same
manner as they were brought in the morning; at night they returned to Court in
two Coaches with six Horses, and supped with the Elector, the Electrice, and
the Princess, where many of the same Healths were drunk again with the same
Ceremony of firing, and standing up.

After supper the Fireworks began, and were much admired by every one,
considering they had only three days to prepare them: There were many Rockets
of all sorts, and four great Fireworks of 40 or 50 foot high, the chief burnt
blew, and was composed of the representation of a Garter, having within it
these four Letters, V. W. M. R. signifying Vivant Willielmus Maria Reges; and
without the Garter were the supporting Crown and Crest of England. The other
three were Pyramids burning in bright white fire, with Crowns on the tops of
them; the middlemost having the Letter B. and the other two, F. and H.
signifying Britannia, Francia, Hibernia. The Elector has ordered the Garter to
be put on the Plate. Ever since the public Audience, we have been entertained
at our Lodgings at the Elector's charge, and attended by his Officers. Both the
Commissioners have received Rich Presents, the principal Commissioners being
double the value of what was given to the other. The Servants of the first, to
the number of 16, and those of the other Commissioner, 3, had all considerable
Presents according to their several Offices. In a word, every thing was done
for the honor of the Sovereign of it, and of the new Knight; and in a manner
more noble than it could have been expected the shortness of time would have
allowed.

Mr. Johnston's Speech to his Electoral Highness.
May it please Your Electoral Highness,
NOthing excites in men the desire of Glory so much as signal and lasting marks
of Honor. For to Noble and Generous Minds, Honor is certainly the greatest
Reward, and such marks are the most acceptable (...) of it to wit, a public
acknowledgment that men (...).

Of these marks, the most eminent have been appropriated to Chevalry. Religion
has its Treasury above. Justice, and the other peaceable Virtues without Arms,
would be of little or no use. Therefore Military Glory, as most necessary, has
been preferred to all others; besides, it is acquired with greater danger, and
is founded on nobler Passions.

Amongst all incitements to it, nothing has proved so effectual as the
Institution of the Orders of Knights, Companions and Brethren.

Such Orders do engage Princes by the strictest Ties of Honor, to give in
their own Persons an example of Military Virtue, as also the highest
Encouragement imaginable to follow it: For by these Fraternities they descend
from their Greatness, and consent, that brave and gallant Men should be brought
into a sort of Equality with themselves.

Amongst Military Orders, there are none that can dispute either Antiquity or
Dignity with that of the Garter; which may indeed be called the Mother Order,
For the other great Orders have sprung out of this Root, being formed upon the
Model of it.

Such Institutions, like other things of the same nature, in their first
conceptions use to be imperfect, and calculated for receiving the Reformations
that time only brings: But the Rules of this Order were from the beginning so
well digested, that they have admitted of few or no material Changes.

To the Antiquity and Wisdom of the Institution, I may add the Chastity of the
Order: The Knights have at no time exceeded the first foundation of Twenty six,
contrary to the fate of other Orders, of which none have supported their
Dignity as this has done, considering jointly the small number, and singular
eminency of those that have been of it, viz. Four hundred ninty seven only. And
yet amongst these, there have been eight Emperors (of whom two, Sigismond, and
Charles the Vth went to England and received it there, so much did they value
the Honor of being of it;) Forty five Kings, including those of England; and
above sixty Princes, for the most part Sovereigns; Not to mention that the
others generally deserving to be Princes, were therefore by the Order in a
manner made such.

The Qualities of Edward III. who founded this Order, gave a peculiar Luster to
it; He was the Greatest and Bravest Prince of his Time, in the opinion of all
others, as well as of the Germans, who first made Him Vicar General of the
Empire, and afterward offered (...) perial Diadem.

He claimed the Crown of France as his Just and Lawful Inheritance, and studied
by the Institution of this Order, to engage the most martial Spirits of the
Age, in his Quarrel. It was with his Garter that he gave the Signal at the
Battle of Cressey; remembering, it seems, that which was reported of one of his
Predecessors, Richard the 1st, That he had upon a like occasion, with great
Success, made use of a Garter. In this Battle the whole Power of France fell
before Him; upon which Augury he made the Garter the chief Sign of the Order.
Richard the 1st, is also said upon such an account to have had the same design.
Besides, a Garter is the Symbol and Badg of Unity, and therefore most proper to
signify these Bonds of Amity and Affection, into which all the Companions were
to reckon themselves knit.

He delighted much in Devices, and chose for the Device of the Order, these
words, Honi soit qui mal y Pense; in English, May he be ashamed that thinks ill
(or does not approve) of it. That is, either of the Order it self, or of his
Title to the Crown of France, which gave occasion to the Institution.

He made Blew the chief Color, that being the Color of the Field of the Arms
of France, which, with the Title he had about that time assumed to himself, his
Successors have ever since used: Besides, Blew denotes the Sublime and
Celestial Temper of those who were to be of the Order. The Pilgrims that
returned from the Holy Land, brought over such an account of St. George (then
the Christian Mars) particularly of his Tutelary care of the English in that
War, that according to the Persuasions of those Times, he made him the Patron
of the Order, as well as of the Nation.

He wisely considered that other Sovereign Princes might think it a lessening
of them, to come into an Order subject to the Laws and Government of England;
therefore he entirely separated its Concerns, and made it a distinct Body with
Seals and Officers, and Statutes peculiar to it; over which the Seals and Laws
of England have no sort of Authority.

This is the Order, Sir, so deservedly famous over all Christendom, these Three
hundred and forty Years, of which we have now the Honor, in the Name of the
King our Master, to Present Your Electoral Highness the Ensigns. The same Order
which His Highness, Your Illustrious Father, desired so much, and received as a
great Honor done him, and to which he did great Honor: He wore it in a time
of Action, when the Fate not only of the North, but of the whole Empire; nay, I
may add, of all Europe, turned according to the Measures that he took, and
which is more, turned often with the approbation of all good men. It was thus
that he run his Career, which he finished with an happiness that might be
called the obtaining of the Prize, if that were to be done here; For he being
full of Honor and Years, in Peace and Quiet, Beloved and Esteemed by the
better part of Mankind, died; leaving behind him the only Two things to be
left, a Great and Good Name, and a Glorious Successor.

It is also the same Garter, as well as the same Order, with which we are to
invest your Highness. This I should call a happy Omen, that the Order is still
to receive the same Honor: But your Highness has not left the World to
Divination and Conjecture; you have begun your Regence in a way worthy of the
Son of such a Father, and already given Mankind real instances of that which
they may expect: And now this day you are to put the Order in possession of the
Honor which you have, as it were, advanced to it, and to which the Order has
a Natural Claim, your Highness having acquired the same, as the Founder did
his, by defeating the acient Enemies of both Nations. For this Reason, I
suppose, the King, my Master, as well as for doing your Highness greater
Honor, has sent you a Sword, amongst the Ensigns of the Order, which hitherto
was never done to any other.

Sir, Nothing is more evident than that this Society was instituted for
carrying on a War with France, in which War, the Emperor, the Princes of
Brandenburg, Bavaria, Lorrain, and many others, were engaged by a Confederacy
with the Founder of this Order, as your Highness, and others, their Successors,
are now with the present Sovereign of it. It seems in all Ages it has been the
Wisdom of Great Princes to have no other thing to do with that Crown. Sure that
which has happened in this Age, does not alter the Case; nay, the present
Confederacy is a Demonstration, that it is the Sense of Mankind, that the
Public quiet can be no longer secured by the Faith of Treaties; and therefore,
that a firm Peace is only to be obtained by a thorough War: For Men that having
enriched themselves by Violence, are fallen in love with it, will love on till
they lose by it, then it will be seasonable. To trust to Treaties, the
incapacity such Men shall be in to break them, (...).

Edward the 3d designed a Conquest, and succeeded in it: But there is here
place for yet a more Noble Design, that of a Redemption. The Work of an Hero is
not to mind his own Business only, much less to do hurt, to plunder the World
with Alexander, or ruin his own Country with Caesar; but to do good chiefly
to others; to chain up the Disturbers of the Public Peace, to set Bounds to
Exorbitant Power, and the Will of Man; and so to deserve the Blessings of those
that were ready to perish. All this the King, my Master, has done, by
redeeming his own Country from Ruin, and other Countries from the danger of
it, in suffering them to become his own: Thus endeavoring every where to stem
the Inundations of the present Times, as his Ancestors did those of theirs.

But to this, not only the Example of the Sovereign invites those of the Order,
but the Order it self, in a particular manner, engages them, Pugnare pro jure
and tuitione oppressorum and indigentium, To fight for the relief of the poor
and the oppressed.

This, Reason, Humanity, common Christianity, and Interest too, requires of all
Men, much more of Princes, that are to act as Gods Vicegerents, who Glories in
nothing oftener than in his firm purposes to avenge and Protect Widows and
Orphans, and such others, the Innocent, though Unfortunate part of Mankind, to
wit, by commanding all those that have power to do it, to punish their
Oppressors.

Thus it is here, That a Capacity to do good, not only gives a Title to it, but
makes the doing of it a Duty. It is strange, That among Christians in all Times
there should have been some who doubted of this, and have had narrower Thoughts
of Heroical Enterprises than either the Jews or Heathens had; nay, of whom some
have believed all War to be unlawful, since the Design of Christianity was to
exalt our Natures to a higher and sublimer pitch of Perfection, and not to
stifle and undo, with specious pretenses, that which is most Commendable in
them, the Inclinations and Ties we may have to do one another good.

The Jews of old had so Noble an Opinion of such Performances, that they
imputed them to Inspiration; they thought, that without extraordinary
Assistances, Men had neither Goodness nor Largeness of Soul sufficient for them.

It is true, several among them endeavored thus to defend the Irregularities
that sometimes did accompany such Actions, and supposed an express Order from
God* as necessary to justify them. Yet Rules and Laws are means for obtaining
the ends which they relate to, and in that relation cannot be too well
observed; but they are not the ends themselves which must still be pursued, tho
in another way, if the ordinary way fails. No doubt the Letter of the Law, that
upon great occasions opposes it self to the public Safety, which is intended
by all Laws, must needs be the Letter that kills. This those high Pretenders
came at last to understand (and to fight even on their Sabbaths) tho their Laws
were given them by God; and that it was their humor to swallow Camels, and
strain at Gnats; to let go the Substance for the Law, and perish in defense of
the Letter of it. The true standing Character in all Ages and Nations, and
ordinarily the Fate too, of Weak, and Warm, and Obstinate (tho often Well
meaning) Men.

Those Jews are much more in the right, who ascribe great Events more
particularly to God, because of that which is singular (as well as of his
Concern) in them. Thus they would, no doubt, judge of the late Revolution in
Britain, where we have an Illustrious Example of such sorts of Events. In which
the concurrence of great Dangers, of an unexpected Opportunity to be delivered
from them; of the Capacity and Circumstances of the Deliverer, as if they had
been given for this End; of the evident infatuation of those, whose Interest
(and in whose Power) it was to have prevented it; of a multitude of mere
Accidents previous and absolutely necessary to it, which by Humane Wisdom could
neither have been forseen nor procured: In aword, of a Chain and Coincidency of
various, and often, in appearance Cross Events, yet in effect, so well agreeing
with the Methods resolved on, that Divine Goodness and Humane Prudence seem to
have had a Correspendence. All this, with the sudden vanishing of Difficulties
that had appeared, in a manner insuperable, and a Success worthy of the Care of
Providence (such as History cannot parallel) without Blood, Danger, or
Disorder; So (...) Public Peace and Quiet seemed rather not interrupted than
restored; as if no change had happened, except in our Hearts and Thoughts. All
this I say, does complete an Event so much above the ordinary course of things,
that whoever believes, that God does at all concern himself in Humane Affairs
(much more such as believe, that the Hairs of our Heads are numbered), must
needs conclude, that this whole business was (to speak so) laid and concerted
by him. Sed praestat de Carthagine, ut aiunt, silere quam pauca dicere. And
therefore to return to my Subject.

The Heathens went yet further in doing Honor to the Authors of such great
Undertakings; They thought they could not do too much to encourage Men to
venture upon them: And therefore upon such accounts they Defied their Hero's;
Men seemed to them in the performance so like their Gods, that they could not
abstain from Honoring the Copies with the Names of the Originals. The Heathens
considered the Public Good that was done; for as their Hero's became their
Gods for chastising Oppressors, in their Opinions the Enemies of Mankind, so
others became their Hero's for destroying Monstrous Beasts of the same Temper,
if we may not rather believe, as no doubt we may, that the Poets, the
Historians of those Times, meant Men (and to them gave the other borrowed Name,
as more proper than their own) whose Souls, by Success in their Passions, were
become as Monstrous as they described the Shapes and Voracity of those Beasts
to have been.

Sir, How great and noble Thoughts would those Jews and Heathens have of the
present Undertaking in which the King, my Master, your Electoral Highness, and
so many other Princes are engaged? An Undertaking such as Humane Nature
requires, where Honor, and Duty, and Interest go hand in hand together: And
the most necessary thing to be done, is the greatest and best thing that can be
done.

In particular, it is an Undertaking that will transmit your Highness Name
glorious to Posterity: for you first gave life and motion to it, by saving the
Town of Cullen, and that whole Electorat, by taking Keiserswert, Rhinberg and
Bonn; by routing the Forces sent to assist them, and so delivering the Lower
Rhine from the Chains that in time must have proved those of the Empire.

Sir, You have thus outdone the Enemy in Diligence, their most commendable
Quality, if it were well employed: You have overcome them, where they
themselves, and others too, think them most invincible, behind Walls: You have
defeated their Troops, neither by number nor surprise; Advantages are to be
taken; but it is greater not to stand in need of them.

Thus your Highness has begun the War, where it must end with Victory, and
taken to your self a share in it suitable to the Dignity of your Family, and
the importance of the Conjuncture, which gave your Highness the opportunity to
Signalize the beginnings of your Regence by doing the public such eminent
Services; as if Providence, in compliance with the Integrity of your
Intentions, took care, that no sooner you should be in a capacity to do good,
but that the Public should require and receive the benefit of it, to signify
to your Highness, that the good of the Public ought to be the end of your
Greatness, and to others, That it is the end, and will be so.

Sir, The great Power that God has put in your Hands, can at no Time be better
employed. Without Controversy, the Peace and Happiness of Europe, during this
Age, depends upon the Success of this War.

All Laws, Divine and Humane, of Peace and War, the Fences of the public
Sufety are broke thorough; Those eternal Dictates of Reason, the obligations of
Honor, Humanity, Oaths, Promises, Religion, as well as the Customs of Nations,
which the Necessities of Humane Affairs have rendered inviolable, and without
which the great Society of Mankind can no more subsist, than private Societies
can without Rules and Laws: All these have been openly and avowedly trampled on.

Now if the Ambition, and other Passions of Men that have done such things,
have carried them so far, notwithstanding the just apprehensions which, no
doubt, they had of a general resentment; whither will the same passions not
carry them, if the present Confederacy should happen to be frustrated, and
there should remain nothing more for them to be afraid of.

But better things, no doubt, are reserved for this Age. The Chariot Wheels of
those that have asked Brick, and forbid Straw, begin already to move heavily.
And provided the easterly Wind continue to blow steady, and neither little
private Interests, (sure little in comparison) nor certain points of Honor
(only tolerable when Innocent) disorder the present Harmony, the event is
infallible.

Sir, Nothing can contribute more to this than the happy Union that is between
the King my master, and your Electoral Highness, which states His Majesty, and
your Highness, in the best Circumstances imaginable for preventing or removing
differences.

This, among other Reasons, gives ground to hope, that the Confederacy is not
to be broke, since the Union I speak of cannot be dissolved. It is strong, by
all that is Sacred amongst men, the Ties of Honor, Religion, Blood,
Friendship, Obligations, Engagements, and I may add of the same Interests and
Designs, with relation to the Public.

To so many Ties it may seem there needed no addition of a new one. But His
Majesty was resolved not to lose any opportunity of giving public Instances of
the great Affection and esteem that he has for your Electoral Highness: And
the Knights Companions were unanimously of Opinion, That his Majesty could not
better dispose of the greatest Honor that he can give, than by sending it to
your Electoral Highness; from whom the Order may expect the greatest return of
Honor that it can at present receive.

Monsieur FULCKS, Minister of State, His Speech.
SIR,
HIS most Serence Highness, the Elector of Brandenburg, our Gracious Prince,
receives the Honor his Royal Majesty of Great Britain has been pleased to
confer on him, in sending him the Badges of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
with all due Respect and Esteem. For whether its Antiquity be regarded, it
being Three Hundred Thirty Nine Years since its first beginning, or the
glorious Founder of it, Edward the Third, together with his Royal Qualities,
especially his unheard of Courage, and the Happiness that attended him; or
whether the Splendour and Excellency of those that have been honored with the
most Noble Order be considered; amongst whom are reckoned several great
Monarchs, and what is wonderful, Eight Emperors, Five and Forty Kings, Sixty
Electors and Princes, vested with Sovereign Power, besides a great many others
Hero's renowned both by their Birth and Actions; or whether the design of the
Institution be looked on, which was the defense of Justice, the relieving the
oppressed, and the encouragement of true Virtue, 't will be found, that it
gives place to no Order in the World, but on the contrary does far excel them
all. The Excellency whereof is visible, by those two things that are absolutely
required in every true Knight, which are, not to have been tainted of any
Baseness, or of any Cowardice. But the Dignity of this Order his been so fully
shown by His Majesty's Envoy, that 'twold be superfluous to add any thing to
what he has said. Indeed in the ancient Histories of the Greeks and Romans,
many Examples may be found, where Kingdoms and Provinces have been given away
to others by the Possessors thereof; but Desert and Right were not always the
Cause of such Donations. They were oftener made by blind Chance or Favor, or
else Reasons of State were the occasions of them. But that Honor which is
foundded only on Merits, and which proceeds from a true and solid consideration
of Worth only, is to be preferred above Scepters and Crowns. And the conferring
of this Noble Order must be thus looked upon, since it is done by a King who
does nothing but with an exact knowledge and mature deliberation. For although his
Electoral Highness could not but have always thought it an Honor to have been
of this Order, yet he looks upon it as greater still in this, That the Dignity
is conserred upon him by his present Majesty of Great Britain. The Diamonds and
Gold which shine on the Badges thereof, receive yet a greater luster from so
glorious a Hand, which the Divine Providence has made choice of to render this
Age famous even for Miracles, to be a terror and chastisment to Tyrants, to
deliver the oppressed, raise up those that were fallen, restore those that are
driven out, to stablish Tottering Crowns, and which having already freed Two
Kingdoms, will in all probability gloriously recover a Third in a short time.
Things that come from such an august hand cannot but be of excellent Virtue and
Effect. His incomparable Valor and Courage, and the blessing of Heaven, have
had this great effect, that the most Famous Nations in the World, have put Four
Crowns on his Head, and on that of his Royal Consort, adorned likewise with all
the same Virtues and Perfections. Which Crowns, in stead of adding any Ornament
to the Persons that are possessed of them, become more Illustrious from the
heads of those that wear them. His Electoral Highness was the first of any
Foreign Prince that has received this Noble Token of Favor from His Royal
Majesty. From whence his Highness cannot but acknowledge, That tho His Royal
Majesty, and his Electoral Highness, were before nearly Related, His Royal
Majesty has thought fit to make still a closer Union, It Is not to be questioned
but that it proceeds from the Secret Providence of God; That as this Order was
instituted by Edward the Third, especially against the French, who then, as at
present, began to strive for the Universal Monarchy, so now is conferred by
William the Third, on Frederwick the Third, at a time when they Two first of
all displayed their Colors for the Freedom of Europe, and with United Forces,
opposed Themselves to that monstrous and dreadful Enemy, rendering the Thing
more Ominous, by the Badge which this Ordermakes use of, Honi soit qui maly
pense. Let him perish shamefully who dares rashly despise this inseparable
Alliance. To this without doubt, His Royal Majesty had regard, when He sent the
Sword to His Electoral Highness, which otherwise relates not to the Badges of
the Order, and was never before conferred on any Knight; and with which he
would have him girt with so great Solemnity, that he might make use of it in
his Wars, for the asserting the Freedom of Europe. His Electoral Highness
certainly designs to do that which His Majesty intended by conferring this
Honor on him, and will always think himself so strictly united to His Majesty,
that no Force nor Artifice shall ever be able to break the Union: But he will
esteem whatever Fortune whether bad or good, that attends his Majesty, to be
the same as if it happened to his Highness, making no other difference betwixt
his Majesty's Concerns and his own, than to give those of his Majesty the first
place. Moreover, his Electoral Highness will never render himself unworthy the
Honor conferred, or forget the Statutes of the Order. And because his
Electoral Highness is now become one of the Members of the Order, instituted
amongst the English Nation, his Highness will always endeavor to promote their
Interest and Glory, Lastly, His Highness thanks the Commissioners, in that they
have been pleased to undertake the conferring this Noble Present on him, and
thanks his Royal Majesty for having chosen them for this Solemnity, to whom his
Electoral Highness will on all occasions show all Favor and Esteem.

SErenissimus Princeps, Elector Brandenburgious, Dominus Noster Clementissinus,
debito cum respectu atque aestimatione acceptat honorem, quo Regia Majestas
Magnae Britanniae condecorare ippsum voluit transmissis insignibus toto Orb
celebratissimi Ordinis Equitum Divi Georgli Anreae Periscetidis. Sive enim
respiciamus Antiquitatem inclytissimi Ordinis, qui jam trecentos triginta novem
annos a primis suis incunabulis numerat; seu gloriam Fundatoris, Edvardi
tertii, cum omnibus to fastigio dignis Virtutibus, tum imprimis inusitata
sortitudine ac selicitate clarissimi Regis; sive Splendorem ac praestantiam
little queis istius Ordinis bonos obtigit, inter quos multi sublimes Monarchae,
and quod jamjam non sine admiratione audivimus, Octo Imperatores Romani,
quadraginta quinque Reges, Sexaginta Electores, and ut plurimum Supremo Imperio
gaudentes Principes, praeter plurimos alios non minus Splendore Nataelium, quam
rerum gestarum gloria celeberrimos Heroes numerantur; sive etiam scopum
instituti qui praecipne ad desensionem Justitiae, sublevationem oppressorum,
and cultum virae atque infucatae Virtutis tendit; manifesso deprehendetur,
isthune nulli alteri ejus generis Ordini toto Orb concedere, multis autem
rebus alios long antecellere. Cujus praestantiae infallibile documentum
perspicitur in duobus palmariis genuini Equitis requisitis, ut quod turpisuga
tergum hosti obverterit, infi^^lati potuerit. Sed quae ad dignitatem kujus
Ordinis spectant, ea jam a Domino Legato itae luculenter ac solid deducta
sunt, ut superfluum suerit eidem aliquid superaddere velle. Equidem in Antiqua
Historia Graecorum comprimis and Romanorum multa licet videre Exempla. Regnorum
ac insignium Provinciarum a Possessoribus in alios collatorum. Sed tantorum
munerum causa non semper meritum ant jus reperitur: Saepe ista caeca fortuna,
aut enormi favori debennur, aut quia Reipublicae rations ista per alios potius
possideri suaserunt. Ast qui solo Virtutis merito utitur, and ex vera solidaque
praestantiae aestimatione promanet honos ipsisSceptris Corenisque long
praestabilior habendus. Atque eodem modulo quoque collatio inclyti hujus
Ordinis mensuranda est, imprimis cum ea proficiscatur a Rege, cui nil nisi
praevia exacta cognitione and maturo judicio suscipitur. Quanquem enim
Serenitas sua Electoralis semper sibi decorum babitura fuerat illustrissime
huie Ordini adscrib^. Quod tamen id a Regia Majestate Magnae Britanniae, quae
nunc rerum potitur, fiat, id multis modis gaudium, quo ipsius men's ex
ta-perfunditur, adauget. Quin ipsi Adamantes and Aurum, qutis insignia Ordinis
radiant, multo vividiorem Splendorem mutuantur a manu tam gloriosi collatoris,
quam Manum Divina Providentia elegit ad Seculum hoc Miraculis insigniendum,
quae Tyrannis Terrorem incutit, torumque insolentiam castigat and solo
affligit, quae Oppressos liberat, and e ruinis sublevat, spoliatos ^estituit,
titubantes Corenas stabilit, immo quae adhuc calet ab admiranda liberatione
duorum Regnorum, cui and de tertio propediem trophaeum statuendum Auguramur.
Quae a tam Augusta menu dantu^ singulari Virtute and effectu vacua esse non
possunt velut quae incomparabili sua fortitudine animique constantia, ac
coelitus prosperate successu effecit, ut celeberrima toto orb Natio quatuor
Coronas ipsins and serenissimae Consortis Reginae, omnium Virtutum ac gratiarum
Matris, capiti exornando porrexerit: Quibus Corenis tamen divinum Lumen quo
caput isind circumsunditur, plus splendoris affert quam ab iisdem Accipit. Quo
and illud Accedit, quod serenitas sua Electoralis inter externos Principes
prima fit, quam Regia sua Majestas illustri bocce aestimationis ac
benevolentiae sua signo muneravit. Ex quo and eadem agnoscit, quod licet jam
antea Regia sua Majestas and serenitas sua Electoralis sanctissimo sanguinis
and propinquae cognationis vinculo divinitus sint combinaiae, Regiae tamen
Majestas isthane necessitudinem isthoc ordinis ligamine arctius adbue
adstringere praeclarum duxerit. Nec dubitare fas est, quin and istud ex occulta
operations Divinae providentiae promana it, ut cum bie Ordo primum ab Edvardo
tertio institutus fuerit, and quidem praecipue contra Gallos, qui jam tum
insolentiam and dominands libidinem, qua nunc totum foe Orbem subversum eunt,
parturithant, idim nunc a Guiliclmo tertio in Fridericum tertium conferatur,
and to quidem tempore, quo by duo primi signum ad excutiendum, quod Europae
cervicibus imminebar, jugum fustulerunt, ac junctis animis viribusque immani ac
truculento isti hosti sese objecerunt, anspicatissimis victoriarum monumentis
simboli, quo bic ordo utitur, Omen firmaturi, Honey solt qui mal y pense,
dedecore obrutus pereat, qui insolubilem hanc conjunctionem contemnere, aut
temerare Awus suerit. Quo etiam, sine dubio, prosolita sibi Sapientia, respexit
Regia Sacra Majestas, cum Serenttati suae Electorali Gladium, qui alias cum
Ordinis insignibus transmitti non solet. Ad insignia Ordiois haud spectat, and
antea nemini Equitum oblatus fuit, Offerri, todemque illam in tanta Solennitate
accingi jusserit; ut nimirum eadem in Belli and Periculorum Societate; ad
afferendam Europae Libertatem a jugo Gallico uteretur. Sane Serenitas sua
Electoralis Regia Suae Majestatis scopum, ad quem delato hocce Honor collimat,
ex ass implebit. Eadem its arcte Regiae suae Majestati sese obstrictam
judicabit, ut nulla vis aut fraus ad eam divellendam valitura fit: Quaecunque
Regiae Sua Majestati, prospere aut secus eveneriut, sibi quoque accidisse
judicabit. Denique Regiaesuae Majestatis and proprias rations non alio
discrimine habebit, quam quod istis exra priorque locus deforendus sit. De
caesero, Serenitas sua Electoralis delato bocce. Honor nunquam sese indignum
reddet, ac Statuta Ordinis Memori semper mente tenebit. Et quia Serenitas sua
Electoralis nunc inter Membra Ordinis recepta est, ab intlyta Natione Anglicana
instituti, bujus Gloria and Emolumentum eidem semper quam maxim cordi trunt:
Ad Extremum Serenitas sua Electoralis Dominis Legatis Gratias agit, quod
officium tam egregii and acceptissimi Muneris offerendi in se suscipere
voluerunt: Eidem gratissimum est a sua Regia Majestata istos potissimum huic
Functioni obeundae delectos, quos and qua Aestimatione and Affectu Sua
Serenitas Electoralis prosequatur, nulla occasion demonstrare omittet.

LICENSED

G. SARVM. Chancellor of the Order.
July 15.
Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew
Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesty's, 1690.


