AN ACCOUNT OF THE Bold and Daring Enterprise OF THE Primitive Reformed, IN
ORDER To Recover their Just Rights, Liberties, and Profession of their Religion
in the Duchy of Savoy.
In a LETTER written from Lauzanne in Swisserland, to a Person of Honor,
August 30. 1689.
Licensed,

September 3d, 1689. J. F.

THE Waldenses being weary of living out of their own Country, have once again
contrived the means of returning thither.

This Affair was managed with so much precaution and secrecy, that the laudable
Cantons were wholly strangers to this Design. And all things being made ready
for the execution, every Individual received Order to Repair on the
Friday-Morning to the Wood of Nion, which is upon the Banks of the Lake,
between this City and that of Geneva: And all obeyed the Orders: They had each
a Musket, a Sabre, a Bayonett, and a Pistol; this was all their Baggage: Being
come to the Rendevouz, to the number of Two Thousand Five Hundred Waldenses,
and Five Hundred French Refugees, they were distributed into Companies, each of
Twenty Five Men, to which were appointed a Captain, a Lieutenant, and Two
Sergeants, all Men of Service. Some Days before they had made choice of an
Officer of great Experience to Command them; they Swore to obey him, and the
other Officers, after which was given to each a Pound of Powder, Lead in
proportion, and Bread for Three Days.

That same Day between Eight and Nine a Clock in the Evening, the Weather being
very close and duskish, the Army marched out of the Wood, and went to the Lake,
where Twelve Vessels waited to waft it over into Savoy. Before they went on
Board, Messieurs Arnaud, and Boutrous, Waldensian Ministers, who have never
forsaken this People, and who have managed and brought this matter to the point
it is, caused the Army to be drawn up in Battlearray, and having all prostrated
themselves on the Earth, Monsieur Arnaud made a long and fervent Prayer, which
drew Tears from all those of the Assembly: He compared them to to the People of
Israel, upon the Shore of the Red Sea; promising himself from the Goodness of
GOD, that would bless their Enterprise, since it only tended to his Glory, to
the Deliverance of their Ministers, and of their Children that were unjustly
detained in Savoy; and to return unto the Inheritance of their Forefathers,
that so they might Serve GOD in Peace. The Prayer being ended, and the
Resolution taken not to do any injury to the Catholics, at least, unless they
opposed their Passage, they Embarked about a Thousand Men, which was all the
Twelve Vessels could contain. When these had performed their passage, which was
done in an Hour and halfs time, they returned to take on Board as many more
again; and this was done three times. The Masters of the Vessels who carried
them over, report, That they met with none to oppose their Landing; but that in
the Morning of the 27th, the Peasants inhabiting about the Lake Tolled an
Allarum Bell, to warn their Neighbors to come in to their Assistance. The
Waldenses sent to tell them, That they came not to do them any injury, that
they only mean'd to pass on; and that if they took any thing of the Inhabitants
of the Country, they would faithfully pay for it. This was said in such manner,
as that the Savoyards gave credit to it, and caused the Allarum-Bell to cease.
Our Brethren began their March in Battle-array, having a Van guard, and a Rear.
It is beyond all expression how much Joy and Resolution they expressed at their
departure. If it has pleased the Lord to continue them his Assistance, they are
by this time, believed to be got into their own Country: And if they are there,
it is certain that all the Duke of Savoy's Forces will not be capable of
driving them thence. I know not how his Royal Highness may have entertained
this News; but do not question it will be very grating to, and disrelish'd by
the Court of France.

On the Day before the departure of those poor People, there was celebrated,
throughout the whole State, a Day of Fasting and Prayer, with great Devotion.
Just now we understand, that there is forming another Assembly of the Waldenses
that remained in this Country, and that as soon as the Number shall be
complete, it is said, they will follow the rest; unless they are hindered by
the Cantons.

Note, If these poor People succeed in their Design, it may possibly give
occasion to an Insurrection of all the French Protestants in Dauphine, and
Languedock, and thus make way for as great Revolutions in France, as have
happened elsewhere.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE History of Gustavus Adolphus, Sir-named The Great King of Sweden, Together
with the life and Reign of His Successor after, Christina Carolus Gustavus,
Count Palatine. Translated out of French by Ferrand Spence, Servant to Their
Majesty's. Sold by R. Clavil, W. Not, D. Dewman, T. Dri^^, S. Crouch, and J.
Hindmarsh, and R. Bentley, and most other Booksellers.

The Dilucidator: Or Reflections upon Modern Transactions, by way of Letter
from a Person at Amsterdam to his Friend in London, Published Weekly. Both Sold
by Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul 's Churchyard.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock near the West End of St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1689.


