AN ACCOUNT OF THE Capitulation and Surrender of Limerick.
Published by Authority.

Whitehall, October 5. 1691.
BY the Letters from Dublin of the 29th past, which came in this Morning we
have an account, That an Express arrived there the day before from the Camp,
and brought the good News; That the General, the Duke of Wirtemberg, and
Lieutenant General Scravenmore, having passed the Shannon on the 22d very early
in the Morning, with all the Horse, (except Colonel Coys Regiment and 50 out of
each Regiment of Dragoons) and ^0 Regiments of Foot, taking with him 14 pieces
of Cannon, and 7 days Provision, the rest of the Army remaining under the
Command of Major-Generals Mackay and Talmash, for the security of our Works on
the other side. About 12 at Noon all our Troops drew up before the Town on
Clare side, the Enemy playing upon them all the while from the Castle and
several Towers both with great and small shot, but with little Execution. About
5 the General ordered a detachement to attack the Fort near Thomond Bridge, and
though two great Detachements sallied out of the Town to support those that
defended it, we carried it, and pursued the Enemy over the Bridge to the Town,
and were so near that they were forced to draw up the Bridge for fear we should
have entered with them, by which means they left a great many of their men
Exposed, of whom we killed 700, and took 200, among which was Colonel Skeleton,
two Lieutenant-Colonels, 3 Majors, 5 Captains, and about 15 other inferior
Officers; we took also 3 pieces of Cannon and 5 Colors. Soon after we posted
our selves in all the Enemies Forts and Retrenchments on that side the Water;
we lost not one Officer of Note, and about 50 private Soldiers. The 23th,
Colonel Corbet came over to us from the Enemy, and proposed to the General the
bringing over Tyrconnel's and Galway's Regiments of Horse, and out of them to
make one good Regiment to serve Their Majesty's in Flanders. On the 24th about
4 in the Afternoon the Enemy hung out a White Flag, and beat a Parley all round
the Town, desiring to Capitulate; and thereupon a Treaty was set on foot, and
Hostages exchanged. Those from the Enemy are the Lords Westmeath, Iveagh,
Trimblestown, and Lowth, and from us the Lord Cutts, Sir David Collier, Colonel
Tiffany and Colonel Pipar. Our men who were Prisoners in the Town were already
set at Liberty, and a like number of theirs would be sent them in Exchange. The
Enemy have about 1500 Horse who were not in the Town, but Sarsfield desired
they might be included in the Capitulation, which seems to be carried on
without the Consent of the French Governor, against whom, and all the other
Officers of that Nation the Irish are highly incensed for shutting the Gate
upon their men, and suffering them to be destroyed as they were.

The Lord Justice Porter, and the Lord Justice Coningsby parted from Dublin on
the 29th past toward Kilkenny, to assist at the Treaty if there was occasion,
and to concert with the General the settling the Winter Quarters.

The Letters from Bristol of the 3d of October, just now come in, say, that a
Vessel was newly arrived there, who came from Waterford on Wednesday the 30th
past, the Master whereof gives an Account, that two Expresses came in there
that Morning to the Governor of Duncannon-Fort, with an account of the
Surrender of Limerick, the Garrison marching out, and our Troops marching into
the Place on Sunday the 27th of September. And as the Master terms it, the
Garrison marched out almost Naked, and without Arms.

Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy, 1691.


