AN ACCOUNT OF THE Bombarding of St. MALO, by the Fleet under the Command of
the Lord Berkeley Admiral of the Blue.
Published by Authority.
ON Thursday the 4th instant at 10 in the Morning, the whole Fleet Anchored
about 4 Mile without the Quince Channel, which leads to St. Malo; about Noon a
Signal was made for the Commanders of the Bomb Vessels to come on Board my Lord
Berkley. It was ordered that 3 English and 6 Dutch Bomb-Vessels should batter
the Quince Rick, and Fort called Dambour, and that the other Nine English Bomb
Vessels should go in and batter the Town; accordingly about 4 in the Afternoon,
Captain Benbow, who had the Command of them and of the Frigates that were to
support them, stood in, being himself on board the Northumberland, and battered
the Quince, which he continued till it was Dark; one or two of our Bombs fell
upon the Rock, and did the Enemy some damage. The 5th about 4 in the Morning,
the Fleet weighed and went in nearer, and immediately my Lord Berkley made the
Signal for the small Frigates and Bomb Ships that were to Attack the Town, to go
in; Captain Benbow went by his Lordships Order on board the Charles Galley, and
there hoysted a broad Pendant; at 6 they were all under Sail, and about the
same time the Charles Fireship Commanded by Captain Durly, and a Dutch
Fireship, were ordered to go and lie close to the Quince Rock, and there to
blow up their Ships, which they performed very Gallantly, and soon after the
Fort took Fire, (whether occasioned by the blowing up of the Fireships, or the
falling of a Bomb, we cannot tell) which lasted near two Hours; and during that
time we saw several Blowings up, which we suppose was by some Powder taking
Fire; and we conjecture some of their Guns were likewise dismounted thereby,
for they did not fire upon us afterward so much as they did before. About 7 in
the Morning, our Bomb Ships and Frigates were laid to Pass, and played on the
Town, the Bomb Vessels lying so near, that they were forced to abate of their
Powder, for otherwise the Bombs would have gone over the Town. About 10 they
set Fire to the Eastward part of it, which broke out in two places; and at two
in the Afternoon, we saw another Fire about the middle of the Town, which
continued till it was Dark, blazing over the tops of the Houses, but at last it
was put out by the blowing up of the Houses near it. The Ships that went in
were 6 English and 4 Dutch men of War, 9 Bomb Vessels, 14 Well-Boats, 2
Brigantines, and one Spy Boat, who lay in the midst of the Enemies Batteries,
and received the Fire from 9 or 10 of them, and returned the same with great
Bravery and Resolution; but most of the Enemies Shot went over us; and their
Galleys and Guard Boats which were sent out to annoy us, took care never to
come within point blank Shot of us: My Lord Berkley was himself in the hottest
of the Fire, going in his Boat to encourage our Men, and to give such Orders as
he thought necessary. The Frigates and Wellboats appointed to attend on the Bomb
Vessels during the Action, being placed by Captain Benbow, were very
serviceable to them, both in securing them from the Enemy and supplying them
with Ammunition. We Fired 900 Bombs and Carcasses into the Town, a great part
of which is certainly burnt or beat down. and we believe there is little part
of it free from some share in the Desolation. Several of the Enemies Shot were
taken up in our Ships and Vessels, some of which were shot from Canon of Seven,
the least from Demy-Canon; one of their Bombs fell into the Carc^ss Bomb
Vessel, and broke one of her Beams, and tore up part of the Deck; but only
wounded one Man.

About 7 in the Evening, a Signal was made for the Bomb Vessels and Frigates to
come off, as they did, after having Bomb'd 11 Hours, and done all that could be
expected from them. In this Action we had about 60 Men killed and wounded; one
of our Bomb Vessels called the Dreadful, being very much shattered and disabled
by the Enemies Cannon, the Commander and his Men quitted the Vessel, after
setting her on Fire; Three of the Well-boats were Sunk, and 3 or 4 other Boats.

On Saturday the 6th, Captain Benbow was Detached with 8 Bomb Ships, and as
many Frigates to Bombard Granville; and my Lord Berkley with the rest of the
Fleet Sailed to Jasey.

Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy. 1695.


