An Account of the CAUSES Of some Particular Rebellious DISTEMPERS, VIZ. The
Scurvy, Cancers in Women's Breasts, etc. Vapors, and Melancholy, etc.
Weaknesses in Women, etc. Gout, Fistula in Ano, Dropsy, Agues, etc.
TOGETHER With the Virtues and Uses of a Select Number of Chemical Medicines
Studiously prepared for their Cure, and adapted to the Constitutions and
Temperaments of all Ages, and both Sexes.

By an Eminent Practitioner in Physic, Surgery and Chemistry.

THEY BEING His Choice Secrets, Experienced for many Years in his Practice, to
be of wonderful Efficacy, as the Cures performed by them Manifest; and now, by
the Importunities of many judicious Persons, set forth and recommended for the
universal Good and Benefit of all People:

And are to be had only at (...)

THE PREFACE.
THERE needs no Apology for publishing the following Account of Diseases, and
the Medicines for their Cure, the Title Page telling the World, It Is done for
the universal Good and Benefit of all People, which indeed was the Motive; but
that the excellent Remedies recommended for their Cure, may not be branded with
the infamous Appellation of Quack Medicines, so detestable to all wise People
(and indeed not without Reason, if it be rightly considered what Riff raff
Stuff is set Abroad and vended under the Specious Name of Medicine) I shall
take leave to say only thus much in their behalf, that they have all of them
been really experienced for many Years, to be of most excellent Uses for the
Distempers to which they are appropriated; and it is presumed will be found upon
Trial, more Efficacious than some may be willing to believe, upon only the bare
hearing of them, or by reading the following Account given of their Virtues,
which have been lagely known, or else had not been recommended: Therefore it is
hoped, as the intent by publishing them was to serve and not deceive the
People, as is too notoriosluy known, many of the Quack Medicines vended Abroad
have done, to the bringing disrepute on the most excellent ones, none will
condemn them, till they have tried them, which is the true Test, and by which
the Author is content to Stand or Fall, have Credit or Disgrace.

The Histories of Cures performed by them, might have been enumerated, had not
designed Brevity forbid. The few inserted it is hoped will be sufficient to
convince all People till they have tried them, that they are Medicines
effectual; and for further Confirmation, should have mentioned the Names of the
Persons on whom the Cures were wrought; but that the Author is obliged to
conceal himself for the sake of his constant Business; besides, the World is
now so Censorious, that if the best Physician recommends but a Medicine for
Public Good, which he has experienced to be Excellent, he shall presently have
the scandalous Epithet of Quack put upon him, though its no more than what the
greatest Physicians in all Ages have done, without thinking it digressive;
because they did it, as the Author here does his, for the common good of his
Countrymen; but now I say it cannot be done publicly, with any tolerable
Reputation: For which Reason does the Author conceal himself, and obliged the
Seller of them never to let his Name be known to any, without which solemn
Promise, they had never been made public, and consequently the People never
been benefitted by them.

But because of this, none need to doubt their Efficacy, neither will any want
proper Directions how to take and use them, every thing in that kind being
sufficiently provided for in the Book, so that none will be at a loss, or have
any need at any time, upon any pretense, to speak with the Author concerning
'em; besides, for their Efficacy, the People that sell them can give some
Account, being well assured both of their Virtues and the Authors Skill, or
else had not undertaken the task of selling them.

And as they are Medicines effectual, so are they lasting; for they will retain
their Virtues many Years, and may be carried beyond the Seas: For that no
Climate, Season of the Year, or Age will in the least altet or diminish them,
provided they be kept from the Air and the Wet.

A Catalogue of the Names and Prices of the Medicines mentioned in this Book,
which are to be had only at the Place directed in the Title Page, viz. At the
(...)
Page 1. THE English Pills for the Scurvy, etc. each Box Price 3 s. 6 d. Page
19. The Liniment for Women's Swelled or Cancerated Breasts, each Gallipot price
5 s. Page 33. The Suffumigating Powder for Vapors, Hypocondriack Melancholy
and Diseases of the Nerves, each Parcel 3 s. 6 d. Page 42. The Ingredients to
make the Poultice for the Gout, price 5 s. Page 50. The Balsamic Electuary for
Weaknesses in Women, etc. each Gallypot price 3 s. 6 d. Page 55. The Injection
for the Cure of Fistula's, each Bottle price 5 s. Page 61. The Cephalic, or
Head Tincture, each Bottle price 3 s. 6 d. Page 67. The Balsamic Restorative
Elixir for all Diseases of the Lungs, each Bottle price 3 s. 6 d. Page 70. The
English Vegetable and Plasters for the Cure of all sorts of Agues, both
together price 6 s. Page 76. The Hydragogue Tincture for the Dropsy, each
Bottle price 3 s. 6 d. Page 79. The famed Eye Powder and Water, both together
price 6 s. Page 81. The Carminative, or Wind expelling Lozenges, each Box price
2 s. 6 d Page 83. The Balsam to make Issues run, etc each Box price 2 s. 6 d.
English PILLS FOR THE SCURVY, And all other Cutaneous Diseases, or Breakings
out of the Body, Sores, etc. from that or any other Causes.
AMONGST all the Diseases incident to Humane Bodies, there is none more
predominant (though least regarded) than the Scurvy, a Disease that seems
incident to this Climate, and which spares none of any Age, Sex or
Constitution, being a general Malady scarcely taken Notice of, because it
seldom kills, tho at the same time it introduces many direful Distempers, and
proves the principal and efficient Occasion thereof.

The cause of the Scurvy, is from an acid corrosive Humor tainting the Blood
and Juices of the Body, encumbered with Earthy Sulphurs of a Nature rebellious
and stubborn, and attended sometimes (especially when inveterate) with a very
strong Smell or Stench; which Volatile Saline Acid, irritates the Nerves and
Membranes, sharpens the Lymph, debauches the innate Spirits of the Parts, and
perverts the equal Temperature of the Blood; this is the immediate cause of the
Scurvy: But the remote Causes, are the Sea-Air, and the Specific Malignity of
the Stagnated Waters and the Earth, affecting, by their corrosive Effluvium's,
also by infection, an hereditary conveyance from the Parent, and from gross,
faeculent and obstructive Diet, especially if overcharged with Salt, or
rendered hard and compact with Smoke, as dried Neats Tongues, Bacon, Sawcages,
red Herrings, dried Salmon, hung Beef, etc. do not only contribute Matter, but
obtain also a peculiar faculty of impressing a Scorbutic Idea on it: Of the
same Nature are Melancholic Meats, as Beef, Pork, Geese, Ducks, Salt-fish, and
all other Fish that are bred in Standing Waters, as Eeles and others; also
pickled and marinaded Fish, as pickled Herrings, Anchovies, and the like, which
bears a great part in this Morbifick Production; also a Salin Air rendered
thick and constipative by Vapors and Damps, Nitrous Evaporations out of the
Earth, filled with putrid Steams of Sinks, Gutters, Ditches, muddy and dirty
Streets, and Sulphurous Smokes of Chimneys, stagnating and pent up between
narrow Lanes and Corners, and seldom or but little serenated, or putrified, by
the Rays of a clear shining Sun, nor frequently ventilated with Easterly
Breezes, and such is the Clime of London, where the Air is experienced close,
dull, damp, salin and muddy, overspread with dense, dark, salin Clouds
(attracted out of the Sea) for two Thirds, if not three Fourth Parts of the
Year, during which time the Winds seldom blow Easterly, or is favored with a
smiling Sun; the two, viz. Diet and State of the Air, etc. are accounted by
all, the principal, external and internal Agents or Causes of the Scurvy,
agressing the Body both within and without; the first by making its efforts on
the Stomach and its Ferment, thereby assaulting the Blood and animal Liquor;
and the latter, by entering the external Pores by their subtle effluvium's, as
is most certainly and at large set forth in a late ingenious Tract, entitled,
Scelera Aquarum; Wherein the Author tells us,

That London is situated on a wicked Bottom of Earth called blue Clay; this
Bottom is many contiguous, though separated Bodies, extends it self round the
Metropolis and Lines of Communication some Miles in Circumference, and reaches
likewise downwards to an enormous Depth toward the Center; for the boreings
that have been frequently made by the Brewers in quest of the impregnated Water
(called Spring Liquor) has been mostly attempted to thirty and forty Fathom
Depth without success.

As all sorts of Clay are found by Experience and Observations of Country
Farmers and Brewers, to abound with a Juice or Salt of an Esurine Acid Nature
and Quality, which vitiates all the Fruits of the Earth, except it be first
sweetened and sheathed by Chalk both crude and calcined into Lime; so this blue
kind of Glebe more scelerous and corrosive than all the other, maleficates
equally Air and Water, and renders all the stagnate Waters of the Neighborhood
esurine to a very high degree.

And here it is that the bounty of Nature has made it self remarkable to the
Eye, in burying this bottom of Clay near twenty foot in depth under Ground; and
besides, covering it over and over with repeated Strata of diffe^ent kinds of
Moulds toward the Gravelly Surface of the Earth, left the Atmosphere should be
invaded, and the ambient Air we aspire, should be thereby exasperated and
rendered Catarrhous, through the corrosive effluvia sent up from below; so that
till about One Hundred and Fifty Years ago, when an endless number of
Perforations began to be made by the common Brewers into the Subterranean
World, the City of London enjoyed its Native State of Health, and was entirely
free from Coughs and Catarrhs, Periodical Fevers, vulgarly called Agues; and in
a word, from all the Symtomatical Branches of the Scurvy, hitherto enumerated.

And here it may be observed by the by, that the acrid Effluvia sent up from
the Clayey Bottom, by reason of their volatile Nature, do little harm in the
Summer Season; but during that of the Winter, whilst they are weighed down and
reverberated back toward the Bafis of the Atmosphere by the Fogs and Frosts;
then I may say it is, and not till then, that they begin to Bite even Persons
adult, bur more especially the unseason'd Bodies of Children and Foreigners.

In short, the Scelus Aquoe and Loci, or corrupted or corrosive Waters, here
insisted on; slept for a long Succession of Ages, out of Harms way in the
Bowels of the Subterranean World; and besides, the corrosive Waters were not
employed either in Bread or potable Liquors extracted forth of Malt: And, as I
may add, they were only made use of for clearing of the Sight, and for eating
away the Kells and Cataracts off of dim Eyes.

But about the Accession of Queen Elizabeth to the Crown (as I am well
informed) Clay Waters began to grow into credit with such as Brewed or Baked
for Sale, as a more powerful-Menstruum, for extracting the Tincture out of
Malt: And at that period of Time, it was that the Waters of D AT C. were Carted
from Hogsdon to the several Brew-houses in the Metropolis, or City of London,
at 800 l. per Ann. Expense; and at the same time a world of Wells were made,
and Pumps erected at every corner of the City and Suburbs.

In a word, the Scelus Aquoe and Loci, now spoken of, that is to say, the acrid
Nature and esurine Quality of the Stagnate Waters in and about this City, is
sufficiently evinced a Posteriori from the ill natured Effects thereof in all
Domestic Uses. First, in chopping and ditching of Hands and Face: Secondly,
from coagulating of Alcalous Fluids, both Soap and Barm: Thirdly, from
hardening of Pease and redning of Bacon, and all Flesh Meats, if boiled
therein; which the Lord Bacon enumerates amongst ill Signs and Diagnostick of
Insalubrity or Unwholsomness: Fourthly, from the killing of Flowers and
destroying all manner of Garden-stuff, unless the acid Salt be rst fievaporated
by open Airings and Insolations on the Surface of the Earth, as was practiced
by the Ancients, and put in practice by Gardeners to this Day.

I had almost forgot to add here, that the prodigious bottom of Clay now spoken
of, extends it self from the Metropolis, or City of London, all along the Banks
of the River Thames, into the Marshes or Flats of Essex, which vitiates both
Air and Water in the Hundreds to a very high degree, whereby the Foundation
has been laid of such Chronical Fevers, and Scorbutic Agues, as incessently
reign in the Districts of Dench and Rochefort. In a word, the River of Thames
is also vitiated by Dyers, etc. so that no Water is fit for Bread and Brewer's
use, save the New River, which is far more Salubrious or Healthful than any
other Water in or about the City of London.

However, the Scurvy; whether from immediate or remote Causes, is certainly a
Corruption and Putrefaction of the Blood and Humors; whence the Concoction
being hurt, the Stomach (which is the Index of Diseases) is depraved,
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, etc. are occasioned, bringing, by
degrees, a general Cachexie, or evil Habit of Body; whereby manifold and
complicated Distempers are at length introduced, which affects all Persons
according to their various and different Tempers and Constitutions.

Such I say is the Scurvy, that grand Enemy to Health, and only reigning
Disease of this Kingdom, which Persons of all Ranks, Ages and Sexes are more or
less afflicted with, it being the original and productive Cause of almost all
the Distempers incident to Humane Bodies; and from which alone Disease (if not
timely removed) more especially proceed Rheumatisms, Gouts, Fevers, Agues,
Jaundice, Green Sickness, Dropsies, Cholicks, Stone and Gravel, Phtysicks,
Consumptions, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Palfies, Hectic Fevers, Hypochondriack
Melancholy, Hysteric Passion, Vapors, Fits of the Mother, Rickets in
Children, King's Evil, Falling Sickness, and the like, which these Pills, if
taken, both prevents and Cures; their Reputation having, by their manifold
Virtues, been kept up for many Years, and accounted the only Sovereign Medicine
in the whole Art of Physic, against all Scorbutic Distempers whatsoever; they
penetrating, in a very short space, the whole Humane Body from Head to Foot;
and though they never till now were made public to the World, yet many Thousands
of Boxes have been dispersed with wonderful Success, not only here in England,
but also in Germany, Holland, and other remote Countries, where that devouring
Disease, the Scurvy, has likewise predominated, they being so certain a Cure
for that stubborn and rebellious Disease, that Thousands have been cured, when
the Distemper has grown so inveterate and deplorable, as to become a shame and
scandal to those that have had it, and which has been taken by many to be some
bad Distemper; for the Scurvy often causes great Pains in the Head, Nose,
Shoulders, Arms, Hips, Legs, and Bones, with the Sciatick and other tormenting
Pains all over the whole Body, whereby they sleep ill, and tumble and toss in
the Night with great uneasiness and trouble, and are attended with a heaviness
and weariness, having reddish or blueish Spots or Breakings out on the Skin,
weakness in the Back, Loins and Knees, a bad Stomach, and sometimes loss of
Appetite, strong or stinking Breath, looseness or foreness of the Teeth and
Gums, Throat and Mouth, with Itchings, Pimples, Blotches, Boiles, Ulcers,
Morphews, Scabs, Scurf, a general Weakness and Faintness over the whole Body;
the Scurvy most commonly afflicting People after various means, and sometimes
with Vomitings, Loosenesses, and the disguise of almost innumerable Distempers,
according to their Constitutions, different Situations and Places where they
dwell, and so resemble all manner of Illess, too tedious here to enumerate, as
that its no wonder their Diseases are so frequently mistaken, and does, with so
much violence and force, oftentimes wander about the Body and affect it, that
if it be neglected, it will at last get into the Bones, and infect the very
Marrow thereof, yet notwithstanding (so famous are these most excellent Pills)
the Cure then will be performed, by only a few times more than ordinary taking
of them.

Though it is advised, that upon the appearance of any of those Symptoms, you
have speedy recourse to these Pills, which will prevent their increase, and
carry them off with less trouble and difficulty; there being scarce one Disease
which People are afflicted with here in this Climate, but the principal and
efficient Cause thereof is the Scurvy, that Disease carrying Thousands to their
Graves, when it scarcely has been known-of what Distempers they have died,
there being very few that discerns, or indeed will give, themselves the trouble
to consider what the original Cause or occasion thereof is, though it too
manifestly appears (as every judicious Physician may discover, if he will,)
that it is the Scurvy. Therefore be well advised about your Distemper, and run
not into the Hands of inconsiderate Practitioners, who take not due Thoughts
about the original Cause; for how many, both Old and Young, are daily carried
off by Fevers, Rheumatisins, Apoplexies, Consumptions, Convulsions, Rickets,
King's Evil, and the like; which, if the original Cause had been consulted, and
timely recourse had to these famous Pills, might in all probability have been
alive to this day; these Pills being very harmless and safe, and proves the
only Universal, Purgative, Preservative, Preventative and Curative Remedy, in
the whole Republic of Medicine.

They wonderfully, so far as any Purging Medicine can* prevent and cure the
Dropsy and Gout speedily (those Diseases being the product of the Scurvy)
taking away the Water in one, and the Pain in the other, though never so great,
and not only gives present Ease, Relief, and Comfort in the Gout, and that
beyond expectation, but also very much lessens, if not totally prevents the
Pains returning for the future, they working gently by Stool and Urine, and
sometimes by Vomit, if the Stomach be very foul, without the least Griping or
making sick; thereby curing most curable Diseases, by stirring up and
discharging those lurking, offending Humors, sweetning the Mass of Blood and
Juices, and bringing the ill and untoward Habit of Body into a good, sound and
firm Disposition: These Pills having cured numbers of Persons both of Dropsies
and Gouts, and that in a very short time; some of which have been given over as
incurable, others have gone above a dozen Years upon Crutches, and never heard
to this Day, that they ever mist the Cure of one Person although they have been
used in Practice for above Twenty Years.

These Pills are admirably good against Consumptions of all sorts, that
disheartning Disease so daily and apparently dwindling a Person to the Grave
(and is the manifest product of the Scurvy) not so much from their adding of
Matter, as by taking away the Obstructions, which hinder the Nourishment from
going to its respective Parts; in which Disease, whether in Old or Young, they
have done Miracles, making the Persons grow plump and full, who but a while
before were reduced to nothing but Skin and Bones; and this they have generally
performed, and scarcely been ever known to fail.

Also in that rebellious, troublesome and oftentimes loathsome Disease, the
King's Evil, whether hereditary or not, which numbers of Persons of different
Ages and Sexes are infested with; they are a wonderful Help and Cure, whether
in the Swellings or running Sores, disposing the vitiated and scorbutic Blood
and Humors into such a state, that the Disease is as it were pulled up by the
Roots as never to return again.

These famous Pills are the most excellent Head-purge in Nature, and that for
all Diseases therein, as Headache, Megrim or Swimming, Vertigo or Giddiness,
Lethargy, Frenzy, Madness, Melancholy, Diseases of the Spleen, Dimness of
Sight, Rheums and all other Distempers in the Eyes, Deasness, Noise in the
Ears, Drowsiness, Heaviness or Dullness of the Spirits, etc. (all these
Distempers proceeding originally from Scorbutic habits) and is a Medicine
beyond any ever yet known, being of so Amicable a Property, that none can
pretend to a greater Secret to extirpate the Scurvy and all the effects
thereof; there being no Disease so remote or abstruse soever in the Body of
Man, but these Pills will find out, insinuate into, and potently and
universally expel or throw out.

These Pills are an admirable help for such Persons, who are unhappily
afflicted with the Scurvy to that degree, as to be exercised with
Hypochondriack Disaffections, Hysteric Passions, risings in the Throat, the
frightful, and as it were dying Disease, the Vapors of all sorts, Fits of the
Mother, Cloggings, Stuffings, Gnawings or Illness at Stomach, whether from
Wind, Humors, or the like; also for such as grow too fat, sweat much, and have
nauseous spittings in the Morning, Bleeding at Nose, Cachexies, have costive or
hot Bodies, and for all as have lost their Complexions by the Green Sickness,
Jaundice or otherwise, and such as are overtaken with lingering Diseases,
growing worse and worse every Year than other, not knowing well what they ail,
having ill Digestions, Stoppages in the Head and Breast, shortness of Breath,
etc. till such time as they fall into Dropsies, Hectic Fevers, or deep
Consumptions, pining and wasting away with dry Coughs, Wheesings, faint Sweats
in the Day or Night, Weakness, fainting Fits, and the like. These admirably
Pills carry off all those Diseases the right way, by taking them twice or
thrice in a Month, or oftener if you find occasion.

They are the best Physic in Nature for to take Spring and Fall, as a
Preventative Remedy and to preserve Health, as most People that have any regard
to the welfare and security thereof, are mindful to take; and likewise from any
Disorder or Indisposition, whether from Heats or Colds, Surfeits by eating or
drinking, or the like. If taken as soon as your perceive your self ill, they
most assuredly prevent any Fever or other Disease from invading you; and there
is as much prudence in taking Physic Spring and Fall, twice or three times in
each Season, to discharge the peccant Humors which are heaped up in the
Stomach and lodge there (though at the same time you seem to be very well in
Health) thereby to preserve from, and prevent Diseases which all Persons are
liable to every Moment, as there is to take Physic for curing those Diseases
when they have seized you; and no Person that desires a happy and healthy State
of Body, will be so imprudent to neglect that which is so absolutely and
undeniably necessary for for the preservation thereof; and I can assure them,
from a very large Experience, that no Physic under the Sun will answer such a
purpose beyond these famous English Pills.

These Pills purge by Stool, Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy, disposing all old
Ulcers, Fistula's, running Sores, Sore Breasts, Sore Eyes, Scald Head, King's
evil, Swellings or Sores, Wounds, Gangreens, Cankers, Cancers, Tettars,
Ring-worms, Scabs, Salt Humors, or any other Breakings out, as Pushes, Boils,
Wheals, etc. to a speedy healing, by purging away the evil Humors which feed
them; and perfectly removes the cause of the Elephantiasis or Leprosy.

These Pills are of wonderful use for all Travelers, Seamen and such like
Persons who live on bad Diet,in ill Airs and moist Places,and near the Sea
Coast; and for all such as have spoiled their Bodies, and surfeited their Heats
and Colds, hard and excessive Drinking in their young Days; and for such as
cannot attend upon a Cure, but are forced to go about their Business: They may
take them to Sea with them, because they keep their Virtues many Years, nor do
Sea Voyages spoil them. They will will be found to stand them in great stead in
all Sea-sicknesses, sickly Climates or Seasons; Calentures, Fevers, Fluxes,
Poisons, Agues, Surfeits, and the like Scorbutic Diseases, which so commonly
afflict such as go to Sea; as that scarcely any but are afflicted in one or
more of these Diseases, so excellent are these Pills, that more cannot possibly
be done by a purging Medicine.

These Pills are incomparable against all manner of Coughs, Colds, Rheums or
Distillations, difficulty of Breathing, Vomiting, weakness of the Stomach, want
of Appetite, Pleurisies, Pains of the side, spitting of Blood, etc. performing
every thing of this kind to admiration, suddenly and strangely easing of Pains,
proceeding from Wind, Humors, Colds, Surfeits or any other Cause whatsoever.

They cure Fevers and Agues of all sorts, sometimes in three Weeks, sometimes
in fourteen Days, and sometimes in less time, although of 2 or 3 Years standing,
and given over by all Physicians, and when almost every one thought the hopes
of Recovery had been past.

These Pills kill all sorts of Worms in Old or Young, although the Patient has
been almost destroyed with them; they bringing away not only the Worms, dead or
alive, but also Slime, Filthiness, or wormy Matter, both from the Stomach and
Bowels, which generates and breeds them; bring down the great Bellies of
Children and others, which Worms occasions, causing a strong Digestion and a
sanative Constitution; and I cannot forbear repeating them to be, as they are
indeed (and which every one that make trial will find) the very best Remedy in
the World against the Dropsy and the Gout; taking away all Swellings from the
Belly, Thighs and Legs, and all manner of Pains, though fixed in the very Bones;
and that in Rheumatisms when the Pains have been so cruel and intolerable as
not to be born without violent Roarings and Cryings out, they have done
wonders, and that when no other means whatsoever would any thing avail.

They also dissolve the Stone, as much as any Medicine in the Universe is able
to do, bringing away, Slime, Sand and Gravel from the Reins and Bladder, taking
away Stoppage of Urine, and causing those to make Water plentifully and easily,
who could not do it in some Days before; this they have done in numbers of
People to admiration.

These Pills are a certain Cure for the Falling Sickness, Convulsions (that
deplorable and fatal Disease to Infants, whereby several Thousands, and that
from a Scorbutic Cause, are carried off in a Year) Apoplexies, Palsies,
Cramps, Lamenesses, weakness of Limbs, loss of Memory, Sciatica's and all
manner of fixed or running Pains whatsoever in any part of the Body, all which
does most certainly proceed from the Scurvy, that Bane and distroyer of Health
and Life; insomuch, that many Bedridden Persons, given over in ail appearance as
incurable, have, under God, unexpectedly met with a Cure almost to a Miracle;
so that many learned Physicians could not but admire at their wonderful Virtues.

These samous English Pills Cure Barrenness effectually, whether the fault be
in the Man or Woman; they exalting the Generative Faculty, cleansing and
strengthening the Spermatick Vessels, resisting all Foulness and Infection in
the Act of Generation; bring down the Terms in Women and Maids, strengthen a
weak Back, cure Ulcers and Stoppages in the Womb, and are wonderful in all
other Diseases belonging to the Female Sex; they expel Wind, carry off the Wind
Cholick to admiration, and so speedily Cure the Griping of the Guts, that many
who seemingly were at the point of Death, have found them a present Remedy,
when all other means have failed.

They are the most powerful Pills in Nature against the Rickets in Children,
the pale and wan Countenance, whether from the Green Sickness or otherwise in
Virgins, all manner of Stoppages and Pains in the Stomach, Head and Brain,
Liver, Spleen, Reins, Womb and Bowels; they purify, cleanse and sweeten the
whole Mass of Blood, rectify all the Distempers of the Head, quicken the
Senses, add a good Color to the Face, strengthen the Sight, and so wonderfully
recreate the Natural, Vital and Animal Spirits, as that the Body thereby is
made perfectly able to withstand and resist all its Diseases.

They cleanse the Body of Wind, Water and ill Humors, without the least
Griping or making Sick, (unless, as was said before, the Stomach be very foul)
or any way weakening the Body; which done, they cease working; for they will
work no longer than there is Diseasy Matter to work upon, but contrariwise will
help all inward wastings or decays of Nature, caused through Pains, Wrenches,
Bruises or over-strainings; they stopping all Weepings, Moistures, Whites,
Fluxes, etc. by carrying off the Humors another way, thereby strengthening the
Vessels, fortifying Nature, and restoring the decayed Parts even to a wonder.

In fine, these Pills are the chief and real Medicine now used for the Scurvy,
and the aforesaid Diseases, which are produced therefrom, and found to be such
from long Experience, not only here in England, but in many Foreign Countries
and Kingdoms; they being cried up and prized above all Remedies whatsoever;
insomuch, that in some Thousands of Families, on most occasions, they are their
only Physic; and indeed no Person living, from the highest to the lowest, can
have a better Purging Medicine in the World, let the Patients condition be from
what cause or occasion soever, they being known to be safe in Operation, and
certain in the end proposed; for no Person curable, troubled with the aforesaid
Diseases ever failed of a Cure, especially if they continued them (without
delay of time, or taking of other Physic) according to the Directions; and all
Persons that have been known to take these Pills, have found good at the first
taking, and several Hundreds, yea Thousands of People who have taken them, have
given them as great Commendations as it was ever possible any Medicine could
deserve.

Their safety, and the success that has followed upon the use of them, has
brought them into the great estimation they have have acquired in many parts of
the World; for as much as they that take these Pills need not go under long,
dangerous and chargeable Courses of Physic, nor suffer by bad Medicines, or be
driven time after time from one Physician to another, as many hundreds daily
are, not knowing where to apply themselves safe, when only a Box or two of
these Pills will do more notable Cures than twenty times that Money expended
upon Doctors.

These Pills are the only Antidote in Nature against all infectious Diseases,
contagious Airs, and preserves from the mischief of Fogs, and unwholesome and
suffocated Vapors in Marshy or Fenny Countries, which arise from the Earth or
Water; they making old Age comely, and the Countenance of all that take them to
be cheerful and Sanguine; they mundify and cleanse the Skin of all its
Impurities, restores and increase Beauty; and abound with more Virtues than any
one Medicine besides; for although many Diseases have been mentioned, the labor
might have been saved; for as they are Pills of an universal Tendency, and I
verily believe the only Purging Medicine in the World, it might only have been
said they are good for every Disease; and not only for the Distempers herein
inserted, but also for many others, known or unknown, without name or number,
even when they are so unaccountably afflicted, as not knowing what they ail.
These Pills being endowed with such excellent Properties, and are so full and
effectual a healer, that they deservedly merit the Title of the only universal
Pills in the World.

And although they are of such admirable Virtues, yet I must inform you, that
when the Disease is of long continuance and stubborn, a perfect Cure cannot be
expected in a few times taking them, in those Cases you may take them in the
largest Dose, and that at least for ten or fifteen times or more, as need
requires, omitting them a day or two, as you shall see cause; but if any shall
presume, upon the commendation of these Pills, that any Disease, in whatsoever
condition the Patient is in, must be infallibly cured, he is mistaken; for I
speak here only of such Diseases as by God's Blessing, and the very best of
Means (as these Pills undoubtedly are) they may receive cure for; for in some
Cases no Medicine in the World can prevail, for sometimes the Lungs themselves,
or the Liver or the Reins are ulcerated and putrefy'd, and sometimes other
internal Parts are consumed; and what Medicine in Nature can repair such Ruins,
or make new Viscera when the old are perished?

These Pills operate extremely pleasant, safe and gentle, and is Physic fit to
be taken by Persons of the greatest Rank and Dignity, and that by all Ages and
Sexes from Two Years old to Fourscore and upwards at any Season of the Year;
and it is observable that these Pills after four or five times taking, keep the
Bowels open for a Month together, and leave not the Body costive and bound, as
is the Property of all other Physic, by which good Property, Diseases seem to
melt away insensible.

These Pills are of an admirable and friendly quality, performing all its
Operations as-Nature-her self requires, and is disposed to the Action, though
chiefly by Stool and Urine, so that they are bound to that way of Operation as
best serves Nature's end in restoring Health: Hence it is, that they cure
Diseases with so great safety, speed and ease, and that without almost any
other Medicine, they being (as was said before) fitted for all Ages, Sexes and
Constitutions whatsoever; and that if there but little Corruption in the Body,
they bring forth but little, if much, they bring forth much, and in Persons
perfectly well, they will scarcely work at all, because in such they have no
Enemy to meet or contend withal.

These Pills are not only the surest and most certain Medicine, as well as
cheapest, for the Scurvy and all the asoresaid Diseases, which are the
consequents or productions thereof, of any ever yet published or administered,
but does a thousand times more excel the best prepared and most celebrated
sorts of Spirit of Scurvygrass, so highly applauded for the Scurvy; they
affecting what is herein proposed so stupendiously and beyond the power of any
other Remedy, whether ordinary or extraordinary, as that they never can be
vallued or esteemed enough; for what Reachings, Strainings, Vomitings,
Gripings, illness at the Stomach, sickness at Heart, Faintings and other very
unpleasing Effects, many Medicines occasion, which are here avoided; this
single Medicine gently cleansing the Stomach and Bowels of their drossy,
mucilaginous Dregs, saluting the Vital Powers like an Angel of Peace, and
piercing the whole Body like Lightning, does, as it were by its Character and
benign Beams, subdue the Malignant Powers of Diseases, and thoroughly overcome
the morbisick Matter thereof, and that without the least perturbution of
Humors, alteration of Body, change of Countenance, impair of Health, or any
ill attendance, they gently removing Obstructions of all kinds, exciting an
Appetite, and rendering the Body vigorous, active and sprightly to the
admiration of all.

And this they do not only by fighting or contending with the Disease after a
rugged and robust manner, but in a passive way, by glancing, as it were, and
piercing of it with the subtilty of their Effluviums, and as it were by
charming of it, undoes it in its very Root and Essence, whereby the Diseasy
Matter being melted and changed in its Nature, Diseases and the very Seeds of
of them insensibly vanish away, thereby curing those Distempers which are
almost incredible to relate.

But no more need to be said of their Virtues, only give me leave to add, that
these Pills are cheap, easy approved helps, free from the least danger upon any
account whatsoever; are safe and benign in their Composition, rational in their
Preparation, amicable and adapted to all Constitutions, most powerful against
those Diseases to which they are appropriated; able to stand the test of all
Trials, and have an uncontrollable Probatum est continually attending them,
they being made of nothing that neither nauseates the Stomach, or tortures the
Patient, but operates Cito, Tuto and Fucunde, even when many other Medicines of
far greater Names, have woefully failed: Their gratefulness to the Senses and
Animal Spirits are such, as will invite as well as assist all the Powers of
Nature to withstand the Diseases, and by the subtilty of their Temper,
pemetrate into those close Recesses where the Roots of Distempers usually
lodge, and into which the common, dull and earthy Preparations, so frequently
used in practice can never possibly enter or reach into; but as Experience is
the best Schoolmaster, I leave every one to make Trial and judge as they find,
and accordingly to commend or dispraise them to their Neighbors and Friends,
not doubting but they will perform what is herein asserted, without hazard of
Body, Purse or Expectation, as some Thousands in this Kingdom can, upon their
own Knowledge, testify, what is said of them, being no Rhodomontade Story to
raise a Penny, nor gilded Bush to set off bad Wine, but Matter of Fact, backed
with such number of Experiences, as not to leave the least umbrage or shadow of
Falsity or Pretense.

For these Pills are no fallacious, emperical Medicine, repugnant to Art or
inconsistent with Reason, but a regularly prepared Arcanum, much in vogue for
their Virtues, being homogene to Nature, and so peculiarly adapted against the
Scurvy and its Consequents, as that no Medicine in the Universe can possibly
transcend them, they being a Medicine, though very difficult, expensive and
tedious in preparing, yet are of such Properties, as to retain their Virtues
for numbers of Years, and that to work all good effects, as well after a length
of time as at their first preparing. I shall now close all with Advice that you
take your Disease in time, and not render it incurable by delay, an Error daily
committed, though contrary to the wholesome Dictates of the Poet.

Principiis obsta sero Medicina paratur,
Cum mala per long as invaluere moras.
Delay not any known Disease too long,
Lest thou grow weaker, and it grow more strong.
The way and manner of taking these Pills are as follows, viz. From Two Years
old to Three or Four Years, you may give one Pill; from Four Years old to Ten
Years, you may give two or three Pills; from Ten Years old to Sixteen Years,
you may give three or four Pills; and from Sixteen Years old to Threescore and
upwards, you may safely give five or six Pills. You may begin with a little
Dose first, and so increase it as you find the Body is in strength. They may be
either swallowed down alone, or taken in a Spoonful of Ale, Beer, Posset Drink
or Water Gruel, of wrapped up in a Wafer, the Pap of an Apple, or Honey, or in
a stewed Prune, or in a little Syrup; and such as cannot swallow Pills, may
bruise them and take them mixed with a little Beer, Ale, Wine or Broth, as
every one likes best, and so take them early in the Morning, or late at Night
going to Bed, drinking in the Morning Possetdrink or Water Gruel, as they
operate, or you may omit drinking any thing if you had rather, and that without
observation of any other order whatsoever, only taking heed that you get no
Cold.

The price of a Box of these famous English Pills (each containing six Doses)
is Three Shillings and Six Pence, and are sold only at the Places
aforementioned, and which for prevention of Counterfeits, are to be had at no
other Place in the Kingdom besides, whatever may be pretended by any to the
contrary.

A LINIMENT FOR Sore, Swelled or Cancerated BREASTS IN WOMEN, WITH THEIR
Nature, Cause, etc.
IT is not my design to write any thing here concerning Cancers in any part of
the Body, save only those that happen in the Breasts of Women, wherein I shall
to the meanest Capacity, show the difference between those that really are, and
those that are only imagined, or reputed to be Cancerous; whereby the Mistakes
too common, may be prevented, and Ruin to the Patient saved; when the Name is
now so frequent, and the fear of it so dreadful, that not one swelled or pained
Breast in Twenty, but is presently thought so, and every Goody Nurse, Doctress
or Midwife, will pronounce so right or wrong, and consequently has a never
failing Remedy for Cure, which upon applying, produces a Cancer, where no such
thing perhaps had been.

A Cancer is as much as to a Crab, and is a hard painful Tumor, either Whole
or Ulcerous, and is said to have its rise from many Causes; some say from ill
Diet, Meats of ill Juice, of a hot quality, and thick and glutinous substance,
and that Onions, Leeks, Garlic, Venison and hot Spic'd Meats, eat too
plentifully, and hot fiery Liquors, that burn and make adust the Blood and
Humors, such as Brandy, strong Wines, etc. immoderately drank, breed them.
Others, that the Air, perturbations of the Mind, Melancholy, ill Habits of
Body, hot, sharp Humors, where there is a discrassys of the Blood and Lympha,
being filled with an Acrimonious Salt, and a malign Sulphur is their occasion.
Others, that they seldom proceed but from Blows, Strokes, Punches, or such
external Violence, ill handling, Tumors from curdled Milk upon Lyings in,
Imposthumes, etc. by which means there being an acid Ferment in the Blood, or
it may be Obstructions of the Terms, or some other illness, which oftentimes
causes Humors to flow thither, where coagulating, is capable to produce a
Cancerous Germen, especially upon ill management, so as in time it increases
and arrives to to that degree of inveteracy, which we sometimes find them to be.

Having now accounted for the cause of Cancers in the Breasts, we come to their
Definitions, and are preternatural Tumors of a hard, lumpy, round or unequal
Substance; of a livid or black Color, having great Veins every way round it,
which the Blood extends and makes turgid and visible, resembling the Feet of a
Crab, from whence it took its Name, and is full of Pain, and very hot, and of a
cruel and horrid Aspect; and sometimes rises to such a hight of Malignity, that
the Matter it contains when it is broke, is as sharp and as corrosive as Aqua
Fortis.

They are, as said at first, Whole or Ulcerous; in the beginning, growing or
increasing, they are generally whole, but when come to ripeness, they break,
run or gleet, and are then called Cancer Ulceratus, or Ulcus Canceratum. This
Humor being fixed upon some one or more of the Glands of the Breast, from
either of the Causes mentioned, and being sharp and corrosive, is apt to
convert whatever comes to it of Blood, into the same Acrimony with it self, and
so increases apace, while the Skin is whole; but much more when upon the
breaking of the Skin, for then the accession of the Airs adds to the vigor of
the Ferment, when it grows fierce or enraged, and so shoots forth it self in
the nature of a Fungus, or Excrescences, or Tubercles, etc. This part being
depraved, and a vicious Ferment therein, the Humors that flow thither, are
still farther changed, till at length they partake of a malign and poisonous
Nature, vehemently deleterious, consisting of a stinking Arsenical Sulphur, and
a Catheretick, or highly corrosive Salt, extremely subtle and penetrating.

This malign Humor, when so from whatever Causes, chiefly take up its seat in
parts that are Glandulous, beginning in the Glandule of a Part, and most often
affects Women's Breasts, by reason of their looseness, great Humidities, and
strong Ferment they contain, and at first is very difficult to be known; for it
at first exceeds not the bigness of a Pea or a Bean, which in time increases
slowly to the bigness of an Egg or a Melon, or as sometimes it has been known
as big as a Pompion, tho again in some, according as is the Cause, it grows big
of a sudden, and discovers its evil Nature by the grievous Symptoms that
appear, and a^ it increases in bigness, it increases in malignity.

In the Cure of Cancers, various Successes have happened, which have divided
the Opinions of Practitioners concerning the Causes of them. The Ancients
observed, that Women were most troubled with Cancers, upon the stopping of
their Monthly Visits, and that when at any time they had swellings in their
Breasts, upon the provocation of that Evacuation, the swellings either sunk or
left thin, from whence they concluded, that the stopping of that Course in
Women, was the only Cause thereof; and this they endeavored to explain, by
saying that the Blood, by such stoppages being not purified from the
Atribilious Humor or Acids, which separate themselves from it, by the regular
flowing of the Courses, discharge themselves upon some one of the Glandulous
Parts, and those of the Breast, more generally, from the Communication there is
between them and the Womb, which Communication Experience confirms, because we
see that just upon, or a little before the coming down of the Courses, the
Breasts of Women are tender; that is, the Glandules or Kernels of them, so as
not to be handled or pressed with ease, which upon the flowing of the Courses,
that tenderness leaves them, and they may be felt and handled without any
manner of uneasiness, so that it is plain, that upon the stoppage of the
Courses in Women, Cancers are oftentimes occasioned, especially where the Blood
abounds with Atrabilious Humors or Acids. I say sometimes it is so, for it
must not be said to be always so, because we have instances without number, of
Women that have had them by Blows, Bruises, etc. as before we have made mention
of; and as was the case of a Gentlewoman, whose Husband after a Drunken Bout
was thrown into a Fever, and being delirious, upon her giving him something to
drink, he hit her Left Breast with his Hand, which caused it to Cancerate, of
which she soon after died. We are assured by many observations, that Cancers
sometimes have proceeded from the stopping of the Monthly Visits, by Frights,
violent Grief, and by letting of Blood unseasonably at the times of the Courses
actually running, which are dangerous stopping them, and care should be
forthwith taken to bring them to flow again, or else the Breasts may be
affected, especially if the Blood abounds with Atrabilious Humors or Acids as
beforementioned.

The hardness of Cancers is from the thickness of the Humor; the pain of them
is from the conjoined Cause, it being sharp and corrosive; the Heat of them
proceeds from the extremity of Pain; the livid or blacksh color is from the
Malignity and Poison, which even discolours the purest Metals, if touched with
it; the roundness of the Cancers is from the thickness of the Matter, which
cannot spread it self abroad as Humors do that are more fluid; the inequality
of shape of the Cancerous Tumor, as sometimes 3 or 4 square, or longish
proceeds from the Ferment of the Humor, and because sometimes it is contained
in several little Glands; and its turgid Veins, like to Crab's Claws, is caused
from the Recrements of the Blood filling those Parts, which by reason of Matter
obstructing or pressing upon them, hinders its getting forth.

Cancers are known in part by the Places they fix on, which are the Glands,
though they may breed in almost all parts of the Body; and this Aegineta
confirms, who says, a Cancer may happen to sundry Places, as the Lips, Tongue,
Cheeks, Womb, and other loose Glandulous Parts; but were One has a Cancer in
any part besides, Twenty have them in their Breasts; and so says Galen, That
Cancerous Tumors are chiefly in Women's Breasts, which have not their
Purgations according to Nature, and the reason seems to be from the consent of
the Parts, as before observed; for that the Mammariae Veins, or Veins of the
Breasts, meet with the Uterinae, or Veins of the Womb under the Musculi recti
of the Belly, by which means there is a translation of the Matter from the Womb
to the Breasts.

Where Cancers in the Breasts are painful, there is also attending a Pulsation,
or beating like a Pulse, together with a Heat more than ordinary; and where the
Pains are very sharp, so as if the Part was struck with a Dart, (...) the
Matter is very corrosive, and will certainly in a little time break forth in a
Gleeting or some dangerous stinking Ulcer; and when they are Ulcerated, as
frequently they are, from the breaking of some of the Tubercls lying under the
Skin, whether the Matter that runs be much or little, the Ulcer is painful and
very stinking, and not only discharge a stinking Gleety Humor, but also there
thrusts forth hard and painful Lips, which in time, if not rightly managed,
fixes to the Ribs (that is, if the Cancer be in the Breast or side of it)
becoming, by the quick progress it makes, of a horrible and frightful
appearance.

Such Cancers sometimes bleed, either through the eruption of some Vessels, or
from the sharp corrosive Nature of the Humor, which gnaws the Vessels asunder;
though I have known them to bleed while they have been whole, the Blood issuing
through the Nipple, or some small Pin-hole. Some Cancers again, that are
Ulcerated, send forth a Fungus or fleshy Excrescencies; other consume and eat
away all the Flesh about them, after a wonderful, and indeed dreadful manner;
and both these often bleed, and that in great quanties sometime, because the
Capillary Vessels are by the corroding quality of a Cancer, eaten asunder,
whence the flux of Blood is so great, that the strength of the Patient is
quickly spent, and the Spirits being exhausted and consumed, they soon dye; as
a poor Woman did that I knew, after laboring under a Cancerated Breast very
painful, for near two Years, and could all that while have no Remedy; for
indeed such are very rarely to be cured, and if at all, it is by Surgery; that
is, by cutting off the Breast in time, which the Woman I mention was by many
Surgeons advised to, but would not submit to the Operation.

Those inveterate and dangerous Cancers but seldom happen, and is frequently
more from want of timely and proper Applications than the Nature of them; for
they are oftentimes aggravated and enraged, and the Humor, by wrong
Applications inwardly and outwardly, made corrosive and sharp, as we frequently
find it to be; and the Humor is (...) corrosive, it is as subtle, quick and
penetrating as Poison it self, as will appear from the following Relation,
which a Surgeon tells us happened upon himself, who was by Name Mr. Samuel
Smith, one of the Surgeons of St Thomas's Hospital in Southwark, who at the
cutting off of a large Cancerated Breast, had (after the Breast was off) a
Curiosity to taste the Juice, or Matter contained in one of the little Cystis's
or Glands of the same, which he did by touching it with one of his Fingers, and
then tasting it from the same with his Tongue, the Taste of which he protested
did immediately like a Gass, pierce through the whole substance of his Tongue,
and passed down his Throat not less sharp or biting than Oil of Vitriol, Spirit
of Nitre, or Aquae Fortis, or some vehement Catheretick, or Caustic Salt, and
although he presently spit out, and washed his Mouth with Water, and that
oftentimes, and also with Wine, and drank presently very freely of Wine after
it, yet could not get rid of the Taste thereof, but it continued with him, and
brought him (who was a very strong Man) into a Consumption, or wasting pining
Condition, attended with several other ill Symptoms, which in a few Months
after killed him, the Taste thereof never going off from his Tongue to his
dying Hour; and that the Taste of the Juice, or Matter of that Cancerated
Breast, he declared upon his Deathbed, and near the last Moments of his Life,
to be the true and only Cause of his languishing Condition and Death.

Galen tells us, and the same is confirmed by daily Experience, that Cancers in
the outward Parts, as in the Breast, may in the beginning be cured, but when
they are come to a considerable bigness, oftentimes will yield to no Remedy but
extirpation; indeed a palliative Cure may be prescribed, which, if the Cancer
be not Ulcerated, may make the Patient easy, and prolong Life, so as not to dye
the sooner, because of that Cancer; but when it is Ulcerated, it can never be
cicatrised, but as long as it so remains, the Patient will live in continual
Pain and Filthiness, and at last dye miserably, unless it is cured by Ustion,
Cautry, or Extirpation, and then may prove but a doubtful Cure.

If a Cancer in the Breast proceeds from malignant Humors or corrosive Salts
in the Blood, it is generally incurable, by reason of its malignant and
poisonous Ferment, which seldom yields to any internal and external Remedies,
whether Vomiting, Purging, Bleeding, Sweating, Dyet-drink; nay Salivations, or
application of Annodines, Suppuratives, or any other kind of Medicine; or if in
some it should seem to yield, or indeed seem to be cured, while it proceeds
from those corrosive Humors, they many times breed again, and break forth
afresh, either in the same place, or in some other parts of the Body.

But if a Cancer proceeds from external Causes, as Bruises, Blows, etc. and be
taken in time, and the hurt lies not very deep, a Cure, with good Success, may
be undertaken, yea oftentimes though they lie deep; but then must be with proper
Applications; for wrong Medicines applied, though the Injury be but small, is
increased to what, of it self it might never have came to, therefore is a
caution worthy to be taken notice of; many Women, by undue tampering, and ill
advice and Medicines, having been ruined, and lost their Lives, which
otherwise, in all likelihood, might have been preserved: Therefore before
external Applications be made to a Cancerated Breast, or supposed Cancerated
Breasts, it ought to be considered whether it be recent and small, or
inveterate and great; if the first, it will by proper Applications, admit of
Cure, (I say proper Applications, because by and by I shall come to relate what
is the most proper to apply to a true Cancer, or an imagined Cancer of the
Breast) if the second, it never will admit of Cure without cutting. A pallative
Cure may be had, if it be not ulcerated, as said before, where, by proper
Remedies, Ease may be had and Life prolonged, and that done by diverse
Medicines, at least every Nurse, or good Woman has a Medicine, and that if you
will believe them, they say will cure; but those hap-hazzard Remedies I have
known fatal, and therefore advise none to give Ear to them. But I would not
have it understood, that I design here to direct to the Cure of Cancerated
Breasts of all sorts, I mean those that are running and ulcerate, which require
a skilful Surgeon's attendance and care; but only those that are Swelled and
Tumefy'd, as well such as are continually, or only intermittingly painful, and
whether proceeding from Blows, Falls, Strokes, ill Habits of Body, Tumors from
Milk, hardnesses of the Breasts, by Imposthumes after Lyings-in, etc. which
oftentimes by ill management, and pressing and handling, turn to Cancers; I say
from what ever cause they proceed from, so they be whole and taken in time, may
be cured by proper Applications; and if they be broken or ulcerated, to prevent
its increase, and remove the hardness and swelling about it; a Medicine or two
may be directed, that will (if any thing will) not fail of proving successful:
But as I said before, every swelled Breast being not always Cancerous, it may
be necessary in two or three Words more to explain which hard or painful
Breasts can justly be said to be Cancerous, and which not so.

A Cancer in the Breast at its first appearance looks like a small round
swelling, more or less deep in the Glandulous Substance of the Part, with
little or no Pain; and when the hardness increases, the Pain becomes sharp, and
its observed to be uneven, and as the swelling increases, it becomes of a
livid, or blueish, or blackish Color, the Nipples at the same time often
sinking in, round about which also there arises hard, uneven, heavy
Protuberances, or little Swellings, which, as they grow big, do at last pierce
the Skin, and discover the Cancerous Mass, from whence an Ulceration proceeds
in its Substance; the running Humor of which is reddish, the edges of the Sore
broken or ragged, the tops spungy, and when it comes to a cadaverous Smell or
Stench, it shows the utmost state of a Cancer in the Breast, which will not
yield for Cure to the best Remedies in Practice.

Now in order to compass the Cure of a Cancer, requires a good Understanding in
the nature of them, without which nothing can rightly be done; and if every
hard, swelled, tumify'd or painful Breast were known at first whether Cancerous
or not, many succeeding mischiefs might be prevented; but it is so common a
thing for almost every Practitioner, and every tatling Gossip, presently to
declare upon sight of a hard or swelled Breast, that it is Cancerous, and
accordingly make Applications to it as such, that scarce one Breast in twenty
they look upon or manage, but is made Cancerous, though it had at first no manner
of relation to it: Therefore that none may be deceived that reads this in time,
and fall a Sacrifice to the Ignorance, or Avarice of such and many others
abroad, that undertake what they know nothing of; and to set People in a clear
light, as to the Matter of a Concern so dangerous in it self, as is a Cancer,
was the occasion of this Tract, recommending to them a Medicine for outward
Use, and another for inward, that will soon discover whethe Swelling, etc. be
Cancerous or not; for if not Cancerous, by the use of this it will soon
disappear, and the Patient be well; and if it be truly Cancerous, the
continuing them, if not too far gone, will effectually cure; almost wonders
having been done by them, by others as well as by my self, in my Practice in
Cancers, with only using them as directed, and as by and by shall be related,
and as the following instances of Cures performed make appear.

A young Lass of about Fifteen Years old, by a Blow which she received upon one
of her Breasts, had a great hardness and Pain, which was cured by the Liniment
I shall by and by mention, although the hardness and Pain was so great, that she
was in the utmost danger of a Cancer, though it was not a Cancer, as she was told
by others that she applied to before she came to me, it was. I ordered her to
bathe her Breast warm with the Liniment every Night and Morning, applying a
piece of Flannel over it; by which means, and before she used all of what I
gave her, she was perfectly cured, which might be in Three Weeks time, and
never then, or after did any thing else to it.

A poor Working-Woman, by a Blow upon her Right Breast with the Key of a Door,
which she run against, had a great Pain in it that she could not Rest Night not
Day; the Bruise inflamed and Swelled, she ran from one to another for help,
till at length she was told it was a Cancer, and must be cut off, she was
advised by one that had used the Liniment in a Swelled Breast, to come to me,
which she did. The Symptoms were so bad, that I very much questioned her Cure,
yet I undertook her, and ordered her to anoint with the Liniment, which she had
not used above a Week, but the Pain much abated, and Swelling began to abate,
and she continued it constantly Night and Morning, and in about Two Months
time, was at well as ever she was in her Life.

A Gentlewoman, a particular Friend of mine, upon a Lying-in had a sore Breast,
which, although broke, continued hard and sometimes painful, at length is turned
to a Gleety Humor, running out at a place near the Nipple like a Fistula, the
Humor that run being sometimes yellow, and sometimes of other Colors; and
sometimes thick, at other times thin, sometimes it did not run at all, at other
times burst our again, still continuing hard, tender and something painful,
which put her in fear of a Cancer, and indeed did something resemble a
Fistulous Cancer; but notwithstanding, upon bathing all the Swelling with the
Liniment before spoken of, she in about Sixteen Weeks got cured of it, and is
now perfectly well, though it be Four Years since it was performed, only at times
some of the English Pills beforementioned, were given her inwardly to purge a
little, which are most proper, when Humors abound, and the Body be gross, or
foul, to purge now and then, in order to the quicker and more certain amendment.

A Gentlewoman by a punch upon her Breast by a Man's rushing by her in the
Street, had such a Pain, throbbing, and at length Inflammation and Swelling,
that she was told it was a Cancer, and had diverse things of diverse Persons for
Cure, but all to no purpose, rather aggravating than abating the Symptoms. She
took inwardly Wood-lice, for a Month together used Bleeding, Purging, and to
the Breast Poultices, Ointments, Oils, Suphs, and even every thing she had
heard commended: At length some Body told her of my Liniment, she came to my
House and had it, by the use of which, and now and then purging with the
English Pills aforesaid, she became, perfectly well in about Nine Weeks time,
though I was at first jealous, whether ever it would be cured or not.

I could give many other instances, were it not needless; these two or three I
think sufficient to convince, if not, more will not do it; which however, the
use of the Liniment will, that it is really the only Medicine I believe upon
the Earth, for all manner of Swellings on the Breasts of Women, whether
Cancerous or not, and whether broken or whole, to anoint the hardness or
Swelling; but to the Sores it must not be applied, but must be managed by some
Surgeon; either do I believe any Medicine whatsoever will do like it; for it
disperses all the hard and tumify'd Kernels, takes off all Pain, Bruises and
Inflammations; for if inflamed, it presently abates it, if the Breast be cold,
as some have observed it to be, it warms and comforts it; and in fine, does
every thing Nature in that Matter requires to be done, curing all
Indispositions of the Breasts curable. Therefore for the sakes of those that
stand in need, I wish they were as sensible of its Effects as I am, and then
none under that Calamity but would use it, and where now there are Twenty
Cancerated Breasts, there would not be Three, as I am verily persuaded; such is
the great force, power and virtue of this Liniment, which is so innocent that
it may be eat, and yet of such wonderful Effects, that if any sore Breast be to
be cured, 'twill infallibly do it, and if incurable, will no more injure it
than applying upon it only a piece of Flannel or Cloth.

By this time the Reader may be in expectation, or at least wise desirous of
knowing what this Liniment is compounded of, which I must beg pardon for
concealing; and shall proceed to direct the way and manner of using it, which
is thus; Anoint the Swelled or Pained Breast with a little of it, with a warm
Hand every Night and Morning, for almost a quarter of an Hour together,
applying a Piece of Flannel over; and this must be done daily for a
considerable time; for it is frequently observed, that the Glands in the
Breasts are very hard, and it cannot be expected they should soften presently;
but this every Patient may depend upon, that if they continue using it, without
once omitting it, it will infallibly cure; some People are cured sooner by it,
in others it is longer first, according to the Condition of the Breast and
Constitution of the Patient; but the Rule must be this, to persist in the use
of it, till the Pain, Swelling, Hardness, etc. are all gone, which infallibly
will be, sometimes in a Month (as have been done in very bad Breasts) have been
cured by it, and some sooner; others again have taken up two or three Months
before they have been well; but then they have constantly found an Amendment,
which I affirm by Experience, under God, every one, that keeps strictly to its
use, without wavering, or being weary, and I think none should be tired on such
an account; for what would one give to be cured of an incurable Cancer? Let
every one but consider that, and they will not be a weary of doing that which
will restore them to their Health, and preserve their Lives, which, I say,
under God, this Liniment will do, if used according as is directed.

But, as said before, it is necessary in some Constitutions to use a little
Purging also, during the use of the Liniment, especially in Bodies that are
gross or soul, and where the Humors flow to the Breast to cause Inflammation,
Pain or more Swelling, or if the Habit of the Body be but indifferent; in such
Cases, and indeed most cases of sore Breasts, it is proper to Purge, to do
which, nothing can be more prevalent or more adapted to correct or carry off
those sort of Humors, whether Cancerous or otherwise, than the English
Scorbutic Pill, so largely before spoken of, the taking of two, three, four,
five or six of which, according as is the strength of the Patient, every third
or fourth Morning, oftener or seldomer, as there may be occasion, keeping warm
those days, and drinking Posset Drink, Broth or Gruel warm as they operate, and
as is directed in the account given, will be of excellent use, and contribute
greatly to the benefit of the Patient; so that the Pills inwardly and the
Liniment outwardly, will do more I verily believe in Cancerated, Swelled, Sore
or hard Breasts, than any sort of Medicines or Methods, that can by all the
Physicians in the World be prescribed or advised to; for I speak it from large
Experience, and where it not so, I should not be so positive in the Matter as I
am; therefore all People may depend upon it, which when they have tried, will
esteem it, as many others do, to be the only Remedies in that case in the whole
World.

The Price of this Liniment is Five Shillings the Gallipot. To be had only at
the Place aforementioned.

THE Suffumigating Powder For Vapors or Hysteric Fits in Women, and
Hypochondriack Melancholy or Flatus in Men, and all other Fits and Distempers
of the Nerves in general.
HAD I not more than ordinary Reason and Experience for many Years of being
acquainted with those Diseases, and consequently of their Cure, I should not
take upon me to be so absolute as you will find me to be in the Matter; but
they being Diseases which do very frequently deceive numbers of Persons that
are afflicted therewith, so as that they know not what they aile; I shall for
their sakes and benefits, before I come to treat of the abovesaid Medicine for
the Cure, describe the Symptoms and Causes thereof, and begin first with the
Vapors.

First then, the Vapors, otherwise called Hysteric Fits, or Fits of the
Mother, is a Disease which more generally afflicts Humane Kind than any other
whatsoever, and Proteus like, transforms it self into the Shape and
Representation of almost all Distempers, those who are troubled therewith,
generally perceiving them approach in the following manner: First, they feel a
heaviness upon their Breast, a grumbling in their Belly, they belch up, and
sometimes Vomit sour, sharp, insipid, or bitter Humor; they have a difficulty
in breathing, and think they feel something come up into their Throat, which is
ready to choke them, they struggle, cry out, make odd and inarticulate Sounds
or Mutterings, they perceive a Swimming in their Heads, a Dimness come over
their Eyes, they turn Pale, are scarce able to stand, their Pulse is weak, they
shut their Eyes, cry, shriek out, groan, foam at the Mouth, and remain
Senseless for some time, afterward by little and little their Pulse returns,
their Face regains its natural color, their Body grows hot, as before, they
open their Eyes, and by degrees come to themselves.

Some moreover, have their Bellies swelled and stretched like a Drum, their
Hypochondria's distended, and they fancy they feel somewhat within them roll
from place to place, which the Ancients imagined to be the Womb changing from
place to place, whereas the Ligaments which tie it down render that impossible;
besides that, Men are also afflicted with this Symptom as well as Women; their
Pulse is almost imperceptible, they feel a violent Cold run up their Backs,
which afterward strikes through their whole Body, their Head-achs, and
sometimes there ensues a Palpitation of the Heart and a fainting away; there
are many, who when these accidents are over, come quietly to themselves by
degrees, and in others when the violent cold is ended a no less violent Heat
succeeds, which casts them again into many of the former accidents, as
Palpitation of the Heart, Head-achs, Giddiness, difficulty in Breathing; and
into some new ones, as Flushings of the Face, Raving, Convulsions, foaming at
the Mouth, violent beating of the Muscles and Arteries, and a tingling
Sensation in the Thighs, which are Paralitick, during the cold Fit; nay,
sometimes the Palsy will continue in the hot Fit too, sometimes the cold with
which the Fit begins is hardly perceptible, and then the Patient has no
remarkable accidents whilst the cold lasts; but when the hot Fit comes on, it
is accompanied with several of the above-numbred accidents, but the Pulse beats
higher and quicker than in the foregoing state, and if no coldness was to be
perceived at all before the hot Fit, then many of the same accidents will
happen, but only in a more violent degree, and still more frequent and beats
higher.

Sometimes the Patients in this Distemper fall into such violent Fits of
Struggling, that they can hardly be held; they mutter odd and inarticulate
Sounds, grate their Teeth, foam at their Mouths, and strike their Breasts;
others suffer much violent, and long continued Contractions of the Diaphragm
and Int^^costal Muscles, that their Breast and lower Belly remain elevated for
a long time together, so that they cannot draw their Breath all that while;
nay, some have lain for three whole days without the least sign of breathing
perceivable by those that were about them.

One complains of a violent Pain on the top of her Head, which is frequently
accompanied with Vomiting.

Another is troubled with a Pain under her Heart, and a reaching to Vomit, or
Vomits a mixture of Porraceous and Choleric Humors, and it ends in a Jaundice.

A third lies with her Jaws pressed together with all the violence imaginable,
and her Nostrils drawn together so close that she is in danger of being
suffocated, and sometimes remains for a considerable while as if she were dead.

A fourth upon the smell of Civit, Musk, Ambergrease, or any such sweet Scent,
shall fall into Fits.

A fifth shall be molested with them upon any Anger, Passion or Disturbance of
Mind, which is immediately followed with great quantity of pale Urine.

A sixth is very thoughtful, blushes or grows pale on a sudden, has a depraved
Appetite, sometimes to craving, at other times to loathing all sorts of usual
Meats, and is pleased only with the eating of absurd things, as Chalk,
Charcole, etc.

A seventh will on a sudden fall into extravagant Fits of Crying or Laughing,
without being provoked by any external Cause.

Besides all these, several other accidents happen to People troubled with this
Disease, as a Pain in the Bladder and Kidneys, like that of the Stone and
Gravel, violent Cholicks, Swellings in the Jaws, Shoulders, Legs, Hands or
Thighs, which yield not to the Finger that presses, nor retain any Mark; Pain
in the Back, which all feel more or less, as also in several Parts of the Body
so violent, that the Place affected cannot endure touching for a long while
afterward; they breath short and with Pain, yawn and stretch, their Sleep is
disturbed, and their Dreams are frightful, their Eyes are fixed and staring,
sometimes they remember what happened in their Fit, sometimes they do not, they
cough without intermission, spit in vast quantities for several Weeks, as if
they were in a Salivation, with many other accidents too tedious to enumerate.

Lastly, we observe that those who have labored long under this Distempe are
oppressed with a dreadful Anguish of Mind, and a deep Melancholy, always
reflecting on what can perplex, terrify and disorder them most, so that at
least they think their Recovery impossible, and are very angry with those that
pretend there is any hopes of it; the least contradiction to their will, cast
them into violent Passions; they are fickle, wavering and unconstant, now
resolving on one thing, and immediately changing to something else, which they
as presently quit, and by indulging their Distemper, decline all sorts of
Diversions.

But Note, that all these accidents do not happen to every one that has
Vapors, or Hysteric Fits, but some to one some to another: This Person shall
be molested with a great many, that with but a few of those Symptoms, and it
suffices, that any two or three of them return by intervals, to have them
termed Vapors.

It is also observed, that this Distemper comes by Fits, and has its intervals
like an Ague, though the return be not exactly Periodical like it, and that in
every Paroxism the same accidents happen as did in the precedent, provided the
Patient committed no excess in the interval.

Thus much for the Symptoms, the next thing to be considered, is the Cause of
this Disease, which is necessary to be taken notice of, the better to be
avoided as much as is possible, and which some assign to this, others to that,
and others different to both, which, though all plausible Notions, fall short of
the real cause, wanting Reason backed by Experience and Matter of Fact to
support them; but forbearing to enumerate their several imaginary Notions, I
shall in short, content my self to show the true and only Causes thereof, which
are Crudities and Indigestions of the Stomach, nothing else being to be found
within the Stomach and the Guts capable of producing those Symptoms, unless it
be the Aliments we take, but these we know when well concocted and digested,
are so far from producing any ill effects upon Humane Bodies, that they alone
sustain and preserve them in a capacity of exercising their Natural and Animal
Functions: However, if they by any vicious Concoction turn into Crudities and
Indigestions, then their laudable Qualities are changed into quite opposite
ones, and they produce the many Accidents and Symptoms of this Distemper; for
when by the vicious qualification of the Ferment of the Stomach, the Aliments
are not well digested, they turn into Crudities, these Crudities by little and
little gather together in the wrinkles and solds of the Stomach and Guts, where
they lie for some time without much sensible motion or fermentation within
themselves, till at last by the Circumjacent Parts, their grosser Salts are
divided and put into motion, which Fermentation is augmented by the various
Juices that flow into the Guts, from the many Glands which are placed in the
lower Belly, and by this means they are dissolved and liquify'd as to enter by
the Milky Veins into the Blood, where they produce all the accidents of this
Distemper, which the only way to prevent in all Persons, and especially in such
where the Vapors are feared, is to cleanse the Stomach and Bowels of the
Saburra which lies in them; and that frequently, viz. once in a Month, oftener
or seldomer, as there may be occasion, with some proper, gentle, abstersive
Vomit or Purge, than which nothing can exceed the famous English Pills
aforegoing, taking them as you see occasion; thus much for the Symptoms,
Causes, and Prevention of the Disease.

But perfectly to cure the Vapors or Hysteric Fits, or Fits of the Mother, in
such that are so unhappily afflicted, the Cause must be eradicated, and the
Blood restored to its Natural Constitution, without which the effect can never
cease, and that the common Medicines in Practice are not capable of performing
it, is daily seen by the few (if any) that are cured therewith, they only being
sufficient, and sometimes not that, to appease the Symptom^ and palliate the
Disease; but such is the prevalency of the aforesaid English Pills and this
Suffumigation, that they immediately strike at the Root of the Disease, and
never leave (if reiterated) till the whole Economy of the Body is changed,
which will soon be perceived by the (...), or not return of the usual Symptoms,
or Paroxisms, the manner of taking which Pills, with observations to be heeded
as to Diet, etc. is at large before set forth, with which and this
Suffumigation (they observing Rules as to Diet, etc.) numbers of Hysteric
Persons have been cured, when they have lain some Months in violent Ravings,
and other Symptoms, almost supposed irretrievable.

Secondly, of Hypochondriack Melancholy, or Flatus in Men, which is a sort of
Cachexie that frequently reigns in our Northern Climates, whose Symptoms
appearing mostly in the Hypochondria, is termed the Hypochondriack Disease, and
when its Symptoms are very fierce and exalted, it is entitule the Scurvy, a Name
given it by the Saxons in Nor^^ Germany, who are most liable to it; the better
part of Authors upon this Subject being amused with its Symptoms and Effects,
have vainly fancied to establish its Original Seat in several Bowels that are
only accidentally concerned; but if they traced it to its state of Infancy and
first beginning, they must have pitched upon the Stomach for the Place of its
Nativity, and upon the Acid viscous Cruditie, that a faulty digestion occasion
for its Causes.

For our further satisfaction in this matter, we shall briefly run over its
Symptoms, and if we find that they owe their Being to an Acid Crudity in the
Stomach, shall reckon that we have made our point good. In the first place
then, the Appetite is over-keen in Hypochondriack Persons, their Digestion
being weak, and followed by Convulsive or weighty Pains in the Stomach,
belching Wind and Noise, especially in the left side of the Belly, where the
Gut-Colon is straightened; they are always Costive, and Laxatives operate better
in them than Purgatives; if an Artificial or Natural Vomiting happen, they
throw up Acid Matter, which stupfiies, or sets the Teeth on edge, and which
will corrode a Copper Vessel so as to render it rusty. After Eating, they are
oft-times seized with a gnawing Pain in the Stomach, reaching along the Back
from the lower part to the Neck of the Gullet (which some miscal Nephritick
Pains) as also with sudden flushings in the Face, wringing Pains in the Guts,
palpitation of the Heart, perturbation of Mind, and a difficulty of breathing,
occasioned either by viscous Crudities distending the Stomach or Convulsions of
the Midriff, and Muscles of the Breast, or Wind in the Abdomen, hindering the
descent of the Midriff; while their Stomach is empty, they are apt to be giddy
and dull, they are liable to periodical Exasperations; frequently they are
sensible (as it were) of Fumes rising up from the Belly, and the Paroxism
resembles an Hysterical Fit, in the Paroxism the color and consistence of
their Urine is inconstant, but when it is over, returns to a Natural order.
These are the Symptoms of Hypochondriack Person, but all of them are rarely to
be seen in one Person, the most certain Symptoms that always attend, are
Gripings and Wind in the Guts, a weak Stomach, Costiveness, and Perturbation of
the Head.

The Symptoms being thus premised, we come now to enquire after* the Cause of
this Disease, the first and original of which is a vicious Acid in the Stomach
enlarging the Appetite, but unfit for Digestion, hence ensues an Acid Crudity
in the first Passages, which depraves the crasis of the Blood, prevents the due
separation of volatile Spirits, upon which the Lymph becomes Acid, and the Bile
inactive.

These are the Sources of all the preceding Symptoms, since Wind, Noise,
Griping of the Guts and Costiveness are the natural result of a vicious Acid in
the first Passages, as flushings in the Face arise from its effervescence with
the Bile, the Convulsions of the nervous Membranes in several Parts of the Body
are the effect of its Iritation; its Crudity impairs the due Fermentation of
the Blood, and causes a palpitation of the Heart, and difficulty of Breathing;
it depraves the Nutritious Juice of the Bowels which settles into hard
Swellings, and occasions a degeneracy and austerity in the Spirits; hence Fear,
Melancholy, irregular Thoughts and uncouth emotions ensue.

The remote Causes that promote Crudities are Acid Liquors or Salt Victuals, or
such as are dried in the Smoke, since both partake of the Acid Spirit of Salt
or Soot; also want of motion to promote digestion, and the speedy assimilation
of the Chyle; likewise Nocturnal Study and over thoughtfulness and care,
exhaust the Spirits, impoverish the Blood, and render the Lymph acid; Thus much
for the Symptoms and Cause of this Disease.

Now as to the Cure, its consists in correcting and evacuating the Crudities of
the first Passages, fortifying the Stomach, retrieving the due crasis of the
Blood, and restoring all wonted Evacuations to their former course, in order to
compass which ends, let the following Rules be heedfully minded.

1st, That a Dose of the English Pills aforementioned be taken so often as you
find occasion, with a careful regular Diet, and using a moderate quantity of
true natural red Wine mixed with Water instead of Maltdrinks, which, with the
use of the Suffumigating Powder I shall by and by give directions about, never
fails setting them to rights, as numbers in very deplorable conditions have
happily experienced.

2dly, Their way of living both in the Vapors and Hypochondriack Melancholy,
as to Diet, ought to consist chiefly of cooling refreshing Nourishments, Food
of good Juice, eating Water Gruel, Barley and Rice-Broths, Rice-milk, boiled
and roast Veal and Mutton, Veal or Chicken-Broths not made so strong as
usually, eating no Salt or spiced Meats.

3dly, They must sleep not too much, neither indulge Melancholy or
thoughtfulness, but be cheerful and use diversions, keeping in company that is
mirthful and talkative, ride and take the fresh Air; which, with the variety of
different Company and Objects which they see, concur to pleasure the Mind and
remove all anxious Thoughts, and thereby contribute much toward the Cure.

And for all Diseases of the Nerves, Fits of all sorts, whether Convulsions,
Falling Sickness, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Palsies or other Disorders of the
Animal Spirits and Brain, Spasms, Tremblings, Contractions, Relaxations of the
Limbs, Numbness, Coldness, or the like, a Dose now and then of the aforesaid
English Pills, and using the Suffumigating Powder, as I shall presently direct,
nothing will be found more efficacious, especially if the contracted or relaxed
Limbs be anointed every Night with Oil of Amber, and the following Diet-drink
be made and drank constantly of, which is also excellent in Vapors and
Melancholy.

Take Mustard Seeds, 4 Ounces buised, Horseradish Roots two Ounces,
Scurvy Grass two Handfuls, Aaron Roots half an Ounce, Bryony Roots two Ounces,
boil all in a Gallon of Spring Water till a Quart be boiled away, then strain
it, and drink half a Pint three times a day.

Use the Suffumigating Powder thus, put a Paper of it upon some live Coals in a
Chasing-dish or some such a thing, and put in under a Chair with a Hole in it,
clapping a Funnel upon the Coals, so that the Smoke will go through the Funnel,
and the Patient sitting upon the Chair bare, will receive it up the Fundament,
which must be so done every Night going to Bed, or once in 2 or 3 Nights,
according as there is occasion, whereby in Fits, Vapors, etc. there is instant
Relief. The Price of this Powder is 3 s. 6 d. the four Papers. To be had at the
Place aforementioned.

THE CATAPLASM: OR, POULTICE FOR THE GOUT.
THOUGH I shall say something concerning the Gout, before I speak so particularly
of the Poultice for its ease; yet the Reader is not to expect any learned
account of it, that being sufficiently Done by diverse Authors, but only just so
much as to inform those that are afflicted with that Distemper, how far they
may preserve themselves from its fury by a regular mode of living, and how
thereby those that ever had any touch of it, may certainly nip it in its Bud,
so as never after to be afflicted with it:

But the Publishing a Medicine (though the most celebrated one) and crying up its
virtues without giving a Rationale of the Disease, looks so rank Quackish, that
every Man of Sense will (and with very good reason) account it all bombast and
splutter, and for that very reason decry it, as coming from some illeterate
Pretender, for the sake only of getting a little Money; for which reason, to
convince the World, that the Author of this Medicine is not altogether
unacquainted with the Nature and Cause of the Gout (...) as the way to Remedy
its excruciating Pains, (...) not recommend this Medicine but from a well
g^^^^^ed Experience, he here offers to every ones con^^^^ration, a short hint
of the Blood, its changes A nalitically proved, and the Rationale of the Gout,
its Nature and Causes from thence explicately deduced.

The Blood of Man is made up of a mixture of diverse Principles, to wit, a
Bitter, a Sweet, a Salt, an Acid, etc. the mixture and temperaments of which,
while mutual, preserves the Body in a state of Health, and consequently creates
no trouble or uneasiness: But when any one of these Principles is divided or
separated from the rest, and exists by it self, then the effects plainly show
what great Trouble, Perplexity, and Pain it creates in the Body.

Now nothing more conduces to the separation of those Homogene Principles of of
the Blood, than a fault in either some, or all of the six Non-naturals, as Air;
Meat and Drink; Sleep and want of Sleep; the Motion and Rest of the Body; the
retaining and discharging of the Excrements; and the Passions of the Mind; but
the chief error is in Meat and Drink, in pampering the Body with more plenty
than is needful; by which means the Particles of the Blood are not so exactly
mixed with the rest of the Mass, but are blended and confounded, so as to
become Heterogeneous (the Principles jarring one with another) occasioning such
a perturbation and preternatural Fermentation, as evidently show Sanguification
to be vitiated, and the whose Mass corrupted, thereby forcing the Sharp and
Foreign Juices, together with part of the Serum, by what way it finds; as for
instance, if they get into the Guts, they are evacuated by a watery Looseness;
if into the Kidneys, by plenty of Urine; if into the habit of the Body, by the
Pores of the Skin; but if they fall upon the Joints, they pierce into the
innermost recesles and interstices of the Nervous Parts, and cause the Gout;
and as the Salt in the Serum is the thicker or thinner, it much alters its
Nature; so that when the Extremities of the Muscles, Tendons, Ligaments,
Fibers, and other Nervous parts of the Joints are twitched by them, more or
less Pain, Heat and Violence are occasioned, and it proves to be a Fit of a
longer or shorter duration.

This Serum, though it be thin and sharp, is at first but very small, occasioning
but little Pain; but that little Pain, if the Cause of it be timely removed,
grows greater at every Fit, and the more violent the Pain is, greater store of
Serum abounds, and very often a flood of other Humors is carried along with
it; which causes that Swelling, Heat, Throbbing and Uneasiness every one
afflicted with it feels, which leaves not the Patient till the Humor is spent,
at which time that Fit of the Gout is at end.

I said before that a fault in some of the six Non-Naturals named, was the
cause of the Gout, and that pampering the Body with plenty, was the Chief, I
mean thereby Gluttony and Drunkenness, especially upon eating such Meats as are
stored with sharp Matter, not to be sufficiently separated or discharged, or
that can be easily mixed or tempered with the other Juices of our Bodies; as
also drinking too plentifully of Wines which have much Tartar in them: For not
only that Tartar, but the Spiritous part breeds the Gout; which Spirit consists
of an Oil, an Acid and a Volatile Salt, in which the strength of Wine consists.
Yet as Excess therein hurts, so Temperance preserves the Health: For those
Wines which most abound with Tartar, are much more homogene to our Bodies, than
other Wines that have little Tartar in them, and should be made choice of; and
are the best with Moderation for all Constitutions and Temperaments, and the
Red of all sorts, is far more preferrable than the White.

And not only is it manifest that the Gout is bred by Gluttony and Drunkenness,
but also other innumerable inconveniences are caused thereby, for by that
means the Appetite is destroyed, the Digestions vitiated, etc. the consequences
of which every one may easily consider, and time, (if not prevented) will most
certainly and fatally determine: For a good Appetite and perfect Digestions,
are so indispensably necessary to the support and preservation of Humane Life,
that we can no more well subsist without the one, than we can long without the
other; the one indicates Diseases present, the other threatens Diseases to
come, and frequently brings the whole Humane Economy into disorder and
confusion: For when there is a depravitty of the Primae Viae, the Chyle into
which the Food is converted in the Stomach, is depraved also; and according as
is the Chyle, so must the Blood of necessity be, whether it be good or whether
it be bad, and according to which the Body suffers more or less.

And as some forts of Meats and Drinks, and Intemperance therein are hurtful,
so also the Eating of Suppers are more than ordinary pernicious, for they
pervert the functions of the Body, and injure the mind; and then at those
Seasons to eat too plentifully, contributes much more to the spoiling of the
Blood, as every one that has for any time followed the Practice has observed;
few things being more detrimental and ruinous to the Health, as all Physicians
allow; and as in Schola Salerni it is well noted, where it is said,

Ex magna Coena Stomacho fit maxima Paena,
Ut sis nocte levis, sit tibi Coena brevis.
Great Suppers put the Stomach to great pain,
Sup lightly, if good Rest you mean to gain.
Also over hard Study, especially in the Night time, which in this Case is the
worst, and afflicting Cares, hinders Sanguification and breed the Gout; so that
the sharp part in the Aliment received, is either not well mixed, or not well
separated, and therefore cannot be well discharged. Likewise Anger and Passion
very much injure: For,

Exhiler at Tristres, iratos, placat, amantes,
Ne fuit amentes, men's laeta, requires, etc.
It Is Mirth that Nurseth Life and Blood,
Far more than Wine, or Rest or Food.
Also immoderate and unseasonable Venery conduces not a little; for it weakens
the Strength, hurts the Brain, extinguishes Radical Moisture, and hastens old
Age and Death; the Sperm, or Seed of Generation, being the only Comfort of
Nature, which wilfully shed or lost, injures a Man more than the loss of forty
times that quanty of Blood; wherefore Virgil well says,

Nulla Magis animi vires Industria firmat,
Quam Venerem and caeci stimulos avertere amoris.
Much Venery cause great Ills to Mind and Blood,
Exhausts the Stock, unfits Man for's Wife's good,
When moderately used, holds long, and helps as Food.
Levinus Lemnius likewise says, if a Man intends to Live Long and happy during
the Life he leads, he should, Vesci citra saturitatem, non refugere laborem,
vitale semen conservare.

That is, make light Meals, use Exercise, and preserve his Seed, which is the
vital and principal Part of Life, and certainly nothing more assuredly breeds
the Gout than immmoderate Venery.

Thus the Causes of the Gout being sufficiently explicated, I shall next give a
definition of it, its Nature and Remedy.

The Gout then is a most intense, sensible Pain of the Tendonous Membranous
Parts about the Joints, caused by a Serous, Pungent and exceeding sharp Humor,
forced suddenly out of the Vessels from an inward dispesition, and led thither
by the interstices of the Nervous Parts.

The sign of its coming, or being present, are sometimes wandering Pains,
especially in the Joints of the Feet or Hands: That it is at hand, is shown by
a stretching, yawning, painful weariness; Catarrhs, Pains in the Limbs and
Joints, and sometimes a heaviness in the Head, a kind of Feverish heat, a
pricking Pain in the Joints, causing starting, with inability to move; and
after that comes a Swelling, usually red, attended with Watching, loss of
Strength, stiffness of the Parts, and several other complaints, not alike to
all at all times, yet is what Gouty People well know, and are more acquainted
with than is consistent with their Ease.

The way to remedy this untoward Evil, is first to remove the Cause, that is,
that which aggravates the Paroxism; and secondly to preserve the Patient from
the return of a Fit, or at leastwise to render it when it comes, more easy, and
not so intolerable as we frequently find it to be; for when it has once feiz'd
a Man, it will (if not prevented by proper Medicines) return again at certain
seasons and distances of Time, as the Gouty Matter in the Blood is a fresh
increased, gathered and led down to the Joints, which distances are longer or
shorter, and the Paroxisms greater or lesser, according as the Patient live
Regular or Irregular, and according as is the strength or weakness of his
Constitution; for if it be weak or broke, or the Patient in Mala Stamina Vitae,
it occasions its coming oftener, pains him worser, and holds him longer than if
the same Constitution was stronger, and the Patient in Bona Stamina Vitae; and
also acccording as he takes proper Medicines to evacuate that Humor, by
leading it away by the proper Passages.

I know some Physician's Doctrine is to let Nature take her free Course,
advising their Patients to bear under the burden of that intolerable Misery as
well as they can. Indeed, in the Knotted Gout the Advice may hold good, for
there, no Cure can be expected, according to that known ancient, but true
Axiom, Solvere nodosam nescit Medicina Podagram.

Against the knotted Gout no Medicine can prevail.

But even there a Cure, as to the Fit, may be obtained, as well as in other
Fits of the Gout; for the longer a Patient lies under its severity the more the
Humors of the Body flow down, which keeps the Part more lax and weaker, and
the Patient longer confined, which may be prevented; and when a Remedy to Ease,
by carrying those Humors away by Urine and Perspiration, which would crowd
down upon those weakened Joints, may so easily be had; for a Patient to reject
it, and not to hearken to such a Remedy, shows his willingness to retain his
Misery, and is like suffering an Ague to shake him for a Year, or some certain
time, before he will prevailed with to take Medicines to cure it.

But the common saying among all being, That there is no Cure for the Gout,
makes every one's Proposals look Preposterous, even where there is but the bare
mentioning of doing it: But if any thing I say be found out that manifestly
carries off the Gouty Cause by Urine and Perspiration, which would otherwise
flow down to the Joints, so that the Patient is saved from the Pain, I fee not
why any should be offended, or that a Gouty Patient would rather bear his Pain
than be so incredulous, as not to make experiment of it, when the Nature of the
Medicine is such, and the Operation so safe, that every one that has any
knowledge of things, must allow that it cannot possible be hurtful, for that no
Evacuation is more to advantage than by Urine and Peripiration, and that with
such a Medicine as makes a regular separation by the strainers, by first
carrying them away smoothly and freely thoroughly the Uteters, which always of
necessity would have been thrown upon the Joints and consequently cause a Fit,
proper Dieureticks being what all Physicians allow to be the most effectual
Evacuations to divest the Blood of those peccant Salts, which, if not removed,
would prove injurious to the Patient.

And to do this, nothing is more prevalent than the English Pills
aforementioned, whose admirable Virtues are such, that those who never tried
them, will scarce believe; who yet after taking them, will to every one of
their Friends recommend them. Therefore to say more would be needless; nothing
being so like to convince a Man of their Efficacy, as making trial, which is
the trust Test; and by whose Success the Reputation both of the Medicine and
the Author desires to depend, and by which he is content either to stand or to
fall.

The Pills are taken as directed in the Account before given of them, and that
oftener or seldomer, as there may be occasion. And to give present Ease and
remove wholly the Pain, the Cataplasm is to be applied warm to the Part every
Night and Morning, till the Pain is quite gone, which will soon be.

The Price of the Ingredients is Five Shillings the Gallipot, which are to be
boiled with fix Ounces of Crumbs of White Bread and a Pint of Milk, to the
consistence of a Cataplasm, or Poultice, which is to be spread upon Linen
Cloth, as thick as two Crown Pieces put together, and applied I say as warm as
can well be borne to the Gouty Part, renewing it very Night and Morning. The
Pot of Ingredients are to be had only at the Place aforementioned.

Electuarium Balsamicum: OR, True Balsamic Electuary FOR All manner of
Weaknesses in Women, etc.
THIS is such a wonderful Medicine that I think it cannot be equaled, its
Virtues being such in the Distempers to which it is appropriated, as every one
that shall take it must own are not ordinary, it being a far different thing
than what by its appearance may be taken for by most, or the Medicine makers
now adays, would have it to be; being an Electuary which has done, and (by the
Blessing of God) will do much more benefit in the following particular Cases,
than any other Medicine of what kind soever, numbers of both Sexes having with
wonder observed its Effects, and been cured by it, who for many Months together
have been under Courses of Physic, by Advice of Eminent Practitioners to no
purpose.

It infallibly and expeditiously cures Weaknesses of the Back in both Sexes,
and all Pains of the Back whatsoever, whether occasioned from Bruises, Falls,
Wrenches, Strains by lifting, carrying, or by Sickness and Weakness, or from
Women's Miscarriages, Lyingsin, Frights, Grief, or the like. And for Bearings
down, or falling down of the Womb, by weakness or relaxation of the Lagaments,
caused by hard Travel, or by violent occasions, as Blows, Falls, lifting or
carrying heavy Burdens, Over-walking, Running, or the like; it is a present
Remedy, by comforting, easing, healing and strengthening the Parts.

It effectually prevents Miscarriages, though you have miscarried never so many
times; and this it does by strengthening and nourishing the Womb and weak
Foetus therein; for it corrects the Blood and Humors that affords Nourishment,
and if the Symptoms or danger at any time of Miscarrying appears, the taking
immediately of this Electuary, certainly secures you, if not too far let alone
before you begin.

It wonderfully corrects and alters the heat, thinness and sharpness of the
Blood, which occasions immoderate or overflowing of the Courses of Nature, by
which many are reduced to a very low and dangerous condition, and that more
especially in Elderly Women, upon whom, they ought naturally to stop, which if
neglected, and not timely remedied, will occasion Bearings down, bring the
Whites, and other weaknesses and soulness of the Womb, introducing in time
Ulcers, Cancers, etc. for prevention of which, the Electuary is a most
admirable Remedy, only the better to correct and thoroughly to evacuate the
vicious Humors, 'twill be necessary that you Purge twice or thrice in the time
of taking it with our English Pills aforegoing

And also for the Whites, a Disease very troublesome and spending, and which
most Women are incident to, both Old and Young, but more especially Elderly
Women, after their Courses have left them, or are about to leave them, and that
generally more than ordinary for want of taking proper Medicines to settle
their Bodies at the time of their Terms leaving them* it is an excellent
Remedy, perfecting the Cure, though of never so many Years standing, and the
Patient reduced by the length of time and greatness of the Flux, to so weak a
condition as scarcely able to go about, only twice or thrice, in the time of
taking the Electuary, you must also Purge with our Pills aforesaid; but if the
Whites be neglected or not timely cured, they will bring great pain and
weakness in the Back and whole Body, and occasion many other dangerous
Maladies, as Cachexies, Dropsies, Consumptions, etc, which may prove fatal.

Such Women therefore that have regard to their own welfare, will have recourse
to this Electuary at such time as the Courses of Nature are about to leave
them, and not as many do, take little or no care concerning it, notwithstanding
Nature is always so kind to let them know, that she wants the help of Art at
that Juncture, by their Courses dodging them, and their flowing but poorly, and
sometimes not at all, ebbing and flowing untimely and irregular, sometimes
paler and thinner, at other times in smaller quantity and foul, which is
warning sufficient, that she stands in need of help, and that they ought at
that time to be settled and disposed after a particular manner, and not be
neglected as many Women to their Sorrow have done, who for want of such care,
are now complaining of either Vapor, Flushings all over the Body, the Whites
in abundance, pursiness at Stomach, loss of Appetite, Cholicks, Faintings, or
other the like Weaknesses and Indispositions, which if not timely remedied,
brings Ulcers or Cancers in the Womb, Dropsies, Consumptions or other fatal
Distempers; but Women that are wife will in time prevent those inconveniences,
by making use of this Electuary, which will be of unspeakable advantage; who in
the time of taking it (if Plethorick or full of Blood and not much reduced)
must once be let Blood, and purge with our English Pills aforegoing, once, just
before you begin with the Electuary, and twice or thrice more in the time that
your are taking it, by which means they will assuredly be preserved and secured
from those Dangers.

Also for such Women that are afflicted with a Flux of their Courses and the
Whites together, as numbers of them are, and reduced extremely low with the
same, this Electuary is a Remedy that cannot be equaled; only for correction
of Humors and the better to cleanse the Womb, it is convenient to Purge also
once or twice with our Pills aforegoing.

And likewise for all Loosnesses, Bloody-fluxes, inward Bleedings, Bleedings at
Nose, Spitting or Vomiting of Blood, bloody Urine, and the like, whether from
the sharpness of the Blood, a Vein broke, Falls, Bruises, or any manner of
cause or occasion, there is hardly the like present Remedy in the whole
Republic of Medicine, it retrieving in such cases, many times when all hopes
of Life have been dispair'd of, and dissolves congealed or coagulated Blood
remaining in any part of the Body; though indeed in all those cases (if strength
will permit) 'twill also be necessary to Purge now and then with our English
Pills aforesaid.

And as this Electuary has cured many in the aforegoing Distempers, so likewise
has it perfectly cured several Children and others of riper Years of
incontinency of Urine, Pissing in Bed, and the Diabetes, and that after the
continuance of the Distemper for several Years, and when multitudes of
Medicines have been used to no purpose; and has also cured several Children and
others of the falling down of the Fundament and Ruptures where the Rim or
Peritonaeum has not been broken, it being a Medicine which so admirably and
potently strengthens the inward Parts, as never to fail, though sometimes I have
been obliged for the better facilitating and making lasting the Cure, so as
that the Distemper may never return again) to exhibit our English Pills (so
often mentioned) for correcting of the Humors, administering them in proportion
to the Age and Strength of the Patient.

In fine, it is so excellent a Medicine, that it corrects and amends all ill
Vices, Weaknesses, Foulnesses and disorders of the Womb, Bowels and Reins, that
tend to corrupt and destroy them, whether it be from any preternatural Fluxes,
or abounding of virious Humors, etc. and which happening upon the Womb, is
most times the cause or occasion of Barenness, and will (and that more
especially with the use also of our aforesaid Pills) preserve the Womb truly
clean and fine, and make it apt for Conception (as by many has been
experienced) and prevent the many Inconveniences and Mischiefs which Women are
daily complaining of; and therefore do recommend it as one of the most useful
and necessary Medicines hitherto discovered, for the several particulars
occasions before mentioned.

Directions.
TAke the quantity of a Small-Nut of it from off a Knife's Point every Morning
fasting, and the same at going to Bed, drinking a Glass of Tent, Alicant, raw
or burnt Claret, or Ale after it; and if your condition be very bad, then take
the like quantity at Noon, eating nothing for an Hour before or after it, and
this repeat every day till you find your self cured: And Children must take it
after the same manner, only the Dose is to be proportioned according to their
Age, and in every of the Cases mentioned, the Pills must occasionally be
exhibited as aforesaid.

It is a Cordial corroborating, and strengthening Medic^ne, makes not the
Stomach sick or uneasy, unless it be very weak or soul, nor causes the least
disorder whatsoever, but is so very safe and harmless, that you may go abroad
in the taking, (if able) and that without any other care or observation than
what is usual; only let your Motion and Exercise be gentle, the quieter and
stiller you keep, the better.

OF THE CAUSES OF THE FISTULA in Ano: OR, The Fundament, With its certain Cure
by an Injection, without Cutting or Burning, etc.
THE Causes of Fistula's proceed chiefly from Plegmons and Hemorrhoids, or
Piles, broken or ill cured, or that are not cured in a long time; as also from
the application of Horse-leeches to the Piles, which are commonly done, and not
well cured, they leaving some Venomous Matter behind them, which in time
creates a malignant or corrosive Indisposition, that in time makes a Sinus, or
Hollowness, becoming, if neglected, Callous; also Bruises or Hurts on those
Parts cause Swellings and Fistula's. I say often those are the causes of
Fistula's in the Fundament; but there is another Cause not much taken notice
of, or at least wise is what few People care to own, and that is, proceeding
from, an ill cured Clap, which is more frequently the cause of Fistula's than
any other, I having observed that where one Fistula is occasioned by any other
means, ten proceeds from that, though it may be so many Years after, as to give
reasons to the contrary, yet is certainly so; especially if the Patient had
been for Cure of that Clap in the Hands of some Pretender, or was too hastily
cured, which is what now adays, though very wrongful to the Patient, most
endeavor to be valued upon, when a true Cure is gradatium, and ought to be no
more hudled up, than it should be prolonged, as all true Artists in such Cures
well know.

The Fistula generally comes on gradually, its Matter passing at first between
the Tunicles of the Intestinum Rectum, and is of a thin gleety Nature, which
makes its way out near the verge of the Fundament, through as it were at first
of a small Pin-hole, and is perceived by its staining the Shirt or Shift of the
Patient without any Pain, and is thought (though mistakenly) to be rather a kind
of Sweating Moisture than a real Fistulous Matter.

But in time, if not remedied, this Humor occasions an itching, and subjects
the Patient to excoriation or galling of the Part by it continual moistness and
sharpness of the Humor, which also in longer time causes several kinds of
small Pimples or Pustles to break out; and sometimes Rhagades, Fissurae or
Chops, which at length causes the Sinus to spread outward, and the extremity
of the Orifice to grow hard, callous and so contracted, as not to admit the
passing in of a small Probe.

Sometimes those Fistula's pass deep among the Interstitia of the Muscles,
according to the sharp Matter can make its way; sometimes they penetrate
through the Intestinum Rectum to the very neck of the Bladder, may, sometimes
into the Pelvis, or amongst the Musculi Glut^i and other Parts, being then very
painful, and sends forth a purulent sanious Matter, sharp, ugly and stinking,
and that in greater or less quantity, as the hollowness reaches, which in time
grows very Callcus, and makes its twisting and twining like a Coney Burvow,
which are the very worst sort of Fistula's.

There are two sorts of Fistula's in Ano, one pierces through the Intestinum
Rectum, or Gut, into the Fundament, and the other not, and both of them are
either shallow or deep, which you may easily come to find out. If it passes
into the Fundament, you will, upon breaking Wind, find part of it make its way
through the Sinus of the Fistula; also if the Excrements appear mingled with
the Quittour of the Fistula, or if the Quittour that comes from the outer
Orifice of the Fistula smells like the Excrements, it is a certain sign it
passes into the Fundament. If by injecting any Liquor at the outer Orifice of
the Fistula, part of it passes through into the Fundament, or if by passing a
pliable Probe into the outer Orifice of the Fistula, you can feel the end of
the Probe bare to your Finger put into the Fundament, they are infallible signs
the Fistula goes into the Fundament.

As for the Presages or Prognostics of Fistula's, it is allowed by all that
they are not easy of Cure; for the Parts being depending, and as it were the
Sink of the Body, so great plenty of Humors and Impurities, and much
superfluous Moisture slows naturally down, and always hinders the Cure.

The Curative part of Fistula's, Authors tell us, depend on five means, viz.
Diet, internal Medicaments, Incision, Deligation, and Topical Applications. As
for Diet and internal Medicaments, they are what is absolutely necessary, as
also some Topical means; but for Incision or Cutting, or applying Causticks or
Corrosives, so frequently now adays advised, and almost as frequently performed
(but with what Success the Patients themselves are best able to relate) I by no
means agree to, unless in some particular Cases, where the Patients Life is in
danger, and where no other means whatsoever will avail. Such I say, for to save
Life, cutting or applying Causticks etc. are and ought to be used, as also in
some superficial Fistula's that run upwards by the Intestinum Rectum; but to
make Incisien in all promiscuously, has been the ruin of many, and the one
cutting, which the Patient was told would be sufficient for Cure, has
occasioned more Sinus's by the Inflammation and Pain, and the f^uxion of Humors
thereby upon those depending Parts, so that cutting again and again has been
done, to the utter spoiling of the Patient, causing the Fistula to be
inveterate, to run much, to the extenuating the Body, decaying the Strength,
whence loss or debilitation of Stomach ensues, and at length Faintness, cold
Sweats, etc. which brings the Fistula and whole Body into such a State, as that
all hopes of Cure are past, especially if the Fistula was deep, or penetrated
beyond the Musculi Any, for by cutting such, if they are cured, the Patients
will scarcely ever retain their Excrements but with great difficulty, if no
worse accidents happen; and if they reach beyond the Sphincter, the retention
of the excrements will be impossible, so that great care ought to be taken, and
a Skilful Surgeon advised with, before the Patient submits to be cut at all.

It is allowed by all, that Fistula's that are very Sinous, and have been of
long standing, are dangerous and of difficult Cure, especially if they
discharge a large quantity of Pus, and lie so far distant, as that there is no
coming at the bottom, but the nearer they are to the Anus, the more easy they
are of Cure.

The Anus, or Fundament, is more subject to Fistula's than any other part in
the whole Body, because the great quantity of Fat, with which the Intestinum
Rectum is loaded, and the Evacuation of the Excrements (this being the common
Sink where all the filth of the Body is brought down to be carried off) from
its continual Humidity and numerous Vessels, as Branches of the Hypogastrick
Arteries and Veins; a Branch of the Aorta; another of the Inferior or
Mesenterick Artery; the Hemoirrhoidal Veins; the vast number of Lymphaticks;
the Glands also seperating a white Glairy Viscous Liquor; I say those meeting
there and Humors from internal Causes, whether Obstructions, Inflammations,
Ascesses, Ulcers, Piles; or external, as Blows, Contusions, impure Embraces,
Falls, Leeches ill applied, etc. which happening more or less to meet there, as
being a Part more disposed, it is no wonder to find Fistula's so soon formed
and so frequent as we observe them to be.

There are some Fistula's that are not noisome nor very troublesome or painful,
and that sometimes are open and run, at other times close, and the Patient is
dry, and thus they do for many Years without any great inconveniency, and is
what is found expedient for the Health of the Patient; for thereby the Body is
discharged of superfluous Humors, which otherwise might breed great disorders,
and endanger the Patient's Life. I have known many People have such Fistula's
which have contributed greatly to their Health, and continued on them to the
end of their Lives.

But enough has been said as to the Nature, Cause and Consequence of this
troublesome and oftentimes dangerous Indisposition. I shall now come to speakof
its Cure, which is what was chiefly at first aimed at, and what I presume is by
the Patient expected.

I have said already that cutting is not necessary in all, and showed wherein
it is, and is not for the Patients safety, and where it is not I shall
recommend a Method, which if followed according to directions, will be found
more beneficial than many Physicians and Surgeons will be ready or willing to
believe.

In the first place, the Patient is gently to purge with the English Pills
herein recommended, and to repeat them oncein a Week, oftener or seldomer as the
Body is gross, or Humors abound, but not to take too large a Dose; for gentle
Purging is best; and he is also at the same time to make the following
Dyet-drink, which he is constantly to drink of till he is perfectly well; and
is this.

Take Burdock Roots 8 Ounces; Elecampane Roots 3 Ounces; Tormentil and Bistort
Roots, of each an Ounce; Sanicle 2 handfuls; Germander, Ground Ivy and
Agrimony, of each 2 handfuls; Sarsaparilla 6 Ounces; China Roots 3 Ounces;
Sassaphras 3 Ounces; Guaiacum 4 Ounces; Raisons of the Sun and Figs, of each 4
Ounces, Liquorish 3 Ounces; boil all in 12 Pints of Lime Water, till 2 Pints
are boiled away, then strain it and drink half a Pint every Morning, and 4 or 5
in the Evening, and at Night going to Bed, a little warmed.

Upon the use of this Dyet-drink, and now and then, (but not too often) purging
with the aforesaid Pills, and using at the same time the Injection into the
Fistula, the Patient will find the Cure will come on; for the Purging gently
carries off the Humonrs, the Dyet-drink dries up the superfluous Moisture, and
nourishes and strengthens the Body, and the Injection, which I am now going to
mention, will cleanse and cicatrize the Fistula, that the Patient, if he
continues the Course long enough, which he must be sure to do, if he expects to
be well (for those things will take up time, in some more in some less,
according as is the Indisposition) will find it to answer his expectation,
without the pain and danger of cutting, which has ruined many.

The Injection for this purpose is neither corrosive or will cause pain; it is
to be injected into the Fistula every Night and Morning warm with a Syringe,
two Syringes full each time, which upon casting in, he will find (if the
Fistula goes into the Fundament) to come some of it out at the Fundament; but
he is not to put the point of the Syringe into the Fistula too far, but just so
much in, as that the Liquor will be forced into the Orifice;

By this means I have cured several, and most, if not all that use the method,
will have the same success; for the Injection takes away all Callosity; and yet
I say, without pain, cleanses, astringes, dries up and cicatrizes the Part,
that by degrees the Fistula will close and heal up from end to end to the great
pleasure and satisfaction of the before terrified Patient, who could hear
nothing from his Surgeon but Cutting, Cutting, which News is received by some
as unwelcome as an Old Bailey Sentence to a Criminal.

The Price of the Injection is 5s. the Bottle. To be had only at the Place
beforementioned.

Tinctura Cephalica: OR, HEAD-TINCTURE.
THE most incomparable and appropriated Medicine that can possibly be made use
of for preventing and curing all Distempers of the Head and Brain, as
Head-achs, Megrim, Vertigo, Epilepsies, Palsies, Apoplexies, Lethargies,
Convulsions, Phrensies, Carus, Coma, trembling of the Nerves, Numbness, loss of
Memory, dullness and heaviness of the Senses, Drowsiness, tasting and smelling
hurt, weakness, glimmering or dullness of the Sight, thickness of Hearing,
noises in the Head, beating or shooting Pains, etc. which numbers of Persons
are sorely afflicted with, and which very often seizes such as are over
thoughtful and studious, etc. those Diseases (amongst the numbers that afflict
Mankind) being generally the most uncomfortable, lasting and dangerous.

It truly and most stupendously repairs weak Memories, bad Eyesight and
Hearing, being inwardly taken, and outwardly made use of, and strengthens and
preserves the same, removing dullness, drowsiness and heaviness from the Spirits
and Senses, rendering the Intellectuals lively, quick and apprehensive, etc.
being peculiarly adapted to remove all Head-diseases, even to help such that
are crazed, whose Senses are almost gone, occasioned from overwhelming
Perplexities; for which, and all Discontents, vain Fears, foolish Fantas^es and
Imaginations, which discompose and enslave the Mind, hurry and disorder the
Spirits, thereby hurting the Brain, impairing the Memory, Sight, Hearing, etc.
it has been experienced, to do more than many other Medicines of greater repute.

It comforts and strengthens the Brain and Nerves powerfully, refreshes the
Sensitive Faculties, relieves the Animal Spirits, being excellent also in
several other Diseases of the Head, whether recent or inveterate; as Stuffings
of the Head, Colds, Catarrhs or defluxions of Rheum, whether upon, the Eyes,
Nose, Teeth, Palate, etc. cures the Palsy of the Tongue, running Sores or
Imposthumes in the Ears, being admirable against Deafness or thickness of
Hearing, noise and pains in the Ears, etc. swellings of the Throat, Jaws, and
the like, from a defluxion of Humors.

It is a certain Remedy in the Apoplexy both for Prevention and Cure (that
Distemper of late being very frequent and fatal) and will do more in that case
than any Person is aware, if it be inwardly taken, and outwardly used in the
beginning of the Disease, and reiterated in the Intervals of time, as necessity
requires; it discussing Flatulencies, absorbing the Acid Humor, which are many
times the original Causes of the Disease, attracting or drawing away the
Morbifick Matter from the Parts affected, destroying and carrying it off the
right way, that the the like can scarcely be done by any other Medicines.

In the Megrim, Vertigo, Giddiness or Swimming in the Head, and in the most
cruel, vehement and inveterate Head-achs, they do wonders, taking away the Pain
in many Persons in 3 or 4 minutes time, and that with the use of it inwardly
taken, and a little snuft up the Nostrils, and the Head, Temples, Forehead and
behind the Ears being bathed therewith, and that so perfectly, as never to
return more from that present Cause: This I can assure you upon my own
Experience; for they radically cure after all other things have been found
ineffectual, and when the hope of Cure has been past, by removing the cause or
occasion thereof; without doubt in the cases of an old and vehement Headache,
Giddiness, Swimming etc. whether continual, or coming by Fits, it has no equal
in the whole World. This Tincture, and the English Pills before mentioned,
cured a Woman that had the Headache from her Minority, so violently sometimes,
that it was thought she would be distracted, and at all times so extreme, as to
make Life very uncomfortable and unfit for the doing of any Business, and, this
was done with only two Boxes of Pills and two Bottles of the Tincture, though she
had gone through Courses of Physic, with Blistering, Cupping, Shaving, etc.
for near 20 Years together to little or no purpose.

In the Palsy and Dead-Palsie, as some call it, it is the greatest and noblest
Medicament known; for being taken inwardly, and also used outwardly, it takes
away the benumedness of the Parts, and restores its Sense and feeling; curing
the shaking or trembling of the Head and Members, arising from weakness and
relaxation of the Nerves, caused either by old Age or a coldness of Humors,
and so strengthens those Parts affected, that they seem to put new life into
them again.

Nor do know, or believe there can be, any equal to it for the Cure of the
Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, and that not only in Children (proceeding from
Faults of the Stomach, Wind, corrupted Food, Worms, etc.) but also in elder
Persons, it having cured in both Sexes of 20, 30 and 40 Years of Age, having
done so great Cures of that kind, which should they be related, they would not
easily be believed, except by those who were Eyewitnesses of the same; and
likewise it cures Convulsion Fits almost to a Miracle; for it digests that
pituitous Humor which so much abounds in such Persons, by exciting their
inward heat and strengthening the Brain, which is in many Persons the cause of
this Disease, it separating, and consuming in the Stomach and Bowels those
Acrid and Malign Vapors which ascend to the Brain, and which by pricking with
their sharp Points the Membranes and Nervous Filaments, excite and induce this
terrible Disease.

This Medicine by its subtle and penetrative Particles enter into the very
substance of the Nerves, opens their Pores, removes their Obstructions,
refreshes and causes a free course and circulation of the Animal Spirits, it
acuates or sharpens all the Senses, both internal and external, facilitates and
expedites the motions of the Members through the whole Body.

And by taking this Tincture inwardly, and using it at the same time outwardly,
warms, comforts and strengthens the Brain and Nerves after a very wonderful
manner, thereby helping the weakness of the Sight, strengthening the Eyes,
fortifying the visive Faculties and Nerves, and multiplies and clears the
Animal and Visive Spirits, taking away Darkness, Clouds, Vapors, etc. which
obfuscates the Sight, or obstructs the Optic Nerves.

But during taking the Tincture in all the several cases before spoken of, it
is necessary now and then to purge gently with the English Pills
aforementioned; which, together with the Tincture, performs after a wonderful
manner, and proves thereby the most absolute and exquisite Method that the
World can afford.

Directions.
TAKE of the Tincture 60, 80, or 100 Drops, more or less, as your Distemper
requires, and that in extremities twice, thrice or four times a Day, well mixed
in a Glass of Sack or other Wine, taking it the first thing in the Morning, and
the last thing at Night, and once or twice in the Day time at convenient
distances; but if the case be not extreme,6o or 80 Drops Night and Morning will
be sufficient, and this do daily as well those days you take the Pills as not,
without any observation as to Diet or Confinement, it being not Purging, but
cures by a Specific Property; and such as care not to take it in Wine may take
it in Ale or Beer, or in Sage or Rosemary Tea, but then they must drink it off
immediately, well stirring it.

Also in Pains of the Head, Megrim, Apoplexies, Palsies, and all other the
Distempers of the Brain and Nerves for outward use, pour a little of it into
the Palm of your Hand and snuff it up your Nostrils, doing so twice or thrice
in a day, and in extremities oftener, bathing also some of it in with your Hand
all over the Head, Neck, Forehead, Temples, upon the Eyebrows, behind the
Ears, rubbing it in without the use of any Fire; it will sink in almost as fast
as you lay it on, and will admirably comfort the Head and Brain; strengthen the
Sight, and perform wonderful Cures, and that more esecially, if you Purge now
and then with the English Pills.

In the Tooth ach or Defluxions upon the Jaws, Palate, etc. by holding a little
in the Mouth, and snuffing some up the Nostrils as aforesaid, it is a present
help, and by dropping a few Drops into the Ears twice in a Day, putting in a
little Cotton or Wool dipped in the same a little warmed, 'twill be an admirable
Remedy in Pains of the Ears, Deafness, Noise, etc.

The Virtues of the said English Pills and Tincture in one other particular
Distemper, I cannot but take notice of, their Effects being so very remarkable;
and that is, in the most violent and extreme Collicks or racking griping Pains
of the Bowels and Stomach, even when the Patient has been at the point of
Death, rolling, tumbling about and roaring out with Pain, as if distracted;
four of the Pills being taken, and 100 or 150 Drops, or more, of the Tincture
mixed in a Glass of Sack or White Wine hot or mull'd, drank immediately after
them, gives instant Ease, even upon the spot, when Glysters and all other
Medicines have been ineffectual, and comforts and heals the Bowels so, that the
Patient in half an Hours time after, is as if nothing had ailed him; they being
of great power to suppress Wind and Humors that fly upwards, by which may be
seen their Excellency in defending the Head from obnoxious Fumes, etc. which so
frequently indispose it; and also 50 or 60 Drops of the Tincture taken twice a
Day in a little White Wine, gives immediate Ease in After-pains to Lying-in
Women, it bing a Medicince of cleansing, safe and strengthening Properties.

A few Drops snufft up the Nose, eases the most violent Pains thereof in a
Moment, and that without sneezing or endangering Cold; and for that very use,
it is scarcely to be expressed the wonderful and instant Ease it gives; for no
sooner is it snufft up the Nose, but the Pain is gone, though before it was never
so intolerable, and by continuing, prevents its return, having cured old
inveterate Head-achs of many Years standing, in an instant, which long courses
of Physic were not able to do.

The Price of this Tincture is Three Shillings and Six Pence the Bottle, to be
had only at the Place beforementioned.

THE Balsamic Restorative ELIXIR FOR Diseases of the Lungs, whether
Consumptions, Astma's, Phtysicks, etc.
BEING a wonderful rich and pleasant Medicine of stupendous Effects, it
admirably strengthens the Lungs, being the very Life or Balsam thereof,
cleansing the Pipes of tough foul Spittings, thickened by a preternatural Heat,
helps shortness of Breath, eases and remedies Coughs, though never so violent and
perplexing, all Asthmatick Stoppages of the Lungs, Hoarseness, Distillations or
Defluxious of Rheum, all Wheesings, straitness of the Chest, not to be reach by
Syrups, Oils, Licks, Slops, or Lozenges, which oftend the Stomach and feed the
unnatural Fire; it comforts Nature, nourishes and enriches the Blood, chears
the Heart, recreats and revives the Spirits and Vitals, though never so low and
drooping, being an exceeding generous Cordial; it takes off your spending,
faint, profuse Night-sweats, strikes at the root or cause of all Consumptions,
and so restores and renews the whole habit of Body and Blood, as that in the
most spending and languishing Cases, even when the Patient is reduced to a
pining emaciated Condition, contributes more toward the Cure, than it is
possible for any other single Medicine to do; and is a Specific Cure for
Hooping and Chin-coughs in Children.

And for weakly and Consumptive People, whose Lungs are Ulcerated, spitting up
foul, purulent, bloody Matter, with tedious hollow Coughs, Hectic Fever, etc.
it is an admirable thing, it supporting the Body wonderfully; and will be found
much more prevalent and restoring in all Cafes of the Lungs, if it be taken 4
or 5 times in a Day, 2 or 3 Dishes at a time, in Tea made of Ground Ivy and
Liquorish, two handfuls of the former and two Ounces of the latter to a Quart
of boiling Water, sweetened with Sugar Candy: And if at any time the Body be
pursy or stopped up, or the Stomach be foul, and Digestion bad, or are hot and
costive Bodied, it may be also convenient (if Strength will permit) to take now
and then a Dose of our English Pills aforementioned, of whose Virtues in
Consumptive Habits you may read in its place.

A certain Woman, among others, was cured with this Elixir of an inveterate
pineing and wasting, supposed to be an incurable Consumption, and that after
two Years despair, when she was so weak she could not stand without two to hold
her, looking like (as it were) the Picture of Death, and given over as past all
hopes by several very able and learned Men, the alone taking of this Medicine
in Sack or Milk, and sometimes in Ale sweetened, but most commonly in Milk,
Morning, Noon and Night, and in Extremities of Faintings, etc. oftener,
continuing the same for about 5 or 6 Weeks time, restored her through the
Blessing of God, to the wonder of all that knew her, and in all probability
will perform the same in others, when greater Remedies and Methods may be
ineffectual.

You will find it sensibly raise your Spirits, and give Relief after a little
while taking it, and will correct and destroy every irregular Humor in the
Body, and prevent Consumptious beyond any thing known; twill assist Nature in
all her declinings and decays, even when the radical Moisture is consuming, and
the Vital flame almost spent or worn out, provided the Lungs themselves, Liver,
etc. be not putrified, for then no Medicine can repair those Ruins, or make
new Viscera when the old are perished, though it has performed mavelous Cures
in Cases that have been so reported, which are too tedious here to be incerted.

Directions.
TAKE 30 Drops of it every Morning; the same also an hour after Dinner, and at
Night going to Bed, mixed in a small Glass of good Canary, old Malaga, the Tea
aforementioned, Milk, or any other proper Liquor: And Children may take half
that quantity, or in proportion to their Age, and thus continue it for one,
two, or three Months together, as you see occasion, without any other
observation.

The Price is Three Shillings and Six Pence a Bottle, to be had only at the
Place aformentioned.

AN English Vegetable For all Sorts of AGUES.
THERE are diverse sorts of Agues, which are distinguished according to the
difference there is in their intermission, etc. Some are Quotidian Agues, or
Simple Quotidian, that come daily, and that not with vehemen^ Cold at the
first, but cold and colder by degrees, nor is the hot Fit very excessive: The
Thirst in such is but small, the Urine white or thin, and watery, or thick and
troubled; and the hot Fit generally lasts eighteen Hours, and sometimes with
Vomiting of Phlegm. These Fits oftentimes seize the Patient in the Nightime,
and is frequently dangerous, because its continuance being long, is more
subject to degenerate into a Cachexie, Dropsy or Lethargy. Hippocrates says,
That it is more dangerous if it comes in the Daytime, than if it comes in the
Night. It is the Stomach that is for the most part afflicted in these Agues,
because, as said before, the Patient in the Fit is sometimes inclined to Vomit,
which when done, gives relief.

Others are double Quotidian Agues, or every Day Agues, returning twice in
Twenty-four Hours, with Coldness of the extreme Parts; but there is went to be
no shivering Fit, or but very little; the Symptoms are otherwise the same as in
the Simple Quotidian before spoken of, and caused also chiefly from the Stomach,
but reduplicate and stronger, holding commonly longer and more tedious, unless
some eminent Critical Evacuation intervene; and as the Causes are reduplicate,
so do they show more danger than the Simple Quotidian; and if it continues
long, does rarely fail degenerating into some other chronick and tedious
Disease, and more particularly into a Dropsy.

Others are Tertian Agues, or Agues of the third Day, and comes with vehement
cold or rigorous shaking Fit, as though the Patient were pricked, followed with a
hot Fit and other Symptoms; the Pulse is equal, and anon a violent heat
increases, with great Thirst, and sometimes vomiting of Choler, with reddish
Urine; giving the Patient very great uneasiness, dreading every Fit, which
oftetimes is more than other, shifting as to times, keeping no periodical
Paroxisms, but comes so uncertainly, that the Patient knows not in that Day
what time to expect it. The shaking coldness at first coming is vehement and
sharp, the heat and burning in the hot Fit is also violent and strong,
spreading it self over the whole Body in the heigtht of the Fit; and toward
the end of the hot Fit, the whole Body is in a gentle Sweat. These sort of
Agues holding not above the fourth Fit, other times not above the seventh, each
Fit holding not above Twelve Hours, and is without much danger, unless
Malignity be joined with it; and if breakings out on the Lips, Scabs or a
Looseness happens, it is very healthful, because they are critical, though these
are Malign and Pestilential Tertians, which, though they have evident
Intermissions as the others, yet do often kill the Patient; besides, many
accidents may fall in upon a Tertian Ague, such as a Surfeit, violent Cold,
etc. which may breed danger, though the Ague may have none of it self.

Other Agues there are called Semi-tertian, which whether they be exquisite,
that is, where Choler and Phlegm equally abound, vexing the Patient
continually, but the third Day with a shaking Fit, or Spurious, wherein either
Choler or Phlegm most abounds; if the first, represent chiefly a Tertian, if
the latter, a Quotidian, of which we have spoken before; yet these cause no
great Thirst or Burning, but sometimes is attended with an inflammation of some
Viscera, or Bowels, as Stomach, Liver, Spleen, or Parts adjacent, which is
caused when the Feverish Matter is carried thither with the Blood. The
Semiter-tian Ague, both exquisite and spurious (for they differ chiefly in
degree) are both dangerous, because thereby the Stomach and Nervous Parts are
very much affected, and is attended with almost a continuil burning Fever; but
especially the exquisite, being there is a dryness of the Tongue, Thirst,
Swooning, Watching, and sometimes raving and dead Sleep, and is what
Hippocrates account amongst acute Diseases, and continues long; Avicen says
seven Months, and at last ends frequently in a Hectic.

There is also the double Tertian Ague, which comes once or twice a Day, two
Days together, leaving the Patient free one Day between. Some Authors mention a
triple Tertian, where there are three Fits in two Days, and one Day clear
between; but is reckoned to be seldom seen, and less easy to be discovered by
a Physician, though he had Argus's Eyes. These Agues are chiefly of Humors
gathered together in the Liver, Gall, Stomach, Mesentery, Pancreas, or in the
Veins of those Parts. In this Ague it is a hard Matter to get a convenient time
for the giving Medicine to Cure, because oftentimes there is no long; space
beetween the two Fits; for sometimes the Fits hold so long, that the one begins
before the other is ended, being thereby much more dangerous than a
Semi-tertian, because it comes from a reduplication of the Cause.

The next is the Quarian Ague, or Ague that comes every fourth Day, and is
accompanied with vehement Cold* as if it would nip and break the Bones; the
Pulle is flow in the beginning of the Fit, and afterward the Melancholy
Humor by little and little is inflamed, whence comes a burning or hot Fit; the
Urine is white, thin and watery, with two Days intermission each Fit; and when
the Fit is coming, it causes reachings and yawning, with a shaking Fit: at
first small, but afterward extreme, yet not so much pricking, as rendering the
Patient as if he were beat or bruisel; the Cause is from Melancholy and adult
Humors, known by decaying the Appetite, causing great Chirsts, and Head and
Back ach. These sort of Agues are of all of them, of longest continuance,
handling a Patient sometimes half a Year or a Year, or if it happen in the fall
of the Leaf, two Years or longer; and is sometimes dangerous, especially if it
degenerates into a continual Quartan, or happens to afflict People of Sixty
Years of Age or upwards

There is also the Compound Quartan Ague, which is either double or triple: in
the double, the Fit leaves the Patient two Days free, and comes the next two
Days; in the triple, the Paroxism returns three Days together, leaving two Days
free after them, as in a Quotidian and double Tertian; these come of
Melancholy. Putrefying in diverse parts of the Body, and are dangerous, if not
in time cured, being else apt to degenerate into chronick, inveterate and
incurable Diseases, and that because the Fit so often returns; it emaciates and
wastes the Body exceedingly, consuming the radical Moisture, depressing the
Spirits, obstructing the Natural, Vital and Animal Functions, and at last
brings the Body into an incurable Hectic, Consumption or Dropsy: But if the
Ague be taken in time, and it happens to a young strong Person, and proper
Medicines be exhibited, there may be no great doubt of a Cure; but if it
happens to an old Person, who is weak of Nature, and that in the Winter also,
it is desperate, and if cannot soon be got off, but contiues long, will prove
Mortal.

Thus have I run through the Nature and Causes of the distinct sorts of Agues,
and which, as all Authors observe, are generally to be cured by the same Class
of Medicines, only regarding the Strength and Constitution of the Patient.

The English Vegetable and Plasters, at first mentioned, seldom or never fail,
if used together, to cure the most inveterate and chronick sort, provided they
both be made use of in time, before Nature is too much depressed by the
severity of the Disease, and yet even in People that were Young, and not Old,
they have effected the Cure, which before had baffled Jesuits Powder, the
Bitters, Alteratives, etc. And in those Agues of late standing, the Vegetable
alone has cured without the Plaster, and in some the Plaster without the
Vegetable; but where the Case is severe, to expedite the Cure, I generally use
both; but some, (especially Children) cannot be gotten to take any inward
Medicine at all, and there the applying the Plasters most commonly does, only
must be renewed more times than there would be occasion, if the Vegetable was
taken also at the same time.

Directions for taking the Vegetable Powder, and applying the Plasters.
A Man or Woman may take a whole Paper at a time, which must always be taken in
a Glass of hot Wine, an Hour or two before the Fit, and be covered up warm;
whereupon it will cause in some gentle Vomiting and Sweat, in others only
Sweat, in others will only work by Urine, but which way soever it operates, it
never falls short of expectation, curing almost all Agues without using any
thing else; but where the Case is inveterate, and has been of long standing, we
are forced to apply the Plasters also, which I shall by and by give Directions
about.

One of 12 or 15 Years of Age, may take two thirds of a Paper: those of younger
Years in proportion, always giving it in Wine as before directed; and is to be
repeated to every one for 5 or 6 times, more or less, as the Ague is severe, or
has been of longer or shorter continuance, though not one Ague in twenty requires
its being taken above three times.

Note, There is no occasion to drink any thing with it, more than the few
Spoonfuls of Wine, just to mix it and make it drinkable, which may be White
Wine or any other Wine, proportioning the quantity, as the Patient is either a
grown Person or Child. A grown Person taking it in 6 or 8 Spoonfuls, and always
as hot as it can be well drank.

The Plasters to the Wrists, must be prepared and applied thus: To all the
Powder in the Box and the whole Yolk of a new laid Egg, which mix and beat up
well together in a Mortar or Porringer ^^^^^^ rating them well together, adding
so much (...) and strongest Vinegar as will be sufficient to make it into such
a consistency as Venice Treacle is; then spread it pretty thick upon a Linen
Cloth of 2 or 3 Inches broad for a grown Person, but narrower for Children,
which apply upon the Pulses of both Wrists, tying them on, so as not to come
off, where they must remain without changing them, for nine Days, because this
Remedy exerts its virtues but by degrees. And it ought to be applied an Hour or
half an Hour before the Fit comes, and if the Ague be not cured in nine Days,
to be laid on afresh.

The Price of the Vegetable Powder is 2s. 6d. a Paper, and the Box of Powder
for Plasters is 3 s. 6d. both to be had at the Place aforementioned.

Note, These Plasters to the Wrists frequently, I may say generally, Cure all
forts of Agues (unless they be of very long standing indeed, and attended with
other Indispositions) without any inward Medicine at all, but where there is a
complication of Infirmities, besides the Ague, that the Stomach is foul and
Blood injured, there is a necessity for an inward Medicine, than which nothing
can exceed the Vegetable Powder beforementioned, and will do a hundred times
more Service, and is a thousand times more safer than Jesuits Bark, or any
other Medicine whatsoever.

Hydragogue Tincture: OR, DROPS, Purging away Water, thereby curing Dropsies of
all sorts.
BEFORE I speak of the excellent Virtues of these Drops, I shall say something
of the several species of Dropsies, which, as they affect diversely, so go under
diverse appellations, as the Ascites, Tympanites and Anasarca.

The Ascites, or Hydrops Abdominis, is in English, the Watery Dropsy in the
Belly, and is always attended with a stretching of the Belly, by reason of the
superabounding of ferous, watery and salt Humors, cast forth into the capacity
of the Abdomen, through fault of the Liver, Spleen and Reins, causing also the
Feet, Thigh^, and in Men sometimes the Cods to swell, and is known by the
swelling of the Belly, a difficulty of Breathing, and the hoarse sound of the
Belly if struck, like as if a Bladder half full was struck upon; also upon
compressing the Belly with the Fingers, it pits and leaves the print of them
thereon; and if the Patient turns from side to side, a Noise like the murmuring
or waving of Water is heard, and the Water by continuance there, will in time
putrify and corrupt the Bowele, cause a Fever and Thirst, and waste the
Patients Strength and Spirits: Therefore all imaginable care ought to be taken
to evacuate the Water in time, both by Stool and Urine, or else the Patient
will dye; and if let alone so long as that the Patient's Strength be spent, not
being able to bear Purging Medicines; then Tapping must be used, as the only
present way to secure the Patient, if that Method will do it.

The Tympanites, or Windy Dropsy, shows it self also by a distention or
stretching of the Belly; but as the other contains Water within the capacity of
the Abdomen, this contains only Wind, which so distends the Belly, that it
being struck upon with the Hand, sounds like a Drum, and is rather more swelled
than the watery Dropsies, and the Navel hangs out, but will not leave any
impression upon pressing it with the Fingers; the Patient is most afflicted
with Pain about the Navel and Loins in Windy Dropsies like a Cholick, when
there is no such Pain in a watery one, and is easier to be cured, and of less
danger.

The Anasarca, or Leucophlegmatia, is a Dropsy of the whole Habit of the Body,
the Water being dispersed, so that all the Flesh appears moist, swollen and wet,
wherein not only the Hands, Arms; Breast, Face, Thighs, Legs and Feet swell,
but the whole Body also, whereby, if you make a pressure with your Finger into
the Flesh in any part, it will pit and leave an impression.

The cause of this Disease is chiefly Cold, or by very plentifully drinking
cold Water, or Small Beer, or else proceeds from a defect of the Liver, or
defect of Natural Heat, Obstructions and imbicility of the Stomach, from whence
a collection of pituitous and watery Humors is produced, and universal Cachexy.

If this Disease be recent, and in a young Person, it is not difficult to cure:
In Persons aged, it is very doubtful, if not desperate* and indeed such as are
much in Years seldom find a Cure for it: But yet the Virtues of the Hydragogue
Tincture are such, as that it has cured several Elderly People by being
followed for some continuance, which they must, though it is what some will not
be prevailed upon to do, being soon weary of the best of Medicines, if ^^ey
find not immediate Relief, when the continuance of the Medicine would to all
appearance have cured them: Therefore it is advised, that all People that have
the Dropsy, or are Dropsically inclined, take the Drops constantly as directed,
and then a Cure may be expected.

Directions for the taking of the Hydragogue Tincture.
THE Patient is to take from 15 to 20, 30, 40, 50 or 60 Drops, more or less, as
they operate by Urine or Stool, taking them always in White Wine, wherein
Mustard Seed or Horseradish Roots have been steeped; but if they purge much, a
less Dose must be taken; if they do not purge at all, a greater Dose; and will
also work by Urine plentifully, though at the first taking them they may seem to
give frequent occasions to Urine, and but little come; but after a little
waiting the Urine will come plentifully, and the Patient be relieved. They are
to be taken every Night and Morning, and also in the middle of the Day, if
there be occasion.

The Price is 3 s. 6 d. the Bottle. To be had only at the Place before
mentioned.

The most Famous Eye-Powder and Water IN THE WORLD.
THE Eye is a tender part, and is soon injured by extraneous Bodies, as also by
Humors flowing upon them from within the Body; and as those injure them one
way, so oftentimes does wrong Medicines the other, nay, make the Case more
desperate, so that the Remedy proves worse than the Disease, whence comes
Cataracts and Blindness; for many People grow dim-sighted and dark by Humors
upon the Eyes, which at length breed Spots, Films, Skins, Clouds, Webs, and the
like, which grow over the Sight, the forerunners of which are Atoms, Flys,
Gnats, H^irs, Threads, etc. flying or swimming before them, and which if not
remedied in time, increase to Cataracts, the couching of which sometimes cures,
but oftener ^ot nay, frequently ruins the Sight for ever, as many can too truly
Witness; now these Spots, Films, Skins, etc. though said by Oculists to be
incurable but by Couching; they telling their Patients they must wait till they
come to ripe Cataracts to be couched, are to be cured without, even though grown
to ripe Cataracts, and that by blowing a little of a safe Powder, and using a
Water into the Eyes, the continual using of which will soften and wear a way
gradually that Skinny or filmy Substance, which is a Humor congealed; and
dissolves and abforbs the gross viscid Humors that supplies and gives rise to
those Films, etc. to the perfect restoration of the Sight, whereby not one in a
hundred that uses it, would ever stand in need of being couched, or would ever
have their Sight impaired or injured by Humors, Spots, Skins, Films, or the
like; but to the contrary, keep off Humors, clears and strengthens the Sight,
that all that once use them, will recommend to all they know; for they are such
innocent Medicines, as that they may be taken inwardly, and have done such
notable Cures, as are to be wondered at, even in all sorts of Indispositions of
the Eyes, whether they before, running, hot or inflamed, and that when
Purgings, Bleedings, Blisterings, Cuppings, Issues and Seatons have been used
to no purpose.

Directions for using the Eye Powder and Water.
IF the Eyes be very sore, tender, swelled, hot or inflamed, the Water alone
will be sufficient, without the Powder, washing with it 2, 3 or 4 times a Day
or oftener, as there may be occasion, but if there be no Humor, but Spots,
Films, Skins or the like, there the Powder must be used also, a little of it
being to be blown into the Eyes 3 or 4 times a Day, daily, till well, and the
Eyes to be washed an Hour after it with the Water; but if the Powder or Water
should occasion any smart, as in weak tender Eyes they may (though without the
least injury) then it is to be used seldomer, and then they will be bearable.
It is admirable to find how they comfort, clear and strengthen the Sight, and
remove all Humors, Spots, Films, etc. that darken, or obfuscate the Sight; and
if People that have weak tender Eyes, and are fearful of Cataracts or
Blindness, the use of it in time will prevent any such bad Indisposition, or
dimness or weakness of Sight.

The Price of the Powder is 2s. 6d. the Paper, the Water 3s. 6d. both to be had
at the Place before mentioned, and no where else.

THE CARMINATIVE: OR, Wind Expelling LOZENGES.
THE most famous Medicine for the expelling of Wind, ever known, they keep the
Wind out of the Stomach, if one of them be held in the Mouth in a Morning or
any other time in the Day, and are more ready and much more wholesome, as well
as beneficial, than Cordial Drams; for these break away the Wind pent up in the
Stomach and Bowels, and strengthen them, creating an Appetite, and not
destroying it as Drams do; besides, they keep the Body so solutive, as those
that take them will never be costive; but always open. In the Cholick, Gripes,
Stitches in the Sides, Windy Vapors that oppress the Head, sour Belchings,
Hiccups, etc. they are admirable; if taken after Eating, they cause good
Digestion, and rectify all Indigestions and Disorders of the Stomach; purifying
the Blood, curing Heart-burn, making the Breath sweet, and do render the whole
Body and Mind, cheerful, lightsome and easy; being really a pretty necessary
Companion, in case of ill Scents, bad Air, etc. and so delightful and pleasant
to the Taste, as well well as helpful to the health, that none that once try
them, will ever be without them.

It is only putting one of them into the Mouth at a time, and swallowing it as
it dissolves, and so do as often in a Day as you please. The Price is Two
Shillings and Six Pence a Box, which will last a long time, and are only to be
had at the Place aforementioned.

A BALSAM To Make ISSUES Run; Which is also good to cleanse old Sores, Ulcers,
Wounds, etc.
THIS Medicine is fit and necessary for all Families, on the acccout of Hurts,
Sores, Wounds, Ulcers, etc. as for the making Issues run; for if a little of it
be spread upon Linit or Tow, and applied to the Sore Place, it wonderfully
cleanses it, that a little Diachylon Plaster afterward will be sufficient to
heal it. But for to make Issues run, it is not to be paralleled, removing all
Inflammations about them, taking away proud Flesh, and causing the Pea to keep
in, and this only by smearing some of it all round the Orifice, and moistning
the Pea with it, putting it in, and doing it so every time the Issue is dressed,
which is once a Day, that being sufficient, and applying over it Oil Cloth or
Plaster, as usual. But if there be much proud Flesh, you may anoint that with
it twice a Day, but if not much, once a Day will be sufficient. It is indeed an
excellent thing to keep Issues easy, sweet (...)


