An Account of the Conversation Behavior and Execution of WILLIAM ANDERTON
PRINTER, Who was Condemn^d at the Old Baily, on Thursday the 8th. of June, For
High Treason, and Executed for the same, at Tybourn on Friday the 16th of June
1693.
Licensed according to Order.

SUch has been Their Majesty's Incomparable Clemency, since their Accession to
the Throne, that among the many Lives Forfeited by the Law, on the account of
Treasonable Books and Pamphlets, their boundless Mercy has taken but One: (as a
great Lawyer has excel ently observed) It was only Their Majesty's Goodness
toward many others, to call that a Misdeamenor, which the Law calls Treason.
The Treasonable Libels that this Man suffered, more particularly for, being but
two, of above two Score several sorts that have been dispersed, since the Year
1691, in diverse of which are contained as many and great Treasons as it was
possible either for the Malice of the Devil or the Corrupt and Treasonable
thought of Bloodthirsty Men to invent; Containing 'Treasons against the King in
his own Royal Person; against his Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
full of Treason against the Queen, Scandals against all manner of Professions
both in Church and Kingdom, of Magistracy and Ministry: It is therefore no
more wonder to find those People Distempered, that are entertained with Poison,
instead of wholesome Nourishment, than to see the Sea Rage when the Winds blow.

Thus much said, may seem to give the Disaffected and Murmuring Party a greater
Reputation then Convenient, were it not that their main Design, of shooting
these Paper Pellets, (according to Old Prines Phrase), has lately suffered so
fatal a Disappointment, that many of them are at this Instant under a Course of
Justice; Others in Custody and Expecting it: And the Residue neither in Humor,
nor condition to Prosecute the Quarrel; being so fully satisfied of the
Vigelance, Power and Activity of their Majesty's Friends, (which in Effect, are
as many, as either, Love the Public, or themselves) that they find it morally
Impostible for them ever to bring any Villainy to perfection upon so desperate a
Bottom: Besides they have Undeceived the World, and made appear to their
Sacred Majesty's, that all Mercy is lost upon them.

Mr. Anderton, The Subject of this Narrative was by Birth, a North-Countrey
Man, and though but of Indifferent Estated Parents, yet he was well Educated as
to Grammar Learning. From the School he was put Apprentice to a Printer,
serving his time with one Mr. Miles Fletcher, a Person of considerable Note of
that Trade, after which for several Years: From a Printer, he became a
Corrector of the Press, which Employ he chiefly followed, till the late
Abdication and Revolution, after which he took to his Printing again, but in
Holes and by Corners only.

Mr. Anderton has been known to have been an Old Offender against the
Government, in Printing Seditious and Treasonable Libels being generally
thought to be concerned in most of the most Treasonable Pamphlets that have
been Dispersed for some Years past, Notwithstanding he was Indicted and
Convicted but of two of them; the manner of his Apprehending was as follows.

Mr. Robert Stephens, Messenger of the Press; having formerly taken many
Private Presses, wherein our Mr. Anderton was a Chief Manager, more
particularly one at Hogsdon near More Fields, and another near So-ho Yet
Anderton had the good Fortune always to Escape with his Person. But on the 2d.
of May last, Spying two Journty-Men Printers, whom he had missed from public
Printing Houses, for above six Months before; he followed them, and saw them go
exactly into the House of one Skudamore ( where Anderton was found) and where
be had reason to think he worked privately: So having the Beadle and some other
Persons to his assistance, he Apprehended Anderton there, but not without a
great deal of trouble and abuse: Mr. Stephons and the others, made a particular
Search, and in the Chamber where Anderton Lodged at the back of his Bed they
t^und a private Door, which led them into a R^^n where Mr. Stephens found a
Printing Press, ^^^ers, etc. and searching farther, he found in an O^^^^^^nk a
great Quantity of Libels, and Libellous Pamphtel; one Entitled, A Caution to
the Navyl; a 2^ (...) Historical Romance on the Wars; an other, A Secon^ ^etter
to the bishop of Salisbury; and there was an Errata, and an, etc. found set in
the Press, the same that were in the Book called; Remarks upon the Confederacy.
And in the Chamber where he lay, there was a Desk (which Mr. Stephens knew well
to be the Prisoners, because he had seized it before, in which there was found
the Two Libels, that he was afterward tried for, and diverse others of the same
sort, which Desk the Prisoner owned to be his; (these they seized and conveyed
with the Prisoner to the Lord Chief Justice Holts Chamber: He was Examined by
my Lord, and committed to Newgate for High Treason.

On Thursday the I June in the Afternoon, Mr. Anderton, was brought to the Bar,
where an Indictment of High Treason was read against him; for that he did
Compose, Print, and Publish Two Malicious and Treasonable Libels. The First
Entitled, Remarks upon the present Confederacy, and late Revolution in
England. The second Entitled, A French Conquest neither desirable nor
practicable. In which two Libel there were contained the Rankest, Vilest, and
most malicious Treasons that ever could be Imagined by any man to be put in
Paper: in short the Design of them was merely to incite all the Kings Subjects
to stir up and raise War and Rebellion against him, and to restore the late
King James. After the Indictment was read, the Prisoner Pleaded not Guilty: And
such was the tenderness of the Court toward him, not only in the large
Allowances, of freedom, and favor while he was upon his Trial, but upon his
request, ordered him a Copy of the Panel, and gave him time till Saurday to
prepare for his Trial, that he might want nothing for his Defense. Acco^dingly
on Saturday morninst about nine a Clock he was again brought to the Bar, where
upon a full hearing and Evidence he was found Guilty of High Treason, and the
last day of the Sessions he Received his Sentence with the rest of the
Malefactors. It was observed that his Countenance did not in the least change
all the time of his being in Court, till just as the Sentence was Passing on
him, at which moment of time, there was a visible appearance of his Countenance
Changing very much.

And now Reader we come to the last Acts or Moments of William Anderton, who
pursuant to the Sentencr was this morning being Friday the 16 of June, conveyed
on a Sledge from Newgate to Tyburn, the usual Place of Execution, Sir T. Cook,
Sir T. Lane, the Two Sheriffs, with Major Richardson, etc. Riding by the Sledge
to see the Execution done.

At Tyburn he was attended on by Mr. B. and another Severend Divine, who
assisted him with their Spiritual Comfort, and Advice at this last Moment of
his life, he continued at the Place of Execution above an Hour, and having
del^vered, what he had to say, to the Sheriffs, etc. the Divines often Praying
with him, and he making several Ejaculations to himself very fervently, The
Executioner did his Office.

Printed by John Wallis near the Green Dragon in Fleet street, 1693.


