An ACCOUNT of the Design of the late NARRATIVE; Entitled, The Dissenters New
Plot, etc.
Written by the Author of that Book.
Licensed, March 17, 1689. J. F.

WHen the Bookseller first Acquainted me what Fate the late Narrative met with,
and how it was Condemned to Die as soon as Born; and which was yet stranger, by
such as were no Enemies to the real design of the Author, I could not but
reflect on a pretty passage very like this, of a Book Written in the last Age,
to prove Women had no Souls; wherein were amassed up Scriptures, Authorities
and Reasons to prove the Assertion, and all the Arguments to the contrary
Answered. This was the Face of the Book, but the real design was to expose the
Arguments of the Socinans against the Divinity of our Savior, by making use of
all their Topics in the proof of this Ridiculous Assertion, and solving a^l
those brought against it in the same manner they were accustomed to do, as
plainly appeared to those who looked close enough into it. However, some good
honest Man there was, who happened upon the Book, and not seeing thorough it,
conceived a mighty Indignation against the Person who endeavored to propagate
such an Antiquated Heresy, and sets himself in good earnest to Write an Answer
to it, to prevent the mischief it might make in the World, wherein he would
very Gravely refel all the Authorities and Reasons that Wag had laid together.
To prevent the same Trouble to any body else, I think it most convenient to
Answer my Book my self, or rather lead the World by the Nose into the Design
thereof; and by this Key let the Reader into the Sense of this so
unintelligible a business:

How extremely some People have been scared with a Title Page and Index, and
now and then the word Plot and Plotters in fearful great Characters, and a
Black Letter, shall be made appear by taking this monster of a Book to pieces,
after the general face thereof is first shown, by removing a Vizard, as before
was easy enough to be seen thorough.

The main Wheel that gave all the lesser motion, or general design of the Book,
was no more then this, Under the Mask of a Virulent Enemy to all Temper and
Moderation, the Dissenters, the Protestants in general, and the present King,
as well as the late Revolution, to expose all the weak Arguments such Persons
have made use of against Love and Unity. To acquaint the World how fowly those
of this Character had belied and blackened the Reformation, instancing
especially in former Ages, among others, who embraced such high-flown Notions,
in the Mouth and Soul of them all, the very Notorious Dr. Heylen, and showing
in several Instances how horribly he had misrepresented Protestants. Two things
I need not be ashamed to own I especially aimed at through the whole Scope of
the Book, -- To show the Lawfulness of Vindicating Liberty and Religion by Arms
in some Cases, and so to justify the late Happy Revolution here; and those who
were concerned therein, and then, to prove that Hot and Bigoted Men had been
the occasion of all the Miseries of this Kingdom, both in this and former Ages,
with some Arguments for Moderation of D^fferences, and Uniting all good
Protestants, of late grown so jealous of one another, proving neither side were
such ill men as Prejudice, Interest, Mistakes and Weakness equally represented
both Parties to one another.

Now that this was the very and only intent of those few Sheets which have made
such a Noise, if there be any need of making it more evident then the thing
already is in its own Nature, it shall be done effectually by examining them
all through, by the different Paragraphs, as they are distinguished in the
Terrible Index.

1. [The Introduction to two sorts of Persons, whom the Discovery will
disoblige.]

This is, most matter of Form, being only a Preface suited to the Nature of the
thing, although no doubt is to be made that several Plain Truths in the
following Pages will really disoblige and sting the Madmen (call them
Fanatics if you please) of both Parties, as now unhappily distinguished into
separate Interests. This taken up p. 5. and part of the 6. wherein tho the
Masquels immediately clapped on, by using one of the fleering Reflections of the
present Enemies to the Government, in those words [A King of their own]
borrowed from one of their late Pamphlets; yet in the very next line the
meaning is apparent, by adding it was the Catholic World, who had Principally
such thoughts of Protestants, as being indeed the only Game they have now left
to play, in order to make us fall out with one another.

2. [ The Scheme of the whole design here discovered, traced up to its Original
in the Year 1541, whence it has been continued to this present Year 1690.]
Wherein the Reader is told, were Imbarqued all the moderate Men, and those
Beasts of Trimmers, as a foul mouth once called them, who joined with the
Dissenters in the Unpardonable Sins after mentioned, desiring moderation both
in Church and State; the Consideration of whose Plea in different Ages, will, I
am still of the mind, convince the World they are indeed a far different People
from what they have been vulgarly accounted. Consequently render the Kings good
Subjects, and Friends of the Government, less afraid of one another, showing
their Inclinations and Desires have been the same, though more warmly, less
defensibly, and perhaps with more earnestness than the Things in dispute would
bear, prosecuted on some occasions. Let but any one that has Eyes look upon the
bottom of the 6 and 7 p. and if they don't find this, they must be very
purblind; further at the bottom of the 7 p. is such a Character of Heylin, as
any thing that has ever read a page in him, may know the meaning of, for who
ever commended him for undoubted Credit, Vnbyassedness, Coolness, etc. without
Laughing in their Faces whom he Discourse with?

The Great Cry at first raised against these Papers, was, That they Blackened
the Reformation: I confess they do so, just as much as the Holy Scriptures
encourage Atheism, when they tell us, -- The Fool has said in his heart there
is no God: Since there is nothing in them but either the express Words, or fair
Consequences from the Words, of such as by their wicked prejudicate
Insinuations have done more Injury to the Protestant Cause, and defiled their
own Nest, more then could be ever accomplished by all our professed open
Enemies. However, there are few of those Reflections, whereof the
abovementioned D^^. Works are the exactest Compendium, but what in this Book
receives both Censure and Answer. The first and principal of which, under that
Paragraph, the third in the Index, wherein is,

3. [ An Account of the Rebellious Principles of that Ringleader of Heresy and
Sedition, Jack Calvin of Geneva, with the chief Principle on which he built his
own, and all succeeding Rebellions.] That this is a common accusation of that
great Man, and the civilest treatment some Persons can afford him, is notorious
from many years sad Experience. But there needs no greater Authority to Answer
it, then that Venerable Mr. Hookers, who purposely defends him from these
Imputations, as is proved in the 8 p.

Next comes those dreadful Words so often thrown at this great and good Men,
and represented commonly by his Enemies as an absolute assertion, when as the
contrary appears, that they are as Hypothetical as it was possible to express
them IF there be, etc, which Power PERHAPS, etc, upon which Heylin charges all
the Rebellions, Treasons, Assassinations, etc. which have since disfigured the
Church of Christ. In answer, it is first observed p. 9. that this is only a
Supposition; (and indeed so modest and evident a one as none can deny) and
Secondly, That had he plainly expressed it, there had been neither Treason nor
Heresy in it, being such a Truth as all oppressed Nations must be forced to
own, when there is no other remedy; such a one, as some of the most Learned
Defenders of the present Revolution have chiefly insisted on, and lastly, such
a Truth as none can deny, who will not avow themselves open Enemies to the
present Government.

But not content with thus striking at their Head, the Dr. goes on with all the
other Branches of the Reformation thence denominated, whom he Brands with the
odious Names of Presbyterians or their Abettors, among whom he Censures several
of our Bishops, at least one Archbishop, King Edward, Queen Elizabeth, and her
Parliament, for sending Aid to the French Hugonots; and there Beza and Coligny,
as in the Netherlands, that Heroical Person (and why may not we add Blessed
Martyr?) William the First, Prince of Orange; and indeed almost all that
History has ever taken notice of for Brave and Remarkable among the Protestants
on this side of Europe, whom how wickedly he Traduces, and villanously
Blasphemes, it is the business of the 4, 5, and 6 Paragraphs to make appear,
and shall be further proven to the World, if any take up the Cudgels to defend
him.

His remarkable value for the Protestant Religion at home, is evinced by his
asserting all Queen Mary's Bloody Reign, and the s^ying so many Predestinary
and Sacramentary Pestilences (as he calls Calvin) therein, to be none of the
greatest Infelicities of the Church of England: There needs no long Consequence
to prove this upon him much clearer, then he has so many black Calumnies on the
Reformation. For all this following on the death of that English Josiah King
Edward, whom all the World besides the Doctor admired; and Queen Marie^ coming
to the Crown being the direct Consequence of his Death, as the Cruelties that
followed of her Reign, considering her such a Bigot, I ask any fair Judge,
Whether one who thought this Princes Death no Infelicity to the Church, must
pronounce as much of all that followed? See this p. 12, as p. 9.10, 11. Several
other Flowers and Memorable Passages of the same Author; p. 9. He complains
that by the Reformation, among other horrid Practices^ Catholic Bishops were
deposed, Images broken, etc. and lower, That God blasted the Protestant Arms,
for Assisting their brother Heretics in France. At the bottom, that it was
only some Weak Prince who had granted Privileges to the Netherlands, p. 10.
Paints out the Prince of Orange as the worst of Hypocrites, blacker than even
Strada himself dared represent him; mentioning his Murder with no blame at
all, or very little on the Villain and Party that Accomplished it; whereas he
charges that of the D. of Guise full on the Heads of the Protestants, and
speaks of it with the greatest warmth and emotion possible; which vile Slander
is Answered in the 11th page out of his own Mouth, who acknowledges, Poultrot
who accused them, was Wracked when he did it; and both Beza and Coligny
absolutely denied it, and protested their Detestation of the same.

Follows in the 12 p. his cold account of the Barbarous, truly Popish Parisian
Massacre, of which I question whether ever Author, Protestant, or otherwise,
made mention without some note of Detestation and Horror, besides himself,
whose injustice in this Case is sufficiently exposed by his being commended for
his warmth and zeal therein.

The Designs for Unity and Moderation, and how they were crossed and rendered
ineffectual about those times, are recounted in the 13th p. which, its there
added, had then been effected, Had not the ever Loyal Catholic Party, in mere
Zeal for the Protestant Religion, by Law Established; obstructed the execution
of such a perilous Plot. Which Expression, if there be any so dull to believe
serious, one may conclude them endued with just such a convenient portion of
Sense, as would go to the making a Jacobite.

The Lawfulness of Resistance, and the Opinion and Practices of the Church of
England therein, is made appear, p. 14. and shall be further against any who
deny the Consequence, wherein, although the same Cover is still used, the intent
is clear enough from calling the Kings of France or Spain, their Subjects Liege
Lords, and Tyrants; and the passage at the end of that Paragraph, concerning
the Indians Worshipping the Devil for no other reason but that be may not hurt
them.

At the foot of this 14th p. Beza's Temper, and Moderation is noticed and
commended as the next recounts several great and good Men of the English
Church, who were for mitigation and retrenchments in Controverted Matters.
Where also the Doctor's Justice is remarked for charging the Papists Defection
from our Communion (known to be occasioned by the Pope's Bull) on this same
Party who might just with as much Equity be answerable for all the Plots
thereafter contrived, as well as all other Mischiefs to the Kingdom, and
therefore be exposed on all occasions to Vexation and Ruin, as the old
Christians formerly were.

As for King James the First's Reign, there are only two or three passages
touched in it too notorious to those who have read the History. Abbot'^
Disgrace, Lady Essex 's fine Business, Powder Treason, etc. Which last was
contrived to be thrown on the Puritans, if executed.

As for the 8th Paragraph (or Chapter, which the Reader please) what happened
in the Reign of King Charles the First, etc. The Design of it is to show the
unhappy Occasions of the Misfortunes thereof, taking off a little of the Load
from one side, and all of it from Moderation, and laying it where it ought to
be, on the hot Heads and high Men of both Parties, beginning from the
Illegalities encouraged and Preached up by Ambitious and Turbulent Men, and
undefencible Heights required both in Church and State; the disobliging and
ridiculing Law, Lawyers, and Gentlemen, with several other sad Truths, not
revived to exasperate, but warn Parties any way concerned.

Next are recounted the Names of some of those Excellent Persons who about this
time were best inclined to Abatement and Moderation, with the usage they met
with from the contrary Party, particularly the truly Apostolical Bishop Usher.
whom Heylen most civilly and dutifully calls a Walking Library, and Writ
professedly against him, going in the same way wherein those of his Genius have
since exactly trod; how much and how justly soever they may blame others for
want of Respect to those over them in the Lord, never themselves to pay so much
as Civility, how much less then Obedience to such as do not please them in
their own beloved Notions. And here is added a particular Character of the
Famous Doctor, whom we now take leave of, unless any of his Friends have the
stomach to defend him. In the 26 and 27 p. where he is commended for two or
three Virtues, neither of which, I am pretty confident, the worst Friend he has
ever Scandalized him with before, viz. Gravity, Ingenuity and Good Nature (in
which indeed he is hardly to be paralelled, unless by the Famous little Doct^^
of Cosmus Blene, afterward mentioned) and (...) History of the Reformation,
etc. Vindicated for just as much signal Veracity, as his other Legend of St.
George, which he would persuade the World he did himself believe by his Book,
written concerning that Renowned Champion. Nor can any one justly blame this
severity to his Memory, who used that of those before him no better, and whose
Credit must of necessity be weakened, in order to vindicate theirs; since it is
notorious, most of his Assertions depend only on his own Word; and lastly, who
turned al^ the Venom of his Ink and Soul, and stream of his Studies to Disgrace
and Villifie almost all parts of the Reformation.

The 28^h p. endeavors to rectify the Judgment and unite the Affections of
all Honest Englishmen by showing who were, and who were not concerned in the
black and barbarous Murder of the Blessed Martyr King Charles the I.

[ What happened after the Restoration, etc.] What Expectations of Unity and
fair Tendencies and Advances made thereunto, and what Advantages expected from
it, how frustrated, p. 30 and 31. How thereon Schisms were perpetuated, and all
very near ruined.

Those slanderous Matters of Truth which follow, one would think should be too
gross Banters to slip down any Man's Reason, who had not before enlarged his
swallow with plain Contradictions. They are indeed several sad Truths which
could be never beat into the Souls of some Men, but which all thinking Persons,
not very much biased, all along believed, in that sense here intended.

For the first of them, the Brothers being Reconciled to Rome (let it be
granted, in some measure owing to our unhappy Divisions) How many Plotters
would an Honest Man have been called formerly for asserting or believing it?
Let the Friends of these Reigns, Misgovernments, and the late Kings Person and
Cause, choose which of the two they will have, either believe both the Brothers
were of that Synagogue, or else, that their own Kings Word and Honor (as well
as Faith and Oath) are broken.

Take pass the Debauchery of the Nation, another Calumny is clear as the Sun,
the third of them, the Fire must not be slipped so hastily, treated of in the
3d Page, wherein in a few Lines, is the strength of our charge against the
Papists, as being under the Devil, the immediate Actors thereof; in proof of
which are produced, the Depositions before the Committee in Parliament, the
positive free Confession of Parties concerned in the very thing, and the
Inscription fixed on the Monument, as an Act of the City of London, asserting
the truth of it, which so ga^l'd those concerned, that they always squinted at
it (^ike the Figure of Envy it self cary'd thereon) (...) they got it razed out
again. It Is further added, That there is no face of an Argument contrair to this
Truth, but two or three Observators, which if they are sufficient to
counterbalance the weight laid in the other Scale, the Author will be willing
to own himself a Jesuit.

To this succeed, like a pair of Buckets, the Popish and Rie-house Plot, which
ever of them goes up, the other of necessity goes down. The chief of the Papists
protested themselves as Innocent as the Child unborn. Rumbold, the very head of
the other, did as much at his Death. Let the World believe which they please;
one thing is certain, the Jesuits Religion gives them leave to go out of the
World with a Lie in thi^ Mouths, which ours does not.

To make us all Friends, succeeds an Account of what happened on the late
King's offering Toleration, and of the Behavior of those who were then
Caressed by Papist and Church Men, to win them to their Interest. Wherein, how
much they were wrought upon by the Famous Letter to the Dissenters; the Reason
of the Thing, the Assurances of some great Persons, and Examples of others to
join in the common Interest of Protestants against the common Enemy, and how
strange a Check this gave to those who equally hated them both, is not yet, and
its pity it should ever be forgotten. In pursuance of which, are several plain
Truths asserted, That their Body was not engaged either in Addressing, or
altering the Government, and pulling down that Wall we then so much needed.

What had passed, is the more largely described, because a Looking-Glass for
the present and future Ages, that if Persons will suck up what was formerly
parted with, Mistakes, J^alousies, particular Follies, they may at least be the
more inexcusable. The present state of things succeeds, wherein, as in the
Index No. 8. of the present Plot and Design to overthrow the Church and State,
by the methods there described, And it were seriously to be wished that some
Men by their Follies and Wickedness had not given any seeming Reason for such a
Suspicion and Jealousy; and on the contrair, that this Suspicion and Fear, and
the wild Words and Actions of some Imprudent or Ill Men, had not been hearkened
to greedily, Heightened and Exasperated, and almost Espoused by whole Parties,
thereby setting them to Countermining, where there might indeed be no Mine at
all, and so weakening Peace and Unity, the very Bulwarks of the Kingdom.
However, all the Plot the Author knows, he freely discovers: As p. 33. All good
and moderate Men being forced into the same Notions of Government and
Allegiance. That for those ill Persons and Actions Aggravated in some Parties,
the good and honest Men among them refuse to own them, or any separate Interest
from the public. That the Moderate on both sides are almost of the self same
mind, concerning several things controverted at the foot of p. 34. and in in
the 35 are exposed some of the most remarkable Arguments against any
Mittigation or Alteration: The last of which, indeed, is the weightiest; some
Persons would fain have the Author of all our Miseries once more return, to
make us as Unhappy as the poor Irish now are. These justly apprehend that were
our Interests, Hearts, and Councils once United, this were impossible; and what
wonder they should consequently oppose the means, in order to prevent the End.

After Answering Arguments, contrary to Moderation, come those for it, without
doubt the strongest in the World, Gods Glory the Interest of Europe, the Good
of England in general, and even of all particular Parties; wherein the Author
persuades himself he has done as much Justice to all sides, as well as
intended, and he hopes really taken the Interests of his Country, as ever any
who Wrote on this Subject. For which Work, and for the Explanation and Defense
of it, he is no sooner got clear of one side, but he expects the attacks of
another, which he shall endeavor to be ready for, whenever they think fit to
make them.

FINIS.
Sold by R. Janeway.


