AN ACCOUNT OF THE Discovery and Siezing OF Mr. Harrison, and Mr. R --, On the
Account of the Murder of the late Doctor CLENCH. WITH A Relation of the
Examination, etc. of One of them, and of his Commitment to Newgate last night,
the 6th. Instant.
DOctor Clench, having been most Barbarously and Inhumanely Murdered, by Two
Ruffins, in a Coach, going toward Aldgate, on Monday the Fourth Instant, about
Eleven at Night: Now, it being generally supposed, by all the Doctors Friends,
that the Villains were instigated to Commit this Notorious Fact, more out of
Malice and Revenge, than any Real Design as to Profit, on the Account of
Robbing of Moneys, etc. Upon which, mature Consideration was taken, What
Persons had any Quarrel with the Doctor (himself being, in his Lifetime, known
to be a very Peaceable, Innocent, and Inoffensive Person:) Upon which the
following Concern came fresh to Memory; viz. The Doctor having, a considerable
time since, Lent a certain Gentlewoman a Sum of Money, on a Mortgage, and
afterward calling in his Monys, for diverse Reasons, the Thing being but for
the Gentlewomans Life, that the Mortgage was upon, and for Non-Payment, neither
of the principle Money, nor Interest, the Doctor proceeded at Law, and in time
procured the Rent being paid to him; upon which one Mr. Harrison, who was a
Friend, and as some say, kept very Familiar Company with Gentlewoman, going to
demand the Rent, and they refusing Payment, saying, it was now Docter Clenches
right to Receive it; upon which he was heard to say, G -- damn-him, he would
speedily be Revenged on the Doctor, and cure him of Receiving of it, or Words
to that effect; and, as it is said, in other companys lately he has been heard
to say, he would be the death of the Doctor.

A Warrant being granted for the Apprehending of this Mr. Harrison, and one Mr.
R --, who is supposed to be the said Harrisons Accomplice in the Murder, they
were both taken yesterday, by Constables, Tipstaves, etc. the former after a
long and diligent search (he often changing his Lodgings, taking new Lodgings,
on Saturday last,) was taken near White-Fryers; the latter at his own house.

Mr. Harrison, being brought before the Lord Chief Justice, and the Coachman,
who drove the Coach when the Doctor was Murdered, being sent for and present,
Deposed, That he verily believed, Harrison to be one of the Ruffins, but that
he had then Black Clothes on; but now was in Colored.

Harrison being Examined to give an Account, where he was from Nine to Twelve a
Clock on Monday night; said, He was at a Widow-womans Coffee House near
Fleet Street; but she being sent for, Declared, That he was at her House not
above half an hour; which, as she said, was from half an hour past Eight till
Nine, or thereabouts; though he before alleged, that he was there Three or Four
Hours; he likewise Alleged, that he had not seen Doctor Clench for many Weeks
before, though it was proved that he had been with him but a few days before.

In short, Harrison giving but a very slender account of himself, and there
being very Corroborating Circumstances fixed upon him, the Lord Chief Justice
committed him to Newgate that Night.

This Mr. Harrison, was formerly Clerk to Sergeant Ottway of Gray's Inn, but has
been known to ^e^^ Person of a very Lewd Conversation for several years last
pa(...)

Licensed according to Order.

(...) 1692.


