An Account of the Defeat of the Rebels in England: As also the taking of the
late Duke of Monmouth, the late Lord Gray, etc.
Whitehall, July 8.
YEsterday Morning His Majesty received the News of the entire defeat of the
Rebels; of which we have the following account.

ON Sunday Morning the Earl of Feversham marched from Somerton to Weston,
within three Miles of Bridgwater. He Quartered his Horse and Dragoons in the
said Village, and Encamped his Foot in an advantageous Post near it, fronting
toward a Moor, (being a spacious Plain,) and having a Ditch before them. In
the Evening he had notice that the Rebels were drawing out of the Town, which
made him keep his Troops in a readiness, and send out frequent parties to
observe them. The Rebels so ordered their March, and with so great silence,
that they found a quiet passage into the said Moor; and there toward Morning
formed their Foot in Battle, to the number of between 5 and 6000. the late Duke
of Monmouth being at the head of them, and marched near to our Camp: My Lord
Feversham having notice of it, immediately put His Majesty's Forees, being about
2000 Foot, and 700. Horse, Granadiers and Dragoons, into a posture to receive
them. The Rebels began with a great Volley of Shot and Shouts, which was
returned by Ours in the same manner. In the mean time the Rebels were bringing
their Horse to second their Foot, but were hindered by a Party of Horse
Commanded by Colonel Oglethorpe, who engaged them till my Lord of Oxford's
Regiment and the Detachements of the Guards came in to form the Line. The
Resistance of the Rebels Horse, which were between 1000 and 1200 Commanded by
the late Lord Gray, was very inconsiderable, being never drawn up in a Body,
but giving way before all that charged them, and soon after quitting the Field.
All this while the Foot stood very firm on both sides, and exchanged great
Volleys, the Ditch beforementioned hindering them from closing; But our Cannon
coming up, and our Horse breaking in upon them, they were at last entirely
routed, and three pieces of Cannon, all they had there, taken; About 2000 of
them were killed, and many taken Prisoners: The most remarkable among these are
Colonel Holms, and Perrot his Major, the Constable of Crookhorn, and Williams
Servant to the late Duke of Monmouth. who had about him 200 Guineas, all the
Monvs he says the said late Duke had left; the Coat which he usually wore was
likewise taken.

The Earl of Feversham, His Majesty's Lievtenant-General, was during the Action
every where present, giving the necessary Orders with great Readiness and
Conduct: My Lord Churchil, who Commanded next under him, likewise performed his
part with all the Courage and Gallantry imaginable. The Duke of Graston, and
all the Commanders of Batallions and other Officers, behaved themselves with
great Resolution and Bravery.

Of His Majesty's Forces there were about 300 killed and diverse wounded, of
whom a farther account will be given in a more particular Relation that will be
published of this Action.

After the Field was cleared of the Rebels, the Earl of Feversham marched with
500 Foot, and some Horse and Dragoons to Bridgwater, the Rebels that were left
there having fled and dispersed themselves in several places. His Lordship left
these men in the Town, under the Command of Colonel Kirk; and hearing that the
late Duke of Monmouth was fled with about 50 Horse, the greatest number of the
Rebels that were left together, he sent out several Parties in Pursuit of him.

My Lord Feversham intended to match yesterday with His Majesty's Forces to
Wells, and this day to Bath.

Whitehall, July 8.
This Morning the King received an account that the late Lord Gray was taken
yesterday in a disguise at Ringwood on the Borders of Dorsetshire, and secured
by my Lord Lumley: And his Majesty has been pleased to give order that the 500
l. promised in His late Majesty's Proclamation of the 28th of June 1683. shall
be paid to the Persons that took him.

Whitehall, July 8. at 12 a Clock at Night.
His Majesty has just now received an account, that the late Duke of Monmouth
was taken this Morning in Dorsetshire, being hid in a Ditch, and that he is in
the hands of my Lord Lumley, and now in the Tower.

London, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, in the Savoy, 1685. Reprinted at
Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty,
Anno Dom. 1685.


