AN ACCOUNT OF THE DIFFERENCES Between the KING of DENMARK, AND THE DUKE of
Holstein-Gottorp.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE DIFFERENCES Between the KING of DENMARK, AND THE DUKE of
Holstein Gottorp. WITH Some Reflections upon the present Motions of the Swedes.

IN A LETTER.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE DIFFERENCES Between the KING of DENMARK, AND THE DUKE of
Holstein-Gottorp.
SIR,
YOU are so pressing, when you demand any thing, that one must needs either
grant your Request, or fall out with you. But I never saw you so Violent, as
since the troubles, which seem to arise in the North, under pretense of the
Execution of the Treaty of Altena. You will by all means have me not only to
tell you what the matter in Question is, but also to add my Opinion. It Is in
vain for me to protest, that I am not versed nor skilled enough in these
Affairs, for to be able to discourse upon them pertinently, and to the purpose,
you will not admit of this excuse, and therefore as one must Love his Friends
with their faults, so I will endeavor to satisfy your Curiosity, as well as I
can, being resolved, rather to expose my self to yours, and the public
Censure, then to run the hazard of loosing your Friendship.

For to take things in their true beginning; I must tell you, Sir, that, after
the Kingdom of Sweden had separated it self from the Kingdoms of Denmark and
Norway, and broke the Act of Union passed at Calmer in the Year, 1397. in the
Reign of the glorious Queen Margarete; which was expressed in these Words: The
Three Kingdoms of the North did join for ever, and were to have but one King
for the future; which was also performed under Six Kings one after another;
Frederick the First, Duke of Holstein and Sleswig, to whom the three Crowns
naturally fell, succeeded without any dispute to those of Denmark and Norway,
having besides, the two Dukedoms re-annexed to his Dominions.

This Prince being Dead, left Four Sons, Christian the Third, who succeeded him
in the Throne, Duke Adolf, the Chief of the Branch of the Dukes of Holstein
Gottorp, and the Dukes of Jean and Frederick, who died both without Issue.
Christian the Third, upon the earnest Solicitation of the Queen Mother,
divided the Duchy of Sleswig, which is from time Immemorial a Fief of the
Crown of Denmark, and the Duchy of Holstein, which makes a part of the Circle
of the Lower Saxony, between himself, Duke Jean, and Duke Adolf, his Brothers,
in the Year 1544. in hopes to make his Brother Duke Frederick have the
Archbishopric of Bremen.

Christian the Third died, and left to succeed him Frederick the Second, and
Duke Jean, commonly called Jean of Sunderbourg, or Jean the Younger, Chief of
the Branches of Sunderbourg, Norbourg, Glucksbourg, Ploen, etc. Frederick the
Second made a Treaty with this Duke in the Year, 1564 by which the King yielded
to him Sunderbourg, Norbourg, Glucksbourg, Arensbeck, Ploen, etc. with some
reserves, and the Duke in favor of the King renounced the Succession, after
his Royal Father, for himself, Heirs and Posterity.

Finally, Duke Jean, Brother to Christian the Third, King of Denmark, and to
Duke Adolf, being Dead, Frederick the Second, and Adolf, divided between them,
his Lands and Estates, in the Year, 1581. These Treaties, Sir, are the basis
and ground to several others made between those Princes, which it will be too
long to give a particular account of. I shall only say this: That what is most
remarkable in them is, that by them all, until that of the Year 1658. the
Duchy of Sleswig, was always a Fief of the Crown of Denm. and the Dukes
thereof received their Investiture from the Kings of Denmark. As to the Duchy
of Holstein, the Kings of Denmark, and the Dukes have taken and still do take
jointly the investiture thereof from the Emperor, which is called, according
to the style of the Empire: Investitura Simultanea.

It Is true, that notwithstanding the forementioned Divisions and Treaties of
Alliance and Union, there has often been Disputes between the Kings of Denmark,
and the Dukes of Gottorp; the Dukes having always endeavored to possess their
part of the Duchy of Sleswig in full Sovereignty.

It was to that purpose that Frederick Duke of Gottorp, Grandfather to the
present Duke, having Married Sleswig Eleonora his Daughter to Charles Gustavus
King of Sweden, joined with this King in the War, he had with Frederick the
Third, King of Denmark. This War being terminated by the Treaty of Roeshild, in
the Year 1658. and by that of Copenhagen, 1660. and Charles Gustavus having
Stipulated by the forementioned Treaty of 1658. that the King of Denmark,
should satisfy the Duke of Gottorp by a particular Treaty. And accordingly the
same Year the Treaty was concluded as follows: The King of Denmark resigns to
the Duke of Holstein and his Issue Males, Born and to be Born in lawful
Marriage, the Right of Vasselage and Sovereignty over the Duchy of Sleswig,
and the Isle of Femern, with all their Dependencies, Promising to furnish the
Duke with Letters Patent accordingly. This was performed the same Year, and
ratified and confirmed by the Treaty of Copenhagen, 1660. by that of
Fontainebleau, 1679. and Finally, by that of Altena, which is the last of all,
in the Year 1689.

So that, to have a true notion of the thing you must know, that, before the
Treaty of 1658. the Kings and the Dukes were really Joint-Lords of the Duchy,
though each one had his Domains and Vassals apart, according to the Divisions;
but with this difference, that the Dukes being Vassals of the Crown of Denmark,
paid Homage to that Crown for what they possessed jointly, or separately;
whereas by virtue of the Treaty of 1658, the Dukes are made free from this
Homage: Nevertheless the Union and Community are still in force; insomuch, that
the King and the Duke are always Joint-Lords. It is true, they don't agree
about the extent of this Community; for the Duke pretends that it does not
extend farther than to the Nobility and Clergy, but as for the Country, Towns,
Bayliwicks, with the Rights Pre-eminencies and Prerogatives, the things, says
he, are so separated and divided, that one has no right in the others Portion.

The King on the contrary pretends that, notwithstanding the Divisions made,
and the resignation of the Right of Vassalage, the Community is still in force,
and does extend it self, not only to the Nobility and Clergy, but also over
Towns Bayliwicks, and which is yet more, over the whole Country.

I beg your Pardon, Sir, that I don't examine here all the particular Reasons,
that each party gives, for to make good his pretensions, I shall only say what
may be said most solid in this matter on both sides. The Duke can say: That,
besides the Divisions made by the Treaty of 1658. and by the following
Conventions and Letters-Patent, the Right of Vassalage and Sovereignty, are so
yielded to him in his Portion of the Duchy, that he has therein a Legislative
Power, and a Right of Sovereign Jurisdiction, as to Pardon Criminals, to raise
Taxes, to build Forts, and to put Garrisons in them; to make Alliances, and
generally all the Rights, that other Sovereigns have, and which they are not
accountable of but to God alone; and all this separately and independently,
insomuch that the King has nothing to do, or to concern himself with, in the
Dukes Portion, no more than the Duke has in the Kings, who has the same Rights.

To which the King may Answer: That this is true in one sense, but not in all,
for, if the Sovereignty were absolutely separated, it should be in such a
manner; that whatsoever one Sovereign did in his Portion, the other could have
no right to hinder, nor to take any Notice of it. And this cannot be; by Reason,
that besides the Community, that subsists without dispute over the Nobility and
Clergy, the Rights the Duke has over his part, and those the King has over his
separately, don't hinder the two Sovereigns from their common Right: viz. the
general Inspection over the whole Country.

And this appears: First, by the Treaties of Union, whose aim is, according to
the Tenor, the maintaining of Peace and Concord, the good of the Country in
General, and the Mutual Assistance, which the Sovereigns owe to one another.
Now as the principal point of a Government respects the Good, the Advantage,
the Peace, and the Preservation of a Country, it is clear, that the Community
in the Duchy of Sleswig, is still in force as to this point, according to the
Treaties of Union. Besides, it is grounded upon Reason; for the Portions of
each Sovereign are so intermixed one with another, that if this Union does not
subsist, the Country will always be in trouble and disorder. Secondly, this
will be more evident by these following expressions of the Letters-Patent: The
Estates, Possessions, Liberty, Rights and Privileges, belonging to the
Nobility, Commonalty, Towns, and in general to all the Subjects, shall remain
entire without any Disturbance. Now, don't these Words prove sufficiently, that
the two Sovereigns are obliged Mutually and Reciprocally to the Preservation of
the Rights and Privileges of all the Subjects of the Duchy, and that they
have right to take care of the Performance of this Article, each of them in the
others Portion separately, and jointly over the whole? And it is, I think, but
reasonable; for, if one of them should Act contrary to the Treaties of Union,
the other must have right to oppose himself, and he, that contravenes, cannot
Answer, that it is his particular Affair, being it is a true General business
and a Common Right of two Sovereigns over one Sovereignty.

The King can say yet more, having some particular Rights, which the Duke has
not; for on the one side, the Treaty of 1658. and the Letters-Patent expressly
contain: That the Right of Vassalage and Sovereignty, is yielded to the Dukes
and their Issue Males, Born and to be Born in Lawful Marriage. From whence it
appears plainly, that the Right of Fief, is not Abolished but Conditionally,
and only suspended in Favor of the Duke, and his Masculine Race. And on the
other side, there is an express Condition in the Letters-Patent, viz. That the
Duchy of Sleswig neither shall nor can be Alienated, either in whole or in
part, to the prejudice of the Crown and Kings of Denmark. Now it is certain,
that, if the Duke be obliged to perform these Articles, the King of Denmark has
Reason to have a Watchful Eye upon him for the interest of his Crown, and to
oppose himself against all Contraventions.

And indeed the King has a double Right in this; one, as being Duke of Sleswig,
jointly with the Duke of Gottorp, the other, as King of Denmark, or to say as
Sovereign, who has been and can yet very easily be Feudal Lord of the Duchy.
Therefore the Duke in respect to the King, is not to be looked upon as a
Sovereign, without Condition or Exception, but as a Sovereign, freed from the
right of Homage by his Feudal Lord, to whom he is obliged for it, by a
Principle of Gratitude, if the thing has been done freely and spontaneously on
the Kings side, and by a Principle of Justice, if it has been done by force and
contrary to the Rights and Constitutions of the Government; and to whom he is
accountable for his Administration, on the Points beforementioned.

However it be; it is upon the Principles of which I have spoken, that the Duke
of Gottorp, who has been brought up at the Court of Sweden, and in a very great
aversion to Denmark, has pretended several things, that neither his Father, nor
his Ancestors, ever had, especially the Right of building Forts and Redoubts,
at Holmer and other places, which he had begun two Years ago, or thereabouts,
but was hindered from continuing them by the King of Denmark, who caused the
Works that were begun, to be entirely demolished. But as the Duke since, has
Married the Eldest Princess of Sweden, Sister to the present King, this
Marriage has made a Stricter Alliance between this Crown and him; insomuch that
the King of Sweden has sent about 5000 Men into the Duchy of Sleswig, for to
put the Duke, as it is believed, in a Condition to rebuild the same Forts, by
which he pretends to secure his Country. This, Sir; is the matter of Fact.

The Dukes and the Swedes Partisans allege two Reasons for to justify this
their Proceeding; the First is the Second Article of the Treaty of Altena,
which they say, shows that the Duke is well grounded in his Pretension. The
Article is thus: That the King of Denmark shall re-establish the Duke of
Holstein in all his Estates and Goods, in his Sovereignty, Regales and Rights,
as, to raise Taxes, to make Alliances, to build Forts, and to put Garrisons in
them, etc. The Second is: That the King of Sweden being Guarantee of the
Treaties since the Year 1658. and especially of that of Altena, and a Party
concerned in it, has thereby a just Foundation for maintaining the Duke in his
pretensions. But here are Two Questions to be examined; The first is: If the
Second Article of the Treaty of Altena, is to be understood in that Sense,
which the Duke and his Favorers give it, the Second is, if the King of Sweden
has a just Foundation for his Proceedings. And hereupon I only will make some
general Reflections.

As to the first Head: the first Reflection I shall make is: That how clear
soever the Second Article of the Treaty of Altena seems to be in favor of the
Duke, it is never the less not without Objection, and to give it the extent,
that his Favorers do, the point that respects the Forts, must be expressed
thus: With the Right of building Forts where he thinks fit and Convenient,
without his Majesty's taking any Notice of it, or finding fault with it.

What I here say, is no Cavil; for, to be convinced of the Truth of what I say,
one needs but to read the Fifth Article of the same Treaty, which says thus: As
for the Union and Agreements between the two Houses, and the Treaties made till
the Year 1675. they shall continue in their full Force and Vigor, and be
Religiously kept and observed, as well as the Treaty of Westphalia, the North,
and Fontainebleau. Who sees not, that how Sovereign soever the Duke of Gottorp
be, or what Right soever he has to build Forts, and to put Garrisons in them,
etc. he can do nothing but what agrees with these Treaties of Union and
Agreements between the Houses, else the Fifth Article is useless. Now the
Question is: If what the Duke does be not contrary to these Treaties. This is
my first Reflection.

The Second is: That without descending to the particulars of what I here
before have spoken concerning the aim and intention of these Treaties of Union,
it is enough to say, that all Treaties of Union are by right such, that,
although those, who treat should find their interest wholly separateed, one of
the Parties can do nothing, that is prejudicial to the other, without
infringing the Treaty, else it is no longer a Treaty of Union. This is a matter
of Fact incontestable, and being so; with how much more Reason is it, when the
Parties have the Rights and Interest in common as in this present Case? The
Duke of Gottorp therefore is to prove, not only, that it is for the common
interest to build Forts in the Places, where he will build them, and that they
are necessary for the good and preservation of the Country, but also, that
these Forts cannot be to any prejudice to the King of Denmark his Joint-Lord.
And this is, what he can never be able to prove; for on the one Hand he will
build them in the middle of the Country, which is useless for its preservation,
seeing it is never thought necessary to fortify, but only the Frontiers; on the
other hand, it is evident that he Fortifies himself against the King, deprives
his Majesty of the Right of the general Inspection he has over the whole
Duchy, and consequently the Duke breaks visibly the Unions and Agreements
between the Two Houses, and even the Community; though it should not extend any
further than to the Nobility and Clergy: for this Community alone is enough to
hinder one of the Sovereigns from doing any thing that concerns the general
interest of the Sovereignty, without the consent of the other.

I think the King has reason to tell the Duke: You have Right to build Forts, I
confess it; you have Tonningen, of which you are Master without dispute. But
that you may do nothing to my prejudice, and that, That, which you design to
do, may be for the good of our common Sovereignty, let us agree about the place
and the Works; afterward you may build freely, and I shall be so far from
opposing it, that I will assist you.

But the Duke instead of Acting unanimously with the King for the common good,
will alone give Laws, explain the Treaties as he pleases, and be the Sovereign
Arbiter in a thing, where he has but only his Vote. This is not yet all; for
the Duke is so far from considering jointly with the King what is necessary for
the good of their common Duchy, that he introduces there the Hereditary Enemy
of the Crown of Denmark, builds Forts and puts them in their Hands, pretending,
if I so may say, to give the Sovereignty another Master. Is this the sense and
meaning of the Treaties of Union between the Two Houses? Is this the Sense of
the Treaty of 1658. and of the Letters-Patent?

This is so true, that I would fain ask those, who have advised the Duke to Act
as he does, if, now the Swedish Troops are in his Country, they are assured,
that their Master is Master enough to make them leave it, when he Commands. And
was there never any Example, that Princes have paid dear for their Passion,
desire of Revenge, and too much trust? It is to no purpose to say, that those
Troops shall Swear Fidelity to the Duke, and obey his Orders; for besides, that
such Oaths are but useless precautions, according to the practice now adays,
one must be wilfully blind, not to see, that, whatsoever happens, the King of
Sweden will always be Master of his Troops, and the Dukes Orders must submit to
his.

It might perhaps be said: That this is the Dukes business, that he is Master
at home, and that he has right to make Alliances; but this is a mistake, since
he carries the thing too far; for it is chiefly the King's business, whose
interest it is to hinder the Swedes from Fortifying themselves in the Heart of
his Dominions. Besides, can one say, that the Duke is so absolute Master, even
of his Portion in the Duchy, that he can dispose of it as he pleases? No,
certainly; for without alleging the Community over the Nobility and Clergy,
and the Unions, which hinder one of the Sovereigns from undertaking any thing
to the prejudice of the other, one needs but read the Treaty of 1658. for to
see that the Rights of Vassalage and Sovereignty are not yielded, but to the
Dukes, and their Issue Males, Born and to be Born in lawful Marriage, and not
to any other. And therefore the Issue Males once failing, the King remains
Sovereign alone and enters into all his Rights again, as I have already
observed. Besides, the Letters-Patent say expressly: That the Duchy of Sleswig
cannot be Alienated, neither in whole nor in part, to the prejudice of the
Kings and Crown of Denmark. Finally, As for the Right of making Alliances, it
is evident by all that I have said, that what Right soever the Duke has to
that, yet nothing can Authorize him to put the Country in the hands or Power of
any other, nor by consequence to introduce Foreign Troops. For what reason then
does he charge the Country with new Troops? What War has he to fear? Where, or
who are the Enemies? All Europe is in quiet; and if there be nothing to fear,
why then does he oppress the People or exhaust the Country without necessity?
Is this the meaning of the Treaties of Union between the Houses?

Some perhaps will Answer: That the King of Denmark himself is the Enemy of the
Duke of Gottorp, because of what passed in the time of the late Duke his
Father. But the King may reply: First, That neither he, nor his Ancestors, have
ever been Enemies to the Dukes of Gottorp, but when the Dukes have been theirs,
and held Correspondence with the Enemies of the Crown of Denmark, contrary to
the Treaties of Union, etc. And indeed the Kings of Denmark had good ground
then to secure a Country, wherein they have an incontestable Right, and to
hinder the Dukes from admitting their Enemies, and giving them entrance into
their Kingdom. Secondly, If this reason shall take place, no Treaty of Peace
can any longer subsist; for besides, the renewing of those of the Union, what
do these following Words of the Article of the Treaty of Altena mean? There
shall be an Eternal Oblivion of what is passed on both sides, this Treaty makes
an inviolable Friendship, and a most strict Union between his Majesty and his
Highness, as well as between their Heirs and Successors, etc. And who knows
not, that, when a Treaty of Peace and Reconcilement is concluded between
Princes, it is no longer permitted to renew the Differences passed, nor to make
War without Grievances?

The Third Reflection is: That the Treaty of Altena, taken in its true Sense,
is no more than a Confirmation of that of Copenhagen, 1660. and the others
following; as it appears clearly by these Words of the Second Article in that
Treaty..... and in all the Rights, Privileges, and Pre-eminencies, that he
enjoyed by Virtue of the Treaties of Westphalia, and the North, etc. This shows
evidently, that the meaning of this Treaty has properly been but only to settle
things again upon the same Foot they were before. Now since all things have
been reestablished, and the late Duke satisfied with it until his Death, why
then does he change them at present, and give beginning to new troubles, that
may prove dangerous to the whole Country of things by no great importance?

The Fourth Reflection is: That the Duke of Gottorp, or rather his Counselors,
ought to Remember, that there are very many reasons which ought to bind him to
the Crown of Denmark, rather than to that of Sweden; for, besides that, which
the King and they have in common in their Duchy, their Treaties of Union, the
Disorders and the Prejudice that divisions may produce, and the Friendship
there naturally ought to be between Princes of the same Blood, and descended
from the same Kings; are not the Dukes of Gottorp, for these many Years,
Presumptif Heirs to the Crown of Norway? And is not this present Duke become
Heir to the Crown of Denmark, by the Duchess his Mother? Now if these Ties
don't produce a good Understanding, I know not what can?

I go on to my Second Question, viz. To inquire if the King of Sweden be well
grounded to proceed as he does? Hereupon I shall make the following Reflections.

The First is: That the King of Sweden having no Difference with the King of
Denmark; and the Duke of Gottorp, his Ally, enjoying in Peace his Domains,
Revenues, and his Sovereignty, jointly with the King his Joint-Lord, and
separately over his own Vassals, it is surprising that he should run the hazard
of kindling a War in the North, and not rather try all means of an
Accommodation, especially since the whole difference is but about the Sense of
the Second Article of the Treaty of Altena, the ground of which the Parties
agree on.

To this they will say, that there have been Conferences held and are broke of;
but as each Prince Protests, that it is not his fault that these Conferences
took no Effect, it is a Mark, that it would be easy to renew them, and yet I
think it would be better to attempt it again by way of Negotiation, than by
forcible and unlawful means.

My Second Reflection is: That though the King of Sweden be Guarantee, and
Party concerned in the Treaty of Altena, yet he cannot give it what Sense and
extent he pleases.

The Third is: That, to speak properly, the King of Sweden is not Guarantee of
the said Treaty, for the true Guarantees, that is to say those, who can have
Right to take Notice of the performance of the Treaty, are the Mediators, viz.
The Emperor, the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg; but suppose that the King
of Sweden be Guarantee of this Treaty toward the Duke of Gottorp, the King of
Great Britain and the States General are so likewise; so that it would be well
worth the while to Act unanimously with the Mediators and Guarantees, or at
least not to Act without their consent or advice; and the Duke of Gottorp is so
much the more obliged to do it, for that it is his interest to manage the
Powers, that can do much in this Affair, and will have reason to be offended at
his proceeding. That which makes me believe that, they are not consulted, is,
that I do not see it is for their interest to suffer the Swedes to render
themselves more Powerful in Germany, than they are, nor that they should put
their Troops into a Country, where Denmark has so great a Right.

I know they will Answer, that the King of Sweden is a Young Prince, who has
Ambition and Courage. All this I grant. But is this a sufficient Ground to
undertake a War upon? For in short, it is very likely that the King of Denmark
will not be idle or wanting to himself; and must one not have strong and just
reasons, when he undertakes a thing of so great a Consequence? Without which a
Prince renders himself accountable to God of all the Blood, that shall be shed
in the War he undertakes, or is the cause of.

Nay, I dare proceed yet farther to say, it is not always enough that a Prince
has good reason on his side to begin a War, it must be for some weighty and
important Affairs that are worth the while; without which he is still
accountable to God for all the Disorders, that may ensue.

Now can any Body reasonably say, that to Fortify the Duchy of Sleswig in one
place more than in another, or that the Sense of the Second Article of the
Treaty of Altena, is a matter that Merits the hazard of involving three
Kingdoms in War and Troubles? This being so, I cannot conceive, how any body
can advise the King of Sweden to such an Enterprise.

But, Sir, if you will have me speak plainly, I must needs confess, between you
and I, that I cannot believe, that only the design to help the Duke to rebuild
his Forts, is the true motive that makes the Swedes Act thus, and you can never
beat it out of my Head, but that they have some other projects, whereof the
Treaty of Altena is but the Cloak. However it be, other Princes and Powers in
Europe, and especially England, and Holland must see, if it be their interest
in these present Circumstances of Affairs, to let the War break out in the
North, and not to keep the Balance equal between the two Kings. And how can
this be, as long as one makes himself Master of a Country, whereof he has no
right, and which to speak properly, belongs to the other.

Moreover, every Body knows that the Treaty of Sweden, with the Town of Bremen,
does expire with this Century, and that the King of Sweden might renew his
pretensions; that it is not impossible either to surprise this Town, or to have
gained a party therein, to send some Troops from thence into Sleswig, and to
throw a greater number into that Country, under pretense of making up the
number again, that he may have a considerable Army in Germany. I am apt to
believe, that the Neighboring Princes will have a watchful Eye upon these
Affairs; for my part, I will rely upon their care, submitting my Reflections to
the more Judicious. and my Conjectures to the Events.

I am, SIR, Yours.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Tho. Bennet.
THE Certainty and Necessity of Religion in General, or the first Grounds and
Principles of Humane Duty Established. In Eight Sermons, Preached at St.
Martins in the Fields. At the Lecture for the Year 1697. Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil Esquire;

The Certainty of the Christian Revelation, and the Necessity of Believing it,
Established in Opposition to all the Cavils, and Insinuations of such as
Pretend to allow Natural Religion and Reject the Gospel. Both By Francis
Gastril, B. D. and Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn.

A Conference with a Theist. In Four Parts Complete. By William Nichols, D.D.


