AN ACCOUNT OF THE Defeat of the Irish Army, And of the late King James's
Arming the Protestants in Dublin; upon which the French threatened to burn that
City.
19. Aug. 1689.
LAST Night we received an Express from the North with Letters of the 11th.
Instant, which given an Account, that the Irish having marched away from the
Town of Londonderry as soon as the Succors arrived, and intending to Attack
the Enniskilling Men by the way, the Protestants were too quick for them, 4000
of that Garrison marching out to meet them, and engaging them, routed them, and
killed 4000 on the Spot, taking 14 of their Great Guns, all their Ammunition
and Baggage, many Prisoners, and amongst them were Justin Maccarty and Col.
Hamilton.

This News is likewise confirmed from Dublin, with several other Particulars;
as, that as soon as the Duke of Berwick arrived at Dublin, and gave an Account
to the late K. James of this Defeat, he was in so great a Consternation, that
he suddenly called all the Protestants that were in Dublin together, giving
them Arms, and telling them how he found he had mistaken his true Interest, and
desired them to stand by him, and he would defend them in their Rights, etc.
Whilst this was doing, a Regiment of French Horse advanced toward Dublin, who
commanded them to lay down their Arms and disperse, or else threatened to fall
upon them, and fire that City: Upon which K. James told them, how Unhappy he
was, that his Circumstances would not allow him to follow what he desired, and
therefore desired them to deliver up their Arms, and separate themselves: To
which they answered, That they would disperse; but to deliver up their Arms,
were also to deliver up their Lives, and therefore could not do it. After this,
there came thirteen Captains of the Royal Regiment of Foot, who were the only
surviving Captains of 24 at the Engagement at Enniskilling, who flung up their
Commissions, and said, they would Serve no longer. This was extremely
surprising to the late King James, who answered, He was a second time betrayed;
and therefore gave immediate Orders, that all the Soldiers about Dublin should
be ready to March. So next Day he marched out of Duhlin with 8000 Men, and
coming to Clomnell, he received two Expresses one after another: The first was
from Kingsale, to give him Advice that Admiral Herbert was upon the Coast with
his Fleet, and that he intended to Land and take the Fort. which he would
certainly do, if they had not immediate Succors. He then thought of marching
away directly toward Kingsale, but soon after came another Express, to give
him Advice, that Duke Schomberg was sailed out of Chester with all his Forces,
and that he stood Northward toward Dublin, or that way. This put him in so
great a Consternation, that he marched way toward Lymerick, and we expect to
hear now every hour where Duke Schomberg has landed.

The Reverend Dr. Walker, Governor of Londonderry, designs for England, to
give His Majesty an Account of his Behavior in that place, having now so
miraculously preserved his Country by his undaunted Courage and Conduct, and
freed them from all their Enemies, who were ready to swallow them up, who will
undoubtedly find a fit Recompense for his Signal Services.

FINIS.
London: Printed for R. Baldwin. MDCLXXXIX.


