THE CASE OF MINISTERING AT THE Communion Table When there is no EUCHARIST.

STATED And Discussed, upon occasion of a Treatise Entitled, Parish Churches
turned into Conventicles, etc.

TOGETHER With some Preliminary Reflections made upon two Papers in Answer to
that Treatise.

LONDON: Printed by Ralph Holt, for Obadiah Blagrave, at the Bear in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1683.

THE CASE OF MINISTERING AT THE Communion Table When there is no EUCHARIST.
STATED And Discussed, upon occasion of a Treatise Entitled, Parish Churches
turned into Conventicles, etc. In a Letter to I. B.
Worthy Sir,
TO your Second Letter received last Thursday with the enclosed Dissertation, I
cannot but yield the Debt of an Answer somewhat sooner, because I perceive you
expect it so fully; tho I could scarce at any time set about such a Task as you
set me, more incommodiously, as being wasted with such a Grievous Catarrh,
Hoarsness, and Soreness, that as I was constrained on that Thursday, to break
off my constant Attendance at Church this Lent, and keep close within Doors; so
next day to confine my self to my Chamber, and procure help for the following
Lords day. But beginning through Gods goodness to be better at ease, I would
not deferr to give you mine opinion of the Book. And that in the first place of
the sour Title; which I confess offended me, as I suppose it will others lying
under the same Guilt with me, which he makes very Notorious, and of that
nature, whereby the nature of the Church of England is shaken, and her
Reputation deeply wounded, not so deservedly, nor justly, as is insinuated or
rather openly charged; as I suppose will in some measure appear in the Sequel
of my unpolished Discourse, and very hasty, as you may gather from the short
time and long Letter.

But lest it should be imagined that I offend in the like sharpness, or
prejudice against the Author, I do here premise this sincere profession, That I
do discern a great deal of Ingeniousness, Acuteness, Nervousness, and Weight in
the Discourse. And that being (as may be drawn from some Passages) given to the
Study of the Law of this Nation, he should show such an unusual Zeal for the
Power, and established Orders of the Church, which I would to God, were with no
less Conscience observed by the Clergy it self, this not excepted, which he
contends for so vigorously. And that I flatter not him, nor dissemble with you,
may be attested in part by your self, who know I restored the Usance of
Ministration at the Communion Table, or rather introduced it where it was not
heard of in the Memory of Man: and so continued it for 7 years, when for
causes, some not touched by him, and some endeavored to be refuted by this
Author, I desisted. I would not therefore be looked on at any hand at present,
as going about to confute what he delivers: but upon your request, deliver mine
own Thoughts somewhat diverse, not contrary to his, and that in these in
Propositions.

First, I do fully Grant, and firmly believe, that it is most agreeable to the
mind of the Church of England, that the Office called the second Service be
performed at the Communion Table; Circumstances remaining the same, as when it
was first so instituted. For seeing Circumstances do vary the case egregiously,
the intention of the Author of such Orders is to be judged from the Motives,
and Ends inducing to such Constitutions; which ceasing, or changing, the
Intention of the Ordainers may be said to cease and change likewise: and
consequently, the Obligation to observe the first Institutions according to the
rigor of the Letter: Examples or Instances whereof I shall afterward give you.

In the mean time I must here note how wide the Author of that reproachful
Title to his Papers is [to wit, Parish Churches turned into Conventicles] from
making the Omission of Ministration at the Lords Table, Conventicling, or
Phanatical. For, what (I beseech Mr. H.) is Conventicling, or Phanaticism which
I make Synonymous (however some that call themselves the Sober Dissenters would
fain deny this?) Does it consist in simple Omission of some part of the Service
absolutely, and not rather in these two things principally, and in my opinion
Essentially? First to have a contrary judgment and affection against the
Established Lyturgy, and as far as safely and successfully they may,
strennuously to oppose the same? And if a man be far from any of these
Distempers of mind and actions, yet neglects somewhat enjoined (for that we may
suppose at present, which we shall Question hereafter) rather than opposes, is
there no favor to be shown him, but he must be condemned for a Phanatick, and
his Ministration for Conventicling? Or are the Parish Priests Phanatical, who
observe not Holydays, and the Service of Wednesdays and Frydays? Or rather are
they not (according to this Gentleman's Rule) worse than Conventiclers; as I
think before God they are, who come not to Church, nor go to Conventicles, but
on Public Days of Worship profanely stay at home. Surely as perverseness, and
obstinacy in error, are by the Learned judged the formal part of an Heretic:
So likewise is it of a Schismatic, or Schismatizer; the Material part being
the error it self of no small importance.

And this is the second Reason distinguishing Omssion at most of a Circumstance
in Public Worship from Conventicling: For see, and judge indifferently the
whole worship of Conventiclers. Is it not in Matter and in Form both, and also
in all Circumstances as much different from the Church-worship, as they well
can to bear up the Name of Christian? Does it not wholly proceed from their own
humane Brain? An intolerable crime with them, when they whom they have made
their Adversaries cannot allege direct and express Scriptures for all they
say, or do in Gods Worship? I am of St. Hilary's mind of old, That not the love
of Walls sacred, alters the Worship, but the Doctrine and Worship rather
changes, and unhalloweth the Place: And when the Imaginations of private men
are graced with the Fabric of a Lawful Church, the Church is disgraced into a
Meeting-Room, or Conventicling place. But where a Circumstance, and that of
Place is only changed, I am quite of another opinion, unless this be done out
of Opposition. For what if we should suppose a Minister should be so absurd as
to change the time of the second Service, and keep his due place of the
Communion Table, reading it after Dinner? This would be worse than the former,
but still it would not be Conventicling, unless all Irregular Worship makes a
Conventicle, which if so, it may make it Popery too, and with better Reason,
such as the Phanaticks never dreamt on, or dared never to utter. For Papists
divide not their Service into several Places, but keep their Station where they
began, using some variety of Gesticulations. But I have spoken more under this
Head than I intended, and therefore break from hence to,

The second Proposition intended, and that is, That it does not appear that the
Church of England has given any direct Precept for reading that part of the
Communion Service at the Lord's Table, which is to end without Actual
Consecration. This I am to make good by two Ways, First by probable
Circumstances begetting this Persuasion, Secondly by Examining the Pregnancy
and Validity supposed in the Reasons to the contrary mentioned and urged by Mr.
H. My first Part I shall endeavor to make good by fetching somewhat farther my
Conjectures. For I suppose 1. that the constant profession of our Church in
following the Scripture as a true Rule of Doctrine and Worship, and that as
interpreted by the most Ancient, Sound, and Holy Church of Christ met here with
no Obstruction or Exception; little or no cause being given her to swerve from
her professed Rule of Charity and Conformity. Now, as I have (if my memory fail
me not) intimated unto you in Personal Discourse, I do not find that any where
in Ancient Churches, nor at this day out of England, in Reformed or Unreformed,
in Eastern, or Western Churches, that the Office of the Church was so divided,
as that one part of it should be said in one Part, or Quarter of the Church;
and another in another Part; but where it began, there it ended.

It may seem therefore a more necessary than curious Inquiry, to learn whence
our Church took up that Custom so strange every where else. For tho after
greater Concourses of Christians, for their greater benefit drew down the
Office of the Church from the Eastern Part, and Quire, into the Body of the
Church, for better Distribution of the Service among the Multitude, yet still,
the Office designed for the day was entirely completed in one Place. Neither
can it be said that our Desk-Service, or common daily Service is a distinct
Service from that of the Communion Service, which some allege, others making a
threefold Service by virtue of the Litany added to the rest, upon Special days,
which I think can scarce be made good; yet if all this were true, (which I
shall rather yield, than here dispute) still we shall want an ancient Precedent
to warrant this division of our Service into sundry Places.

For as for that Ancient Distinction of the Missa, into that of the Fideles,
and the Catechumeni, whereof that consisted in the Celebration of the Lords
Supper and the Communicating therein; This was called Sicca, because there were
only certain Prayers preliminary and common to all, designed for Baptism, as
well as Baptized, without Consecration: and therefore was also sometimes called
Nautica, because it might be used at Sea, on Shipboard, where they judged it
not safe to consecrate, yet (as I was saying) in one and the same Place when
jointly used, they were performed. This Distinction mentioned coming nearest to
the Resembling and Justification of our stop of the Communion Service, where
there is no Consecration, at the end of the Prayer for the Holy Catholic
Church, is much asserted by Bartholomaeus Nervius in his defense of Cassander,
page 890, 891 of Cassanders works. And is acknowledged by Chemnitius Exam.
Trident. page 363. Part. And more largely by Cassander himself out of
Waldensis, Socrates, and Durantus, in the 34 Chapter of his Liturgies. Which I
choose to speak of here, as well to justify the like Practice in our Church, as
also to show, that such Distinction in the Office can be no sufficient ground
to just ifie distinct Places of Worship: And therefore we are to fetch the
causes from some other ground than this: And I am of opinion, that such search
will be lost Labor out of our own Church: And that in our own Church will be
found a Singular Oeconomia, (as St. Chrysostom. would call it) and Condescension
to gain, in the Spring of our Reformation, by all means, some.

For in truth I am not so well read in, or so well remember, the Antiquities of
our Church, as to be able to say when the Desk or Reading Pew in the Body of
the Church, came first to be appointed, tho I remember some no modern Articles
of Bishops Visitations enquiring after them, as appointed. But when ever they
were first appointed, I presume to say; That they were intended not for Prayers
at all, but for Reading the Scriptures and Homilies to the people in the
English Tongue, which they had not the happiness a little before, at all to
enjoy. But the whole Service of the Church was, as in Ancient Churches, all at
the Altar, as they call it, the People then having not forgotten to gather
together before the Priest, and humble themselves, as formerly in times of
Popery: For they had not drunk in the Popular Superstition of following
Teachers, scaring them, as Children, with Bugbears of Superstition in places.
And when the ordinary daily Service was brought into the Desk, as most
commodious, at the time of celebrating the Lords Supper, which was adjudged
then requisite to be continued, all Holydays, and Sundays the Communion Service
was continued as formerly, at the Altars, as at first, or the Table, in the
stead and place of the Altar. And I do really believe, but cannot demonstrate,
that until the first Book of Edward 6. enjoined, all the Reformed Service was
as formerly, at the Altar. But in that first Book I find no Rubric directing
the Service in the Body of the Church, or Chancel: But in the 2 Book of Edward
6. this Rubric is premised. The Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used in
such places of the Church, Chapel or Chancel, and the Minister shall so turn
him, as the People may best hear, etc.

Here is mention made of the most commodious Posture at one Place for the
People to hear: But no mention at all of diverse places, either in the first
Service, or in the second, where is order taken more especially for proper
Habits at the time of celebration of the Communion, but nothing else, implying
but one Place, as yet. Now when the Places become distinct by erecting a
Reading Pew, I am of opinion, that it was then, and after permitted to
Officiate then in the Second Service (as we call it) in the Desk, till the
Canon of Consecration, which the Ancients would call the Canon of the Mass,
began. For in such Junctures, and Cases, I believe it was the command of the
Church there only to minister.

And from hence I gather a Solution of the Riddle, and of the Objections made
for the Direct Precept of our Church for Ministering the whole Office of the
Communion at the Lords Table. The Difficulties and Arguments for the
Indispensable Obligation to it, are founded upon the certain Command, which I
grant ought Religiously to be obeyed, that command certainly appearing. Command
Direct none is pretended, but Indirect, and Implicit is endeavored to be
proved by Mr. H. and others from a twofold Rubric, the one requiring that the
Minister stand at the North end of the Table, which he cannot do, unless he be
there. This is very true. But can he not be there, unless he be commanded to be
there? Or may he not be commanded to be there, when he actually is to
celebrate, and so have Rules appointed how to order his Actions, and Station
through the whole, but this must oblige to that place when the celebration does
not follow, nor is intended?

Again, it is argued from a Rubric saying, Then shall the Priest return to the
Lords Table. And this say they necessarily implies that he was there before. I
grant it. But the question is not concerning his being there upon some
occasions, and having been there upon such occasions (as namely preparing for a
Communion before Sermon) he must return thither again having ended his Sermon.
This teaches how he must demean himself when he is there, but does not prove
that indispensably he must be there at all times, when so much, and no more is
said, as reaches to the proper Office of consecration. That this is no Querk
or groundless Evasion, will competently appear from the Rubric immediately
going before, which is this, Then shall follow the Sermon, or one of the
Homilies already set forth by Authoirty. Let them tell me now, whether this be
not a direct Precept of our Church. Let them likewise tell, whether this be an
absolute command, or Conditional only. That is, whether the Minister having
proceeded so far in that Service, is absolutely bound to Preach, or read an
Homily (which I know none will positively affirm) or only obliged when there is
a Sermon or Homily, here to have it. Which I doubt not but will generally be
granted to be the very truth.

From hence then in proportionable manner I infer, that returning to the Lords
Table is necessarily imposed upon the Minister, when his Ministration required
that he should be there, and conditionally, not when it did not require him.
And if it be yet urged, that he is always required, this is to beg the
question, which could not be gained by Argument: And to fall into this circle
he must needs be there because he must return thither, and he must return
thither because he was there. And thus have I done with my first proof of my
Proposition, viz. That the primary intention of our Church was (imitating
ancient Churches) that the entire Service should be said in one place, and
consequently that she never intended one part of the Communion Service should
be Executed in the Desk, and another at the Lords Table, but that remitting of
its principal design in suffering the first Service, as now it is called, to be
in the Desk, it is Probable that she yielded, that so much of the second might
be there used, as related not necessarily to Consecration. And so of the two
main Reasons arguing a necessity of the Missa Sicca to be out of the Desk.

A Second Reason I make to be from not the Casual, but the Purposed Uncertainty
of the Forementioned Rubricks diversely understood by diverse Men. That there is
no such Convincing clearness in them, as is pretended, I show from a passage I
learned from one of Archbishop Juxons's Chaplains upon the sight of the last
Reformation made of our Liturgy under this King: Who observing the Rubricks to
Stand in that doubtful manner, as before, in the New Edition, where no Precept
is given to minister out of the Time of the Lords Supper, and yet order taken
how he that ministers shall stand and return, was much offended with the Bishop
of London, Dr. Sheldon for not taking care of Rendering things more plain: but
which way he desired more Perspicuity, I cannot tell, that this, whether by
determining for constant Ministration at the Communion Table, even where, and
when no Communion was, I cannot say, or whether not.

A Third Reason I take from the Apparent, and Indubitable Tenet of the Church
of England, which is, That all Sacred and Public Worship of God be
Intelligibly performed before the Common People, and more especially the
Scriptures then Rehearsed. This I could show, if need Required, from the
judgment of some of our Gravest, and Learned Divines delivered to me upon
this occasion, Instancing to them in this Inconvenience of the People not being
able to hear, and much less to understand that which a man of Competent Voice
Says at the Altar, keeping their Seats in the Church, which has more than one
Alley, or I Will. You know mine has three Alleys, and when I constantly used
Ministration in the Chancel (which you know is none of the least) I have been
assured by some most affected to the Church Service, that they could hear
nothing of what I said in the Chancel: And yet I am confident there are more
Voices weaker, and lower than mine was, than louder. Now what Apology can be
made for such unknown Tongue to them that hear it not, which may not be made
for a Tongue absolutely unknown, which is heard? I know none. I know in the
Greek Liturgies often occur in their Rubricks (...), and (...), i. e. Lowly and
Lowdly: But their Low Voice is there only appointed when they speak not to the
People, but apply themselves directly and especially to God, as in actual
Consecration. And the Author of the Compilatio Chronologica, at the Year 484.
amongst the German Historians has these words, Tres Causae ob quas sub
silentio pronunciat Canon Missae: 1 Quia Deo loquitur. 2 Taedium crearet Populo
and Sacerdoti. 3. Ne vilescant Verba.

The like causes may you find in Biel Lect. 15. or the Mass and yet more fully
in Vicecomes Vol. 3. Lib. 3. Cap. 23. which notwithstanding the Church of
England never purposely hides from the People any part of the Service, tho by
accident all may not be capable of what is said openly: But looks upon it as a
Corruption befalling the Worship of God in Tract of time: Ancienter Days
allowing Explicit and Audible Pronunciation of those things which after-Ages
made too Mystical to be made Common: As you may find well Proved by Spalatensis
Reipub. Ecclesiast. Lib. 5. Chapter 6. Number. 11. And Photius Nomocanon. Tit. 3. Cap.
1. proves the same out of the 5 Canon of Laodicea, and 5 Basil, and the Code.
And therefore much more does our Church require such Audible Ministrations.
Which if she does, how she can require such a Ministration, as should neither
be understood, nor so much as heard, Judge you.

Two things I am very Sensible may be here Retorted, one whereof is mentioned
by Mr. H. First, That it may so fall out that a Man cannot be heard in the
Desk, and so another manner of care ought to be taken against this
Inconvenience as well as that. I answer, This is Possible, and does diverse
times happen: But when the Church has taken all Ordinary care to prevent an
Inconvenience, and yet cannot, there is no more to be Expected from her, but
such rare Inconveniences must be suffered, to prevent Multiplicity of Remedies,
which like the Frequentation of Physic to obviate every little Indisposition
in the Body Natural, would prove worse than the Disease. For as Plato was wont
to say, To multiply Laws upon every light occasion seeming useful, is to cut
off Hydra's Head, in place of which many will suddenly Spring up. Which by the
way were to be wished would be duly considered by our Statesmen, who presently
finding the Subject in the least Incommoded, must make a Law to cut off that
Grievance, not foreseeing greater Evils ready to break out upon that Law. But
to return, The Case is much different in the Service at the Lords Table, and in
the Desk, when as the first by many is never heard, and the Second sometimes
not heard by some few.

Another Objection may be, That as for the better hearing the former Part of
the Com. Service was brought into the Desk, so by the like Reason ought the
other Consecrating Part be there also fixed. To which my reply is that, First,
this by the Rubric of that Office was, and is left to the Discretion of the
Ordinary, who has Power to bring the Com. Table into the Church, I suppose,
when he Sees the Chancel incapable of so great a Company as is to Communicate
Ordinarily. Next I Answer, That there is a great Disparity in the Cases. For
when People actually Communicate, they are not only Permitted, but invited to
leave their Remoter Places, and Humbly to Present themselves in the Chancel at
a Competent distance, so that they may heighten their Meditation by beholding,
and Inflame their Devotions more fully, by hearing the Liturgist Officiate: But
in the first Part this is not Permitted, nor would be liked.

Will you Please to hear the Judgment of Martyn Bucer in his first Chapter of
his Censure of the English Service concerning this Point? It is very Harsh, for
one that was much more Gentle then his Fellow Reformers of that time: His Words
are these, Vt enim chorus sit tam procul sejunctus a reliquo Templo, and in eo
tantum Sacra represententur, quae tamen ad omnem pertinent Populum, Clerumque
hoc Antichristianum est. I English nothing to you: For you know this to be
severe. And little less is that of Merick Causabon Son of Isaac, and Late
Prebend of Canterbury in his Treatise of Preaching Page 21. If I mistake not,
Speaking thus, However this Occasion being given me, I cannot but profess my
Great Dislike, that the Service, and Sermon should be Parted any where, the
one, in one Place, and the other in another, if it may possibly be avoided.
Especially at such a distance, as it is here with us in the Cathedral, and
Metropolitical Church of Christ in Canterbury. I Conceive it one Reason, that
so few are acquainted, and by Consequent, not more in Love with the Service. I
leave this to Consideration.

But I gather from St. Aug. words in his first Book Contra Epistolam
Permeniani, Chapter 7. That tho the Priest minister'd in the Chancel, yet the
People both heard and understood, and said Amen to the Prayers, as these words
Testify, Populus autem, cujus ille Sacerdos est, adhuc foris gemit: Nam cum
Episcopus solus intus est, Populus and orat cum illo, and quasi subscribens ad
ejus Verba, Respondet Amen. This being within of the Bishop, and this foris, or
without, of the People, who answered Amen to his Prayers, was much different
from our Church and Chancel. For indeed they seem to be divided not much
otherwise than that Place within the Rails from the rest of the Chancel; or as
myself have seen in some Greek Churches, as a Skreen with two Doors divides one
Part of an Hall from another, which hindered not the People from partaking of
what was there within done by the Bishop or Priest. But when Zeal toward the
most Sacred Place, (as they judged that, wherein the Service of God was
specially performed) caused men to build Ample Chancels distinct from the Body
of the Church (to Speak the Plain truth) they fell into a Pious Error, and
brought great Inconvenience into the Public Service of God in the Judgment of
all those, who look upon unknown, or unheard of Worship; as contrary to true
Christian Communion. Of the Number of which seeing our Church has ever
Professed it self, how can we fairly suppose she should contradict her own
Doctrine by her Practice. And thus far of my Second Proposition.

My third and last Proposition (for it is more than time that this Discourse
were ended) is this. That upon Supposition that once it was the real Intention
of our Church, that no Part of the Second Service, even when there was no
Communion, should be said any where but at the Communion Table, Custom has
both weakened that Law, and Interpreted the meaning of the Church so far
otherwise, that it cannot deserve that odious Name of Conventicling to Read one
Part of it in the Desk. This I purposely set down thus, and directly oppose to
the main Column of this Gentleman's Discourse built on the contrary, which he
farther Buttresseth, (as I may so Speak) with many Inferior Reasons: As the
unreasonableness of Custom to overthrow a Law. For tho says he well, Page 6. a
Custom not prevented by a Law, makes a Law, yet where a Law goes before
inconsistent with the Custom, Custom cannot, and ought not to Null that Law,
being not orderly Rescinded.

Again, (I give his meaning, not sticking to his words) it is a Grievous
Affront to the Kings Majesty, and Authority, thus by Custom to be Baffled. It
is a Great Breach upon the Churches Authority to have her Canons and Orders
thus slighted. It is an Intolerable Presumption for Private Priests of their
own Heads without good Authority, to judge of what is Convenient or
Inconvenient, what is Decent, or Indecent, what Superstitious, or not
Superstitious, contrary to Public Decrees, and I may add, it is the Pest, and
Ruin of this, and all other Established Churches, the Pretended Charitable
Compliance, with pretended tender Consciences of Private Men against the
Conscience, and maturer Counsels of Superiors. All this I acknowledge to be
very important, and deserving due Consideration: Which I shall endeavor to
give to it, by opening briefly the Power, and Nature of Custom, not only when
there is no Written Law to the contrary, but where there is. And this I shall
do by running through, and giving Instances in all sorts of Laws, as Civil,
Common Law with us; Canon Law with other Churches as well as ours, in all which
it will appear what Great Influence and Efficacy Custom has over them; and so,
no such new, notorious, or Intolerable thing is said or committed in Custom
here predominating over the General Rule here supposed by that worthy Gentleman.

I shall begin with the Judgment of that Learned Dr. Eaden, late Master of
Trinity-Hall in Cambridge, Inferior to few of his Time, and none of this
Nation in knowledge of the Civil Law, as I am assured by those that knew him
better than I did. It being demanded of him, what he thought of Custom contrary
to an unrepealed Law, or Statute of a College specially? He answered, Custom
does prevail in such Cases. And being urged a Second time, and demanded, But
what if there be such a Law made that says, by way of Anticipation of abuse of
Custom, that no Custom which afterward may possibly arise shall make void such
a Law, shall Custom prevail also against such a Law? Yes, (answered he) Custom
is to be observed against such a Law also.

And that he spoke not without Book (as they say) or without good Reason, I
shall show, beginning with the Civil Law. But first of all must we agree what
Custom is. Consuetudo, (says Isidore Hispalensis, Lib. 5. C. 3.) est jus
moribus institutum. Now it is not so well agreed upon by the Learned Civillians
what Continuation of Practice makes a Lawful Custom. Some Lawyers, and Laws,
(as I could Instance in, were it seasonable) make twenty Years a Competent time
to produce, and denominate a Custom; others Assign an Hundred Years, others
forty. Now choose which we will of these three, there will be good Ground to
found a Custom of not necessary Observation of the Service at the Communion
Table, out of Communion. For tho (as Mr. Hooker said, quoted by Mr. H.) the
said Service was commonly there used, when there was no Communion; yet it is
much more certain that more Common and General it was to omit it, and that for
these Hundred Years. And besides Experience, I think the Argument of the
quarrelsome Sectaries, do prove so much, who would not have dared (tho they be
daring enough) to have called it an Innovation, had it been in the Memory of
Man Generally observed.

But in truth, it was their wonted, and affected Ignorance, which so
Venturously and Mischievously transports them oftentimes to call it an
Innovation, when they could not be so stupid many of them that had ever seen
and been present at a Cathedral, but they must acknowledge it to be almost as
Ancient as the Reformation, than which they are wont to desire nothing
Ancienter. Here therefore we may bring in the finer Discourses of such who will
distinguish Use from Custom. For Use may that be called, that which is not
altogether laid aside: But Custom that which is most Common and Prevalent: And
such undoubtedly is this Omission we speak of. Some add a third kind, which
they call Prescription, but Vasquez in 1. 2. Thomae, tells them well, they are
mistaken: For as much as Prescription differs from Custom as to Degrees, or as
a Child from a Man. One or two Acts or Examples the Lawyers will allow for a
Sufficient Prescription: but they cannot allege them to be a Custom: Custom
being that which for Multitude, and Extent exceeds all other Rules.

Now for the force of Custom, because some are of opinion it depends upon
Authority to be of Weight, I shall give you Vasquez his Judgment in Thom. 1, 2,
Tom. 2. Disput. 177. Cap. 6. 52. Ego quidem, says he, Existimo, si loquamur
secundum jus Canonicum and Civil Imperatorum, Consuetudinem posse introduci
absque ullo actu Speciali, solo Extrajudiciali usu. Nam in jure Canonico nullus
textus est, in quo contrarium statuatur; In Civili vero Imperatorio est lex
quae exigat duas Sententias: That is, as I understand him, which required two
Judgments, one taken from the Law written, another from the Law unwritten, or
Custom. And he that shall advise with Thomas, 1. 2. Quaest. 79. a. 3. and his
Retinue of Commentators shall find these three Properties Generally ascribed to
Custom. 1. That it abrogates and takes away the Law, which I confess I assent
not to, giving my Reasons hereafter, because it only voids the Present
Obligation to it, and not destroys it absolutely. 2. It Interprets Law. This I
hold generally true. 3. It brings in a New Law, i. e. there being no Law
Antecedent opposing such a Law: For in such Cases it only lays the Ancient Law
asleep, not kills it.

I might enlarge more upon this Preparatory Discourse to Custom: But I come to
the thing it self, and the effects of it. First in Civil Law, to make void (as
even now I said) the Letter of a Law Prescribing otherwise: So that if besides
General Obligation of Obedience to Lawful Governors, men for the firmer
Ratification of it, and Observation, shall take an Oath to keep it, his Oath
according to great Interpreters, does not necessarily, and fully bind according
to the Literal sense, when a General and long Custom prevails to the
contrary. I here to prove this, allege the words of Gerson Chancellor once of
Paris, Coroll. 13. Page 6. De vita Spirituali; and the rather, because Mr. H.
has plainly said, that such Consuetudo is no other than Corruptela, which is
directly confronted by these words of Grave Gerson. Omnis Lex humana est vel
Positiva, in eo quod non necessario participat cum Naturali, and Divina. Haec
autem Abrogatio fit vel per Consuetudinem oppositam juxta quod dicunt Juristae,
and verum est, quod Consuetudo est optima Legum Interpres. Nec unquam dicenda
est Corruptela, nisi ubi Legem Divinam aut Naturalem laedere convincitur. And
by and by he adds. Fit autem Abrogatio per Expressam, aut Interpretativam
Revocationem factam ab illo, qui condendi habuit Potestatem: fit denique
Abrogatio Causa manifestae Damnationis, si Lex illa Servetur.

Here is matter offered of a Refutation of Mr. Hearts Supposition, that such a
Custom, as we now contend for, would be both a great Corruption, and Abrogation
of the Law supposed to enjoin this Practice. For this would be only an
Interpretation of the mind of the Legislatour in the like Juncture of Weighty
Circumstances. Again, it would not be such affront to the Kings and Churches
Authority, they both looking on and permitting this Custom enervating their
Law. And besides, where a Law is Abrogated properly, there goes before such a
Recision, and Repeal, which deny Power Ordinary to the Authors of that Law, or
Constitution, that it no more can be of force without a New Act Establishing
it: but where long Custom has voided it for a time, it remains still with the
Dispensers of the Laws, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical, to Revive and
Reinforce it, without any new Solemn, and formal Enacting of a new one.

This farther appears from Statutes of Universities, Colleges in
Universities, and Collegiate Churches: The Members of which oblige themselves
to a due Observation of them, and you see what great Latitude is suffered by
virtue of Custom subtly, and Insensibly creeping upon such Foundations,
whereby as the Ivy eats out the Heart and Life of the Timber-Tree in time, the
force of them is almost lost. Of this the same Gerson in the same Place Lectur.
4. thus takes notice, Nobis praeterea dicendum videtur multae sunt
Institutiones, ad quarum Observationes videntur Omnes se Quotidianis Juramentis
obstringere, quas tamen observare non tenentur. Non quod Perjurium sit licitum,
sed quod talia Juramenta semper sunt intelligenda civiliter. Horum Exempla
sumere possumus in praeclara Vniversitate Parisiensi.

Now what he means by Civil sense of Precepts of our Superiors and Obedience
of Inferiors, he intimates to us in his Treatise De Perfectione Cordis; that
Obedience Sworn to our Rulers, extends not simply to all things, but only such
as their Power extends unto; And in the former Treatise again our Obedience
he makes fourfold. 1. Of Necessity 2. Of Congruity. 3. of Counsel. 4. Of
Perfection. So that in things not of Necessity, a lower Obligation tyeth us.
Bernard. de Praecept. et Dispens. c. 16. wisely considers two things in taking
upon a Man Obligation to Superiors, the Praeceptum against Sin, and the Remedy
Provided against a Transgression of our Superiors Laws, and concludes, Solum
igitur existimem fregisse votum, violasse propositum, praevaricasse pactum, qui
and praeceptum contempserit and remedium.

Here we have the true and genuine Character of a Phanatick: For to violate a
Law, so as to contemn it, and the Propounder of it, is to fall into Notorious
Disobedience, and Contumacie odious to God, and destructive to all Government:
And having so done, to refuse the Remedy of Admonition, and Submission, is to
be Perfect in modern Impiety: From which no Priest being Censured for not
Ministering at the Altar according as our Author requires, and still obstinately
refusing, preferring his own sense, and the will and good liking of the Common
Sort, before Governors, can well excuse himself: But while the Case is left at
large, and notice taken of such Omission without Censure, the Case is altered.

And I will now make this farther good from the Common Law, from which Custom
has given sufficient Dispensation, the Law remaining in it is Native force
unrepealed, and unabrogated: For which I shall follow the Judgment of that
Learned Judge, Chancellor Elsmere, in his famous Case of the Postnati, Page
48, 49, 50. Where he gives diverse Instances of change of Laws, and contrary
Determinations of Judges to Ancient Precedents and Prescriptions, standing
there unrepealed. Formerly, says he, and shows one Present, Aiding,
Comforting, and Assisting a Murder was taken to be no Principal, but an
Accessory; but now is judged Principal. Again, the Remainder in Tall anciently
could not have an Action of Wast against a Tenant for Life: But afterward he
might. Anciently the Vicar could not have an Action against the Parson: But now
he may, etc. And how came this Change but by Custom? And how came this Custom,
but by one or two at first varying from the Ancient Rule? And yet the Kings
Authority was not supposed hereby to be invaded or affronted, by which Ancient
Laws Subsisted; which Mr. H. with great Zeal pretends must hereby wonderfully
suffer, if so be such a Change should be made in Ecclesiastical Laws.

The Reason why the King and Church lose nothing hereby, is, because as Judges
are Delegates of the King in Civil Matters, and being Subordinate to him, what
they do passes as done by himself, he not entering his dissent: So the Bishops,
so far as concerns the Civil Sanction of Laws Ecclesiastical, are deputed by
the King to preserve, and execute such Laws, which if they do not, but by
Conhivence give way to a contrary Custom, in time proving a Law, they are, if
not Authors of, accessory to their own affronts, and swervers from the old
Letter, thus by Practice interpreted, and in great Measure justified. A more
apparent Instance of Yesterday (as I may say) may be given in Custom opposing
and nulling the first Act of Parliament for Burying in Woollen, until it was
Reinforced by a more Strict and Penal one. And another more Pregnant Instance
we have in the Act requiring that all Wagons, and Travailing Carts should have
Broad Wheels, which never took Place, but being Generally neglected, that Act
lost it is end, and Vigor without repeal.

And now, to touch upon the Canon Law, and it is Obligations against inveterate
Custom, I shall set down what I find in Biell, Lection the 3 on the Canon of
the Mass, out of Gerson de Contract. Proposit. 16. For I Remember not the
Passage my self in Gerson, and am in too great have at present to search for
it. It is this. Vbi Papa, vel Ecclesia, vel Legislator sit, vel quando
Constitutiones non publicantur, sed dantur oblivioni, vel non approbantur
moribus Vtentium (Note well this) sed passim declinant in oppositum, tum
Constitutiones illae desinunt habere vim Obligationis, tanquam abolitae per non
Vsum, vel Consuetudinem oppositam, quae est optima Positivarum Legum Interpres.
And it is well known to indifferently Learned in the Doctrine of Councils, and
their Decrees, that there is a strong Party in the Roman Church, tho not the
greatest, that say, Acts of General Counsels oblige not until they be received:
Yea, that a Council is then General, when it is received, and not otherwise,
which tho it makes for my present purpose, is denied by me, as very absurd to
affirm.

Yet this is most certain, (and I hope no man of Common insight into
Ecclesiastical Story will deny so far as to put any Body to the expense of so
much Labor as to prove) that Innumerable Canons, and some called Apostolical,
are totally laid aside by a contrary Custom growing upon them, and oppressing
them. Let us only reflect upon things done at home, and concerning the keeping
of Lent (the time I now write this) is there any more express Law, or Canon for
other things, than for this? And yet do not you see what a Gross neglect there
is in Observing it? And how few make a Conscience, as they ought, of it? Does
not the Law stand as entire and vallid, as ever, and yet Custom prevails to
the contrary? Are all Phanaticks that omit it? For my Part, if this Gentleman
shall say so, I will not oppose him, especially if Contempt and Contumacy be
found in the Case, or Pishing, and Pushing at the Authority of the Church,
which alone suffices to Characterize a Sectary.

And the like have I already said, and shall say once more, concerning not
Officiating at the Lords Table accompanied with contempt and Contumacy, that it
is Schismatical, and Phanatical. But I deny all Serving of God in Public not
exactly agreeing with the Liturgy, to be Conventicling, which this Gentleman
affirms Page 7. but cannot prove. But then he demands Page 8. When a Dissenter,
and what doing; how much, or how little differing he becomes a Nonconformist?
Certainly Nonconformist being taken according to the Etymology of the word, the
least difference in Practice makes a Nonconformist. But Nonconformist is of a
more large and Civil sense, rather than Grammatical in Common use. For the two
Parts that make an Heretic, constitute a Schismatic too, and Nonconformist.
Not every light Error, but one of Moment, and not every one of Moment, but
such as is stoutly, and boldly defended makes an Heretic, and Nonconformist in
Ceremonials.

It is farther objected, That to approve the Multitudes forwardness, and
Pretense of tender Consciences against Authority, is to endanger the whole
State of the Church. I grant it to be most true, that nothing can be more
Pernicious to Ecclesiastical Order, Unity, or Charity, than Charity pretended
to Private and Ignorant men's Consciences against the wiser, and Weightier
Determinations of our Governors: Especially we considering First, that no Just
Cause is given for to offend Conscience; and Secondly, that we must take their
own bare word, that their Consciences are really offended as is pretended, and
that not rather some other wicked Passions, and Peevish, Envious, Ambitious
Humor to be valued, and give Laws to their betters, wearing the Clothes of
Conscience, puts them upon such Perverse Disputings, and Refractoriness.

To prevent which, it seems to concern Governors to judge fully of the End and
Use, as well as Form of Laws, and especially of the Form it self, and
accordingly to interpret, and enjoin what does appear to be Legal, and
Canonical, without suffering Custom insensibly, but in Tract of time so
strongly to encroach upon them, that both their Authority, and the things
Commanded should become doubtful. And that Variation and Exemption from Rule
may proceed rather from their Particular Dispensation, than the choice or
Liberty of him that is Singular.

Now what those Cases are, which may require an Equitable, or Favorable sense,
rather than Literal, or Rigorous, some may presume to assign, and I for my Part
could allege, not only the unprofitableness, in great Part, not absolute (for
I make no doubt but considerable Benefit does redound to the Deaf, and not
actually hearing, being present dutifully at the Ministration of Gods Officer
in Public Prayers) of such as are at Church at the time of the Communion
Service at the Altar: But mine own Infirmity, which you know, has of late
Years appeared too Notorious: But I hold it more prudent to refer things of
this nature to be judged and resolved in a Synod, which God in his due time
send for the Reformation of such Errors, Obliquities, and Defects, as have and
must necessarily creep into a Church without more Frequent, General, and
Public Review of the Rules of Discipline, than has of late Years been
allowed. And so I conclude, professing all readiness to such Resolutions above
mine own Understanding, not exceeding my Bodily Power also.

Preliminary Reflections to the Ensuing Treatise, occasioned by two Papers of
the same Subject.
IN the beginning of March last receiving from a very good Friend and Reverend
Brother (I may more truly say Brethren) a Printed Treatise entitled Parish
Churches turned into Conventicles, etc. Wherein the Author endeavored to show
that the Ministration of the Church of England not performed at the
Communion Table (which he supposed to be commanded by the Church) rendered the
whole, Conventicling; and being desired to give mine Opinion of the same, I,
tho under great Indispositions at that time, applied my self to declare my
Judgment thereof in manner following: which I returned to them that same Week,
not intending to have it made Public.

But in July following receiving from the same hands two Papers more, the one
called Parish Churches no Conventicles, etc. in a Letter to his Friend N. D.
and the other, whose Title was, Moderation a Virtue: Or a Vindication of the
Principles and Practices of the Moderate Divines and Laity of the Church of
England, etc. in which an Appendix was specially added against the foresaid
Treatise of Churches turned into Conventicles, (of which also I was desired to
give my Sense) I perceiving both the Replyers commended Moderation so much,
thought they, nor any of their Persuasion, could take it much amiss, if I
stepped in between the two Extremes. viz. the Gentleman, and his two
Adversaries.

And to this Purpose I must declare my self to be much Scandalized with the
Title of the Gentleman's Book: but upon later Information, that himself upon
better thoughts, was not very well pleased with it, I rested better satisfied,
and so should others too, if it be so. How far I approved the Work my following
Discourse will show. On the other side, when I discovered so much Gall, and
Bitterness on his Adversaries Part, especially by O. V. I could not well brook
the Treatment they gave him, even supposing he erred, and they had hit the Mark.

But especially, I observed how both were weakly hurried down the Torrent of
Vulgar Acceptance and Sense of Moderation: which doubtless they ought better a
great deal to have understood, before they built upon such a Slippery, Sandy
Foundation the whole Fabric of their Tottering Discourses. For to me this
seems to be the great occasion of Divisions, and Schisms, that every man
fancies to himself a Mean, and Moderation; comparing himself with himself: And
because he can instance in some on both hands, that differ from him, and
therefore must needs be extreme, he applauds himself, as having hit the Golden
Mean: Defining Moderation, as he in Aulus Gellius did Man.

For being demanded what was Man, answered wisely, Socrates is a Man, and
himself was a Man. So these men being demanded, what is true Moderation, in
effect answer, It is to do as they do, and to be able to show that both sides
of them do otherwise than they. Whereas upon due Examination, according to the
Rule of Moderation, either of such Extremes (as they call them) are more
Moderate than what they magnify for such. And to such Moderation as this,
Preduce Mr. Baxter's Unlearned, as well, as Vain and Vile Distinction of
Occasional Communion: As if constant Communion were not Occasional also: And
his Occasional Communion with the Church of England (a little to turn the edge
of the Arguments proving him to be such) were not constant Schismaticalness,
notwithstanding this Plausible Shuffle.

If Occasional Communion be the thing they approve, why do they not Communicate
with the Church, but when they have no occasion, to go to a Conventicle, and
perhaps play the Minister there? By which, Occasional going to Mass, and more
constantly to a Canventicle, may be called Moderation too. And if some men of
the Church of England leave the Communion-Service quite out, while others use
it in the Desk, they may be termed men of Moderation too: As he that lays claim
to an whole Estate, tho most unjustly, is a moderate Man, if he acquiesces with
one Field or two for Peace sake, when not a Foot is by Law due unto him.

And does not the present Moderation come to this, as if the Enemies of our
Church should say thus, as they truly may. We have by innumerable false, and
wicked Slanders cast upon the Government, and Governors, and Service of the
Church of England, disaffected many People from them all: And having so done,
we seasonably and successfully took Arms, and beat them all down, and
confounded them; but an overruling Power and Providence causing us to let go
our hold, and vomit up that sweet Morsel we had once swallowed, we now address
our selves to the Church of England, that they would Fairly, and Peaceably, and
Charitably give all again for the asking for: and if not all at once, by
Degrees: First granting one thing, then another, and then a third, and so on;
our Arguments and Reasons being always as valid for what remains, as for what
shall be yielded to us, and we continuing as unquiet and restless until we be
possessed of all, as we were before any thing was granted to us; and this
Motive being always obliging Peace, and Unity, which we promise to keep with
them of the Church of England, when they shall in this manner become of our
Religion. O Singular Charity, and Divine Moderation!

I must confess our Author of Moderation a Virtue, makes an offer Page 23, 24.
as if he would unriddle this Abstruse Notion; and tell us what is Moderation:
But finding (as it should seem) the task too hard and dangerous, and so hot,
that it would burn his Fingers, and cause him to let go his Pen Writing for it;
after a flourishing promise, he falls quite off from the true Question, and
Difficulty, and leaves it to shift, and plead for it self: and betakes himself
to the Commendation of the great virtue or habit of a Temperate or Moderate
Mind, and Disposition: Which is very fine, and laudable, but nothing at all to
his purpose; which was to declare unto us (...), the Mediocrity of the thing,
as the Philosopher speaks. He should have told us which was the true Mean in
Religion, which was the Moderate Worship of God between two vicious Extremes:
but this he either considered not, or more wisely than faithfully avoided. For
I doubt not, (whatever he does) but a Papist, a Quaker, a Presbyterian, a Jew,
a Mohammedan may be a very Moderate and well Tempered Man of mind, and Modest:
but what is this to our choice of our Religion from the Equity of the same, and
Moderateness?

And yet this Moderator himself was but little acquainted with this Virtue he
commends, as may appear by his taking into such rude, and ridiculous
Consideration, a Sermon laying forth the iniquity of Pretenders to such
Moderation as he fancies: But that I meddle not with, as quite from my purpose:
Yet is it not so Impertinent, as his extremities in wringing the Nose of all
Canons and Rubricks of the Church, which he stomachs, with so much and strange
violence of interpretation, that he forces blood from them. According to which
Practice we shall never be able to understand one another any longer than we
talk together, nor then neither, our Backs being a little turned, and such
canvassing used.

But we supposing that the Constitutions and Canons of the Church, tho, (as in
such Cases it must necessarily happen) some few may admit of various
Constructions, were much more clear and intelligible before, and without his
Scholy, than with it; we earnestly demand of these Reformers of Reformation,
and Moderators of Mederation, before they so apertly presume to modellize the
Church according to their Scantling, to give us the true Notion of Moderation
in more General Terms than hitherto; that we may know better how to accommodate
our selves to their Expectations: And Secondly, that they would set about the
work to purpose, and prove by good Rules and Authority (not their own, the
worst and weakest of all men) that the Church of England, as now constituted in
all it is Habiliments, Rites, and Ceremonies, is not the most Moderate Church
can be produced, or instanced in by them.

Nay, I will venture to add one Challenge more, If we cannot make it appear
upon better Ground, that more might be added, than any of them shall bring,
that more should be taken away than is, then we will lose our Cause, and they
shall Triumph with Cause, who have hitherto without Cause.

This we would not have said, but that we are persuaded we can do it, and that
upon this, our unquiet, and querulous Brethren would cease their Complaints,
and rest satisfied with the present State of things, lest a worse thing happen
unto them. For tho I approve not that saying which Mr. Baxter notes as most
dangerous to them, and Notorious, nor can I tell, but by his Reports, ever any
such thing was said of Dissenters: That if they would not be quiet, they should
have more things to trouble them: Yet I say this, according to all indifferent
Rules of Judgment, it is altogether as reasonable that the Ceremonies of the
Church should be more Numerous, as they can make it, that those we have, should
be abolished, or fewer.

Lastly, we demand of these men, if they cannot give us the true, and genuine
Definition of Moderation, they would at least draw up such a Scheme of
Religion, as shall be accounted by their own Adherents, moderate, and not
extreme. I confess I have met with a late Pamphlet, which seems to aim at such
an end, bearing this Title, The Woe of Scandal, showing the evil of imposing
things on men's Consciences Acknowledged to be indifferent. This Title imports a
closer State of Matters than others, but how he manages his Cause, I cannot
say, having not read two Leaves, if Pages in it: And in truth, I saw no Reason
why I should, had I but little else to do; considering how his clearer State of
matters is a perverting the whole Controversy. This being the truer State of
our Differences, viz. The Woe of Scandal belonging to all such as refuse to
submit to all such things as are acknowledged to be indifferent; Lawful
Authority, and Judges of such matters requiring them.

But leaving that, I return to Moderation a Virtue, who in his Appendix against
Mr. Heart, or T. A. as he calls him, would fortify his loose Sense of
Moderation, Page 78, 79. by a number of eminent, and Learned Divines of the
Church of England some of them, but others professed Enemies thereof, until
Lucre, and Ambition opened their Eyes to dissemble their Nonconformity, and who
these are, I leave the Reader to judge, as is very easy; and therefore unfit
to sway in this matter. Others I acknowledge were truly of the Church, and yet
commended highly Moderation: But what kind of Moderation? The Virtue, not the
new Model. And that is not at all to his purpose, but against the bitter
Spirits, and strange groundless Animosities of Dissenters, who had they their
Wills, would tear Kings from their Thrones (as very lately they have
endeavored) and Bishops from their Sees, for to put down Ceremonies, and think
their own Blood, and the Blood of others well shed to accomplish these ends, as
Mr. Jenkins for one, has said.

Lastly, I grant that some Learned, and Good men of our Church were much
disposed to a Remission of some things Established; But I pray upon what
Grounds? Any taken from the things themselves appointed? very rarely do we meet
with any such: Or from the Persons or Parties aggrieved with them? This was
most usual. But first, they should have considered, that the Relaxation
demanded was as grievous to others, as the imposition to them. Next, this was
only during the fair Face, and carriage of many good Natured, and in General,
well affected to Religion, but cheated into a Prejudice against the Forms of
the Church by Pious frauds: But when the Imposthume broke out into such a foul
Ulcer, as made them, and their close design stink in the Nostrils of all
understanding and honest men, not too far drawn into their Net, they changed
their Minds, and bent their Doctrine, and Discourse rather against the
Immoderate Passions of the Mind, than the Immoderate Worship, as ours was, and
is still slanderously called.

This I speak not without as great, and good Authority, as any ingenious man
can desire, and that is of Sr. Francis Walsingham Secretary to Queen Elazabeth,
and one that was once (till Experience better taught him) a real, tho moderate
Favourer of the dissenting Party in those days: And thus writes he of them, in
his Letter to Mounsieur Critoy, which you have in the Close of the 2 d. part of
Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation, in these words, Page 420. For the
other Party, which have been Offensive to the State, tho in another Degree,
which named themselves Reformers, and We commonly called Puritans, this has
been the Proceedings toward them. A great while, when they inveighed against
such abuses in the Church, as Pluralities, Non-residence, and the like, their
Liberty and Zeal was not condemned, only their Violence was sometimes censured.
When they refused the use of some Ceremonies, and Rites as Superstitious, they
were tolerated with much Connivence, and Gentleness. Yea, when they called in
Question the Superiority of Bishops, and pretended to a Democracy in the
Church, yet their Propositions were considered, and contrary Writings debated
and discussed. Yet all this while it was perceived that their Course was
dangerous and very Popular. As because Papistry was odions, therefore it was
ever in their Mouths that they ought to purge the Church from the Relics of
Papistry: A thing acceptable to the People, who love ever to run from one
Extreme to another.

Here you may first observe that the Church of England in it is Reformation
stands between two Extremes, and I think that is to be Moderate. And next you
may see by late effects, what is the end of the many Specious and Pious
Pretenses of these Moderators; and gather what it is ever like to be: Who are
wont (not being able) not to cut the main Timbers of our Constitutions apieces
at a blow, but Chip by Chip: Which they call Mercifulness, and Moderation, as
that, which may be spared till all be spoiled. And I could instance in some of
these his Witnesses of Moderation, who have taken their Lesson out of Socinus,
and cant with the Arminians about Liberty, and forbearance, themselves being in
no Capacity to domineer, as the Arminians did once being uppermost: But now
(good Men!) brought under Original Sin, and the received Doctrine of it, is but
an unnecessary Doctrine, or rather false Doctrine, but Liberty of Prophesying,
true. And the Mystery of the Trinity must not oblige, but as a thing, which
may, or may not be received. And Holy Jesus, the Holy Jesus over and over
again, must stand instead of such usual Appellations whereby he should be known
to be God and Man.

And all this I take to proceed from the Moderate, but Phanatical Dogme found
in the Cases of Conscience of that Great Man, viz. That nothing must be
imposed, but what the Scripture requires: And this Grounded on the Reason of
Calvin, and his late Admirers, lest otherwise our Governors should multiply
Impositions without measure: Upon which Ground we may Null the Power of our
Natural and Civil Parents, who certainly may exceed due Bounds in their
Commands, and therefore the safest way would be to deprive them of all: And
thus under Color of Liberty, and Moderate Government shall we see Anarchy both
in Church and State, until the Intolerableness of that constrain to accept of
another, perhaps much more Tyrannical, tho managed by many Men; being ashamed
to return to that which they cast off for less Causes than they have, to quit
themselves of that they have Imprudently brought upon themselves.

But no more of that Subject, something being due to this Authors Act, and
Project of distorting, misconstruing, confounding, and in effect Nulling all
Canons and Rubricks lying in his way for tender Consciences sake; that so the
Rules, and Practices of the Church being made aequilibrious, and indifferent,
or perhaps of no Obligation at all, Liberty for such Consciences may be
allowed, and the feat succeed more softly, but no less surely than by open
Defiances, and Ruptures.

But ought he not here also to have told us what is a Tender Conscience, and
who they are that claim Benefit from such Pretenses? For how little good that
Plea can do any Fanatically disposed, will appear from these Reasons. First,
that we of the Church of England, pretend as strongly, and more reasonably, to
Tenderness of Conscience upon parting with such Rites and Ceremonies, as they
can do in opposing or avoiding them: Shall we therefore take a Thorn out of
their Toe, and put it in our own? If they say we acknowledge them to be
indifferent, and so, such as may be omitted for Peace sake, we say they
likewise must, and do hold the same indifferency in Nature, as we do, and
therefore ought no less to accept of them for Peace and Unity sake. Yea, more
obliged are they to this, than we, to the other, Authority lawful turning the
Scales on our side.

Secondly, we directly deny that the Party can be said to be tender
Conscienced, when as such monstrous Acts and Effects of them, not as single
Private men, but as Prosecutors and Advancers of their Faction, all along from
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign to this present day, and most of all,
and latest of all, have appeared to prove the contrary. And the Sins that are
theirs, as United, are they we are to judge them by, and not those of Persons
only. So that Thirdly if they have tender Consciences, we cannot possible know
that they have such, tho they tell us never so often, and loudly, that they are
the Men above others, that are so qualified. And therefore this not appearing,
is as not being, to us: And consequently, can be no Rule, or motive to induce
us upon such blind Grounds, to leave our Station.

Fourthly, if they had tender Consciences, and we knew it, it could be no good,
nor wise Act in us who (as is said) have as great, and just a claim to that
Pretense as they, for us to relieve them to our own mischief.

And thus have I done with the Moderator Writing against them, who are no
Friends to his Grindallizers, and Trimmers, as it seems the words are now
adays, which I knew not before I learnt so much from his Title Page: And might
have well doubted, whether this lover of Moderation; that is, he knows not
what, be Resident upon his Cure, as he there also professes to avoid the
Suspicion of the Leader of a Conventicle: But in truth he does not attain this
end, there being so many ways of Equivocation invented now adays to seem what
men are not, and not to seem what they are, that it is not incredible that his
Cure may be a gathered Church, tho I knowing nothing of that, affirm no more
than I know.

But now I apply my self more particularly to O. V. and his Letter to his
Friend N. D. both true Sons of the Church of England, as they Write themselves:
But I think they should have added to that Character, this Supplement, For
ought they know. For there is great Suspicion that O. V. has taken some of his
Instructions from the Conference of Worcester-House, as Printed and Published
by the Dissenters, where this Sentence of Socrates in his Ecclesiastical
History, Lib. 5. 23. is made great use of to the same end, that is, as little
purpose, as here, viz. Those of the same Faith differ as to Custom from one
another. Can this reach Mr. Hart's Case, think we? Or so much as prove any such
Moderation of Rites, and Ceremonies our Church requires.

This the Conferrers, and surely this our Present Vindicator imagined, deceived
by them in all Probability: But they are all much mistaken. For Socrates meant
nothing less than to countenance, or so much as to say, that any Church in the
Christian World, in those, or Ancienter Days did ever allow any of their
Subordinate Members to differ from the Rules of their Respective Churches, or
to differ from them in Rites and Ceremonies, and least of all in such things
which were prescribed them in the Service of God. But this is the plain and
certain Case between the Church of England, and the Dissenters, and their
Advocates pleading for Moderation and Liberty in things standing determined by
their Superiors. But Socrates tells us how several Churches of several
Nations, and Provinces under Coordinate Governors, did use their known Liberty
in forming the external part of Gods Public Worship, somewhat diversely. And
does the Church of England, or any of it is Defenders speak, write, or act
otherwise? This were indeed blameworthy, but no such thing appears, and
therefore Mr. Hales of Eaton famous for his Learning, might have shown his
Judgment, as well as his Reading, if he had made no such use of such Instances
as these, and taught others so to do.

To this stumble in the very Threshold, I might add another Error charged upon
Mr. Heart in the Title Page, which pretends Mr. Heart defames the Church of
England contrary to the 11th. Canon of those 1603. But I find no such
Defamation chargeable upon Mr. Heart, nor proved by him, as is attempted Page 3.
The Canon, even as quoted by him, speaks thus, To affirm and maintain, that
there are within this Realm, other Meetings, Assemblies, or Congregations of
the Kings born Subjects, than such as by the Laws of this Land, are held, and
allowed, which may rightly challenge to themselves the Name of true and Lawful
Churches. This is all with him, but scarce sense without that which follows in
the Canon, Let him be Excommunicated, etc.

Now the matter is, how to bring to this, any thing that Mr. Heart says in any
place of his Book: The most, and worst that he has in all his Book is the
Title, Parish Churches turned into Conventicles, etc. Does this at all
contradict the Canon mentioned, which flatly denies all Assemblies in
opposition to our Church to be any true Churches? The Canon does not so much as
say that the Church of England is the true Church, therefore he that should say
it is no true Church, does not defame it upon the account of that Canon, tho
upon others he does. But I cannot think it was ever in Mr. Hart's mind to deny
the Church of England to be a true Church, but to affirm that such Parish
Churches as did deviate from such Prescriptions as he conceived all were
obliged to, in that particular, did Symbolize with Conventicles; in which
acceptance, his meaning is more just, and sincere, than to be confuted either
by your, or my Labors.

And this probably you found by Experience, and therefore you more wisely, than
justly relinquish the true State of the Case, and all along fall upon his
Person, and Qualifications with greatest Scurrilities, and Reproaches, becoming
rather the Son of a Conventicle, than a Son of the Church of England; which
manner of Confutation I have chosen chiefly to except against.

First, you acknowledge him to be a Gentleman; you had in my opinion, done much
more advisedly, and peradventure more successfully, if you had shown your self
to have been such too, by Civil Usage, and especially if you be of the Clergy
(which I neither know, nor have enquired after,) to your Civility you should
have added a Degree of Modesty more. It may be remembered how above Forty Years
ago, a Bishop's unadvisedly casting out a word, which was drawn to imply a
Contempt of Gentlemen, it gave such Alarm to many Gentlemen, and so Incensed
them against that Order, if not the Clergy in General, that it contributed not
a little to their Sufferings. It had been Prudence therefore to have been more
sparing of your Spittle in that respect.

And so Secondly, as a Barister, and Lawyer; a Friend and Wellwiller to the
Church, would have omitted the many Taunts, and Revilings you have cast upon
him as such. Do you not consider how much it becomes the Clergy to mitigate the
Prejudices that Order are too Subject to against the Church, and how powerful
they are, to strengthen or weaken the Interest of the Church, and it is
Prosperity? Another man, not inferior to you, would have found occasion of
Gratitude, and Praise, from whence you raise your reproaches, viz. that with
honest, and sincere mind, and good Ingenuity, he zealously undertook the
Asserting of the Rights, and Rites of the Church: Wherein if he failed, as I my
self am of opinion he did, tho I cannot say, that either I, or you have
Demonstrated so much, it was a laudable intention tending to it is Vindication
from private Interpreters of it is Laws, and Corrupters too, as he judged. His
severity in drawing such Conclusions from such a supposed Sense, gave me
occasion to imagine he might be a Lawyer, whose property it is to condemn a
whole Deed for a Rasure committed in it: he conceiving that this omission of
the due Performance of the second Service was of that nature.

But do you think it requisite, or tolerable, that every ordinary Minister
should so modifie his Worship (as the Presbyterians in their Books speak) or so
use their Discretion as in truth rather to follow the Discretion of the
Multitude and Common People, than their own, or the Churches? There is not any
thing more unworthy a wise or humble Minister than this, knowing that to be
true, which Seneca says, de Vita Beata Cap. 2. Vulgus veritatis pessimus
Interpres, The Common sort are the worst Interpreters of truth, of all Men;
yea, taking in what there presently follows, Vulgus autem tam Chlamydatum,
quam Coronam voco, I mean, says he, by the Vulgar, some Robed, or Gowned
Persons, as well as the Rabble, and so we Ministers may be in danger to be of
the Number, and so we are indeed compared with our Governors.

Once more, Seneca in the same Place against Courters of the Common People,
Argumentum Pessimi Turba est, It Is an Argument the thing is very bad, which the
Rout approves very much. Did you never hear of the Expert Master of Music, who
gave his Scholar a Box of the Ear when he took him playing to the Admiration of
the Vulgar, Presuming he must needs be out, and play amiss, or the Common Sort
would never have liked him so well? Which it were to be wished were not too
often to be found in Popular Preachers, who the worse they Preach, the more
they are applauded by such People whom Chaucer in his Squires Tale thus
describes but too truly.

As People deemeth commonly
Of things that been more Subtly
Then they can in their leudness Comprehend,
They deemen gladly to the badder end.
And such are the Judges we commonly choose to be directed by.

But I pass that, and come to a worse reproach than the former by far, an
Argument of a very mean Understanding and low Spirit in the Accuser, viz. That
he was once a Papist, and tho Converted, still looking toward Rome; an
Imprudent, and Unchristian Aspersion. It Is true, as I am informed, in his
greener and younger Days, he fell into the Snares of Rome: And it is no less
true, and more to the honor of our Religion, that in his Maturer Judgment and
Years returning to himself, he returned to the Church of England also, and
preferring it above all other Faiths, or Factions, desires nothing more than an
exact Observation of her Rules and Manner of divine Worship.

And this Last it seems, so troubles you, as it does a great many more such
true Protestants which the selate times have produced, or rather brought to
light to the disgrace of all Reformation, that you take Liberty to mock and
rail him out of that Conscientious design, suspecting the Invalidity of your
Argumentations to that end. For as we see it to be the crafty Practice of
Pilferers, and Thieves having stole any thing from their Neighbors, the first
thing they do is to pull off, or deface the Mark, that it may not be known to
whom it belongs: so Phanatically disposed Persons make it their business to
tear away the Rites and Ceremonies belonging to, and Characterizing the Worship
of the Church of England from the Will Worship of Sectaries, that it may become
their own without Control.

But are such reproaches as you give to one converted to our Religion the best
Entertainment, and welcome you can afford out of the Penury of your Civility,
or true Piety? Have you a mind to drive him back again, and turn him out of
Doors by your ill usage? Or is this the Encouragement you can give to others to
return to us? I will here tell you a true story to this purpose, which some
Seamen, with whom some Years since I was embarked, told me upon their own
knowledge, which may suffice to advertize you of your absurdity in reviling
Converts for having been in Error. A Moor, or Turk was of the Ships Company
who had renounced Mahometanisme, and became a Christian. An ill nurtured and
malicious Fellow among them bearing him a spite, would often be reviling him
for his Religion, calling him Mohammedan, and worse. To whom the Man answered
Ingenuously and Soberly, What means this Man to check and reproach me so, for
having been a Mohammedan? I was so indeed, but now I am as good a Christian as
himself. It happened about the same time, that these things thus passed, that
there was an occasion for the English Railer to go up to the main top, whence
he was suddenly hurried away by a Blast of Wind (as was supposed) being never
seen, or heard of more: Which they told me, as an Instance of Gods Judgment
upon a Reviler of a Penitent, and I tell you.

But you say, He looks toward Rome again. How know you that? Have you turned
his Face that way in Abhorrence of your base Treatment? I might so judge, but
that I am persuaded neither your Evil, nor your good Word is of any account
with him, you should seem rather to be one of the Modernest true Protestants or
as the late expression of a dying Man is, Sincere Protestant, who make all
Popishly affected, not approving their Prophanations of Gods Service, and
Seditious Zeal.

But I suppose you ground your Suspicions from what you here charge him with,
Irreverence at the Ministers Prayer, and Sermon, which in one of our Statutes
(say you) whether he knows it or no, is called Divine Service, by Reading some
Book of his own, etc. And I also am one of those, that know not any Statute, or
Canon where the Sermon is called Divine Service: And whatever may be said in
large acceptance of Words, I am sure it is not so in it is nature, and proper
use of Divine Worship. And I am sure also, the Prayer of the Minister in his
Pulpit before Sermon is no part of the Service enjoined, but a Will Worship of
Men's Private Invention, more like to that of Nadab, and Abihu, than that of the
established Worship which Sectaries have been wont so to traduce. And if the
Gentleman so carried himself at Church at such Private Exercises, he offends
less against the Constitutions of the Church, than they, who show their Gifts
rather than their Grace in using them; whose Original and Design was to bring
the Worship of God appointed by the Church, into disgrace, and contempt, which
accordingly Succeeded in late Years.

And if you plead a Custom, (as my self do against the Obligation of ministering
constantly at the Communion Table) I may answer, First, this Custom has not
the like Grounds, or Reason, which it seems to me the forbearance of that
has. Again, Custom may make it Tolerable to do so, but not Intolerable, or
Criminal to let it alone: So that if any tender Conscience shall be offended at
such strange Fire offered to God, such a one may, notwithstanding Custom,
modestly declare it is dislike by doing somewhat else, not Scandalous in it
self. And therefore, tho the Prayer be beholden to him that shall join with him
in that Superstitious (if as Mr. Cawdry and others of his Strain suppose,
Superstitio be Supra Statutum) and incommanded Worship, yet no man can Legally
censure him that refuses to hear such Exorbitances.

And the same may be said of the Psalms Sung in Meeter and Tunes of Private
Inventions. I confess I have Read lately in the Writings of two Reverend, and
Learned Divines, that it is a Vulgar Error to say that those Singing Psalms
want Lawful Authority: But very desirous to know where and what that Authority
is, I found my self Frustrated, and am so small an Antiquary in such abstruse
things, that I cannot help my self herein: But have been sometimes of opinion,
that if any such Authority there be, as those Reverend Persons intimate, but
instance not in, that it must rather belong to another Ancienter, and (in my
Judgment) more Pious and Elaborate (as to Art, and Sense, tho no less uncouth
in Language) Translation in Verse which I have by me, and seems to be the Work
either of one Man, or diverse concurring to the same thing, and not Patched up
by several Authors, as the Common Singing Psalms are; possibly that Ancienter I
speak of, may be the same, which the Author of the Troubles of Eranckford
Speaks of, who tells us, After the Death of Queen Mary, the Exiled prepare
themselves to depart for England from Geneva, save such as stayed to finish the
Translation of the Bible, and Psalms, both in Meeter and Prose. Which yet
whether they were ever allowed by Authority, Istill remain Ignorant.

And thus I have passed some General Animadversions on the Censurers of Mr.
Hart's Book: Not intending to call in Question their particular Examinations,
from which I might have drawn somewhat pertinent to mine own Method of the same
Subject: But I choose rather to let it pass rudely according to the first and
only Draught by me: Whereby I suppose that if Mediocrity or Moderation be such
a Virtue as it is cried up for, I may in this particular claim that Praise, and
obstain the Approbation of these Commenders of it, Submitting what I say, not
altogether to them, but most of all to such as are over me in the Lord, from
whose Determination I shall hardly swerve.

FINIS.

