Aloisia, OR, THE AMORS OF OCTAVIA Englished.

To which is adjoined the History of Madam du Tillait, both displaying the
Subtilties of the Fair Sex.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street, 1681.

TO THE READER.
WE must confess Love is of so subtle and ingenious a Nature, that it easily
finds ways to effect its Ends, when it has any Design of rendering it self
Master of any Heart. In effect we see very few escape, upon whom it has made
any Enterprise, which it seldom does unless certain before of Victory; they who
resist and lay any Obstacle in its way, being those who commonly feel the
effects of it most violently.

There are in the World two sorts of People who displease me most of all; the
first of them are Painters, who not having been skilful enough to invent or to
compose Colors lively enough, wherewith to draw Eyes for Cupid, have taken a
Fancy to represent him blind to us, and they value themselves for giving
occasion to a common, but false Proverb, that Love is blind. It seems to me
more reasonable to say, that the Cloth with which they blindfold him, serves
rather for a covering for their Ignorance, since with all their Endeavors they
have not been able to make Eyes for any Deity, which could come near the
Vivacity, Splendor, or Eclat, with which his ought to appear. For if (as the
Ignorant would persuade us) he did not see at all; how could he have subjected
to himself so many as live now under his Laws; could he without Eyes have
enlarged his Empire over the whole Earth? We see his Conquests are without
Number or Bounds; besides I know that where he would insinuate himself, he
makes greatest use of the Eyes of one Object to inflame another, which he would
not do, did he not know that the Eyes were of all the Senses the most
susceptible, because they are the first, which discover. There must be
knowledge of it in him, this Knowledge cannot be acquired without Study, and
what means are there for one blind to become Learned, when the most necessary
of Faculties, the sight fails him. It cannot be denied notwithstanding, but
that Cupid is learned, since we see by daily experience that he confounds the
most solid of Reasons, and that no body can enter into dispute with him without
being certain to be worsted. It is just therefore to defend him from the wrong
which is endeavored to be done to him by taking away the chiefest of his
Ornaments.

The seeond sort of men I hate, are a sort of particular persons who make a
necessity of what is mere accident: I mean those People who will have it to be
an infallible thing, that Fortune is never seen in the same place with desert.
I know very well that they dwell rarely in the same subject. But in fine it is
ill, to think to take that for indispensably necessary, which is only the
effect of Chance. It is true, that one happens much oftener than the other, for
we see some to whom the name of Merit, has, not had so much as access, toward
whom notwithstanding Fortune has been lavish; and on the contrary, others who
have merited all things yet have had nothing. But after all, there are to be
found, those who possess both, there being this difference between them, that
those who have merit, find within themselves content. For a man of sense ought
to consider that it is more honorable not to have what one deserves, than to
possess what one does not deserve; and it is in this manner that he enjoys all
things, and in far a more noble manner, when he even wants every thing; whereas
he who has every thing he wishes for, enjoys nothing unless he enjoy himself,
otherwise it being but an imaginary or visionary Possession, whereof he never
tastes the true good, being naturally unworthy of it. As for those who have
both, we may say, if they have more happiness, it is only with the Vulgar,
since as I have said Fortune contributes nothing to the felicity of a great
Courage, and he ought to borrow from none but himself to make himself truly
happy; I come back to my Theme, and advance to convince those visibly whom I
have undertaken, that there are several who have extraordinary Merits to whom
Fortune has also been favorable, which the following Relation will not a
little Illustrate.

ALOISIA: OR, The Amors OF OCTAVIA.
THe easy Humor of many Husbands, and the freedom of Access to be had with an
infinite number of fine Women, rendered Paris one of the most pollisht and
agreeable Cities of the World. It was but being of an Amorous Temper, and a man
was certain to lead a happy Life, and if in the beginning any Lover happened to
be crossed in his Passion, his Mistress would be sure not to leave him any
longer in his Affliction than it was necessary to make him have the more
relish of the sweet of being beloved; The greatest Beauties did not scorn this
Artifice of engaging their Gallants faster to them; Octavia alone was Enemy to
all these little Amorous tricks, confessing ingenuously that nothing was so
troublesome to her as a Lover who was three days without declaring his Passion,
and to whom she should be forced to make the advances; for she loved to have
him free and open, never to hide any thing from her, not even his weaknesses,
and if he felt any Amorous motion stirred up by her he should let her know it
in the same moment. But before I speak of the Amors of this free hearted Lady,
let me describe her Person to you. The shape of her Face is an irregular Oval,
her Eyes are gray, and her look with them very lascivious, her Mouth too wide,
but of a fine color, her Forehead little, her Nose long and lean, her Chin
picked, her Teeth very white, her Hands dry, hard and ugly, upon which one may
discover the least Vein, her Hair is of a chestnut color, and curled in great
Curls, and her Complexion smooth, and sometimes very good; she is for shape
little, and Arched, and the many shocks her body has endured makes it have no
firm Situation, it balancing from one side to the other upon her Hips; as for
the skin of her Neck and her Breasts it is incomparable, and it may be very
well said of her that she hides what is finest about her, and that happy are
her Lovers who have liberty to see all her Beauties. Yet I have often heard
them complain, that in the least heat this fine Body sends forth a smell, which
is not so pleasing to the Nose, as the Body is to the other Senses; She always
takes great care to have her Shoes and Stockings well put on, the Silk
stockings she wears are always drawn up half way her Thigh, and her Garters are
very neatly tied; no Woman takes so much care to carry her Feet well as she; As
for her Mind, she has a great deal of Life, but little Judgment, and very wild,
her Humor is haughty, jilting, malicious, and jealous, she is not able to
endure the Caresses are made to other Women (as if she had wherewithal to
content all Mankind:) It is enough to be handsome to be her Enemy, she speaks
continually ill of the prettiest, and invents all ways possible to give ill
Impressions of them; She has no small kindness for Money, and the most beloved
of her Gallants are not always the handsomest, nor those who have most Merit,
but the greatest liberallity; and if there happen to be any one that does not
leave sometimes upon her Table a Looking Glass, a Necklace of Pearl, or some
other fine thing, he is looked upon with less tenderness than the others.

Octavia, although such a one as I have described, at her first beginning to
receive Company, or her first Entrance into the World, had notwithstanding, a
great crowd of Adorers, and some of the chiefest and hansomest of the young men
of Paris (where she then lived) who were so well managed by her, that she did
not loose one; But Cleander was most kindly received, and most loved by her,
this Lover by the officious care he had of giving her often changes of
Trimmings, had made a wonderful progress in her heart, besides he was not the
worst made in the World, his shape was very neat and well set, his mien very
passable, but his Complexion exceeding swarthy, his Eyes rough, his Mouth big,
and wide from Ear to Ear, a great quantity of Hair curled in large Curles, he
was witty, quick, undertaking and capable of great things; a little too much a
bragger, and one of those Huffs, who think one must be brutish, and passionate,
and quarrel every one he meets, to be thought a man of Courage, his most
violent Passion is for Women, and he gives himself wholly up to them: This did
not a little hasten the effecting his Design upon the heart of Octavia, he
obtained an abundance of small favors from her, and received all the signs of
a tender Passion: but he having no thoughts of Marriage, valued only the solid
pleasures of Love; One day he went and finding her alone, after having made
some Present according to his Custom, he knelt down upon the ground with one
Knee, and taking her hand, he kissed it several times, and spoke thus to her:
You tell me you love me better than all Mankind besides; but what signs have
you ever given me of this tender Friendship, that can make me think my self
happier than any other of my Rivals? They see you as well as I, they have your
leave to discover their passions to you, they sigh in your presence, and in
fine I cannot make one step before you which I do not see them imitate. You
would notwithstanding have me persuade my self by an implicit Faith, that I am
happier in your heart than they are; Oh Madam, Madam, do not dissemble; Had you
that Love for me which you pretend, you would easily have made me (before this
time) sensible of it by more pressing and stronger proofs. Nature is not so
unkind to the fair, as not to have endowed them with stronger Links, whereby to
keep their Prisoner longer in their Chains; she has distributed amongst them
inestimable Treasures with which they may reward Constancy and Fidelity. These
are the most solid Evidences by which you can let me know the difference you
make between other men and my self; you may very well think my Discretion will
never suffer such a Secret to come out of my Mouth, and that I would rather
have my life torn from me than discover it; in concluding his Discourse, he
ventured with the greatest amorous Transport imaginable, to slip up his hand
toward that place, which it is more natural to touch, than modest to name.
Hold, hold, replied Octavia (giving him such a manner of repulse, that he
perceived she was not much disobliged by his way of proceeding) you go on
strangely fast, and do not consider the ill effects which would follow: If I
should condescend to what you would have me, to what a miserable condition
should I be reduced, if by the shameful and almost inevitable Effects, what I
had done for you should come to be known? All the World would look me out of
countenance, and I should after such an Infamy become the scorn of those who at
present seek after me with a violent Passion, for Marriage. I know very well
Honor is but a Whimzy, a fine Fancy which has been invented to keep those of
our Sex within the bounds of duty; but they are such Phancyes (though perfectly
Visionary) as we are obliged to run after for some time if we will live happy.
When we are engaged in Marriage, our shame is then less because it has more
sharers, we have then liberty to do what we please, since we have a Cloak to
cover all disorders; and having no witnesses, nothing is spoken but by weak
Guesses, wherefore we can then look upon what ever can be said of it, as only
Malice and Lies; It will be in that time that we shall live happy (my Dear
Cleander) and that by a wonderful Art we shall unite more strongly our Souls
and Hearts. Schelicon the Doctor you know (to whom without doubt by reason of
his great stupidity I shall be able to give what fold I please) visits me very
often, showing the greatest eagerness possible to marry me, and his Fortune is
too considerable to be refused. This makes me humor him that I may be the
sooner his Wife, and consequently have the more liberty to be yours. What
Madam, replied Cleander, do you intend to come soiled with the kisses of a
stupid Brute, and offer me the relics of his brutishness; can you want wit to
that degree as to suffer such an Original to gather the first Flowers of your
Youth and of your Love? and will you prefer him before me?

No, no, replied Octavia, I know very well what difference to make between him
and you, and I promise you that I will give you a randezvous, when the Marriage
is just upon the point of concluding, which shall assure you of my Person as
well as my Heart. Cleander pressed her extremely upon the same Subject all the
remaining time of their Conversation, and told her that he had admirable
Receipts to prevent the evil she feared: but all he could say was unsuccessful,
and he was forced at last to build all his hopes upon the promises she had made
to him.

She after this Adventure dealt so cunningly with Schelicon, and got his esteem
and heart so wittily, that he thought the happiness of his Life depended upon
marrying so fine and so virtuous a Maid, and thought he ought not to lose one
moment in hastening to possess so great a Treasure; he met with no great
Obstacle, for her Parents who knew her to be of a wild and giddy Inclination,
were glad to be discharged of her into the hands of the Doctor, and were
easily brought to consent to have it accomplished in few days. The hearing of
this good News did not a little rejoice Octavia, her mind being so pleased with
it, that she could not contain from giving Cleander notice of it by the
following Letter.

Octavia to Cleander.
SChelicon is to marry me very suddenly: but Just Heaven, how little
reasonable are we to engage our selves to do any thing. I tremble, my Dear,
when I think you should remember what I have promised to you. I must confess to
you ingenuously, that if I were so unhappy as to see you, late this Night in my
Chamber, summoning me according to my promise, I am so strict an observer of my
Word, that I should without doubt grant you what I have promised: I conjure you
therefore do not come, and I shall always own that obligation to you which you
will deserve by it.

Octavia.


Cleander easily understood the meaning of the Letter, and soon perceived his
Mistress would that Night crown his Wishes: so that without giving any Answer,
he stayed with such an impatience, as such a Lover as he must needs have,
expecting the coming of happy Night, that by means of its darkness he might go
into her Lodgings unperceived. He was skilful in these Affairs, and found out
his time so well that he performed what he had designed, and found her alone in
her Chamber; he lost no time having so fair an opportunity, and by a thousand
little freedoms he took, he wakened in her heart a secret motion which made her
change color several times: he follows his Point, takes his advantages of her
weakness, and loosed to Action some thing more powerful, which she could not
resist, and this Amorous Lady found her self at last forced to yield up her
Arms and Life in a sweet Amorous Languishment to her Conqueror; she came often
again to hand with him, and as long as Cleander had any vigor or strength
left, this Combat was continued; she never ceased, saying all Night long, that
Man was a strangely well contrived Creature, and that she saw nothing in the
World which equaled him in Merit; she did nothing but contemplate with the
greatest curiosity what Nature had endowed him with more than her, and foundin
him nothing but Subjects of Admiration and Pleasure; the Joy which she had
received in all the Attacks which her Lover had performed with such Honor,
made her solicit still for more, she seeming to gather new strength by the
failure of his; It was not so with poor Cleander, he was perfectly exhausted,
and his strength failed him, he was willing to enter the Lists again, but a Law
of Nature full of cruelty forbad him to proceed: which Octavia observing, and
expecting no further satisfaction from him, she had him conducted out of her
Lodgings with the least noise and most secrecy she could; as soon as day began
to appear, she went afterward to Bed, where she remained all that day,
pretending to have some slight Indisposition upon her.

Schelicon made appear all the weakness of a transported Lover, when he learnt
the news of this pretended sickness, he cried and howled in the hideousest
manner in the World, and stamping with his feet against the Ground, he lifted
his Eyes to Heaven in so disagreeable and so fantastical a way, that far from
moving any that saw him, it was impossible for them to keep from laughing. No
matter were he ten times a greater blockhead, he is wished for for a Husband,
and if he know what it is not to be a burden to a Wife all Night, he shall be
received with open Arms, without being inquired into for any thing else;
Octavia has a mind to be satisfied in that Point, and know what he is worth;
for this reason she re-assumes her former health, and puts her self into a
condition to receive him for a Husband on the day appointed. The Marriage being
accomplished, both stay only for the pleasures that expected them at Night, not
giving any heed at all to any Day-Diversions.

Octavia by an affected blush counterfeits the modest shamefaced Maid, and says
she had rather die than pass a Night with a Man, whilst Schelicon pushed on by
his Passion alone seizes her with violence, and throwing himself briskly into
her Arms, after having made her cry out some moments by reason of the pains she
pretended to endure, rolling languishing Eyes, and losing her Voice, she became
unmovable, and pretended to swoon away. The poor Husband thinks her already
dead, and fancies so tender an Age was not able to endure such fierce Attacks,
he does all he can to bring her out of the swoon: But Vinegar, and all he could
put in her Mouth was not able to recover her; he thinks therefore to have
recourse to the Surgeon, and to that intent calls his Man, but she in that
moment seemed to come to her self, and recovering the use of her senses, she
cries out to him (laying her hand negligently upon him) My Dear Heart, what a
naughty man you are, you have made me endure more than ever I did in my Life
before; he asked her pardon, and seemed to be much troubled, telling her that
these were only the first Crosses of a Married Life; but that she should have
as much pleasure hereafter, as she had suffered pain now; she was very well
pleased with him the first Night, although one must be of a strange taste to
relish him, for he is very corpulent, of an ill shape, and abominably big, a
great pretender to Jests, but without any Wit, all his pleasure is to play upon
Husbands for their jealous humors. In his Face there appears nothing but
stupidity and brutishness, and whosoever observes his Actions will find in them
all the instinct of a Beast under the shape of a Man; he has a Heart which is
little, base, and capable of all sorts of weakness; but as for his Liver it
lies bravely great, and all the reputation he has acquired, is to be accounted
the greatest Eater in the Country; he would have People think him a Learned
Man, but those who are well acquainted with him know that unless he had the
Sciences by Infusion he cannot have acquired any Knowledge in them, since he
has applied his Mind to nothing but the knowing when to discard an Ace in good
time, whereby to get a Repicque; this may be said to his advantage, that he is
very open and reserves nothing to himself, things which are most private with
others, are most public with him. A Husband thus composed, was just such an
one as was fit for Octavia, he was not troublesome, and when any Lover made her
a Visit, he (after having thanked him for the honor he did her) quitted the
Room out of respect, and left him alone with his Wife. Cleander was one of the
first who returned to storming of the Place, after Marriage; it was the
greatest pleasure in the World to him, to learn from her own Mouth the Art she
had used to persuade her Husband she had always lived virtuous and chaste. He
was ready to die with laughing when she related to him the perplexity in which
the poor Husband was by reason of her pretended swoon, the ingenious little
troubles he had given himself to bring her to her self again, and the zeal with
which he had asked her pardon for hurting her; she took care not to omit the
least Circumstance; and in fine in this and all the other Visits her Gallant
made to her, the Husband was always the Subject of their Mirth; she giving
Cleander reason enough to know by the many favors she bestowed upon him, that
a Wife was much more obliging and easy than a Maid.

In the happy Course of this Voluptuous Life, an unfortunate Accident happened
which disturbed the pleasures of these two Lovers. As Cleander one day was come
to see Octavia, she brought him into the Hall, where after having knocked at
the door of her Husband's Closet, which was on one side of the Hall, and called
him several times, without his answering once (desiring not to be interrupted
in some Affairs he was about) she begun to be more confident within her self,
thinking for certain he was not within; so that in this great Liberty she but
very gently repulsed the pleasing and strong violences of her Lover, and the
resistance she makes is only to reinforce his Attacks; he sighs, his Eyes seek
hers, to foretell them the pleasures they are just going to taste, his Lips
imprint a thousand Kisses upon her Mouth, and his Hands full of Fire, seize
upon her and lay her down upon a Bench that was there. Then with the greatest
Transports of Love reentred that Fort, where he had before found a kind
Reception. In the midst of his Joys he heard a Noise, and saw Schelicon coming
out of the Closset where Octavia had knocked; this hindering him from finishing
what he had begun, he goes hastily out of the Hall, and with so much
precipitation, that he had not leisure to take his Sword with him. Octavia in
fury immediately, putting down her Coats, takes it up, and drawing it out of the
Scabbard, presents it to Schelicon with the Point toward her, speaking to him
in these Words: Pierce, Pierce, a thousand times this Heart which another's
Crime would have rendered guilty; and spare not a Miserable Creature, which
Heaven had chosen out to be the infamous object of the most horrible bestiality
whereof Man was ever capable; I deserve Death, since my fatal Beauty, and my
Looks as innocent as they are, have been able to inspire such base and shameful
thoughts, and I ought to shed my own blood to wash another's Crime: But if I
may be permitted to say something in Justification of my self before I die:
Know then that although she who has had the honor to be chosen for your Wife
be unfortunate yet she is innocent and partakes not at all in the fault of that
infamous Fellow. I was sitting down upon the Bench, and slept, when at my
awaking I found my self in the hands of insolent Cleander: Heaven is my
witness, what were my thoughts, and whether the painfullest of deaths, would
not have been more welcome to me than this Infamy: I threatened him to cry out,
I cried out, got loose from him, knocked at your door, called you to my help,
endeavored to avoid his violence; and my Nails imprinted upon his Face the
effects of my weak revenge. But all I could have done Alas, would have been to
no purpose, had not you appeared to restore to me that honor which this base
Fellow was ravishing from me; But why do you delay (dear Schelicon) my Death,
since it is the only cure of desperate and generous hearts? Revenge, Revenge,
my Injuries upon Cleander, I request it of you before my Death, and cease to
oppose my Designs; that which the Sword has failed of, I will obtain by Poison.
I owe the loss of my Life to my own reputation: The Ladies of Paris can never
think I will outlive this Disgrace.

In ending her Discourse she got hold of the Sword she had given to Schelicon;
and feigned an endeavor to strike it into her Breast, but he snatched it away,
speaking thus to her; What are you about to do, Madam, do you think it well, to
punish the Innocent for the Crimes of an insolent guilty Man? Is it to have
either generous or reasonable thoughts? Nay, do not you fear God's punishment
upon you for it? Tell me, can you be guilty of the Crimes of another, when your
pure Will detects and abhors it? There must be consent to make a Crime, it is
in him alone, and that pureness, which remains in the midst of Corruptions is a
sacred Oil which preserves it self in frail and impure Vessels? What would you
then be contented yet (replied Octavia, shedding an abundance of Tears) to
allow so miserable a Creature, the Illustrious Name of your Wife, and can you
receive her into your Arms, after having been held in those of another sure you
do not think seriously that a Wife whose thoughts are so noble and virtuous,
can look upon you after this Disgrace without dying of Melancholy?

Schelicon, after having wiped away her Tears, embraces her, and gives her a
thousand Kisses with a more passionate fury than ever, whether because she
looked better than at other times, or for what other reason, I know not; he
examins her, and asks her every little Circumstance of what had happened:
whether she had felt any Titillation, and if Cleander had been in any Ecstasy?
She assures him he could not, by reason of the resistance she made. By this
Assurance he received, he concludes that nothing of his Copyhold was touched,
and is so well satisfied, that embracing her in an Amorous Transport, he
carries her upon a Bed: Oh! how can you love me, says she, since you are so
little sensible of what concerns my Honor. No, no, I cannot endure you, and I
have conceived such a horror for all Mankind, after such an Affront, that I
could almost revenge it upon you. Schelicon, without staying to answer her,
made something intercede in favor of his Love, which she was never in her Life
able to resist, so that he finished the Work which was left imperfect by his
Wife's Gallant. It is true she behaved her self so modestly on this occasion,
that she would not (do what he could) be persuaded to let him see her naked:
She continually putting down her Petticoats, saying, that it was against the
Rules either of Honor or Good Manners for a Wife to satisfy the lustful looks
of a Husband.

Cleander, who had heard from the next Chamber (where he had remained) what had
passed between Schelicon and his Wife, transported with Fury, as she came into
the Room, not minding any thing, came up to her, holding this Discourse to her:
I am then, Madam, that unhappy Victim, you have chosen to have sacrificed to
your infamous pleasures; you must have had one, and you have made the Lot fall
upon me; and by an unparallelled excess of cruelty, you have made me the
Witness, the Judge, and the Executioner of my own Punishments, your Lips moist
with my Kisses, your Eyes full of Amorous Looks, your Heart full of sighs in my
Favor, your Soul raised to a noble and divine Temper; You go and cast your
self in my presence into the Arms of another, and after that I had kindled a
Noble Fire in your Soul, you suffer it to be extinguished by the beastly and
shameful Embraces of the vilest and basest Men. If you would but suspend
(answered she) Cleander, your Resentments, I should easily make you understand,
that as it was you alone who kindled that Flame in my Heart, you alone quenched
it; Is it not true that the Soul is sensible but of what the Imagination
represents, and that since mine was filled in greatest ravishments of pleasure,
with your Idea, I may well say that for you I saw it raised, and for you I saw
it die? Oh! replied Cleander, when one lends the Body, it is very hard to keep
the Soul from following it, that Union being not to be broken without great
Violence. Say rather, Madam, that you do not love Cleander, that you love only
Man in him, and he will answer you, that if ever he has loved you, he detests
that Love as the most unworthy failing he was ever capable of in his Life, and
that hereafter he will look upon you with as much Horror and Scorn, as
heretofore you appeared to him to be aimable. Saying these Words, he went
angrily out of the Chamber, not so much as vouchsafing to hear what Octavia had
to say for her self: She called him back several times, and made use of all the
little Arts with which she used to calm the Fury of her Lovers, but without
success, for since that time he would never see nor hear of her, publishing all
the ills he can of her; she soon comforted her self for the loss of him,
reflecting she could not receive any more of his Visits without great hazard
after what she had said to Schelicon of him: Besides, he was not of late so
liberal as he had been, wanting money often, but above all the sweetness of
variety was a perfect Cure. There was no long Interregnum, she quickly got
another Gallant, who was in her opinion well worth Cleander: He did not indeed
say so much, but he did much more; and the happy portion which was distributed
to him by Nature held the place both of Wit and Desert. After him came another,
and then another; and at last she ordered matters so that she did not let
escape one young man of any Fashion in Paris, without her being informed of his
blind side, as well as his excellency: Yet this voluptuous Life of hers at last
was public to all the Town, either by their indiscretion, or by the Satirical
Humor of Cleander.

In fine she was now looked upon only with shame and scorn, and every little
hypocritical Gilt, whose conduct was as little reasonable as hers, did nothing
but talk of her actions, Rendezvous and Assignations, publishing with open
mouth the disorders of her Life, she began to find she had done enough at
Paris, and that her Trade was good for nothing when it was professed openly; so
that she prevailed with her Husband to leave it upon some false pretenses, and
out of some pretended domestic Considerations, which he at length yielded to;
not knowing what it was to contradict her will, he consented therefore to what
she had so long solicited for, and chose Orleance for his place of Residence;
she preferred this Place before all others, because she had heard the young men
were as fit for her turn there, as any where in the World.

The very first day she came into this City, she endeavored to take other
measures than she had at Paris, and resolved to live after a different manner,
thereby to gain a stock of Reputation and Esteem, she made at first an
acquaintance with those Ladies of the Place, which passed for the discreetest
and most virtuous, and by her easiness and pliable temper, got the friendship
of the most sincere; she counterfeited a severity of virtue to admiration; and
would never in any discourse allow, that there could be in the world any Woman
so criminal as to give the least unlawful freedom to a man, and maintained it
to be an incredible thing; and pretended to be very much disobliged if any
thing was said in her company liable to an ill construction, and when ever any
such discourse happened, she would immediately leave the company with so well
seeming a studied sense of the Affront, that the most cunning of her own Sex,
would take her to be in earnest: She put this constraint upon her self for some
few days, but was soon tired with that way of living, and begun to make it
known that something less of Reputation and more of pleasure was what she truly
desired. There was not any man in Orleance that had yet adventured to make an
Address to her, and her greatest trouble now was the being reduced to so small
an Ordinary, which was the cause she resolved to follow her inclinations and
seek a more happy life; her Glass showed her the little Beauty she had now
remaining, and she saw very plainly that her two last Children had made her
loose that splendor of youth she before carried in her Complexion; and that
lively cast which was heretofore so easily perceived in her eyes; To repair
these faults she had recourse to Paint, both white and red, so borrowing a
Beauty which she owed only to Art, and which had a greater share in it than
Nature. If she had afterward any severity in her humor, it was only in
Public Assemblies, for when alone in an Alcore with a man of an Amorous Temper
nothing was more tractable; she wanted only some Person declaring himself in
love with her to render her happy, that was enough, she loved him already
before hand, without knowing either his Name or Merit. He who first broke the
Ice was a Monk, who had left the Habit, who with his little Managements in that
Condition, had gotten up a small Stock of Gold, which did not a little serve to
advance his Affairs. The name of this Monk was Anthonine, he was tall and very
slender, his head and eyes bow toward the Ground ever since his Noviciate, his
Face is long and narrow, two large bones covered with a rivelled skin, make up
the shape of his Cheeks, below which are two great hollow pits, his eyes are
sunk so far into his head, that the color of them can scarce be perceived; his
Chin is picked, his Nose hooked, and his Complexion of the deepest dark brown;
Nature to accompany well this Face, has, instead of hair, given him two great
broad Ears which rise up above his head and make a pleasant Prospect, he does
not want Wit, and expresses himself pleasantly enough, but is very vain and
proud of his knowledge, cunning and cheating; he would be accounted a great Wit
in Conversation, and with an affected voice speaks very ridiculously. Although
he is really uglier than I have described him; yet he found no difficulty in
obtaining what he desired of Octavia. That which is to be sold, money always
commands, the ways of looking after it are only difficult. The first time he
saw her she was walking upon the New Walks on the Town-walls, and perceiving
him have his eyes fixed upon her, easily believed he was smitten; she fixes her
looks upon him with a studied Languishment; and pretending to be surprised by
his, blushed, and cast down her eyes with so well an affected Modesty, that it
presently served to increase his Passion: Upon this weak Conjecture he was
resolved (though upon never so dear terms) to get her Acquaintance, and like a
true experienced Monk, began with endeavoring to make a Friendship with her
Husband. He soon found that all his pleasure consisted in being whole days at
his meals and play; and in these humoured him so well by treating him often,
that Schelicon seemed never so well pleased as with Anthonine, and could not
well enjoy a moments rest without seeing him. The Vintage season was now come,
and every one went to reap the pleasures of the Country: at that time Schelicon
desired Anthonine to go with him, this favored his Love too much to be
refused; so they went accordingly with Octavia to take the fresh Air in the
Country: Anthonine was no sooner arrived thither, but he resolved to discover
his Love to Octavia, and after having often failed in opportunity, one day,
Schelicon being at dinner, he found her alone sitting down in the shade in a
great Walk of Trees; he was not wanting in so fair an opportunity to discover
his Love to her; but then uttered all the tender and passionate things can be
imagined to proceed from a Heart wholly possessed with Love; What he then said
had that effect on Octavia that she gave him reason to hope all that he
desired: but he being of a hasty humor, would not stop here, he would know how
far he might hope his happiness should extend; the knowledge he had of her
avaritious Nature, put him upon writing a Letter to her in these Terms.

Anthonine to Octavia.
I Should think my Love like that of a Novice, Madam, If to discover my
passion, I should tell you of Sighs, Languishments and sweet Distractions; my
Love is more Masculine than to concern it self with these Childish Play-games;
it loves solid Action, and is not in the least moved by the languishing looks
of those Visionary Lovers, who taste only the pleasure of being loved, by
strength of Phancie: That Noble Fire which Love kindles in our hearts is not to
be evaporated in languishing looks and tender sighs only, Nature has given
another vent to it much pleasanter and more convenient. When a Woman is loved
by one of these weak Lovers, she must expect only Words, and the protestations
of a Chimerical tenderness: It is treason with them but to name Money, and when
any Female becomes Mercenary, they think her no longer fit to be beloved. As
for me, I take another Course, and have not made Sighs my only Aim; my Purse is
freely at your Service; and if you will but give me an hour toward night, you
shall see my Stock, and know what I can do for you.

Anthonine.


She soon returned him this Answer, slipping it into his Pocket whilst he was
at play with her Husband.

ALthough I do not well understand the meaning of your Letter, yet I think
there is something in it very agreeable and rational; if you will take the
trouble to explain it to me after Supper, I will endeavor to find a way to
discourse with you in private.


The Letter which Anthonine had written was so unfortunate, that after Octavia
had read it, it fell out of her Pocket when she pulled out her Handkerchief,
and was found in the middle of the Room by Schelicon, who read it over, and
seemed to be vexed at it. Octavia who had searched every where for it, without
being able to find it, and seeing such a Melancholy in his Looks, easily judged
that it had fallen into his hands: so that she was forced to use the utmost of
her cunning; she therefore comes near him, and stroaking his face with her
hand; caressing and kissing him, she asks him the reason of his Melancholy, and
without giving him time to answer, will you lay a wager (says she) that I will
make you laugh, if I relate to you the pleasantest thing in the World which has
lately happened unto me: I am much obliged to you Sir (added she with a
scornful smile) to suffer your Friends to send me Letters full of
Impertinencies: See says she, searching in her Pocket, pretending to look for
this Letter of Anthonine's) what has been written to me, after this who can be
trusted? Anthonine that Body of Death, that riveled and fearful face, that lean
Skeleton, to speak to me of Love, and to endeavor to suborn my Virtue? You
would never believe it; if the Letter I am going to let you have a sight of,
were not an undeniable proof. After having said this, she searches one Pocket,
than the other, takes out every thing out of both, looks in her Gown, undoes
her Train, and is impatient that she cannot find it. Upon which Schelicon's
first suspicion being banished, he gives it to her without saying a word. What,
says she, are you in the Conspiracy to laugh at me? and has he given you a Copy
of? No, replied he, in a more gentle tone; It is the same you had lost, as I
understand, and which I have found in this Room. Well, then says she, what say
you to this? who would not have been cheated by this Hypocrite? who seems
hardly to dare to look upon a Woman; If you will be ruled by me, to punish his
Insolence, we will bubble him. She then proposed a way to be diverted by him,
which was for her to suffer his Addresses, to answer them obligingly enough, to
gives rendezvouzes, to receive his money upon fine hopes, and thus to cheat
him. Schelicon trusting entirely to her virtue, and to all that she had said,
consented to whatsoever she desired, and to the end he might give them more
liberty to begin that very Night their new Game, he went out of the House after
Supper, and walked abroad alone. Anthonine perceiving this blessed opportunity,
thought he had discovered the happy minute; so that going into Octavia's
Bedchamber, he found her lying upon the Bed, her Coats negligent and
disordered, so great an effect had the seeing a Woman in this posture upon him,
that he was dashed, and not able to approach her. Am I so frightful (says she,
to him, perceiving his ill timed Modesty) that you dare not endure the sight of
me, and are you only brave, with a Pen in your hand? Near so much Beauty
(replied Anthonine, coming to himfelf, and looking simply for his Purse) how am
I stricken with Admiration? and can a man offer you so little money as I have,
without some kind of trouble, to deserve those Favors, I hope to obtain from
you? Lord! replied she, taking his Purse and looking steadfastly upon it, how
fine is the hair with which this Purse is made? are they yours? But what shall
I do with it, added she? take it again, I am not Mercenary: With these last
words the Monk was so animated, that pulling up her coats with eagerness, he
discovered her lovely Body naked: at the same time she puts up the Purse, not
out of any ill design, having too good a Conscience to keep the money without
giving him the Merchandise; she showed her Lover at this time, that she had a
great share of Modesty, turning her face upon the Bolster, and shutting her
eyes, pretending not to have the confidence to see her self in such a Posture
in the Arms of any man but her Husband. Then it was that Anthonine took
possession of what he so passionately wished for, and after having took
satisfaction for his Purse where with briskness then he came.

The Husband being returned, Octavia makes to him a false Confession of all
that had passed, tells him of the Transports of Anthonine, and calls him the
Amorous Scheleton: confesses she had felt some kind of horror to see her self
alone with him; exaggerates the repulses she had given him, tells him she would
never suffer him to kiss her hand, for fear a kiss from such a Satyr should
raise a blister; shows him the Purse, swears to him he had given it to have one
moment of Conversation with her: she shares the profit with him; and by the
relation she makes of the ridiculous manner, with which he presented it, makes
Schelicon almost die with laughter: The good man laughs at the follies of a
man, whose fool he really was. In fine, when she was in bed she embraced him
more than ordinarily, to the end she might make him believe she drew water at
no other Well but his.

As long as Anthonine had Money the Assignations were very frequent, and
Schelicon used to go out of the Chamber and leave them together; but his Purse
failing, it was time for him to think of returning to Paris to seek a new
supply. Schelicon and Octavia soon followed him; and Vintage being done, they
came up to Town to pass the Winter there, and seek some other good fortune.

Octavia being at Paris thought it too little for her to be contented with her
Monastic Ordinary, for change of meat quickens the Appetite. A certain
Gentleman called Caveceus, was the first who justled Anthonine out of favor,
she had too great a desire to taste of all conditions of men, not to receive a
man of so good a Mine, and who came of one of the most Illustrious Families of
that Place; she would have one trial at least of him, let it cost her never so
much, that she might mix Noble Blood with that of a Citizens: Such a good
fortune was not to be refused by her, for he is finely shaped and very tall,
but somewhat too slender; has good legs well shaped, and his hair is fair, well
curled and frized, his mouth well made, his eyes pleasant, a fine hand, his
complexion is not very good, the Small Pox having left some marks; but as for
his mind he is the most sincere of men, sweet, civil and obliging to all the
World, he speaks very slowly, and has some difficulty in expressing himself:
But if any will hearken to him, they will find him say every thing very well
and with great sense; he pleases himself extremely with Women's company, and
shows the Sex so great a respect, that he often by it becomes troublesome, and
chiefly to Octavia, whom he had almost made desperate in the first
conversations he had with her; she who hates respect out of time, and who would
have every one become familiar immediately, was forced to endure him a long
time without his so much as speaking to her of his Love, or daring so much as
to touch her hand; he thought to have done a great deal, and took himself to be
a rash Lover, if by chance he had fetched a sigh, or cast an amorous look in
her presence. From whence proceeds it, said she to him one day, (thereby to
give him an opportunity to discover himself to her) that you seem to me to be
so pensive and disquieted, and that I fancy when ever I happen to observe you,
you cannot be a moment without sending forth sighs? your languishing looks
instruct me well enough, that your mind is wounded with some passion, tell me
for God's sake I request it of you, (but without disguising any thing) what
causes this disorder in you? I swear to you there is nothing in the World which
I will not do to give you ease. To any other Person in the World besides your
self, replied Caviceus (blushing and sixing his eyes upon the ground) I would
never grant (Madam) what you require of me; but since I have vowed to respect
you, and to obey you as long as I live, I will open to you all my secrets, and
in some particulars should be extremely ambitious of taking your Counsels. Know
then Madam, a thing which I would never have told you, had you not commanded
me, which is, that I love, and that with the greatest violence, the most lovely
Person that ever appeared under the Heavens, but as my love is very great, my
profound respect is also so extreme, that I never have dared to tell her I
suffered for her, and that I have hitherto rather chosen to be unhappy, than
indiscreet: Tell me then Madam, is it not time for me to speak at present? have
not I acted by sighs only, long enough? and may not I now make my complaints at
the feet of her I love, of what torments she has made me endure? her humor is
sweet, her eyes tender and compassionate, her heart -- What, interrupted
Octavia, with Anger, thinking he had spoken of some body else; do you entertain
me only with the Beauties of your Mistress; your nature must be strangely
mischievous, or at least you very uncivil thus to praise her in my presence; if
you had not perfectly lost your wits, certainly you would not have done thus,
Oh! I had very well foreseen Madam, continued Caviceus, that your virtue was
too severe to suffer the confession I have now made of that strong passion I
have for you; was it of me, replied Octavia (seeming strangely surprised) that
you spoke? Let us disguise nothing, replied Caviceus, you have understood it
too well for my happiness; well, if it be of me, replied Octavia, you may
continue your Discourse, I will permit you; you go too much about, and speak
with too much obscurity of a thing you would have known: Oh! Madam, replied he,
if you did but know the purity of my desires, you would never disapprove of my
Love, since it is wholly separated from any thing of Crime; so that if you had
less virtue you would seem less amiable to me. In fine he spent the rest of
this conversation only in exaggerating the innocence of his thoughts, although
Octavia (if he had taken notice of what she said) required the contrary of him,
and that that was not the best quality she hoped for, in a Lover. Another time
as she was with him, and being mightily concerned, that notwithstanding all the
advances she had made, there had no more passed betwixt them, she was now
resolved to discover her thoughts to him upon this matter so clearly, that he
should be obliged indispensably to proceed further; when one loves said she to
him (with an affected bashfulness) as much as you say, is one contented to do,
so little as you do? Love then would really have but very weak pleasures if it
should proceed no further, and Persons who love might with reason complain to
find themselves so ill recompensed for the torments they are made to suffer
under Love's Dominion. Well then, if it be so, replied Caviceus, why are you so
unsensible to the tenderness of a Heart which loves you so much? Alas! I know
but too well your cruelty finds out this, to remove me farther from you, and to
force me not to love you, you pretend by this to repulse my passion; by
representing to me the small gains I shall receive from it; but in fine, why do
you blame me, since those weak pleasures it feeds me with, have no sensual
foundation, and nothing criminal in them? What other Foundation can a true
Lover have for his pleasures, but the senses, replied she? the pleasures, says
he, of thinking of his Love, of entertaining himself with little pleasant
disquiets, to think of the Person he loves, to cast toward her a thousand
amorous Looks, to complain, to sigh, to languish and to weep: and do you call
these (interrupted she) the pleasures of Love, truly you are a great Novice in
it then, these are only the torments, and if you had a heart which were any
ways touched with that passion, you would judge of the sweets of it, by the
violence of the torments you speak of; I will let you know out of pity, where
you will find the true and solid pleasures of Love: you can (replied he) Madam,
by loving me, and by that will render me happy beyond comparison; As for what
you now ask, you may be assured of, but -- do not abuse and insult any more
over (replied he, interrupting her very concernedly) the misfortunes of the
miserable, since it is you alone causes it, and if you have not compassion
enough to give me ease, at least be not so cruel as to widen my wounds. They
finished this Conversation as well as the others without coming to any
Conclusion, and Octavia very much incensed against her Gallant, was resolved
another time to demonstrate to him what she could not before make him
understand, but she not having the opportunity of seeing him often, her designs
must have been delayed, had she not invented a way how to facilitate their
commerce, and receive him more easily in her Chamber, which was to tell her
Husband that if at any time she suffered him in her Company, it was only out of
Policy, he being a man of that Quality, and Great Interest at Court, that if
there should happen to them any misfortune, he would be able to do them great
Service; she thereupon advised him to visit him often, to endeavor to gain his
friendship, and to accompany him in all his diversions, telling him it would be
the greatest honor in the World for him, it being the only way to make him
considerable in the World; He who never made use of any reason of his own, but
suffered it to be always governed, followed her Counsel exactly, and was whole
days with Caviceus, living continually at his Table, which was always better
served than his own: Octavia's true thoughts were, that thus advising her
Husband to invite Caviceus often, she should be able, (knowing his obliging
humor, of giving her so often Presents) in the absence of her Husband to have
him often with her in her Chamber, and might have the opportunity of passing
many a pleasant moment with him in her Alcore without suspicion; All things
succeeded to her liking better than she expected: for Caviceus being grateful
for the favors he had received from Schelicon, made offer to him of a House of
his to lodge in, which he accepted of freely enough, and that gave Octavia
better means of succeeding in her designs; she complemented him often, and said
very obliging things to him upon his good Mien, showed him her Neck and Breasts
naked, asking him what fault he found in them, notwithstanding all which her
Linen nor her Clothes were not any more rumpled or tumbled than at first;
which transported her sometimes to such a degree as to make her almost quarrel
with him openly; she then showed him a Song which blamed bashful Lovers for
sighing, and tormenting themselves for a thing when almost offered, they would
not attempt getting possession of, but he read it no better than he understood
it. In fine one day, wearied with all the advances she had made, she was
resolved now to use the last remedy, and had recourse to demonstration, to
render that more sensible which she had a mind to discover to him; she knowing
he was to come into her Chamber, according to his Custom after dinner, laid her
self upon the Bed in her Cornet, with her Breasts naked, and her Petticoats so
ill in order, that her Thighs might be seen; whilst she lay in this posture
pretending to sleep, her Lover came alone into her Chamber (for she had given
order none should give her notice of his coming, that he might find her thus)
and seeing her in this undecent posture, blushed, and thought that by chance in
her sleep her Petticoats had flown up, so that he to hinder her from being in
the Disorder which, he thought, she would be in, if she awaked and found her
self in this Condition before him, takes up her Handkerchief, and with the
least noise he could for fear of waking her, covers her Breasts, and pulls down
her Coats; in the same instant Octavia pretending to awake, pushes him back
with violence, speaking thus to him, tell me perfidious fool, are these the
Actions of a true Lover; ought not you to die with shame for your weakness? and
does not it fill you with horror, it being against the Order of Nature; I am
(says he) it is true a Criminal, but it was Fortune caused the Crime; if you
could but know the Innocence of my Thoughts, you would without doubt have a
better opinion of me, since you would find me not guilty of the least
disorderly motion: It is that Knowledge, replied the Lady, which makes me so
much an Enemy to you, and makes me detest your Person: Madam, (replied he,
interrupting her) I conjure you to believe that what I did was only to spare
you the trouble which you must have had to have seen your self naked in my
presence; was it that way, answered she, that you ought to have covered it, and
if you were but rational, you would find out a better way to excuse it. In
fine, she said, all that could be said, on such an Occasion, leaving him in
that Wrath, that he went from her with the greatest grief and sorrow
imaginable: This resentment of Octavia did not last long; for Anthonine, came
into her Chamber in the same instant that Caviceus went out, and soon comforted
her in performing for her what she had in vain expected from the other too
Modest Lover; she spoke all the ill things imaginable of Caviceus, and assured
him that she had never conceived so much Antipathy against any Man, as against
him, and that if her Husband had not commanded her to receive him, she would
never have suffered him to come within her sight: after this, she set to work
all the little engaging Endearments she could, which succeeded so well, that
she got from him a very rich and pretty Suit of Knots: She took that day so
much pleasure in receiving Presents, that she was resolved to ask of Caviceus
all the fine things she had a mind to, since she could get nothing else out of
him, although when he came again to visit her, he was received with all the
accustomed kindness, as if nothing at all had happened; and the same day,
seeing a Diamond Ring upon his Finger, she pretended to have a desire to buy
it, and commended it so that he could not handsomely refuse giving it to her.
When he went abroad, she would always desire him to buy things for her, which
were always the best of the Kinds, he not being able to defend himself from
executing her Orders, and as he was not kept within the narrow bounds of a
small Pension, the least of his Presents was of greater value than three of
Anthonine's: It is true she would have been unjust to have complained of the
Monk, since he gave her all he had, and that to content her he had endeavored
all he could to content her. But as one day Anthonine was alone with her,
repeating that pleasure which he valued dear as his life: Caviceus was at the
door returned from the Exchange with an abundance of the most modish wearing
things he could purchase for her; Octavia gave Anthonine only time to go out of
the Chamber, and taking her Fann, she endeavored to abate the high color
which the Exercise she had just then used, had raised in her face. There could
not be showed more kindness to a man than she did in this Interview, and
fearing lest by reason of the disturbance she seemed to be in, he might suspect
something; she told him without asking, that Anthonine was just gone out; that
her Husband was become jealous, and had desired Anthonine, as his Friend, to
have always an eye over her, and to observe her conduct; afterward in a
pretended Confession, which she made to him, she assured him she had the
greatest horror in the World to be forced to be alone with such a man, and
that yet she out of respect to her Husband had always suffered him to be in her
company; Caviceus who believed all she had said to be true, began to offer her
what he had then bought, and amongst the rest of the things, a Box set with
Diamonds, wherein was his Picture; upon which Octavia taking the hand with
which he presented it, kissing it with great transport, and cried out; Oh God,
how obliging and generous you are? why am not I able to do something for you,
in return for these favors? Caviceus felt a certain sprightfulness in himself
stirred up by this freedom she had used, which emboldned him; he takes her hand
and squeezes it between his, kisses it, fastens his mouth full of fire to one
of her breasts, afterward kisses her between them, then looks up into her face
with some remainder of Modesty, to know from her eyes whether his Actions
pleased her, every thing flatters him, and he hears from her nothing but
languishing and amorous sighs, he locks her in his Arms, and then fell eagerly
to taste those Joys which he had so long desired, and forborne out of a foolish
Modesty.

Octavia who had not dared say any thing for fear her Lover should have used
some other unseasonable respect, seeing he could not now draw back held this
Discourse to him not without continual Interruptions, pushing him softly back
and raising him upon her Arms, seemed to be extremely concerned, and uttered
all those things we might expect from a cunning Girl (instructed by her
Mother, and Aunt) on the Bridal Night, thereby to deceive the man into an
opinion of his having obtained a Maidenhead. When she found Caviceus
retreating, she fetching a great sigh from the bottom of her heart, and opening
her Arms which she let fall negligently upon the Bolster, rises from the Bed,
and went to one side of the Chamber leaning her Head over the Arms of a great
Chair, her Hankerchief before her eyes, and pretending in this condition to
fall out into Tears and Sobs, thereby the more to move Caviceus, she spoke thus
to him with the most to be compassionated Tone of Voice in the World: Have I
lived thus long, only, to see my self shamefully in the Arms of any man besides
my Husband? and must I after having lived hitherto with so much Honor, be
brought to see my self the infamous Object of your Lust? did Heaven give you
all those great Qualities, only to seduce my Honor, and to disturb the
innocent pleasures which a Citizen enjoyed with her Husband? Oh! miserable
Creature, that I am, why had not I rather chosen to die with the greatest
misery of pains, then to expose my self to those torments, which at present are
tearing my Soul? can I ever after this Infamy, be able to look upon my Husband,
and receive his innocent and chaste Kisses, without dying of grief, to see that
I have defiled by my unchastness, the purity of our Embraces? she said many
other things which did so sensibly move Caviceus, that I do not know whether he
did not for a moment repent of the Action he had performed: he used all his
skill in comforting her, exaggerating the great number of Women who took the
same Liberty, assuring her that all the finest Women of that City had the same
sweet sin to answer for: but as the pleasure began to return, the counterfeit
Grief ceased, and inviting her to renew the Work, she consented to it, saying
to him, that it was only the first time that was dear, all the rest costing
nothing, and that she foresaw, she should never be able to shake off the
passion she had now conceived for him; In fine for a conclusion, she desiring
to take advantage of the absence of her Husband obliged him to remain that
Night with her, but scarce was this agreed upon, before her Husband came in;
all that she could do, was to hide Caviceus in a Closet, and desires him not to
be impatient, since his arrival should not hinder their Design, for he was
accustomed after Supper to return to his Country house, a League from Orleans
to lie there, not being able to dispense with it, because of some Domestic
Affairs he had to dispatch there, but the thing happened far otherwise than he
had said; for Schelicon being very weary, told her he could not return thither
that Night, and that he comforted himself easily since he should more agreeably
pass the Night with her. All that she could do was to steal from her Husband
one moment, and to go and give notice of this to Caviceus, she cried out aloud
to him from the door to be gone with the least noise he could, and without
staying time enough to see him go, she returns to the Chamber where her Husband
was, to busy him, that he might not take notice of the going out of Caviceus.
Anthonine, who far from being gone away, when Octavia thought he was, out of a
jealous humor had slipped behind the Hangings near that door, to see what
passed between her and Caviceus: finding so fine an opportunity to revenge
himself of them both, goes out of the Chamber and shuts that door at the same
time as Caviceus went to open that of the Closet where he was: but he hearing
the noise of that door, stayed there, for fear of being seen, thinking it to be
Octavia, who having changed her resolution, had then shut it: So he stayed till
Night, and seeing his Mistress come into the Chamber with her Maid, he did not
dare appear; he saw her undress her self from the Closet, and saw her go into
Bed, after having ordered the Maid to put out the Candle; when she was thus
gone into Bed alone he did not doubt but that her Husband was gone back to his
Country House, and thought that he had nothing to do but to prepare himself to
lie by her; but finding himself not to be in the true condition he ought to
appear in, having exhausted himself in the day time, he tarried yet some time
in the Closset repassing in his Imagination all the Objects which had before
given him provocations, and feeling the first forerunners of pleasure, he
comes out, and approaches her Bed, who sleeping already, awaked at the least
noise he made, and taking him for her Husband, having as she thought heard
Caviceus go down, said to him, Lord! what have you been doing so long? why did
you not come to Bed, Caviceus being mightily moved at these reproaches, without
giving himself the time to answer, undresses himself and casts himself into her
Arms, before she found her mistake. Schelicon having finished his Letters comes
into the Chamber with a Candle, and drawing the Curtains of the Bed, sees
Caviceus so advantagiously placed: I leave you to judge the amazement of all
three; Octavia to find her Husband in two places, Caviceus to see him so near
him, and Schelicon to see his Wife in the Arms of another. In fine, after this
first surprisal, Caviceus was forced to compound; and the Articles were, that
he should give a good Sum of Money to Schelicon, and the Freedom of his Table,
and that Sehelicon should let him have the use of the Place, of which he only
reserved the Propriety. The Treaty is yet in force, and they live all three in
the greatest Union imaginable.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF Madam Du Tillait, Written in a Letter to another Lady, who
desired it of a Gentleman of her Acquaintance.
Madam,
SInce you were pleased to command me to give you an account of Madam du
Tillait, I shall obey and relate to you a small part of the History of her
Life, for if I should endeavor to give you the whole, it would take up the
rest of mine.

Since I am ignorant whether you know her by sight, I shall here adjoyn a
description of her Person.

She is delicately shaped, and of a good stature, she has fine but blew Eyes, a
very passable Complexion (especially for a French Woman) black hair, her Mouth
not much too big, and her Teeth pretty even and white, all which together would
make up a Woman of a very good Mine, and much to be admired, if it were not
spoiled by an impudent Air, which does so reign in her Face, that by the first
look one may guess her to be an absolute Messalina; as for her Inclinations
they are sweet and free to that degree that she denies nothing that one can ask
her, but thinks it a sin against Nature to deny what is requested of her with a
good grace; in fine, Madam, she has a thousand considerable Qualities which
would infallibly have advanced her to the first rank of Women, if she had been
either at the Courts of the King of Ethiopia, or of the Queen of Aragon.

She was educated by her Grandmother, Madam de la Houssay, in whose House she
had no sooner come to the fifteenth year of her Age, but she fell desperately
in love with one Chanteau, who has been dead now some time; he was not a Man of
Quality indeed, but a very handsome Fellow, and had a great deal of Wit: This
Lady being at that time very pretty, he perceived with no small joy the good
will she bore toward him, and profited so well of it that he soon obtained of
her what ever he desired, but scarce was the Flower of this young Beauty
gathered, but the Fruit appeared, for in some time (notwithstanding all the
tricks that were played to hinder it) it came to perfection, about which time
she found it necessary to pretend to her Grandmother that she would pass some
few days with one of her Aunts a Nun at the Port Royal, under which pretense
she went and lived at a Midwifes house in the Rue du Four at Paris, where she
was brought to Bed of a Daughter, who was taken care of by Chanteau.

She was absent but four days, at the end of which she returned to her
Grandmothers house, where she kept her Bed the full time, pretending to be sick
of a Fever, at which time (her Woman Mrs. du Plais) has told me, she protested
solemnly she would never return to that sin she had been so sick in this
Lying-Inn, by reason of hetender Age; but scarce was she out of her Bed when
she forgot all these Vows that were extorted from her by the violence of her
pangs, and was with Child again, and was brought to Bed this second time at the
same Midwifes house, but not so secretly as the first, for it is believed her
Father knew it well, although he has always pretended himself ignorant of it,
which was not very likely, considering his great have of marrying her so soon
after this second Slip, which he did to Monsieur le President du Tillait, who
after having lived with her several years, and believed her a Vestal, found her
in Bed with a Gentleman of the Court according to the notice that was given him
by his Brother Mr. de la Cour des Bois, who was much incensed with her
permitting any other to partake of those favors she had afforded him. The
manner of her being surprised was thus: He having pretended to go into the
Country, came home (contrary to her Expectation) at Night, and found the
Gentleman with her, who was forced to run away in his Shirt, and leave his
Clothes in the Ladies Chamber, since which her Husband has never seen her nor
owned a Daughter of which his wife went from the time of this Adventure, for
she was brought to Bed nine months after of her, who now is called (Madam du
Plais) this Gentleman who was thus caught, and was then so much in Love with
her has been so constant to her, since that he has had of her two Sons, one
dead and the other who is now his Page, he always thinking himself the only
Person in her favor till he was disabused by this accident, after which he
found himself far from being in the right, for then she had many others, since
she has given up her self to all the World.

The manner of his discovering the Ladies having other Gallants, was thus: She
had an old Maid called Richard, that was the best in the World at entertaining
Commerce with a dozen Gallants for her Mistress at the same time, for she never
spoke of one to the other, without making each of them believe himself to be
the sole fortunate Lover, but she had another who was not so secret, for upon
some suspicion the Court Gentleman had of the Abbot of Aumont, she readily
confessed the truth that he lay with her Mistress, at the knowledge of which,
and the surprising them once together by this Maids contrivance, he was so
enraged, that he endeavored to run the Abbot through, who having put by the
thrust, and closed upon him, gave the Lady time to call up help to part them,
notwithstanding which the Abbot was hurt in the Face and Hand, but as soon as
he was gone the Gentleman discharged his Anger upon the Lady, and gave her so
many blows with the flat of his Sword that she lay sick of it at least a
Fortnight or three Weeks, during which time she was forced to keep her Bed;
since this Affair the Gentleman never cared for her, but broke with her wholly,
notwithstanding all she could do to appease him.

After which the Lady having so well begun in her young years, was resolved to
finish so, and abandoned her self so up to Vice, that it was to the three
States, the Nobility, Clergy and Commonality.

Some time after this she retired into the Hospital of the Charonne in the said
Suburbs of Saint Germane, because of some Creditors that prosecuted her very
severely, thinking thereby to gain time to pay them.

While she was in this Covent she made an Acquaintance with a Father Jesuit,
called Faverolles, who as I take it, was Director of Conscience to the Nuns of
that Covent, whose ingenious Conversation was so pleasing to her, that she had
many private Conferences mith him, in which the good Father found something in
the Lady that made him hope to gain her Favor, which being no very difficult
thing, he soon came to the end of his Design, which he had no sooner acquainted
her with, but she promised him satisfaction; so that there is nothing wanting
now but opportunity he obtained so much of the Lady, that she discovered to him
a Grate that she had in her Parlour, which came out when she pleased, which as
soon as the Father heard, he made such use of it, that he would not stay any
longer, but went through the Grate to the Ladies Chamber, who seemed not to be
displeased at this Freedom, but agreed so well with him that they left the use
of their Discourse, though not of their Enjoyment of their Pleasures, which
they continued to take so long together, that she found her self with Child in
a small time, of which being to be delivered, she made a Journey to Farmontier
under pretense of seeing some Nuns of her Kindred there, where having been some
time, she was brought to Bed of a Boy (which dyed since at Somiers, where he
was at Nurse) whither, although it was very difficult for Father Faverolles to
lie out of his Covent, He did not fail to go to visit Madam du Tillait at the
time of her lying in; from whence as soon as he had given order for the nursing
of his little Jesuit, he came back to Paris, whither he was hardly come when he
received an order from his Superior to go to Amiens (for I know not what
Affair) but however having heard there that Madam du Tillait was very ill, he
left all the business of his order, and went to her, whom finding much better
than he expected, and his business at Amiens not permitting him to be long
absent, he returned thither the next after he had recommended her to the care
to one Puard a Chyrurgion, who had brought her to Bed, and ordered him to have
a great care of her health, which he did to so good effect, that with that and
his being a hansom Fellow, he got so far into her favor that he had care of
her Pleasures as well as her Lying-Inn, in which he pleased her so, that now he
was got into the Jesuits place in his absence, who when he came back (in four
Months time, during which he could not possibly quit his business) found his
Mistress with Child of Picard. It did not a little perplex the Lady to find out
how to discover the Truth to the good Father, but finding it must come out soon
or late (he never leaving her) she resolved to break the Ice without delaying
it further, which she thought it best to do in Confession to him, in which she
told him all that happened between her and the Chyrurgion, but withal assured
him that it was only to keep the thing secret, however this thing so troubled
the Father that he had utterly broken with her, had he not known People of his
Sort did not always meet with such good Fortunes, wherefore he thought it not
convenient to lose this, and thereupon only made her some few reproaches, but
she quickly shut his mouth, by telling him it was not just for him to reproach
her for any thing she had told him under the Zeal of Confession: Some time
after this they came together to Paris where the Father's Amor being known by
the Jesuit, they checked him severely for it, and for the preventing any
further communication betwixt them, they ordered him to go to Moulins, but
instead of obeying their order he retired into Madam du Tillait's house, of
which the Jesuit not being informed were more than a year without knowing what
was become of him, till at length they heard he kept house with his beloved
Lady, from whence they got an order from the King to have him brought home to
them, which was accordingly executed by an Exempt of the King's Guards, who
found him at Madam du Tillait's house in Bed with her at six of the Clock in
the Morning, from whence not having any Clothes on, he was carried immediately
to the Jesuit, who to punish his open and immodest behavior, put him in Pace
(i. e.) into their Dungeon for six Months, during which time the Lady made a
shift to consolate her self with abundance of Abbots, who were in Love with
her, amongst whom there were the Abbot Fournier Foreas de Treville du Four, and
many others of her Acquaintance, which would take up too much time to name
them, came in such Numbers that her who house seemed to be the Concation House
of the Clergy.

As soon as Father Faverolles was out of Prison he left the Jesuit, and being
retired into some Corner out of the Jesuits Knowledge, he obtained by the
Interest of some Persons of Quality a Dispensation for leaving the Jesuit
Habit, and becoming a Secular Priest.

Some time before this he got into Madam du Tillait's Favor again, at whose
house there happened to him a very pleasant Adventure with Abbot Fournier, who
then held the first place in the Ladies affections, for after having lived
there in secret near a Month, he was forced to retire, which happened thus, the
Ladies Woman had at last discovered to the Abbot that he was in the house and
promised him to bring him where he should find them together, and so he might
by threatening the Father, which out of the fear of being caught there the
second time might make quitt the Ladies Company, in order to which Design she
hid him in her Chamber, and told him that her Lady and she always kept a Dish
of their Supper, and carried it to the Father whilst the Servants were at
Supper below, she bad him also be sure, (as soon as he should see a Candle pass
by such a staircase where the Father's Chamber was) to come at the same time
to the Door, where as soon as he should knock she would go to the Door, making
her Mistress believe she thought it to be another Maid of the House, that knew
of the Father's being in the house; in fine, they ordered their Intrigue so
well, that it fell out as they desired.

For the Lady being come home, but at Eleven of the Clock the Father's Supper
was not carried to him past Eleven, where as soon as the Lady and her Maid was
with him, the Abbot comes up to them and knocks at the Door, and the Maid opens
it to him, who came in and immediately asked Father Faverolles how he dared be
so bold as to be at Madam duTillait's house after he had bin fetched from
thence by the King's Express Command, to which the good Father Jesuit being not
of a very patient temper, answered somewhat angryly, telling him, that was not
his business, and therefore he needed not concern himself any further in it;
but the Lady doubting they would come (as it seems they did) to blows, desired
them both to make no more noise in her house, saying to the Abbot, that as for
him she had a better opinion of his Wisdom than to believe he would make any
disorder in her house, and as for the good Father, she does not doubt but that
he being of the Society of Jesus, will have so much patience as to let the
Affair pass without any noise, but notwithstanding all his precaution and
desire of the Lady, the Father bad the Abbot go out of the Room immediately, at
which the Abbot making sport, he took a Dish which the Lady had brought him
wherein there was a Fricassee boiling hot and made the Abbot a Mask with it, in
which moment the Abbot also took up an Ewer and flung it at his head, after
which they fell upon one another and made so much noise in the Fray, that some
feuillant Monks (of whom Madam du Tallait rented her house) that were saying
Mattins, hearing all this bustle through their Church Windows, which look into
her Court, thought there were Thieves in the House, so that the Father
Procurator of the Covent, who was booted and spurred, ready to go to look after
some business at a Country House belonging to the Covent, was sent to her aid
and went straight up to the Chamber where he heard the Noise, with some of her
Servants that he had told the reason of his coming thither (they having heard
nothing of the noise before) where having knocked at the door as hard as he
could, and no body answering, he was confirmed in his opinion that they were
Thieves, and that they had killed the Lady, upon which he and the servants
resolved to break it open, which the Lady perceiving, thinking she must at last
open it, resolved to let it be half open to the Monk (which was better than to
be seen with Father Faverolles by all her servants) which she did, but withal
commanding her servants to be gone, and let the Monk come in alone, which she
hoped might make an agreement betwixt these two angry Lovers, which accordingly
he did, so that they both agreed, but it was in falling out with and venting
all their anger upon the Lady, reproaching her with her ill Life, and other
things of that nature, but at length being all agreed, they all three desired
the Fevillant Monk to be silent and not to discover this adventure, but he
being desirous to gain by this occasion, told them that the only means for them
to be assured of his keeping their Secret, was for him to be in a condition
that should also need their keeping a Secret for him, by which he made them
understand, and by other good Reasons that he would not retire from thence upon
any other conditions than enjoying Madam du Tillait, which the two other Lovers
at length granted, and went out of the Chamber leaving the Monk with the Lady
booted as he was, who not being used to such favorable opportunities made very
good use of this.

The next morning after this affair Father Faverolles left Madam du Tillait's
House for fear the Abbot should inform the Jesuit of his being there, and
thereby once more be put in Pace, but the Lady not being willing to be far off
from a man that had so many good amorous Qualities, as Faverolles had, took a
Chamber at a Surgeon's House over against the Sorbon, where she seldom let a
day slip without visiting him, which Abbot Fournier (who I think was born to be
a Scourge to Faverolles) knowing by the Ladies Woman, who said her Lady went
every day to that Chyrurgeon's House, but she did not know to whom it was she
gave the Visit, for she was always sent back with the Coach home, how ever this
soon made him think it to be Faverolles, but that he might be certain of it, he
resolved to watch at the Chyrurgeon's Door, which he did one day when the Woman
told him her Lady was there, where having staid some time he espied two little
Dogs which Madam du Tillait carries always with her, which he immediately
followed up stairs to the Chamber door where their Mistress was (after having
done what he could to catch the Dogs before) but he being disguised in a gray
Cloak they did not know him) whither as soon as he came one of the Dogs
scratched at the Door, upon which the Abbot caught him up, and hearkened at the
Door, in which moment the Lady having-heard her Dog scratch, came to open the
Door, which as soon as she had done the Abbot stepped in and told her he having
found her Dogs in the Street, had endeavored to catch them, but they running
away from him he had followed them that they might not be lost, but withal that
he was very sorry he had followed them so far as to interrupt her Entertainment.

Notwithstanding all these pretenses the Father thinking he had done all this
to catch him, immediately gave him a box on the car, after which there being no
body to part them, they fought so heartily that they were forced both at last
to make use of the Man of the House who was a Chyrurgeon.

The Abbot threatened the Father so much this time also that he was forced to
leave the Town for fear of further discovery, and take a House at Isey a
Village near Paris, where the Lady visited him very often, though not without
entertaining at the same time many other Gallants, amongst whom there was one
Mr. L' Avocat, a Fellow that has neither Wit nor breeding, but yet a Master of
Requests of the King's Household, was Chief, as being one of the greatest Fops
she could induce to love her, yet having got some money from him, and a pair of
white Flanders Coach-Horses, he had the first place in her affections, next him
was Guerin her Steward, who had a great share of her Favors, and often of her
Bed, where being one Night, there happened a pleasant adventure, which was,
that three Rivals should meet at a time when it was almost impossible they
should see one another, in order to the unfolding of which you must know Madam
that L' Avocat had for Confident one of the Ladies Footmen, and Abbot Fournier
one of her Maids.

The Lady not being displeased at their catching her, agreeably continues in
Bed, they often hid themselves somewhere till she was in Bed, and then came to
her which the Abbot doing once in her Maids Chamber, and L' Avocate in the
Foot-mans, and the Lady happening to have that Night Guerin in her Bed who
having been in Bed sometime, those Lovers also that were hid came into her
Chamber each of them thinking to be the only one there, but both coming in at
the same time, she bad the Steward hide himself under the Bed, and asked who
was there, to which L' Avocate said, it is I Madam, who come to pass a quarter
of an hours time with you, to which she answered, truly Sir, it is too late
now, not too late, Madam, replied the Abbot, for it has but just now struck
twelve of the Clock; truly, Sir, replied the Lady, I took you for L' Avocate,
and so it is truly, said L' Avocate, on the other side of the Bed, who then
came to the Bedside, and flung himself upon the Bed, so as to meet the Abbot
(that was by this time got to the other side of the Bed) and took him by the
hand, whom he asked, when they knew one another, why he that might come at any
time to the Lady, being so near a Neighbor, should come at that time of the
Night, to which the Abbot, answered very angrily that he wondered how he should
come thither from his House at the other end of Paris so late at night, after
which they gave one the other very ill Language, which had come to blows, if
they had had any mind to fight, or if the Lady had not promised to give them
all imaginable satisfaction, which agreed upon at last amongst them thus that
L' Avocate being farthest off his Lodgings should be the first two hours with
the Lady, after which the Abbot should come, and that in the mean time the
Abbot should retire into another of the Ladies Chambers. These two being
satisfied there remained only poor Guerin unsatisfied, who was very ill lodged
under the Bed in his shirt without hopes of getting any thing by the Treaty
till the Abbot had done with the Lady whom he left at six in the Morning, and
gave him his place in the Ladies Bed, where he took his full revenge of them,
which was not unwelcome to the Lady; in fine, Loves feast was never better
solemnized in this world than this night by three Lovers, who all went away
with so great a satisfaction, that they had not the least Jealousy or Malice
left them.

Here, Madam, I must beg your leave to finish this small account of Madam du
Tillait, wherein you will be pleased to believe there is nothing of Falsehood,
since I assure you I know of Faverolles (who is now my very good Friend, and is
since fallen out with the Lady) all that happened between him and the Lady
whereof I have retrenched the greatest part, as not being fit for your Ears. As
to Chanteau's affairs, I knew it from the Ladies Woman, who was then with her;
and as for that of the Court Gentleman's, it made so great a Noise in the World,
that I believe it is unknown to very few.

As for that of her Steward, it was related to me by himself since he came from
her, in a Month after which, he was found assassinated at the Port Saint
Jacques, but by whom it is not yet known.

Since it pleased you, Madam, to desire me to disguise nothing in this
Relation, I hope you will not be displeased at the too great Liberty I have
taken, and that you will believe as a great truth, that I esteem nothing so
much in this World as your Self, and all things that have any relation to you.

FINIS.

