A TREATISE OF CIVIL BONDS AND OBLIGATIONS, SHOWING THE Nature, Use, and
DANGERS OF SUCH CONTRACTS, WITH CAUTIONS AGAINST SURETISHIP.

By R. A.

Licensed March the 17th. 1687/8 R. M.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1688.

ERRATA.
PAge 12. l. 12. f. in security, r. insecurity. ^ l. 5. f. be. r. besides a. p.
45. in the Marg^ debitis, r. debiti. p. 52. l. 20. f. wear. he. p. 53. in the
margent, r. Gejerus. p. 60 in the margent, veta, r. arcta. p. 61. l. 28. f.
difference, r. defe p. 74. l. 18. blot out the. p. 177. l. 7. f. inconti^ces,
r. incontinences.

TO WILLIAM BROMLEY, Esquire
SIR,
WHEN I consider the Temper of your Mind, the manifest sincerity of your
de^tment, and your ardent Affection (...) the Peace and Prosperity of the
^ngdom: I cannot wonder that so ^ch real Worth should purchase you general
Esteem and Love in the ^asts of all your Acquaintance; ^d procure you a Right
to a Seat ^ one of the greatest Councils that this day in the Christian World.
and though that inestimable Modesty which clearly appears in your dispo^ion and
converse, restrains me from speaking all that I think; yet si^ I cannot think
out all that you serve; an utter silence would be less unpardonable, than
Flattery detestable: The World knows h^ to place you in the Catalogue of
^triots, whose Merits transcend the years, whose Manners are exemp^ry to their
Superiors, and shed broad profitable influences upon degrees, and whose Honor
ra^ the Emulation of aspiring Spir^* Had I not a sure persuasion of y^ Goodness
and Candor, I could ^ presume to send so poor a Pre^ as this to your hands, or
desire t^ it may find a quiet repose under umbrage of your Favor. My sn^
acquaintance with you, has enr^ed me with plentiful demonstrati^ of your great
Virtue, and incou^ged me to offer this minute Trac^ wait upon you, as being
agreeabl^ your habitual inclination to the p^lick good. I cannot think, that
^ther the composure thereof, or ^le is worthy of your acceptance, approbation:
For when I reflect on the form, and contexture of my ^scourse, I have some
cause to sus^ct, that it is not so correct, or methodically contrived, but that
may be liable to censure; and I have ^ mind to put the uneasy trouble on you
of sheltering my imperse^on with your Patronage. But be^g sufficiently
conscious to the cur^at of my well directed intention, which is to save honest
men from ^eats and Dangers, and to tender ^em my charirable advice for their
^ety and peace. I do not doubt ^ur favorable construction of the ^tter and
design of it: Which not ^ly for the rarity of the Argument, ^t the general
usefulness thereof, ^y look for a valuable regard from (...) who can but breath
good wishes (...) the happiness of humane society; ^d expect a ready
furtherance from ^ose, whose abilities have rendered ^em capable of Public
Communications, and I know your public Spirit can make a fair and reasonabl^
Apology for such a purpose, and you^ forward Charity can hide a multitud^ of
the Authors infirmities, when the good meaning of his Labor is man^fest to all
Observers. And since I an^ many ways obliged to your Family I have no better
occasion at present to render my thankful acknowledgment, than by presenting
this wel^ meant Treatise to your disposal, as Token of that gratitude I ought
to express and practice; and upon all opportunities must ever be performe^ by

Sir, Your most Faithful an^ most Humble Serva^^ R. A.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THOUGH some look upon the numerous offspring of the Press, with the like
discontented eye, ^herewith an ill Natured Father be^olds the number of his
Children, as a Burden rather than a Blessing: Yet I ^m apt to think that many
useful Books ^re still wanting; and I hope that Fu^ure Ages will produce
clearer Excel^ences of profitable Learning, and better improvements of
knowledge than we ^^e yet acquainted with.

It is observed by the famous Lord ^acon, Chancellor of England, Bacons
Advancement of Learning, l. 8. p. 37, 371.
That concerning the Wisdom of business where^n Man's Life is most conversant,
there be no Books at all Written of it, except an handful or two, of some fe^
civil Advertisements, that have n^ proportion to the magnitude of the Subject;
for if there were Books exta^ of this Argument, as of other; I doub^ not but
Learned Men with mean exp^rience, would far excel men of long e^perience; and
out shoot them (as the say) in their own bow: Neither ^ there any cause why we
should fear le^ the matter of this knowledge should ^ so various, that it could
not fall und^ precepts, for it is much narrower the the Science of Government,
which no^withstanding we see is exactly labour^ and subdued.

Of this kind of Wisdom, it seem^ there have been some Professors among the
Romans in their best and wis^ times: For Cicero Reports, that was in use a
little before his time, (...) Senators who had the name for wise a^ experienced
men (the Coruncanii, O^rii, Laelii, and others) to walk at ce^tain hours in the
Forum, where the might give access, and audience to (...) Citizens; and might
be consulted with^l, not only touching point of Law; but of all sorts of
business; as of the Marriage of a Daughter, or of the bringing up of a Son, or
of a purchase, ^f a bargain, of an Accusation, of a ^efence, and every other
occasion inci^ent to man's Life.

The Subject I have chosen to insist on ^^ongs to this Argument; I must con^^s,
that I have neither read over great ^^braries, nor seen man^ years; yet I ^^ve
sometimes wondered, that after the ^st inquiry I could make, I never yet ^^ld
find (beside the Code and Digest) ^ one small Tract concerning Sureti^p, as if
the management of this Sub^ were unworthy of the Labors of a ^arned Pen.

Whatever may be extant in this kind, ^t relates to the Wisdom of business:
^ere's nothing which may any way be ^^pared with those Aphorisms which ^lomon
the King of Israel set forth; ^ whom this Testimony is given that heart was as
the Sands of the Sea; for as these do incompass all the ut^ bounds of the
World; so his Wis^ comprehended all matters, as well mane as Divine; in whose
Parables many Excellent Precepts and Adv^^tisements springing out of the
profo^^ Secrets of Wisdom, and flowing over i^ a large Field of Variety.

We know by consulting this R^ Author, that the matter of Sureti^ is not wholly
neglected in Scripture, ^ general Commentators could not fi^ their undertaking
without touching u^ what is written in all the Proverb^ Solomon in the course
of their in^pretation: But I never met with, ^ yet could hear of any Book
extant t^ is ex instituto written upon this S^ject; and though there may be some
wh^ of I have not seen one, yet the S^ city will justify my present Labor.

I have heard many lamentable sto^ of Families, ruined by rash and incons^rate
Suretiship; and the love I have the welfare of the Kingdom, which much im
paired by the decay of priv^ ^amilies, has moved me to spend some (...) my
leisure hours in penning my ^oughts concerning this Argument, which is of
general concern: And though ^y conceptions thereof be rude and im^^rfect; yet
they are therefore exposed (...) public view, because they could not ^
profitable were they hid under a ^ushel.

After I had begun some small thoughts (...) this undertaking: Two Clergymen
(...) distant times knocked at my Door; ^^o by Suretiship were reduced to
ex^eam indigence and beggary: The sad ^lation they gave me of their condition,
^s heard and entertained with tender ^^mpassion: Afterward I had the ^owledge
of another person of the same ^at, whose loss by the same way was ^re
considerable for the quantity, than ^eirs; but yet he was supported by bet^
means than begging: Yet was so far ^akned thereby, that his way of living ^ame
somewhat uneasy to him, through ^e restraint that was thereby put upon ^s
charitable inclination; it being little better than death to him to li^ without
being able to do good in ^ World; which he saw had so much (...) of it.

The purpose I had conceived to co^der the Argument of this Treatise, (...) not
thoroughly formed, until I met w^ these instances; for reflecting thereon
suspected the want of Books concern^ Suretiship, might be the Reason t^
Scholars did lose themselves there^*

Whereupon I was quickened to att^^ this business with greater applicati^ and
though I can do no more the^ then make a clear representation, or g^ a
remembrance of such things which obvious to all diligent Observers? what is
here compiled together, after rude manner, may yield sufficient m^^ter of
Caution to all Readers, that (...) clearly survey what is presented to the
minds, not doubting but that men n^ possess no less sure advantage by a p^dent
guarding of their own properti^ than others have obtained by their r^ Projects,
and new Inventions. And ^ my hope I shall not water dry ^icks, or wash Negro's;
because every ^ans interest will conspire with my de^gn.

I cannot pretend, that Friends have ^esired me to employ my self in this ^sk:
for I know no man that can think ^e able to undertake it, neither can (...)
judge my self sufficient for a work of ^is Nature; which were more proper ^r a
Learned and Charitable Counsel^ur, than a private person, who has ^^t an
obscure knowledge of Men, and ^ss experience in Civil affairs. Yet ^aving a
great sense of their deplorable ^ndition who have contracted heavy ^ebts by
their Obligations for others; ^y inexperience in business (which I ^n freely
confess) could not stop me ^om this enterprise, which trembles not ^^ the
capritious force of any Critical ^emarks, or envious Obloquies, being ^esigned
for no other end than the pub^^ck good. And if what I have brief^y Written
(after my fashion) shall either make Men take heed of oppressing themselves
with others burdens; (...) shall awaken some more able Pen to ^swade them from
so doing; I have (...) that I desire.

We know that great things ha^ sometimes been done by small mea^ and strange
distempers have been cu^ by contemptible Receipts, and with imposing upon any
Man's judgment, may humbly conjecture, that it possible, that this slender
sling, ^ small pebble may strike, and sink i^ the brow of a terrible Philistim,
(...) slay that great Evil, which has rui^ many considerable Families; and
con^quently has been grievous both to ^ Ecclesiastical and Civil State.

And since I aim at the public go^ and mean persons may have need of t^ advice
which is here given; I have ^ken care to bestow it in so small a c^pass; that
Men of short abilities ^ purchase this Receipt for their safe and have it ready
at hand to re^ their assaults, who would allure the into a snare, and bring
them un^^e servile Yoke of their secular con^acts.

And that the Benefit of this Manu^ might have a large extent, the style
accommodated to the meanest capaci^

No Man, I suppose, will deny me the ^asure of my own good intentions: ^d if
the Reader may have profit by ^ labor; I hope he will easily part the
infirmities I could not free my ^f from; and accept my endeavors, ^uch as they
are) for his well being.

THE CONTENTS
Chap. 1. Shows the Nature (...) Suretiship, with the ^dinary Causes and
Effects there ^ page (...) Chap. 2. Declares, That the Caut^ against
Suretiship, depends on Divine Authority; and how far M^ are obliged in
Conscience to fr^ their Measures accordingly. Chap. 3. Warns all Men to shun
^ Temptations of proud, foolish, slo^ful, prodigal and Wicked person upon whose
account Suretiship is e^treamly dangerous. (...) Chap. 4. Describes the proper
me^ to be used in Conformity to the C^tion against Suretiship. 1^
CAUTION AGAINST SURETISHIP.
CHAPTER I. ^heweth the nature of Suretiship, with (...) the ordinary Causes
and Effects (...) thereof.
COmmon practice is a sufficient demonstration of the nature of civil Bonds,
and Obligations; but the force of them is usually ^oner felt, than understood:
which is the ^eason that has moved me to write this Caution; and to desire the
Reader to make a pause, and breath a while; tha^ he may ponder what he is
allured to under take, when the kindness of his Suretiship is desired of him.

The form of Bonds, wherein two o^ more are bound, and the customary Ceremonies
that are used at the making (...) them, show, that they have an equ^ strength,
and virtue as to all that are obliged therein.

Whatever the number of persons b^ that are concerned in one common Bon^ for
the payment of one entire Sum; the efficacy thereof is such, that every
part^cular person, by himself, is as well liable t^ the payment of the whole,
as they altog^ther are; for by the form of their Bond^ they are all tied (
conjunctim, and divisin^ jointly, and severally) to the payment o^ the said
Sum; for, immediately after the Sum is mentioned in the Bond, and the person
unto whom it is to be paid is nom^nated, it follows ad quam quidem solutionem
been, and fideliter faciendam obligamus nos, and utrumque nostri Haeredes,
Executores, and Administratores nostros, and utriusque nostri; per se, pro
toto, and in solido firmiter per praesentes.

unto which payme^ well and truly to ^ made we oblige o^selves, and either
(...) us; the Heirs, Excutors, and Adm^nistrators of us, and of either of us,
by himself, for the whole, and full Sum firmly by these presents.



And the Condition of the Obligation is drawn to the same purpose [That if the
within bounden, or either of them, the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of
them, or either of them; shall well and truly pay the debt, then the obligation
shall be void: or else remain in full force.]

And as the form of Bonds in which two, or more are bound; shows that every
particular person by himself is as fast bound, as they all together are: so the
customary ceremonies at the making of a Bond, manifest the Obligation to be
equal upon every one single, as it is upon all: for every one signs, seals, and
delivers the Bond, as his Act and Deed: the signing and sealing is plainly
particular, and though all join in the delivery of the Bond as their Act and
Deed; no man can infer from thence that all their powers must equally concur in
satisfying the person to whom, or to whose use, the delivery is made; for a
joint delivery includes every particular, and this therefore is the act of
every person by himself: for if any one who has consented to have his name p^
in a Bond, should be absent when the customary ceremonies are performed by
others therein engaged, he must repeat then all by himself, and make his
particular d^livery before witnesses when required: s^ that whether the
delivery be actuall^ joint, or particular, it must be understoo^ to be the act
of every person concerne^ agreeably to the tenor of the obligation* Some make
a plausible distinction of Principal, and Surety (and in way of discours^* I
must crave leave to make use of it) which seems to import that the Principal is
mo^^ strictly obliged, than the Surety: and some ignorant Sureties may flatter
themselves therewith, till they find their opinion confuted with an
after-reckoning: for the distinction of Principal, and Surety, sign^fies no
more then that he who has the character of Principal, has received the Sum
specified in the Condition of the Bond; and has the honor to have h^ name
first in the Obligation: but in est^mate of Law both Principal, and Sur^ty are
one person: so that both are equall^ obliged, and if either shall make
satisfacton the Obligation is void; and this to commonly falls to the Lot of
the Surety who though his Name be disposed of i^ ^e lowest place; yet he sinks
not out of ^ght by that means: But as the deepest ^ings in nature, have the
saddest weight upon them, so he who lies undermost in ^n Obligation, too often
bears all the bur^en. He finds that word true, in sad ^arnest, which an
Honorable Judge ^nce spoke in jest, That a Surety is a sure ^ie, and oftener
pays the Debt than the Princi^al: And, being this kind of grievance is ^o rare
case, every one that has a just ^egard to his own Peace, Liberty, Repu^ation,
and Prosperity, should take heed ^ow by humouring the Requests of an In^olvent
Person, he yields up himself a Slave ^o the tyranny of a Creditor, who
frequent^y, is more severe upon the Surety, than upon him who has carried off
the Spoil. Nay, though the Principal be superior ^o the Surety in Wealth, and
Honor; and and the Lender upon Usury cannot but ^nderstand, that according to
all Rules of Conscience, and Honesty, he is obliged to ^ay his own Debt: Yet if
there be any neglect on his part in rendering what is ^ue, the Usurer falls
fowlest upon the Surety, who, notwithstanding he be last named in the Bond, is
first in the trouble that is consequent upon it.

Si plures sint fide j^ssores quot quot erunt numero singuli in solidum
tenentur itaque liberum est Creditori a quo velit solidum petere. Justin.
Instit. l. 3.
Let it be granted, that Creditors have their Liberty, to make their Demands of
whom they please, among such who are equally obliged to make him satisfaction.
Yet I cannot apprehend, what sufficient Reasons they can find to justify their
troubling the Surety, rather than the Principal (which yet is frequently
practiced) when the Principal is in better Capacity, and furnished with greater
ability to content them.

The best Apology that can be made for such Proceedings, is grounded upon the
great-Friendship contracted between the Surety and the Principal; upon which
account an earnest Application to the Surety in the first place, (who can have
freer access to the Principal, than a Stranger can find) is thought a fit
Expedient to hasten the Payment of the Sum which is demanded.

But though there be no more in this case than what is pretended; yet it is
manifest, that the Surety is enforced to be the Servant of the Creditor, and
compelled to haunt his Neighbor with unwelcome Solicitations, that render him
the Object of ^n evil Eye, and endanger the quenching ^f that Love which has
been cherished ^etween them.

And if his Mediation (which in ap^earance was all that at first was desired)
^rove ineffectual, then the Surety that was ^ngled out first must be hunted
down, he (...) threatened with all the Power and Rigor ^f the Law: A Writ is
procured, and ex^cuted upon him, and immediately he lo^es the Liberty of his
Person, and is ravi^hed from the Innocent Delights of his ^wn Dwelling, and the
Comfortable Air ^f a free Conversation; and this is sometimes done when the
Principal Debtor who wants not power to satisfy the Debt) ^njoys his Freedom,
and is suffered to sit ^uietly under his own Vine.

Thus the Surety lies under the Tyranny of the Creditor, and has no relief,
but what may be expected from a false Friend, who would not have suffered so
much ^rouble to fall upon the Surety, if there ^ad been either Sincerity in his
Friendship to him, or Justice in his Deal^ng.

And though it may be supposed, that ^he has his Counter-Bond made to him, for
his Indemnity; which may be thought ^o be a sufficient Plaster for his Wound,
and such as he may confidently, and with out offense, make use of; when it
shall evidently appear, that he does it for no other reason, than to remove a
Burden which his Friend has left upon him. Ye^ the wearied Surety has had
much trouble already, from the Creditor's Vexatious Prosecution, and it is
probable h^ shall have much more in reflecting a jus^ measure upon his
Ungrateful Associate.

And if they who are Sureties for Solvent Debtors often meet with such hard
Treatment, What must they expect, who are Bound for the needy and weak part o^
the World?

It is impossible to give a Catalogue o^ all that have been Sufferers on this
account* who have learned to know the force o^ Bonds, by the great Damages they
have sustained.

They have seen that their Love to their Neighbors has been made use of to
their own ruin, and their Merit of Gratitud^ transformed into the cause of
their oppression; and though there have been innumerable Instances of this
kind, who have bought their sad experience at a dear rate, and groaned under a
Remediless Misery* Yet when it might be expected, that a^ Cloud of such
suffering Benefactors, should drop some Influences upon others, in order to
their bringing forth of better Fruit to themselves; the flattering breath of
the Needy, blows away this Cloud, so that there is no appearance of it, at such
a time, when a Snare is laid to catch an easy and good-natured Friend.

Necessity is always pregnant with cunning Artifices for its own relief; and he
that will give an Ear to the Passionate Entreaties, and fair Promises of an
Indigent Neighbor, and will be so far prevailed with as to subscribe to the
supply of his Wants, is apt to rejoice in what he has done, as being well
assured, that he has performed a good Office for another; and is so charmed
with these Thoughts, that ^he suspects no harm to himself, and fears no evil:
But he sees not that the time is drawing on, when he shall feel the Burden,
and his experience shall give him an understanding of the nature of that
Suretiship which had Honey in the Mouth when he was Caressed, and Treated by
his Friend, but has a Sting in the Tail, that will make him bleed against his
Will; which had he considered in time, he might have had good store of
defensive Arguments to save himself from all such Temptations, whereby he has
been allured, an^ overcome.

The Law of Charity to our Neighbou^ obliges no Man to quit that Prudenc^ which
should enlighten and direct his Co^versation; and there can be no reason, wh^
any Man should vail his own just Acqui^tions, or lawful Inheritance to anoth^^
Man's Pleasure.

Charity and Prudence, are very goo^ Company, and it is pity they should ev^^
be parted; the warm Conjunction of bo^^ being no less necessary in all Moral
Tran^actions, than the good temperament ^ radical heat and moisture to the
health^ Constitution of a natural Body, or t^ sweet Conspiration, and
Intellectual Co^respondence of our enlightened Unde^standings, and regenerated
Wills to t^ peaceful Rectitude, and pleasant Harm^ny of our Souls. If Prudence
be separat^^ from Charity, it degenerates into the W^^dom and Policy of this
ill-natured Worl^* If Charity be put asunder from Pruden^^ it becomes near
akin to a vain, profuse, a^^ superfluous Prodigality. It is expedie^
therefore, that every Man should cons^^ the Measures of Prudence, and observe
wise Conduct in all external Offices ^ Charity. Yea, it is highly reasonab^^
^^at in every purpose, we should make our ^ccompts before hand, least we leave
that ^siness with shame, which we undertook all Adventures; and what was begun
^^th a blind Confidence, become the ^atter of our open Disgrace

The World is too full of rash Examples, ^o have either lost themselves by
their ^ecipitant Undertakings, or strangely en^mber'd their outward Condition,
for ^nt of a cautious foresight of the end of ^^eir Actions. It is not
therefore without ^^se, that the necessity of Discretion and ^ariness in all
Proceedings, should be ^^st upon Men, and particularly in the ^^e of
Suretiship, by which the Subjects this Kingdom (as I am apt to believe) ^e
suffered greater Damages, than by ^ the Thefts and Robberies that have ^n
committed therein, and though ^re be a great difference to be made be^xt him
who allures his Friend to be^^ a Debtor for him by his own volun^y act; and one
who takes his Neigh^^rs goods against his Will, and darts ^rrours upon him in
the doing of it: Yet ^ften happens, that he who enters him^ a Surety for
another, does no more ^^k of paying his Debt, than he fears (...) he should in
that instant be robbed of so much he has engaged for: And yet ^ter some time
is past, he has been o^ strained to bear the loss of it. Wheref^^ it is
expedient, that every one should o^^sider the nature of Suretiship before ^
begin to wade therein, least he fall into devouring Gulf, that will swallow
(...) which with much industry and care ^ has gathered together.

If he do but lift up his Eye lids to ^ hold what he is going to do; he shall ^
that the tottering in security of the ^rower is one main reason that the pro^^
his security is desired.

The Lender upon Usury would h^ more Strings than one to his Bow, beca^ a
threefold Cord is not easily bro^ were he well assured of the good, ^
substantial strength of one, there w^ be no great necessity of requiring m^ But
either the Honesty, or the power one being doubtful; the Lender reas^bly
demands better security before he with his Money.

It is commonly seen, that some Per^ upon their occasional Exigences can ^ more
Treasure by passing their Word subscribing a Note for remembra^ then others can
do by giving their Bo^ And yet these Persons who are read^ (...), and Seal
their Obligations, have ^re visible Inheritances than they, whose ^y Word, with
any small Signal, that ^es only for a Memorandum, shall be ^en for good
Security.

They, who by their Care, and Conduct their particular Vocations, make a good
^ure in the Cities and Corporations of Kingdom, are readily trusted propor^ably
to the Reputation they have gain.

And many profitable Imploys, are ^ported upon Credit, and no such thing a Bond
is desired; the Reasons where^are best known to those who are Consant in such
business: But the chief ^ar of this credit (I suppose) is the ap^^ved honesty
of those that Traffic; nor ^ they have a sweeter Flower in their ^^fession:
For the Custom they have ^cured, and the hope of gain by Sale, ^^ch Spurs them
on in their Business, are ^^able, and uncertain things; and there^ the root of
the matter, and the best ^und of Confidence, is a firm, and in^ctible
Integrity: For when Custom ^ off, or Sale is obstructed, the Mer^nts, and
Traders that are upright, will ^ desire to be trusted above their power, ^ this
makes their Word equivalent in ^ue to a legal Obligation. If some are beginning
a Trade, and want a full Sto^ or such who have Traded long, wo^ make a
Purchase, and need a Sum to fe^ their design, the Booking of it down his
Accounts that lends it, will proba^ suffice: Or if Bonds with Sureties are
^sired, there can be little or no danger the security that is bestowed, either
u^ the Trader that is skilful in his Professi^ and hopeful in his Undertakings;
or Purchaser that is wise in his Bargains, a honest in his Conversation; except
t^ the Mortality of either may be the occ^on of sundry Troubles to those that
an^ ^bliged for them: For though Debts in case have a precedence to Legacies, ^
Justice should be satisfied before the k^ness of the Deceased can be fulfilled:
(...) Executors of Wills, or Administraton^ Inventories may have other
Principles, ^fections, and Interests than the Dece^ had: Upon which Account the
Repos^ the Deceased's Friends may be much disturbed, and their Affairs may be
stra^ly perplexed ever full satisfaction ca^ procured.

It is not so much my business at pres^ to show where Suretiship is not, as w^^
it is dangerous.

I make no doubt, but that in some ca^es it is not only safe, but praise
worthy; ^s being a chargeless act of great kindness. and Brotherly Love, and
such a Work of Charity as puts the Doer to no expense at ^ll.

Were the danger Epidemical, all the World would be affrighted at it; no Man
^ill come near the pit that swallows up all that slip into it, or approach the
Air that ^fects all that breath it: But that rare ^uretiship which is both safe
and commenable, is no sufficient encouragement to an ^niversal Approbation of
this practice.

The harmless Circumstances of some ^ureties, and the grateful Offices that
^ave been returned for their seasonable ^ndness, are no Argument that all
Sureties ^all be saved from Damages, and requited ^r their opportune
Assistance: and there^re let no Man presume of safety, or exect a grateful
Consideration in all Cir^umstances, because there is no danger of ^^ss, or
guilt of Ingratitude in some Ca^s.

The Confidence Men commonly have (...) their Familiar Acquaintance, overles
the Fears of all Inconveniences they ^ay be the occasion of. They make no ^ubt
of the sincerity of their Friendship, and the hope of Mutual Civilities, is a^
Oil to the Lamp of their Correspondence* But both this Confidence, and this
Hope are too often built upon Sands; they los^ their brightness in the next
rising Cloud, and suffer the sad experience of the fals^ness of their ground by
the first peevish Storm that falls upon them.

Far be it from any Man to imagine that there should be no mutual trust o^ hope
among Men, which are the Hinge upon which the motion of sundry Negotiations
turns.

When the Royal Psalmist speaks hi^ Judgment concerning the necessity, an^
safety of trusting in God at all times, an^ says, Psalm. 62.9.
Surely Men of low degree are Vanity and Men of high degree are a Lie, to be
laid i^ the Balance, they are altogether lighter the Vanity. He excludes all
wordly things b^ reason of the mutability, and deceitfulne^ thereof from being
worthy of a Religion Trust, which is an Idolatrous Act when directed to, and
terminated upon an^ Created Object: But he does not charg^ all Degrees, and
Conditions of Men, a^ Impostors that have no truth, and faithfulness among
them; or, cry out, as son^ upon notable provocations have done, The there is no
Faith in Man.

It is the too common practice of the Wicked to speak Lies, Psalm. 58.3.62.4.
Job. 13.4.
to be the Forgers of them, and to delight therein: But part of the Character
of the Just, that they detest this Cretian Iniquity, and know themselves
obliged to keep their Words, and Promises; though their faithfulness in do^ng
so, tend to their own Loss, and Detriment.

Yet the World being full of Lying Lips, of Flattering and Deceitful Tongues;
all persons must have a great stock of easy Credulity, who will be confident
of the truth of all that is spoken, or promised to them.

They whose Eyes are open, can with sorrow behold so much falsness in some of
^ll Degrees, and Conditions, as may justify their Caution in dealing with
them; and cause them to deny their Assent to ^uch needless Oaths, and
multiplied Asse^erations, which being used to obtain Cre^ence, have the
misfortune to be interpreted in a sense clean contrary to their design.

The plainest truth is ordinarily crowned with the fairest Credit, and a pure
simplicity needs no Flowery Bush, or Gaudy ^arangue to make it acceptable.

The upright Dealer is a Man of few words, and loves rather to be punctual in
his Doings, than eloquent in his Language; and believes a ready performance of
whatever is just, will be more comfortable to his Neighbor, than the most
fluent Elocution which is winged with several Distinctions, and Evasions, and
flees away leaving no Track behind; and the word of many are like Wind, which
raises ^ choking Dust, and too often portend ^ Storm.

He that is a great Orator in secular business, usually minds himself, and
warm^ pleads his own Cause; but he that is faithful doer, minds another as
himse^ and will rather suffer harm than do wrong* Wherefore, if men find their
Acquai^tance too full of words in soliciting kin^nesses, they may have some
reason to s^spect a design; and it is more safe to s^ the Collar in due time,
than bear the Yo^ they are tempted to.

Were the Vessel full, it would not man so great a noise; this commonly procee^
from emptiness, and mere vanity; and is no fault to be jealous of his Condition
who by his own Act renders it liable ^ Suspicion.

But Knavery has a full Ward-ro^ whereby it is furnished with diverse Dr^ses,
and Ornaments to cover its Deformity withal. Yea, rather than the Monstrous
Nakedness thereof should appear, it will put on Vestments taken out of the
Sanctuary, and possibly shall seem more skilful in the form, and show of
Religion, than that sincerity which has best experience therein; and we must
confess, it is not easy to discern where the Devil lurks, when nothing but an
Angel of light is in view: Whence it has come to pass that many Cheats have
passed current, that have been stamped with a Sacred Image; and they who have
well learned the distinguishing Notes, and Characters of a Sect, have been able
to play their subtle Games with ^he Brotherhood without discovery.

The World has seen some Families be^rayed to ruin, by being taken in the
^nares, which an Illustrious Profession ^ath laid for them; and since Cheats
^an trick up themselves in all Attires, it is more difficult to spy out their
designs, then ^trange that they should be successful.

However, it is not impossible to strip ^he fraudulent Contrivance that is
disgui^ed with the most colorable Pretenses. ^or when Men's Profession
surmounts their ^ractice, when they are more concerned or a Superficial
Ceremony, than a well-bodied Righteousness: When there a^ palpable
Inconsistences in the course ^ their Lives; when their Fruits are not
a^swerable to their Lip Labors; when the words savor more of Pride than
Expe^ence; when their Moral intercourses wi^ Men, fall much short of that Zeal
for Religion, which they pretend to: and wh^ their constant behavior does not
compu^ with a substantial Piety and Goodne^ the deceitfulness of the show which
the make, is not altogether indiscernible; a^ every prudent person has
sufficient ca^ to take heed lest he be decoyed too far to their Concerns, and
then be taken in ^ Nets, out of which there is no escape, wi^out paying all the
Ransom that is requir^*

If Men's Hearts were animated w^ the pure Spirit of Religion, they co^ not be
unfaithful, or unfair in their D^ings with Men; for he who loves G^ must love
his Brother also: And theref^ none can dispose of any concerns bet^ than by
putting them into such ha^^ which are most sincerely lifted up to (...) great
God of Heaven: And we may ^lieve, that such who have a pious care the first,
will not break the second Ta^ But we may not always be enamou^ with a specious
appearance of Devot^ though the Spirit, and Power thereof, is ^ost worthy of an
Affectionate Venerati^n and Esteem.

It must be confessed, that more Pockets ^ave been picked in the Market, than
in ^he Temple; and yet many knavish tricks ^ave been boldly acted under the
cover of (...) Religious Cloak.

But the Insecurity of the Principal, ^rows not only from the naughtiness of
his Morals, or the doubtfulness of his Truth, and Honesty; but from the
weakness of his ^ondition, and this is Obvious, when Men ^ake up Money, not to
make Purchases, or ^o drive seasonable, and advantageous Bargains, but to
supply real Necessities, or ^o support needless Vanities.

Among the weak Borrowers of this Age ^ich are commonly dangerous to their
Friends, who are either rash in their Pro^ections, or vain in their
Conversa^ion.

There is a Generation, who to win a Name among the Vertuoso's, will soon
^onsume all that they can get into their hands. That little Philosophy they
have ^isturbed their raw Brains with, so strang^y leavens their Phancies, that
they are presently swelled with an Opinion of their own mighty power, and can
freely tax themselves with the charge of sundry Experiments, in hope of some
wonderful performance.

I make no doubt, but such who have eminent Parts, sufficient power, competent
Abilities, and convenient Means for Philosophical Attempts may produce
something considerable for the use o^ Mankind: and though they can reap no
Fruit equivalent to their own vast Expenses; yet they find their reward in the
pleasure which they take in being either the Authors, or Incouragers of an
Invention that is useful to others.

But they who imagine themselves capable for such rare Adventures, and mu^ not
only consume their Substance, bu^ contract great Debts for the Accomplishment
of their Projects, are the Authors t^ as much danger to their Sureties, as of
damage to themselves: And when some sha^ waste much Treasure to extract a grai^
of Gold out of a certain quantity of Iron or a drop of Spirits out of a dry
Bone, an^ weary themselves in such like Experiment or empty their own, and
others Purses t^ fill their fermented Phansies with the glory of some fruitless
Invention; they a^ as Fools that will part with all things for the sake of a
Bauble they are delighte with: And who can discern how such should live by
their Wits, who are consumed by their Folly? Their Trade renders them by so
much poorer than Poets, by how much their Projections are more chargeable than
the Poets, either Comical, or Tragical Inventions. It is not possible for such
to thrive to their own con^ent and others Indemnity, who are still ^^iming at
great Matters, and cannot apprehend the least advantage; but spend more in
their Travels, than ever they can receive at their Journeys end: Or if they
should happen upon some luckly Adven^ure, yet they know not how to husband ^he
Talent when it is in their power, but ^n a vain hope of a manifold increase,
cast ^t into such a Ground which is altogether ^ungry and unprofitable.

Again, the weakness of others is mani^est, whose Expenses exceed the Bounds ^f
their Fortunes, and whose Vices run their Condition into remediless Arrears.
There are not ordinarily any greater Bor^owers in the Kingdom, than such Gen^y,
whose substance melts before the heat ^f their Feverish Phansies, and Luxurious
Appetites; or such who have an Ambition ^o be as they, and the House that is so
full ^f Superfluities as to Vomit out its own Inhabitant, will spout forth such
also, wh^ are Incorporated in his Condition.

It has been the shame of our Age, the the Houses of diverse great Men, which
should be the Nurseries of the most refine Morality and Virtue, have been the
R^ceptacles of Vice, the Lodges of Luxur^ the Nest of Idleness, Hac domo ut cum
familia Dominum comprehendam, nihil est damnabilius ad meritum, nihil
seditiosius ad ^sortium, nihil inhonestius ad mores, nihil sordidius ad
conscienti^ nihil culpabilius ad famam, nihil permitiosius ad exemplum. Pe^
Bles. Ep. 18.
and the Pests of P^phaneness.

It is the great Cry and Clamor of t^ People against Men of Estates, that the
let their Lands at a Jewish Wrack, mainta^ their Servants at a thriftless
height, spe^^ their Fortunes at an extravagant rate, g^tifie their Vices beyond
measure, wear (...) their Bodies, and cast away their S^ for a Transitory and
Sordid Pleasu^ which is a pitiful exchange for either; ^ oblige their
Neighbors, neglect the Children, overlook the Poor, discoura^ their Minister,
and undo their Suret^ or their Creditors, and all to fill up a C^ceit, or
please the State of a Hum^ which sucks them dry, leaves them nee^ and then
Borrowing, Mortgaging, ^elling, till all is wasted, and gone.

When some are of Opinion, that there ^ not a more Ungentile, and sorry
Quali^y, than a discreet Frugality, and wise Thrift (which though it be an
honorable Virtue is thought worthy of no better Title with them, than a stingy
narrow^ess, and Misery of Nature) every Observer may be a Prophet able enough
to fore^el their fall: For he that runs down a Precipice, can rarely stop till
he come to ^he bottom. Every Seaman can tell us, That he that oversails his
Bark, or overlades his Boat, will put both in danger; and every Countryman can
assure us, That he that overstocks his Ground, will starve his Cattle: In like
manner, when an Estate is over-charg'd with superfluous Suckers, it will soon
be consumed: As they who will study beyond their strength, or lift great
Weights above their power; or run beside their Breath, or Wrestle beyond their
Match, show more of Juvenile Desire, than Manly Discretion in their Labors: So
they who will live high, and spend either beyond their Ability, or their
degree, shall find that their necessities will become their Punishment, sooner
than their vain Excesses shall be accounted their Glory.

The largest Flambeaux will be con^med with continual burning: And (...) Gentry
who are fond of keeping up t^ Port of their Families, when their pow^ falls
much short of that of their Ancesto^ are constrained to fall Woods, or sign Re^
Charges, to grant Lives, and pass Leas^ or enfranchise Copy-holds; and when t^
fruit of all these shifts is gone, Debts a contracted, which are rarely paid by
t^ borrowing hand.

He that cannot live within the comp^ of his Annual Income, but is forced (...)
spend Michaelmas Rents at Midsom^ Moon; when Winter comes must wa^ himself at
another's Fire, who knows (...) room would be more advantageous, the his
Company proves delightful, for he w^ is known to be unkind to himself in a
lavi^ Dissipation of his Goods, can find b^ cold acceptance, and little Credit
wi^ his Neighbors, unless among such de^ded Fools who have had a great Opinion
of his free, Noble, and generous way (...) living, and to help him in his
profliga^ humor, are ready to ruin themselves.

The Improvident Landlords, that cannot keep within the Bounds of their i^
states, or be contented with the Rates a^ Measures of a commendable Frugality,
(...) ^atisfied with the Portions which common ^rudence is willing to carve out
to them; ^o often draw their Tenants, and others ^ to dangerout Engagements on
their Ac^ount; and render themselves liable to be ^elted with as many
detracting Verdicts ^t the high Shoos, as they have Tongues (...) utter, Ears
to hear, and opportunities (...) meet together; and every Market is ^^rnished
with a Session of such course ^dges, who will pass their severe Cen^res upon
the needy Man, who is still ^orrowing props to support the Grandeur ^f his
tottering Fabric. Though he strive ^ make some show of the ancient great^ess
of his House, yet the weakness of his ^ondition is manifest, and it is no small
^art of his Misery, that he is become cheap (...) his Country-Neighbours
thoughts, by ^eeding their Supply, before he may com^and it as his due.

And not only the decayed Gentry who ^ruggle in vain, to be as Torches to keep
^o the Illustrious Port of their Families, ^^d go out in the Twilight of a
Farthing ^andle: But all whose Inordinate Phan^s, and Vicious Appetites crave
more than ^^eir Incomes amount to; and who spend ^eyond their Bounds, are
dangerous to ^^eir Sureties: For the Vessel that continually leaks, will in
time be empty, and not one drop will be left wherewith they might refresh
themselves. And as the Body that is often surfeited, will be greatly
distempered, if not destroyed; so that Estate which must yield disproportionat^
Expenses, vanishes by an incurable wast and Consumption.

But I shall have an occasion to spea^ more largely to this point in due place
which I have glanced on at present to show that the Principal cannot be trusted
with out Sureties, as well upon the account o^ the weakness of his Condition,
as the Suspicion of his Integrity; and when either of these things occur to the
Lender's Consideration, he has sufficient Reason to require that Security
which is good, an^ substantial.

There may be other Reasons of Sure^ship besides these I have already
mentioned: As, the Instability and uncertaint^ of all Human Affairs, the
Mortality tha^ is in the World, the distinction of the Bo^rowers quality, and
degree from the Lenders; who can better deal with suc^ degrees which are
suitable to his own the distance of his Residence, or the Privileges belonging
thereto, and I question not, but upon these, and such like Accounts, a good
Security may be required. For though Men's present Ability be sufficient, yet
their Condition is liable to sundry Casualties, and Accidental Diminutions: And
though their Honesty was never suspected, yet they are Men, and therefore
liable to many Temptations; and true History can inform us, that some of the
best have sometimes been foiled thereby.

The mutability of all things under Heaven, is palpable to all Observers: And
it is often seen, that a notable change in Men's Condition, is the occasion of
no small alteration in their manners: besides Death, which is common to all
Men, is the cause of a considerable mutation in all things, and Circumstances
appertaining to them: And the business that might be accomplished with ease,
while the person lived, who was chiefly concerned therein, becomes intricate,
and vexatious upon his Decease.

Morover, the difference, and inequality of degrees among Men, however
necessary it be to the subsistence of all Politic Bodies; yet it is the
occasion of sundry Difficulties, in particular Intercourses, in which Men would
rather have to do with such whom they can Converse with upon even Terms, than
with others whose Stature is by some Cubits high than theirs: And therefore
when the B^rower is seated in a transcendent degree the Lender, he may call for
Sureties the are nearer to his own form.

Or when the Principal has his R^dence in a County far distant, which m^ be
the occasion of some inconvenienc^ The Creditor may desire a Surety near home,
with whom he can Transact a Matters with ease.

Or when he dwells in a Priviledg^ place, where the Law cannot with safe be put
in Execution; or when he ha^ the favor of such a special Protection that he is
exempted from that Subjectio^ which renders him liable to the Law^ then
Sureties may be required, who ha^ neither privilege by their Mansion, n^
Protection by their Office or Relation But in all these Cases in which Lenders
upon Usury are well guarded, and their sa^ty is maintained by good Security, t^
Security is in danger: For if he who w^ once esteemed substantial and war^
through the changeableness, and instal^lity of Human Affairs be reduced to weak
condition; or he that had the R^putation of upright dealing, through the
violence and force of Temptations, b^ mastered, and constrained to practice ^ts
against the habitual bent of his own ^d; or he that living, would have done
things well, leaves an Estate that can^ be touched by the virtue of any Bond,
Bill, his Sureties are liable to pay the ^^bts for which they are obliged: Or,
if ^ Borrower be Superior in degree to ^ Lender, the Sureties are exposed to
the hard Intercourses that the Lenders ^^wer can sting them with: And it is
sin, that when the Principal lives at a ^ance, and the Sureties are near at
hand; when he has his Residence in a Privi^^ged place, or lives under the
shadow of ^pecial Protection, the Sureties that have ^ such advantages lie open
to all such ^oubles as are proportionable to the mea^e of their Obligations:
And were all ^e Reasons examined, upon which Lend^ require Sureties, Men would
have as any Arguments of Caution against Sure^hip, as Creditors can find
Reasons to ^mand it.

The Sum of all is, That Creditors do ^t think themselves safe without good
se^^rity, and yet all the safety of Sureties ^ust depend on them whose single
Bonds ^e thought unsafe, and insufficient: They ^ust trust those whom others
suspect, and rely upon their Counter-Bond, who^^ Bond could not find
acceptance, or d^pend upon their Word, whose Obligati^^ was judged insecure.
Though the par^^cular Judgment of the Creditor may false, and groundless, in
respect of (...) Persons with whom he has to do, yet e^ry Man has reason to
mind his own sa^ty as much as he; and to beware that ^ be not drawn into any
dangerous Enga^^ments, or be not obliged for more the he is able and willing to
pay, without hurting himself, or his Family, which is Naturally, and
Religiously bound provide for.

By the same Reasons that the Usu^^ would have his Money safe, the Sure might
be moved to take care, that his P^^perty be not infringed, and that he be (...)
Bound upon the hazard of all for which is obliged; when he sees one before ^^
that is careful in his business, he has a n^ Example to move him to a
Considerati^^ of what he does.

But if Men will be Bound for their A^quaintance at all Adventures, they (...)
hand over head upon their peril, and coming Sureties for Insolvent Persons, the
rashly expose themselves to all the Cha^ and Trouble that such Obligations can
^^flict them with; as to the Usurers stinging Demands, and severe
Solicitations, which imbitter their State, and disturb their Repose; and though
they study to qualify such Proceedings for a time, yet they cannot quench
them, for the fire increases by delays, when it is only checked without
Extinction; and the Current that was obstructed, floods the Banks; and then
fears of Arrests are poured in upon them, whereby their Liberty is maimed, and
they cannot freely attend their own Secular concerns, but must remain as
Prisoners under their own Roof, and yet probably cannot enjoy a secure rest in
their own Mansions; their Concealment wherein, fills their Re^ations with
Fears, and exposes their weakness to their Servants, who may betray them, if
they be so minded; or will be tempted to disrespect their Persons, and to
neglect their. Affairs as wanting the Master's Eye that should make them
diligent, or suspecting their Inability to reward them.

In this case, Men's Hearts are no less full of Vexations, and Worldly Sorrows,
than their Heads are of fearful Apprehensions; for they cannot be sure of a
lasting safety ^n their closest Retirements, and if by any device they are
fetched out of their Nests, they are presently encountered with the power of
Sergeants, or Catchpoles, where of some are much different from other Men, in
respect of the coursness of their Manners, using the power they are entrusted
with, more like Wild Beasts tha^ know the strength of their Teeth, Claw^ or
Horns, than Men who should tre^ them as Brethren, whom they have g^ into their
hands; and not color their rudeness with a pretense of executing the Law,
which surely might be done with out such Incivilities which are sometime
practiced.

And now, when the hunted Sureti^ are taken, and have suffered the disgrac^ful,
and unhandsome Circumstances of rude apprehension; they are hurried away or
driven like Beasts into a Pound, and i^ case they cannot find Neighbors to be
^ kind to them, in giving Bail for them, ^ they were to others, in being their
Sur^ties, they must suffer the hard measures Imprisonment, and there abide
confine among Strangers, and must expect suc^ Treatment, and no better, than
wh^ they are able to purchase at a dear rate and possibly at best but hard
Fare, an^ harder Lodging; and a sad sort of Gue^^ to bear them Company: And
here the^ are fixed, till they can find means for their Enlargement, which
cannot be had without payment of the Debt that is claimed by him, whose
Prisoners they are; or some Expedient that may be accepted for an Equivalent
Discharge: Besides, they are now liable to all the Charges which Troubles of
this nature are commonly attended with; for the neglect of making a timely
satisfaction to one, grows to a necessity of giving satisfaction to many: Every
one will now endeavor to pluck a Feather from them; so that by that time all
have received what they can pretend any of the least right to, the Miserable
Sureties are stripped naked, and return ^ome (it may be) no less sorrowful for
the grievous Circumstances of their present Condition, than before they were
afflicted with their wretched Confinement. Or, if their Power can despise this
loss, yet they unavoidably suffer the imparing of their Estates, so far as the
several Sums extend, which have been exacted from them. Besides, their business
has been much backned, and much time lost, which in some Men's concerns is a
considerable Damage. And by these Proceedings, some Sureties are reduced to
such weakness, that they are deprived of the Materials which may be necessary
for them in the busine^^ of their lawful Calling; and when Straw is wanting for
making Brick, little can be done; or what is done with great straining, can
yield but small advantage and there is yet a more poynant Grievanc^ consequent
upon the former, that man who are cast into these Afflictive Circumstances, are
daily pierced with the Complaints of their own Families.

Their Wives and Children cry f^^ Bread, and they have none to give them* Their
Servants for Wages, and they have not wherewithal to satisfy them: So the the
presence of their near Relations, wh^^ have been the light of their Eyes, and
the comfort of their Lives, wounds them (...) the Heart, and doubles their
Sorrow They cannot look upon them without yerning Compassions, and mournful
R^flexions upon their own indiscretio^ whereby they have opened such Mout^
against them, whose just Complaints the cannot answer, whose Hunger they a^^
not able to fill, and whose Nakedness the cannot cover: Hereby they are made
^tle in the Eyes of their Neighbors, a^ liable to all the Shame and Obloquy
the Folly has deserved.

The Wise Man tells us, That the Poor is ^ated, even of his own Neighbor;
Prove. 14.20.
but the Rich has many Friends. And again, All the Brethren of the Poor do
hate him, Prove. 19.7.
how much more do his Friends go far from him: He pursues them with words, yet
they are ^anting to him. But he, who by Sureti^hip is rendered Poor, has made
himself not only the Subject of that Contempt which is incident to a needy
Condition; ^ut the mark of more stinging Accusations, being censured as one,
who by abolish Act, pregnant with sundry Mischiefs, has destroyed himself, and
made his own House miserable.

CHAP. II. Declares, That the Caution against Suretiship, depends on Divine
Authority; and how far Men are obliged in Conscience to frame their Measures
accordingly.
THe Consideration of the nature of Suretiship, with all Circumstances adherent
thereto, may warn all Men, the regard their own Interest, to shun su^^
Pecuniary Engagements, which are the cause of great damage, or danger.

But there is a greater Argument tha^ Interest, to diswade all Persons from
su^jecting themselves to such Obligation for Conscience of Duty is a more
bindin^ Reason, than the respect of a Tempor^ safety. When both join their
Forces together, the scales of business (unless the be more violence than
weight on the contrary part) are soon turned on their si^^ The Tie of
Conscience is of equal exte^ with the Law of Self-Preservation; b^ the mind of
Man being thronged with va^ Imaginations, the Knowledge, and Se^ thereof is
more feeble and obscure: A^ in that Suretiship is always painted wi^ pretenses
of Friendship, it is hard for so^ to believe, that the shunning of it is a re^
part of their Duty: For knowing that (...) the Royal Law of God, they are
oblig^ to that Love which is the Bond of perfe^ness, and is fruitful in all
acts of kindne^^ and in all manner of good Offices; the cannot understand how
they can well ^^fuse such a Courtesy, whereby their frien^ship is put to a
remarkable Trial; the ^^nial whereof would render them Obnoous, either to be
suspected of insincerity, or to be charged with a shameful defect in that
Charity which is the end of the Divine Commandment.

All Solicitations for Men's Suretiship, ^^re commonly dressed in Robes that are
^orrowed of this virtue, insomuch, that ^uch are thought wanting in their
friend^hip, who do not readily comply with the Desires of their Neighbors,
when they ^sk no more than their being Security for them. And some are easily
prevailed with ^o become Sureties for others, when they ^re persuaded, that the
real Laws of ^riendship require so much of them.

Wherefore it is necessary, that this point should be cleared, and when all the
false Colors it is painted with, are washed away, will appear, that Men's Duty
lies in the ^voidance of what they may imagine themselves obliged to perform.

For true Justice forbids that Suretiship, which common Friendship seems to
de^and.

Justice is an Eternal, and Indispensable ^uty, and the true Foundation of the
^est Love: For no Man can be rightly Charitable, unless he be just. Neither is
consistent with an Universal Love, to ^urt some, in being kind to others: Or,
to wrong one's self, in being Liberal to ^ Neighbor.

Neither can it be esteemed a Charitabl^ Act in any Man, to dispose of such
thing which are not in his own Power; or to hazard the Goods without consent,
which others together with himself, have a righ^ to. If any one then, by
Specious Arg^ments of Love, shall be tempted to become Surety for another in
such Bond which involve injury to himself, his nea^ Relations, or his Partners
in his business and Calling, his Suretiship in such a cas^ is no Act of true
Friendship, because i^ has not Justice for a Principle and Foundation.

What we read in the Proverbs of a Glorious King (inspired with Divine Wisdom)
concerning this matter, direc^ us in a right understanding of it, an^ plainly
manifests what Men of just, an^ upright Principles ought to do: It is n^cessary
therefore, in order to a clear an^ distinct apprehension of this point, to
e^amine such Proverbial Sayings, which give us a right, and infallible state of
t^^ case.

The First, I shall bring to remembranc^ is this: Prove. 22.26, 27.
Be not thou one of them that stri^ hands, or of them that are Sureties for
Debt thou have nothing to pay, why should he ^^ke away thy Bed from under thee?
The ^cope of the Text is a manifest Cau^on against rash, and heedless
Sureti^ip. To strike Hands is an Hebrew Phrase, or giving frequent security for
others; ^o common a Ceremony among them in ^his business, that it is sometimes
Metoni^ically used for the business it self. But whereas Men may strike hands
in sundry Contracts different from Suretiship, the ^^e whole Verse set
together, shows, that ^uch striking of Hands is understood, which was customary
with those who entered unto this Capacity: And the warning ^ere given against
this Ceremony, when ^he matter is expressed unto which it is applied, imports a
Caution against frequent, and inconsiderate Sponsions; but no absolute
Prohibition of all Engagements for others. For no part of Holy Writ should ^e
Interpreted to any sense, but that which can be fairly adjusted to the Analogy
and design of the whole Book of God, where^n we have some eminent Instances who
have been worthily concerned as Sureties for others.

When St. Paul (the Apostle of Nations) ^nterceeds with Philemon for his
Servant Onesimus, (who had been unprofitable to him) that he would receive him
with the respect, and affection which was due to person newly Converted to the
Christi^^ Faith, upon a supposition of any form injury toward his Master he
had b^ guilty of, or any Debt he had Contract^^ The Apostle becomes Sponsor in
his beha^^ assuring Philemon, that he should suffer^ loss, Phil. 18.19
or damage by him. If he has wrong thee, or owes thee ought, put that on m^
Account; I Paul have written it with m^ own hand, I will repay it. But more
th^^ this, we read in Sacred History of o^ who gave not his outward substance,
b^^ the Life of his Children in security: A^^ when Jacob's Sons knew it was
necessar^ for them, to take Benjamin their younge^^ Brother with them into
Egypt, that the might be furnished with Corn for that so^ Famine which was in
their Land, and J^cob was unwilling that Benjamin should h^ taken away: Reuben
spoke unto his Father saying, Genes. 42.37.
Slay my two Sons if I bring him v^^ to thee; deliver him into my hand, and I
w^ bring him to thee again. And we read o^ another Son of Jacob who gave his
ow^ person for security in this case; for Jud^ said unto Israel his Father.
Genes. 43.8, 9.
Send the La^ with me, and we will arise and go, that w^ may live, and not die,
both we, and thou and also our little ones. I will be Surety for him, of my
hand shall thou require him; if I ^ring him not unto thee, and set him before
^hee, then let me bear the blame for ever. And whereas we find that Benjamin's
return to his Father was obstructed by Joseph's Policy: Judah makes an
importunate Supplication to Joseph for his free dismission; and among many
Pathetical Arguments, makes a Declaration of his personal Suretiship in this
case. Genes. 44.32.
Thy Servant became Surety for the Lad unto my Father; saying, if I bring him
not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my Father for ever. And since the
Lad was now become a Bond Servant to Joseph; by a Covenant in which all his
Brethren were concerned; Judah (who was capable of more profitable Service than
he) offers himself in place of Benjamin, that he might be set free: For being
Surety for his return, he was obliged, not only to give up his Liberty, but his
Life; rather than Israel his Father should be bereaved of that Child, who was
the light, and comfort of his old Age.

Wherefore Judah makes Petition to Joseph: Now I pray thee let thy Servant
abide instead of the Lad, a Bondman to my Lord, Genes. 44.33.
and let the Lad go up with his Brethren.

Hinc fide jussionem generatim non prohiberi constat, nam Jehudae laudi ducetur
quod pro salva Benjaminis reductione se sponsorem interposuit. Cartwrightus.
Judah is not blam^ for his undertaking ^ this case, for by (...) strange
concurrence Circumstances, the seemed a necessity of some Expedie^ that might
conduce to the supply of the present want, and the satisfaction of Isra^ in
taking away his beloved Child. A^ the sacred Account which is given of t^
matter, shows, that it happily succeede^* Hour let it be noted, that Judah's
u^dertaking made him liable to become Bondman, which was no less than a
gr^vous Affliction in it self; though honou^ble for him to endure Servitude,
rath^ than his Father's House, and all his B^thren should perish for want of
Brea^ And though this, together with the fo^mer Instances, show, that
Suretiship m^ be laudable in some cases, in which the^ is an apparent Exigence
thereof; yet it a matter in which much Caution is to ^ used. Vitare voluit suum
filium sponsiones ne in discrimen rei familiaris and egestatem adduceretur.
Mercerus.
And Wisdom instructs her Chi^ to avoid all needless occasions of Povert^ or
Danger.

For the Caution against Suretiship, ^engthened with a Declaration of the ^mage
that may ensue thereupon. If thou ^st nothing to pay, why should he take away ^
Bed from under thee? There are some ^ings very remarkable in this Text, be^
^fficulty in the sense of the latter part, which must be considered.

First, It is clearly implied, that he who ^ Surety for a Debt is obliged to
pay it ^t of his own substance; for if he have ^t a Treasure ready to satisfy
the Credi^rs demand, his most necessary Goods are ^ble to be seized and taken
away from ^m. He may flatter himself in his own ^hansie, and vainly hope that
the Credi^r may spare him, because he never re^ived any thing of him, but
contrary to ^s expectation, the Creditor with ex^eam rigor falls upon him, and
confi^ently justifies his Proceedings, and is ^ady to remonstrate that he never
had ^t out his Money but upon the Interposi^on of the Surety: or if he had
found ^e Debtor Solvent, he would have requi^d it of him, and not have troubled
his ^riend; but since he sees his Bargain is in ^anger, he has reason to act
strictly in ^eeking his due, where it can be reco^ered.

Secondly, The Text gives an Admonition to Sureties, that they do not e^ into
Bonds which ^ceed their power: Priusquam ex alieno nomine nostrum faciamus,
reputandum esse, quam aut amplae, aut angustae nobis suppetant facultates.
Cartwrightus.
^ if they have nothing ^ pay, they are in d^ger of losing the Go^ that are
most necess^ for their constant use: For in the W^ Bed, there is a Synecdoche
whereby ^ are to understand such things which are needful, that none without
great incon^nience can be without them. But h^ some difficulty may be started,
in the it is written in the Law of Moses, tha^ Creditor should not deprive his
Neighbo^ of the use of such things, which comm^ sense might judge necessary for
him. Exodus 22.26, 27.
(...) thou at all take thy Neighbor's Rayment^ pledge, thou shall deliver it
unto him, by t^ the Sun goes down; for that is his cover^ only, it is his
Raiment for his skin, where shall he sleep?

Deuteronomy. 24.6.
No Man shall take the nether, or the up^ Millstone to pledge; for he takes a
M^ life to pledge.

Verse. 10.
When thou do lend thy Brother any thi^ thou shall not go into his house to
fetch ^ pledge.

Verse. 11.
Thou shall stand abroad, and the man whom thou do lend, shall bring out ^
^dge abroad unto thee.

And if the Man be poor, Verse. 12.
thou shall not ^o with his pledge.

In any case thou shall deliver him the pledge ^in, when the Sun goes down,
Verse. 13.
that he ^y sleep in his own Raiment, and bless thee: ^d it shall be
righteousness unto thee before ^ Lord thy God.

Here it may seem, that we have a Di^e Prohibition of taking away a Man's ^d
from under him: But the Proverb ^der our present Consideration imports, ^t an
Insolvent Surety is liable to suffer ^s loss, and damage; the execution ^^ereof
appears irreconcilable to the Law. ^t this seeming difficulty is resolved by a
^stinct Observation of the difference that between a Debt, and a Pledge: For a
^edge may be more valuable, Arctius est vinculum debitis, quam depositi.
and much ^ore necessary than the Loan for which was given, and therefore the
Law requi^d the restitution thereof in some cases; ^ough what was lent was not
returned to ^e Owner.

Besides, there is a distinction to be made ^twixt the Municipal Law of the
Jews, hereby their properties were secured; ^d the Law of Charity which might
pro^bit the detaining of a pledge that was of ^cessary use to a Neighbor; but
the Municipal Law considered distinctly b^ self, might justify such a
detension; ^so different practices may either be app^ved or condemned,
according to the L^ by which they are tried.

The Surety is liable to bear all that (...) be required of the Principal; not
o^ Men's goods, but their Children; y^ their own persons according to some L^
were to be sold, that Debts might be ^tisfied. For we read of a certain Wo^ of
the Wives of the Sons of the Proph^ who cried unto Elisha making this
Re^sentation to him of her sad condition.

2 Kings 4 1.
Thy Servant my Husband is dead, (...) thou know that thy Servant did fear ^
Lord; and the Creditor is come to take (...) him my two Sons to be Bondmen.

Had the Creditor come to do what might not, this Disconsolate Widow mi^ have
had some help by resistance: But ^lisha by a Miracle furnished her w^ means to
pay the Debt, and so freed (...) Sons from the danger of Bondage.

Again, we read in the Gospel a c^tain Parable of a King, Matthew. 28.24 etc. A
Talent is valued to be 187 l. 10 s.
Who took accou^ his Servants, and when he had begun to re^ one was brought
unto him which owed (...) ten thousand Talents; but forasmuch as he not to pay,
his Lord commanded him t^ sold, and his Wife, and Children, and all that he
had; and payment to be made. Which proceeding of his Lord was justifiable
according to strictness of Law, doubtless so great a Debt was not contracted on
a sud^en: Whence we may guess, that the longer ^he payment of a Debt is
deferred, the greater will the Debtor's misery be: For since Riches make
themselves Wings, they may take their flight before the Nest is well warmed,
where once they lay; and so he who once had power to cancel a Bond, has not so
much courage left as to desire a sight of it, and will be less able to ^pen a
Prison Door that is once shut upon him, or to moderate the Tormentors, un^o
whom he is there delivered.

But before we take a view of the utmost misery of the rash Surety, let us
consider another Proverb, like to that, which was ^rst brought to remembrance.

Take his Garment, Prove. 20: 16.
that is Surety for a Stranger. This advice which is given to ^he Creditor for
his safety, is a plain decla^ation of the great damage the Surety is li^ble to
suffer; for he may be stripped of his Garment, which is nearer to him than his
Bed, and the Creditor may justify the taking of it: For when he trusts a
stranger, he has reason to make his Property as sure as he can, Si quis apud
te pro externo, and tibi ignoto homine sposponderit, cujus fides tibi parum
nota est, and qui ex eadem religione, vel Ecclesia non est; aut gente; vel
alioqui tibi ignotus sit. Ne dubites nec reformides, si tibi vestem suam aut
aliud pignus obtulerit pro externo illo accipere: quia ille fidejussor suas
facultates in discrimen adduxit, and tu in periculo, etc. Mercerus.
and not only a Foreigner, or one of another Church, Persuasion, and Communion,
comes under this denomination; but he whose condition is unknown: so that the
Creditor in such a case depends most on the Surety, and may take any Pledge
that i^ offered on that side, that can best secure him, even a Garment rather
than he should run the risk of an hazardous Bargain. Finis hominis qui fide
jusserit pro extraneo erit, ut propter fidejussionem cum solvendo non fuerit,
tollant etiam vestem ejus in pignus. Vatablus.
For the World has known some so forward in undertaking Suretiships, tha^ they
have soon engaged themselves beyond their power, and when they are so deeply
concerned, that their Fountain is utterly exhausted (imagining that their
condition cannot be worse tha^ it is) they follow on the same business still
and become Sureties rather by their own pragmatical intrusion, than by their
Neighbors importunate request: So that their great zeal in this matter may
render the^ suspected to all wise Observers; an^ though by great Words, and
plausibl^ Pretenses, they struggle to buoy up their sinking Reputation; yet the
Creditor that will be safe, must take a Pledge equivalent to his concern; as if
he had to do with one that sells an Estate, which has been often Mortgaged
above the worth; for his dealing is no better, who becomes Surety for Debts,
and is concerned in other Bonds which exceed his Faculties, and ^s therefore
worthy to be deprived of his necessary Goods, to be stripped of his Raiment,
and turned out naked to his ^hame.

It is manifest, Hoc proverbio a fidejussione dehortatur novo argumento ab
adjuncto incommodo; quod facile spondens pro se sponsorem (si quando urgetur)
non reperiet. Cartwrightus.
that this Proverb, which shows, that the heedless Surety has not right to the
Coat he is clothed with, declares the danger of rash Suretiship, as well as
the former: Nay, here seems to be a new Argument to dissuade Men from this
business; ^n that he who readily yields to be Bound for others, will not find
others as ready to ^e Bound for him, when the urgency of his Affairs shall
crave their assistance; for ^he danger of the loss of his Garment according to
the tenor of this Proverb, implies, that he has not one that will Bail him
out of his Distress, but his Garment must answer for him, and Nakedness, an^
Shame must be his Portion.

But the great misery of the rash Surety is fully expressed thus. Prove. 11.15.
He that is Surety for ^ Stranger shall smart for it; and he that hate
Suretiship is sure. Few will give their Nam^ and Faith for a Stranger, properly
so called. But here we must by this Name u^derstand one whose condition is
cloud from us, and who is unprovided with re^sons to oblige us to himself: For
as he wh^ leaving his Lawful Consort cleaves to a Harlot, is said to go in unto
a strange W^man, notwithstanding his familiar A^quaintance with her. Fidem suam
interponit negotiis alienis. Junius.
So he who becom^ Bound for a Man whose Estate is not m^nifest, or is secretly
encumbred when it no part of his Duty to be obliged for him, is rightly said to
be Surety for (...) Stranger; though we have an intima^ knowledge of his
Person; and shall sma^^ for it. This word which speaks his Unha^piness being
ingeminated in the Hebre^ imports a very great affliction, and tro^ble: And
there is no Version, or Transl^tion of the Word, that I know of, b^ signifies a
grievous Punishment, 1 Malo mulctetur, 2 aut contritione conteretur, aut
conterendo conteretur, 3 aut omnino o^ fringetur, 4 aut confractione
confringetur.

1 Castalio, 2 Mercerus, 3 Junius and Tremellius, 4 Aben-Ez^


and T^bulation: For in the Original, there is a Metaphor taken from a Potters
Vessel, Gravissimam faciet jacturam, and maximum rei suae familiaris, ac
facultatum detrimentum patietur, quisquis externi nomine fidejusserit. Mercerus.

Qui fidejubet pro alio, affligetur multis molestiis, and subinde dam^is;
cogetur enim debitum debitoris, si is solvendo non sit, ex suo aere ^ependere,
and praestare. Cornelius a Lapide.

Certe, and graviter periclitabitur, ruetque. Geserus and Piscator.


or such ^ike brittle Ware, which being broken, and shattered in pieces, cannot
by any Art ^e restored: Thus the Surety shall be as a broken Vessel, which
cannot be made whole; his Wealth shall be taken from him, his Power weakened,
his Goods scat^ered, his Liberty infringed, his Health ^mpair'd, and his Life
endangered: For ^hese Troubles bring on that worldly Sor^ow, which works
Death.

Suretiship is the dangerous Rock, that ^plits, and breaks the Vessels that
fall upon it; whereby Men make Shipwreck of their Goods, and are reduced to
such Ex^remities, that they cannot be so serviceble to the public, as
otherwise they might be: So that a Kingdom or State ^uffers much thereby: For
many good, and innocent Persons, who have such considerable Parts, and
Abilities, which might ^ender them useful Members in the Body Politic, are
taken in the Nets, which their fair-spoken Friends spread for them; whereby
they are deprived of that power which might have been of excellent u^ had it
remained in good hands. Haud facile emergunt quorum vertutibus obstat. Res
angusta domi.
I am a^ to think that many Sureties are endow^ with a good nature, and
inclination (...) generous good Offices, and would (...) fruitful therein, if
by flattering, and d^ceitful Lips, they were not deprived (...) their Abilities.

When their Security is newly soug^ they think it no other than an Office (...)
Humanity to grant the request, and a^ apt to suppose, that the Suter was mov^
to make his Application to them upon persuasion of their goodness; and
the^^fore suspect that it would be some sta^ upon their Reputation, if they
should (...) guilty of a repulse in that Matter, in whi^^ a grant upon such
ground is expected; ^pecially if the person be importunate in ^ Suit, they
cannot be so course as to de^^ what with much assurance is desired, a^ is
skilfully painted with a semblance of a harmless Beneficence, and Charity;
(...) what Humanity is it for Men by the strange, and inconsiderate kindness
^wards some, to render themselves uncap^ble of performing good Offices to other
more deserving? Or, what Charity is to violate Human Society, to depri^ the
public of that Service which is due thereto, to be cruel to ones self, and to
afflict such Relations with Necessities, and Streights who depend upon them?
What Justice is it to serve Strangers according to their desire, and to neglect
those whom God has committed to their care? And ^f there be no Justice, there
can be no Charity in their Proceedings. Can it be a generous act for Men to
ruin their own Families, that they may pamper such who are no better than
Caterpillars among Men? Or what good Office is it to bolster ^he lofty heads of
the proud, and to pass by ^oor Wretches in their Misery? Or to ^ndulge the
devouring Appetites of Prodigals, and not to feed the hungry who are ^eady to
starve for want of Bread? Quaenam illa charitas est teipsum spoliare, and bonis
omnibus exuere ut alteri medicinam pares, qui immedicabilis est? Vel quod tanto
^ aere sit unde nec tuis nec suis opibus emergere possit, vel quod ^nquam
hirudo omniae quae undecunque corradere potest exugat? Cartwrightus.
Or ^o multiply Talents upon the Sloathful, and to withhold due Wages from he
Diligent hand? Whatever may be pretended, there is as great want of real
goodness, as of Prudence in such Actions. Doubtless it is expedient, for all
whose ^ecurity is courted, to consider what man^er of Men they must be
concerned with, for some can take pleasure in exposing the^ Neighbors to
danger, that they may have Companions in their wretchedness. When their
Condition is desperate, and the^ Wound incurable, they cover the So^ that they
may the better spread the inf^ction, and make others sick of their D^sease. Yet
while this Game is playe^ under crafty Palliations, and pleasa^ Shades; the
Credulous Sureties im^gine that they have an opportunity (...) procuring some
fast friends to themselve whom they may make use of, as they ha^^ occasion.

They presume it is a light matter to write their Names, and set their Seals to
a Obligation, or if they are taken with suspicion of some danger, yet they can
a well think of a better Issue, and are bo^^ enough to try their Fortune: For
they a^gue thus with themselves, that they f^ whom they are Bound, are not so
far stranged from all Humanity, as to suff^ them to fall into trouble upon
their a^ count; or so far guilty of Ingratitude, to leave them without suitable
acknowledgments of their kindness; much l^^ can they be so Jewish, False, and
Barb^rous, as to betray them to all the damag^ which their Act renders them
liable (...) suffer: And as for such to whom they are ^ound, they have no great
jealousy that ^^ey who know the Debt is not theirs, ^ill look for a plentiful
Harvest from such ^ound where no Seed was sown. But ^e Proverb obviates their
fine Scheme of ^houghts, assuring them that they shall ^e as a shattered
earthen Vessel, the Parcles whereof cannot be set together. The ^hole business
upon trial of all hands is ^stly different from their Sentiments; ^r their
Friends are glad of their Compa^y in trouble, and their Creditors are ri^d
Exactors of all that is due: So that ^^eir experience gives them a grievous
con^ction of the vanity, and deceitfulness of ^l such Phancies and hopes,
whereby they ^ave been decoyed into a Labyrinth of ^rouble. The Consideration
whereof ^arh moved some more wise than the ^ommon sort, to advise all Sureties
to lay ^side so much Money as they are Bound ^r, and to look upon it no longer
as their ^wn; but to compute it as his Property, ^o whom the Obligation is
made, until ^hey shall see sufficient reason to the con^ary, which seldom
happens to Sureties or Strangers.

And though Suretiship in some cases ^ay be so far justifiable, as it is
Charitable; as in case any one has suffered spoiling of his Goods for the
cause of R^gion, whereby he is so far impoverish as to need this expedient for
his necess^^ subsistence: Or any one who has b^ both circumspect, and diligent
in his p^^ticular Calling is afflicted with some ^den, and unavoidable
disaster; where he is destituted of power to follow his P^fession, on which his
Livelihood does ^pend; and therefore craves the help wh^ another interposition
as Surety might ford: They that will be Bound upon the Considerations, may
reasonably be commended for their Charity; but when the have the best, and
greatest Reasons to ^stifie their act; they ought, according (...) the Measures
of Justice, to take heed t^ their Obligations do not exceed their po^er; but
easily comport with that c^ which they ought to have of their o^ Preservation,
and with their regard to competency for the support and comf^ of their
Families: For otherwise, tho^ some Tongues may applaud them for the kindness;
others may justly censure the for their indiscretion, and injustice. T^ several
Divine Proverbs which respect t^^ Matter condemn not the Suretiship, in t^
justification whereof, both Justice a^ Charity join together; but that in which
Folly, or Injustice is manifest, and we are ^aught, That He that hates this is
sure. Which words come next to be examined, which are rightly put according to
the true sense in our Translation; for though the Original Literally rendered,
stands thus, He that hates Strikers of hands is sure: Qui odit compledentes,
qui odit stipulantes, qui odit fidejussores.
And there are several Versions according to the Letter, yet the meaning is,
that no Man should hate the Persons but the act of such Men, (i. e.) by their
avoiding of Suretiship should declare their disaffection thereto: And they are
sure, (i. e.) safe from all the molestation and trouble which Men, heed^ess of
their concerns are liable to: Tutus est securus est confidit.
And his word sure may well import their enjoyment of a happy freedom: When as
rash and imprudent Sureties are subject to many tormenting fears, to the loss
of their Liberty, to Banishment from all sweet Society, from the Church of God,
and the Holy, and Regular Communion of his ^ervants. The fear of this misery
imbit^ers their condition, and sowres all their enjoyments: The approach of a
Creditor ^s no less terrible to them, than the view of some ghastly Apparition;
and whoever comes toward them in their Walks, or knocks at their Doors, is an
Affrightment to them, as being a Messenger that brin^ a dooming Errand, or an
Officer the carries the power of an Arrest in his ha^^ which may hurry them
into a dark De^ where they may lose their time, and Li^ in Sorrow, and
Disgrace; learning a R^pentance which cannot save them, and ^ning away in
Reflections upon their ow^ Folly, and Indiscretion.

Prove. 17, 18.
A Man void of understanding strike hands, and becomes Surety in the presence
his Friend.

This Proverb declares the madness of Precipitant Suretiship, whereby M^ Hand
over Head, run out of a safe, a^ quiet, into a Vexatious, and Dangerous
Condition. We see by this, and oth^^ Proverbs, that Divine Wisdom condescen^ to
such Matters, in which the o^ward interest of private Families is co^cerned.

Solomon Prophetiae cancellos hic non transilit, cum oeconomica praecepta
tradit; nam Ethnico pejor est, qui suae familiae non ^^spicit: and ea est
Ecclesiae cum oeconomia, and Politia adeoque ave colligatio, ut una labefactata
alteram ruere, and in deterius verge necesse sit. Cartwrightus.
It is not therefore unbeseeming a Mesenger of God, to insist on such
Oecon^mical Precepts which conduce to the w^ being of Domestic Society; even
an ^postle kept within the Bounds of his Cal^ng when he wrote thus to Timothy,
1 Timothy 5.8.
If any ^rovide not for his own, and especially for those ^f his own House, he
has denied the faith, ^d is worse than an Infidel. And it is evi^ent by the
tenor of his Discourse, that ^e respects a Temporal Provision.

God the Benefactor of the Universe, and Patron of his Church, leaves not his
Manifold Gifts, and Talents, to our Ar^itrary disposal; but has given us the
^isest Rules to act as good Stewards of his Grace and Bounty.

We may not hide our Talent in a Nap^in with the Covetous, nor may we pro^isely
waste it with the Prodigal: The ^^ght use of his Donatives is determined by
himself. He has granted us Liberty to act according to his Command; but no
Li^ence to fulfill our own pleasure. His Wis^om dictates the regular use of what
his ^ounty bestows, and we cannot better ^^prove his Gifts, than by an
Administra^on becoming the intent of the giver. We commonly put a great
estimate upon ^he Largesses of Wise and good Friends; and by our care in the
management, ex^ress our difference to our Benefactors: Doubtless we have much
greater reason by ^ur good use of all the Gifts of God, to manifest the Honor
which is due to (...) Name; as none must waste their Tale wholly on themselves
in the Indulgence of Intemperate Appetites; so neith^^ must they cast it away
upon others by fo^ish Contracts, whereby their own, an^ their Families Welfare
is endangered and the public State is offended in pr^portion to that Relation
they have there Wherefore the Wise Man instructs us imprudent Conduct of our
private Affai^ that we may pass by all perilous Rocks Offense, and come safely
to the Haven rest, where we would be; and may our Capacity, and Measure be
useful to (...) Church, and Kingdom to which we belong. And though Suretiship,
consider^ in it self be lawful, (for since it is written that we ought to lay
down our Lives (...) the Brethren, it can be no fault in so^ cases to part with
our Goods for them, to hazard our Temporal power in their (...) half) yet all
precipitancy therein is an A^gument of great Folly, and he that w^ run into
danger before he is called, ha^ more intemperate heat in his Head, the clear
Wisdom in his Heart. A Man v^ of understanding strikes hands, and becaeth
Surety in the presence of his Friend. The words, as they stand in our
Translation may signify a Man's entering into Bond be^e Witness: But there
another Construction the Text: Homo vecors complodit palmam, fidejubet
fidejussione ante proximum suum (id est) antequam proximus hoc ab illo
postulat. Cartwrightus.
That he ^o has not the in^^ligent Heart of a ^an, strikes Hands before his
Neigh^^ur makes his request for any such matter: and this Interpretation is
thought congru^s to the design of the Author, which to expose the folly of
Inconsiderate ^reties; and therefore he uses a Verb in ^e present Tense to
denote a Man's over^wardness, and frequency in this Transtion; which is worthy
to be stigmati^d with a Brand of shameful indiscretion. ^r he must be extremely
blind, or fool^ly confident, who can discern no dan^r at all in a business of
this nature: For ^hoever has an understanding to enligh^h his steps, will use
no small circumspe^on in this concern, and will in good ^^e consider, who the
person is for whom is Bound, what figure he makes either the Church, or in the
Kingdom; what heritance he possesses; or in what Cal^^g he is employed; what
Relations he ^th in the World; what Credit, in re^ect of the constant tenor of
his Practice, ^d what Reputation among those who are best acquainted with him:
when he be reduced to want by his own (...) and Extravagance; or by some
irresis^ stroke of Divine Providence: For (...) different Circumstances may
either ju^ his Caution on one hand, or extend^ Charity on the other.

Moreover, as he attends the Qu^ and Condition of the Person for who^ is
obliged; so he takes a good view of person to whom he is Bound; when Humanity,
Candor, Goodness, and ^tue be manifest in his Temper, and ^^versation: Or he
be destitute of t^ lovely Accomplishments, and cloat^ with contrary
Deformities. The s^ Nature, and substantial integrity of s^ Creditors render
Suretiship more ^ than otherwise it would be; and s^ without blemish to their
prudence (...) give their Names to such, who never w^ be concerned in the
delivery of an C^gation to course, ill natured, and unwa^ hands; yet a wise man
always rec^ that Debt to be his own for which h^ bound; which is commonly
neglected those who rashly take this Charge u^ them, as if they were certain
that p^ment should be made by the Princip^ hand: But they believe more than
pro^ly they shall see done, and it were better ^or them to follow that advice
which is gi^en in few words, than to live by such a ^aith which shall never
come to Vision: ^e not over confident of the truth, Quos credis fidos effuge,
tutus eris.
and ^aithfulness of all Men's Pretenses, and Promises; and you shall not be
hurt by their Treachery, Falseness, and Flattery. ^ut they, whose Faith is as
large as their ^riends Consciences are, may run all Risks upon all Invitations;
and at length suffer ^he sad experience of so much deceitful^ess, which they
once thought impracti^able, if not impossible. But to prevent ^ll this
mischief, it is necessary that they should hear what Wisdom speaks to her
Child. Prove. 6.1, 2
My Son if thou be Surety for thy ^riend, if thou have stricken thy hand with a
^tranger, thou art snared with the words of by mouth, thou art taken with the
words of by Mouth.

Whatever may be imagined, or presu^ed by a careless and trifling mind; the
^eal truth of the present Transaction is, that thou art entangled, and taken in
a ^nare. The Words that are past, are cer^ain Nets, and Snares; and the hands
that ^ave been employed in striking, fasten the ^nares which such words have
woven, the Contexture whereof is so strong, and the Juncture so firm, that they
who before h^ their Liberty, are held Captive thereby and cannot recover their
Freedom until^ due, and proper means the whole W^ be dissolved.

It is observable (according to so^ Commentators) that Wisdom's Judgme^^
concerning Suretiship is placed immedia^ly after a Dehortation from the Imbra^
of a strange Woman, (whose Lips dr^ as an Honeycomb, and whose Mouth smoother
than Oil; but her end is bit^ as Wormwood) because there is the sa^ danger in
both: For by means of Sure^ship, as well as by means of a Who^ Woman, a Man is
brought to a piece Bread: He loses Health, and Honor (...) both; and Strangers
are filled with (...) Wealth, and with the Fruits of his Labou^

In the Explication of this Proverb, it material to understand, whether the wo^
Friend, and Stranger signify one and t^^ same, or different Persons. Some are
(...) Opinion that they signify one and t^^ same, who is called Friend before
the Bo^ is made, but after it is finished, is calle^ Stranger: Kabvenaki amicum
and externum pro eodem sumit, ut qui ante amicus erat, postquam apud eum
fidejusseris, jam fiat externus, and tibi adversarius: ut in neg^ pecuniario
saepe accidit. Mercerus.
For while he saught a Surety (...) acted as a Friend in all the semblances a
dear Correspendence; but when he ^th made him fast he shakes off the former
^miliarity; and puts on strangeness, if ^t enmity toward him; and this is no
^s than a common experiment in pecu^ry concerns. The Surety finds his con^ion
no better, than the free Lenders, no lent his Money to his Friend, and as^d his
money of his Friend, and then lost (...) Money, and his Friend: For consi^ring
the force of Bonds he may be ought to lend as much as he was engaged ^; and
when the payment of this Sum demanded, his Friend turns Stranger to ^m, and to
the business also in which they ^th were yoaked together: So that there some
use to be made of this Interpreta^n, whereby Friend, and Stranger are ^ade to
signify one and the same per^n.

But that Explication of the words which points out different persons, is more
^^ngruous to the matter insisted on; ac^rding to which Friend signifies the
Bor^wer, and Stranger the Creditor, who ^ough he have the Title of Friend in
the ^ird Verse of this Chapter; yet that de^^mination makes no difficulty in
this In^rpretation; because it was usual with the Hebrews to call all persons
by this Nam^ with whom they had any concern: (...) he is called Stranger in the
first Verse, distinguish him from the person, (...) whom a Man becomes Surety;
wh^ act (as it is here expressed) confirms (...) Construction. For in the making
of Bo^ the striking of hands was a Ceremony ^formed with the C^^ditor, Innuitur
hic arcta, and fortis infixio manus sponsoris in manum Creditoris cum sono, and
plausu. Gejerus.

Ausim dicere Hebraeis usurpatum esse istum ritum, quem Tultius nexum, Clemens
(...) appellant: qui non solum in mancipatione, sed etiam in stipulatione, and
pignoribus adhibebatur: ut docet Hotomannus in leges 12 Tabularum quo ritu qui
sese alteri obligabat, aut fidem offerebat suam, carpum apprehendendum,
stringendumque dabat; ut se obstrictum manner significaret. Salazer.


to give him a^rance of faithful d^ing. I have had oc^sion to touch upon ^
customary Rite, in Explication of Prove. 26. where it is appl^ to the matter of
Su^^ship, as a Symbol ^firm Contract; a^ make no doubt but Obligation was as
stro^ly established there as it is by Hand, a Seal in our practice; which with
is observed for the satisfaction of Creditor, as the rite of striking ha^ was
done with a person in the sa^ Capacity, for the same purpose. A^ having thus
far explained the Te^ ^e should consider the effect of striking ^nds, as it is
expressed in these words: ^hou art snared with the ^ords of thy mouth, Post
sponsionis actum sequitur periculum. Gejerus.

Nam contractus ut tradunt Jureconsulti priusquam meantur sunt liberi, ubi
semel sunt initi, parts contrahentes obstringunt. Mercerus.


thou ^t taken with the words (...) thy mouth: Which ^ew the force of that
^ontract, which is here ^nderstood, that such ^ho have contracted, are bound
accord^g to the Tenor of the Obligation; and ^^eir Bondage may not be
remediable without a Ransom equivalent to the cause, and reason of it. At ^ast,
Ostendit plenum esse periculo, si quis temere pro aliquo fidejubeat, ideoque
caute in ea re versandum. Saepe fit ut etiam viri boni propter adversos casus,
fidem vel prorsus, vel tempore quo promiserant liberare non possint, opes enim
variis casibus sunt obnoxiae; fit etiam ut quibus been fidebas fidem fallant.
Levater.
their undertaking dangerous; for though ^he Principal be a man ^f good
Principles, and ^nown Integrity; yet ^e may fall into Temp^tion to the
distem^ering of his Morals: and all Men's power ^eing liable to manifold
Occurrences and Accidents; he may be unable to accom^lish his honest purposes;
so that though Men are thick set with gay Credentials; yet ^here is no certain
safe^y in this matter, Non quod Solomon charitatem in proximum omnino
dissuadeat, ne pro amico, cujus tibi nota sit, and explorata probitas
fidejubeas: sed quod caute velit hic agi: quod fidejussiones saepe sint
periculosae, and in Templo Delphico ferunt scriptum fuisse proverbialem illam
sententiam (...), sponde s^d praesio est damnum. Mercerus.
which ^s to be considered, not that every good m^ who is cast into ^ straight,
should be ^glected; but that eve^ man should be cautio^ in what he does, a^
proceed no farther the his Charity limited by his power, and ^rected by his
prudence can extend, a^ because some who have little knowled^ of men, and less
experience in busine^ have small skill in the observance of the Rule: Therefore
w^dom instructs l^ Child in the great Caution, Idcirrco Solomon filium suum
adhuc imperitum, and rerion ignarum diligentes instruit; ne se conficiat in
aliorum potestatem; aut aliorum litibus se implicet. Baynus.

Sunt enim juvenes improvidi, qui facile fidejubent, adeoque magno suo damno
praestare coguntur. Cornelius a Lapide.


and to enlar^ his apprehension of the danger of Suretiship shows what course^
to be taken by suc^ who are snared, an^ taken by their own Promises. Pro. 6.3,
4, 5.
D^ this now, my Son, and deliver thy self, when thou art come into the hand of
thy Frien^ Go humble thy self, and make sure thy Friend Give not sleep to thine
eyes; nor slumber i^ thine eye lids: Deliver thy self as a R^ from the hand of
the Hunter, and as a Bi^ from the hand of the Fowler.

Herein we must observe, First wha^ ^e must do, who by his contract has
sub^cted himself to another power. He ^ust go and humble himself, and make ^re
his Friend, And tho such submission ^ay seem unsuitable to his degree, or
^ality; yet the Borrower being in some ^spect servant to the Lender, his
present ^ndition constrains him to stoop, that ^ burden he has brought upon
himself ^ght be taken from him: And he fares ^ell if by so tolerable trouble he
can be de^ered: Memento quod sponsione in Creditoris, and Debitoris potestatem
devenisti: ut non minus te dece^t humiliare teipsum, quam si serv^s se
supplicem suo Domino praebeat, in debitoris potestatem eatenus venisti, ut si
negligens iste, vel dolosus sit, facultates tuas etertere possit, in Creditoris
potestatem eatenus, ut rigide exigat debitum. Cartwrightus. Salazer.
And therefore ^st not be slothful, or ^ck in this self humili^on. The Hebrew
lord which is Tran^ted [go] imports ^quent visits, and ^eat attendance; and ^e
Word [humble thy self] a low sub^ssion, like casting thy self at his feet, ^d
yielding to be trod upon: For he ^at is caught must take the best measures
(...) can to get out of the share in which ^ is taken, and tho these are
somewhat ^easie, yet his own act has made them ^cessary: He must humble
himself, and ^ake sure his Friend; even by crouching, ^ petitions, and
entreaties win as strong an interest in his favor as possible; t^^ he may have
patience with him, and ^ grant convenient time, upon the assura^ he gives, that
he shall lose nothing there^ And besides he must be importunate w^ the
principal to set him at liberty from obligation: And he may find it necess^ to
solicit many Friends for their assista^ in this affair; whereby cares, labors,
^ troubles throng upon him, which he m^ undergo; notwithstanding he may
doubtful of an effect relief thereby: Periculo damni, aut etiam servitutis
semet opposuit, ut te liberaret. Grotius.
An^ they prove unsucces^ both his liberty and property are shaken. Ecclus.
29.18. Multi obid non fortunis tantum sed and patria sunt evoluti, and addit
Ausonius in dicto Thaletis (sponde noxa p^ est) per mill possum currere
exempla, ut probem praedes, v^ paenitudinis reos.
Suretiship has ^ done many of good Estate, and shall them as a Wave of the
Sea: Mighty ^ has been driven from their Houses, so t^ they wandered among
strange Nations.

Secondly observe with what solicitu^ industry, and application such means to
be used which may be helpful in ^ case. Give not sleep to thine Eyes, nor
st^ber to thine Eye lids: Deliver thy self, ^ Roe from the hand of the Hunter,
and ^ ^ird from the Hand of the Fowler. These ^imilitudes can import no less,
than the ^reatness of the danger the Surety is lia^le to. And therefore he must
strenuous^ bestir himself to procure a deliverance, and watch for it, as ^he
Roe, Quanta autem diligentia hoc facti tandum sit, docet similitudine Capreae,
and avis quae captae; illa a venatore, haec ab aucupe quam primum totis viribus
elabi contendum. Cartwrightus.

Summam solicitudinem and diligentiam significat. Mercerus.

Vt avis non parvipendit libertatem, sed omnes elabendi rimulas rostro
pertentat. Gejerus.


and Bird which are taken, strug^le to make their es^ape: Their great na^ural
instinct for their ^berty, makes them ^eadily apprehensive ^f any way that may
^elp them out of their ^ntangled State. They fear the worst when they are under
the power of an Enemy: and therefore will do what possibly they can, to get out
of his ^and. And when such Examples are set before the Surety, whose case as to
loss of Goods, or Liberty, if not health, and ^ife is represented to be no less
dangerous ^han theirs; he has sense, if not sufficient understanding to
quicken his endea^ours, and actuate his joints in working out his own
deliverance: And if he find out any successful expedient for his in^emnity, he
makes a better escape in this concern, than thousands in like circumstances
have done. And now I have ^membred what is written in the Sac^ Proverbs
concerning this matter, and c^sidered the meaning thereof: I can make^
sufficient Apology for those Hebrew Doctors; or those Commentators in the
C^stian Church; who turn these Proverbs i^ Allegories. I shall not trouble the
Re^er with their imaginations; only n^ that some pretenders to the knowledge
(...) Scripture, are too often guilty of turni^ clear Truths into dark
mysteries, a^ show more Juvenile Wit, than Orthod^ judgment in their glosses. I
blame the not who make moral inferences from ^storical, or other, passages that
become the Tenor of the whole book of God And tend to the Edification in
Righteo^ness, or such who can discern a Divi^^ Spirit in all parts of Holy
Writ: But su^ who (when there is no necessity) will ^ spiritualizing Texts
beside their prop^ signification, or are much addicted (...) frame all things
according to the patte^ of their own fancy, or prejudice; (...) all
probability will make sad work wi^ the Bible; and bring forth very stran^
commentaries thereon. Wherefore I a^ not in the least grieved that I have
negl^cted their learning who streign an alleg^rical sense out of the Proverbs
which I ^ave brought to remembrance; which ^vidently import a Caution against
fre^ent Suretiship as being dangerous to ^rivate Families, and consequently
preju^cial both to Church and State: For the ^eatest bodies suffer in the pain,
and trou^^e of the smallest Members. The Sacred ^roverbs richly abound with
Theologi^^l, Moral, Political, and Aeconomical pre^pts: And what we read
concerning ^rudence, Proxime actum de-familia honest instituenda, nunc de
eadem quoque decenter conservanda, ac alenda, cujus duo insignia impedimenta
sunt fidejussio temerario and pigritia. Gejerus. Salazer. Bainus. in Pro. 6.18.
and Caution (...) the business of Sureship, respects the good ^ministration
and sus^tation of private fa^^lies. God the great ^overnour of mankind
^anifests his goodness in manifold gifts; ^d both in Wisdom, and righteousness
^ch determined the right use of his tem^ral favors, Cum mandatum octavem
legitimum bonorum usum praecipiat, palam est a Theologiae finibus non
discedere, qui adversus bonorum dissipationem homines ca^tos reddit. Ad haec
cum Ecclesia ex familiis constat, sicut and Respub. Ecclesiae tantum dec^dere,
quantum familiis manifestum est: ut familiae labefactatio Ecclesiae diminutio
sit. Cartwrightus.
and pro^ited all heedless dis^tion thereof. And ^erefore it may well seem
spiritual Pa^s to press a conside^ion of this argu^ent, the due obser^^ion
whereof re^cts the comfortable State of Families, and that the Honor of the
Church, and Prosperity of the Kingdom. And though it be their D^ty chiefly to
persuade all men to seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousne^ in the first
place, and to work out the Salvation: yet it well becomes them (...) have that
regard to men's Temporal w^ being which the Scriptures themselves j^stifie, and
approve; and is therefore inc^ded in the Commission granted to the^

The sum of all is, That Suretiship (...) not unlawful in it self, but
dangerous its efficacy; and such may Sin against themselves, against their
Families, against the Nation, and against the Church (...) God who make more
have therein, the good speed. For

1. First all men are obliged both (...) the Law of God, and Nature to be
pr^vident for their own preservation, a^ well being: And therefore must avoid
(...) things that are hurtful to themselves, a^ which, by a certain malignity
adhere thereto, render their condition grievo^ and uneasy.

Secondly, They ought to have a sp^cial regard to their own liberty, witho^
which they cannot readily attend the b^ means of their preservation: He is
litt^ better than an Enemy to himself, who will precipitantly incur a State of
servi^ide, when he might be free, Pro. 22.7.
we read that the rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the
Lender: And his ^urety also, is in the same bondage; who when he is free should
rather continue so, ^han subject his neck to a yoke, which may prove too heavy
for him. 1 Cor. 7.23.
The great Apostle St. Paul tells us that we are bought with a price, and
should not be the Servants ^f men; unless there be a sufficient reason ^o
oblige us thereto. If then we have our liberty, we should keep it according to
^he wisest and best measures delivered to us.

Thirdly all men ought to be tender of their Reputation; For a good Name is
rather to be chosen, than great Riches: Pro. 22.1.
And therefore all such ways are most eligible, which are most honorable, most
worthy, and of good report; and no man by an ^mprudent act should blemish that
honor which it becomes him to maintain in a ^ovely presence, and amiable
Luster.

Fourthly, It is part of a man's Duty to have a care of his Health, and he is
therefore bound to shun all things that may either deprive him of means for the
preservation of it, or may bring upon him such troubles, and sorrows of this
World which are prejudicial thereto.

Fifthly, All men ought to look upon themselves as Stewards of such things
which God has put into their hands, and should rather improve, than diminish
the Talen^ they have received; and not be guilty (...) such consumptions which
justice forbid and Charity rightly understood cann^^ approve: But in such wise
administer a^^ things committed to their trust, that the accounts may not be
grievous to them ^ their Trial.

Sixthly, Such who have houses und^^ their care, should provide for them
accom^ing to the abilities which God (of who^ the whole Family in Heaven and
Ear^^ is Named) has furnished them with; Nature, Hoc documentum de fugiendis
in^ssiciosis officiis proprium (...), qui non observata facultate sua and
officio erga suos, aliis imprudenter officiosi esse cupi^nt. Junius in Prove.
6.1. etc.
and Religion bo^ conspire in obligin^ men to so much ca^^ of their Families,
(...) that they may not b^ reduced to extrea^ necessities, or painf^^
hardships, through their improvidence i^ dangerous contracts; or their excesses
i^ any kind.

Seventhly, All persons that are Members of the Church, and Subjects of the
Kingdom where they live; should so ma^^ge their affairs, that they may be most
^ful in these general relations, and in ^^eir capacity may promote the Public
^od.

The Reader that has leisure may have ^ce enough to enlarge his thoughts upon
^se particulars, which are now only ^nced at, to show, that whoever is allu^ to
strike hands in Suretiship, must con^er himself, his liberty, his reputation,
(...) health, his dependence on God as (...) Steward, his Family and his
relation ^th to the Church and State; and if his coming a Surety does not
consist with (...) Duty in all these respects, whereby he ^ore engaged; it is
much better for him (...) withdraw, than to commit an act ^ereby he shall
render himself obnoxi^s to be charged with manifold miscarri^s, and offenses:
But if notwithstand^^g all that is here said, he will run head^g into the
snare: Let him put the case ^t the day of payment were come; and ^t his Name is
then called; that the ^eriffs Officers, and Emissaries were ^on him; besseging
the house where he ^els; and that a prison was made ready for ^n, where he may
live miserably, and die ^thout honor, and after that, must give (...) account
to God for what he has done, and surely the foresight of so great affliction
may make him cautious in (...) he does undertake.

CHAP. III. Warns all Men to shun the Temp^ons of proud, foolish, slothful,
p^gal, and Wicked persons; upon (...) account Suretiship is extremely ^^^gerous.
IN all the business we have with ot^ it is expedient that we have a ^petent
knowledge of the persons (...) whom we have to do: When Momu^ considered the
many Angles, and rec^ that were in the frame of man's heart ^ found fault, that
there was not a Win^ through which a man might look into t^ obscure and crooked
windings. Bu^ need not complain much for want of (...) in this case; if we
practice so much ^cretion only, as is common in secula^ ^fairs, wherein our
interest is concern^ In all which it is requisite that we (...) some knowledge
of the Natures, disp^ons, and qualities of the persons with whom we deal; and
understand the cir^umstances of their condition: for such ^ay not be charged
with a pragmatical ^uriosity, who look into their Neighbors ^ortunes, for whom
they are desired to ^ngage their own.

The Natures, and qualifications of per^^ns are more different than their
comple^ions; and the difference that is in Morals (...) of greater
consideration than the varie^ that is in Features: And since the Tree ^ay be
known by its fruits, and every ^ans course of life discloses the fountain ^f
his affections; the Natures of Men how ever reserved some may be in their
^empers, or designs) are not so far un^archable, but that we may know whom ^e
should chose to deal with in all matters (...) moment.

And he that will keep himself from ^rm, must remove his steps far from ^e
proud; whose Sin (as a glaring Co^et) portends mischief to all, who lie ^ider
the malignant influence which ^reams from it. While it seems a Star (...)
considerable magnitude, we should ^ot honor it as such upon that false
ap^earance: But seeing its irregular wan^rings, and a prodigious tail of woeful
effects which has swept away great F^tunes, and caused much trembling in
World; we should flee from it, as fa^ possible. We have good reason to rece^^ a
monitory Caution against this evil the first place, that we come not wit^ the
sphere of its deadly activity; beca^ it is thought to be the first Sin that e^
was committed; and if thereby so bright Angels of Heaven forfeited the
Obligation, and became disloyal to infinite King of the Universe; we h^ great
cause to fear that the same evil i^ble to make sad work among men, (...) are
tied together by more slender Bo^ This dark and devilish wickedness wh^ makes
an infinite separation between (...) and Man; will by such pranks which
intolerable in Society, set men at a g^ distance from each other.

They are unhappy who are nearly ^lated to the Proud; and they are unw^ who
embarque themselves too far in a^miliar acquaintance with them. The ^tural Bond
of the former is unavoida^ but the Temptations that thrive upon (tho of great
force) are not invinci^ The act of the latter is arbitrary, a may be stopped in
the beginning; E^ the Cockatrice Egg may be crushed, ^ ^reak out into a Viper.
It is much bet^for men to be wise as a Serpent in ma^g a good defense in time;
than to ^er a Wound by that Pride, which is the ^at Serpents Sting: And it well
becomes that respect their safety, to withdraw ^n all correspondence with the
Proud, ^ose iniquity is a dangerous Rock of of^ce, that will split the Vessel
in pieces ^^ch falls upon it, whereby all her lading ^l perish. They stick not
to raise them^es by others ruin; or to make all their ^aintance a footstool for
their advance^nt: And can practice diverse Arts tend^to the accomplishment of
their high ^poses; Nay, can dissemble that very ^g they are most estranged from
(which ^imility) when it appears helpful to ^r designs.

They know the way of crouching, and ^king softly, to win others shoulders ^^er
their burdens; and then can spurn ^tame Asses whom they have thus sub^d, and
haughtily trample upon them. ^ese are the Men whose phansies are ^^gnant with
vain, if not mad and mon^us projections: And they value them^es upon their
empty conceits, much ^^her than others may do upon substan^ grounds. Their
lofty opinion is a costly Babel that cannot be suppo^ without vast expenses; a
tall Ceda^ appearance, that to maintain its loft^ sucks the moisture from all
infe^ Shrubs: And when they take all the g^ Offices that others can do, to be
du^ their Merit, their Conversation will p^ extremely chargeable to their
unfortu^ acquaintance.

It is not a small Treasure that will ^fice for all the superfluous Vanities w^
must be sought out for the content of a proud nature: And when their Fountain
is almost dry, they must their Buckets to their Neighbors spr^ and yet with
all this help their gr^ cannot equal their desires and hopes their necessities
multiply together their Vanities.

The World is sensible that Pride i^ imperious Vice, a Weed that craves Soil to
grow in, and will contract debts for its subsistence and Glory. W^fore they who
will yield themselves ^ties for the Proud, are in danger o^ fraying all their
Obligations, and pro^ shall not purchase the cheap retrib^ of a Verbal
thankfulness for what have done: Nay it is possible they be blamed, if they do
not Worshi^ that have cost them dear; for such are as Gods in their own Eyes,
de^ much in others costly Sacrifices, and ^ations; and kind fools must imagine
^mselves well blessed, when their Offe^s are accepted; and if they can but in a
common civility they must take ^r a very great Favor.

^he deadly Sin of Pride is Burthen^, and odious to Society; and may ju^
exclude the guilty from all that Credit, (...) confidence, which all good men
^v poor soever) have the sure possessi^^ ^f. All familiarity with the Proud is
many respects dangerous; how much ^e all engagements upon their account: ^ou
refuse to be as deeply concerned them as they desire, you must live un^ the
malignant aspect of their fuming ^n, if you comply and yield, you must ^ the
yoke your self, which you have ^en upon you.

When they first condescend to a friend^ Communication with you (tho it be ^r
design to lay some grievous charge ^n you) yet you must understand it is ^reat
kindness in them to take so much ^ice of you, as to think you worthy to be ^ted
with the discharge of their Obli^ions. None of all the Treasure that is on
Earth (if their opinion may be ^dited) can better be employed, than w^ is taken
up for their use, and if all y^^ have the lucky chance to be thus dispo^ of;
you must think your self much ^debted to them, for the honor they h^ done you
in their acceptance of it. Wh^fore when you have paid their debts, (...) must
be thankful that your Money wa^ well expended, as to bring forth Frui^ their
use, and benefit, who imagine th^selves most worthy of it. They pha^ no service
can be adequate to their dese^ and surely all the most valuable things (...)
best managed, when they are put into (...) Power of the most deserving; so that
(...) may soon ruin your self in serving the and when you have done all that
you c^^ you shall be despised because you (...) do no more: And other more able
V^sals shall be sought out to supply ye^ place, who shall taste of the same
Fortun^^ unless they learn Wisdom by your ex^^rience, and make a Prudent
retreat bef^ they are gone too far. The Merits of (...) Proud (if their high
minds might pe^ upon an incontroulable Tribunal) ar^ so large a Figure, that
they judge a^gain lawful that by any means they ^^ apprehend, any oppression
justifiable the ^elds Fruit to their increase, and any ^uds commendable whereby
they lay ^urthens upon others, who (they say) are (...) for nothing better than
to bear them. Such Excellent and high deserving per^ns as these self-admirers
must in all ^ings be humoured, and Cockered; o^erwise it will be proclaimed
with cla^orous Trumpets, that you have great^ wronged them. They look upon
them^ves as if they were all the World, and ^at all the Treasure, and Glory
thereof due to them; and that no man beside ^ould be any farther considerable
there^, then as they are serviceable to their ^^rposes: That the good State of
things ^to be measured by their condition; ^at all is well if they do prosper
and ^rive; all is ill if they are disappointed their. Projects, and designs.
They re^rd not what courses they take to com^ss their desires; hence they
trample up^ right, violate all Laws, and Rules of ^onscience, falsify their
Trusts, betray ^^eir Friends, supplant their Neighbors, and about, and shuffle
any way, and ^ing hardened for any kind of injurious, fraudulent practice, it
must needs be con^ded that Suretiship upon their account ^ll bring on great
charge, and trouble.

The Spaniards (tho they are a peop^ generally condemned for pride) have smart
Proverb against it, That a Pr^ Beggar is the Devils F -- And such strong, and
filthy blast it is that brings (...) a storm: For besides that Pride is a cost
Vice in the Nature of it, and tends (...) Beggary and borrowing: It is a gre^
provocation to the Supreme and absol^ Sovereign of the World; who has p^claimed
a dreadful woe, against the Crow^ of Pride, and will pour down his Jud^ments
upon it, whereby, as it is Written The lofty looks of Man shall be humbled,
Isa. 2.11, 12. etc.
^ the haughtiness of men shall be bowed dow^ for the day of the Lord of Hosts
shall be up^ every one that is proud and lofty, and up^ every one that is
lifted up, and he shall (...) brought low. Before him the high Ce^bows, the
stately Oak Shivers, the brig^ mountain trembles, the lofty Tower t^ters, the
fenced Wall shakes: Bell bowe^ down, Nebo stoopeth, and the Idols in the dust.
Every one that patiently o^serves the wise and just Methods of P^vidence; may
behold the Beauty of Pride stained, polluted, and disfigure^ and the very top
thereof levelled w^ the weak, and wretched part of (...) World. When we
remember how (...) Almighty confounded, Genesis 11.7.
and scattered the ^^ilders of Babel, who projected a Tow^ whose Top should
reach unto Heaven.

How he opened the Jaws of the Earth, Number. 16.32:
^o swallow up those arrogant Rebels, who ^fted up with Pride, conspired
against his ^ervant Moses. A strange, yet meet a^asement of such haughtiness.

How the great Goliath that disdained, 1 Samuel 17.49.50.
and despised David was overthrown, and ^rampled on by him.

How Absalom who was lifted up against ^is Father, and usurped his Throne, 2 Samuel 18.9.
hung miserable Spectacle to all Israel.

How Rabshakeh was utterly vanquished, who in his arrogance told King He^ekiah,
that he was not able to turn away ^he face of one Captain of the least of his
Master the King of Assyria's Servants. But the Angel of the Lord went out, 2
King. 19.35.
and ^ote in the Camp, an hundred fourscore, and ^ive thousand, and when they
arose early in ^he Morning behold they were all dead Corpse,

How Haman (who in his proud indignation thought scorn to lay hands on Mor^ecai
alone (who had displeased him by ^efusing the bowed knee which was expected,
but in revenge would swallow the whole Nation of the Jews) was forced to yield
the greatest honor to him w^ he mortally hated; Esther 6.10.
and the people, had devoted to slaughter, were sa^ and he himself suffered the
shameful ^ which he had plotted for Mordecai. 7.10.


How when Nebuchadnezzar walke^ the Palace of his Kingdom, and Glo^ in the
great City he had built by the m^ of his Power, and for the honor of Majesty:
Dan. 4.30, 31, 32, 33.
While the word was in mouth there fell a Voice from. Hea^ O King
Nebuchadnezzar to thee it is ^ken, the Kingdom is departed from thee he was
driven from men, and his dwel^ was with the Beasts of the Field, and was made
to eat grass as Oxen; and Body was wet with the Dew of Heav^ till his Hairs
were grown like Eagles others, and his Nails like Birds Claws.

How Antiochus when he had spo^ proudly against Jerusalem, and threat^ to turn
it into a Charnel, was smi^ with an incurable, and invisible plag^ A pain of
the Bowels that was remed^ came upon him, 2 Mac. 9.5. etc.
and sore torments of the ^ner parts, and whereas he yet ceased ^ from his
bragging, but still was filled w^ Pride, breathing out Fire in his rage aga^
the Jews; it came to pass that he fell do^ from his Chariot carried violently;
so t^ ^^ving a sore fall, all the Members of his ^ly were much pained: and thus
he that a ^le before thought he might command the ^ves of the Sea (so proud was
he beyond ^ condition of Man) and weigh the high ^nntains in a balance, was
now cast on ^ Ground, carried in a Horselitter, showing (...) unto all the
manifest Power of God. So ^t the Worms rose up out of the Body of ^ wicked man,
and whilst he lived in sor^ and pain, his Flesh fell away, and the ^iness of
his smell was noisome to all his any: and the Man that thought a little ^e he
could reach to the Stars of Heaven, ^ man could endure to carry for his
intole^le stink.

I shall call forth but one sad Example ^re: How that Herod being arrayed in
^yal Apparel, and sitting upon his ^rone made an Oration to the Tyrians, ^d
Sidonians who gave a shout (saying) ^t the Voice of a God, and not of a man: ^d
immediately the Angel of the Lord smote ^; because he gave not God the Glory,
Acts 12.21, 22, 23.
and was eaten of Worms, and gave up the ^st.

We see that these are glaring in^nces of Pride, whose humiliation was just, as
their self exaltation was abomi^ble. I have entertained the Reader with them,
because the remembra^ thereof may give him sufficient proof t^ the stoutest
Pride may be cast dow^ For when we find such Mountains wh^ seemed to threaten
the skies laid low, ^ know not but all may be partakers of ^ measure, who are
guilty of the same ^nity. This Sin threw the Apostate ^gels out of their great
possessions in H^ven, and doubtless the same iniquity ^eject mortal Worms out
of their sma^ Estates on Earth.

The Power and Justice of the Div^ Government changes not, and whate^
punishment is due to sin may be execu^ whenever the Governor pleases. ^^ delay
of penalties is no Evidence of Absolution; nor shall the long suffer of the
Almighty put out the Glory of Justice. It may make way for Act^ mercy toward
capable Subjects, who Faith in a Mediator can be justified fr^ all things: But
in this dispensation jus^ is not lessened; because it is emine^ Glorified by
him upon whose acco^ the favor is bestowed; For the Myst^ of an omnipotent and
incarnate Cruci^ Savior was most wisely adjusted to the Attributes of the
Divine, and ^ tenderly comport with all the necessi^ ^ the humane Nature: So
that whate^ punishment is either suspended, or ^doned in consideration of this
Hea^nly Mystery (from whence all acts of ^ace do proceed, and ever did from the
^ginning) is abundantly recompensed ^ereby. But whatever Subject is, and
^ntinues to be incapable of the benefit ^ereof; must suffer the Terrors of that
^rfect justice, which will certainly pu^sh him for all his transgressions,
where^e let no man be high minded, but fear: ^r true Wisdom utters her Voice in
these ^ords. Every one that is Proud in heart ^an abomination to the Lord:
though hand ^n in hand he shall not be unpunished. Pro. 16.5.
and there is no question but that he may ^ punished in the Circumstances of
his ^tward condition, as well as in a more ^eadful way. When we find that they
^ho have made the largest; most pom^us, and most magnificent Figure in ^e
World, have been shrivelled into short, ^oken, thin, and insignificant
Cha^cters; and deprived of all their noble^ess and Glory: Let no man trust to
the ^sible, and illustrious power of the Proud, which may vanish in a moment;
or adore ^eir Beauty, which by the just hand of ^od may soon be clothed with
deformity, Worms, and corruption: And w^ a Vial of divine Wrath is poured u^
them, some of the drops thereof, at le^ may fall upon those, who are conjoy
with them in their secular concerns. ^ the Proud are great Critics in point^
Honor, and some may imagine that t^ passionate abhorrence of all contempt
disgrace will scare them from all igno^ and base Actions; that since they hat^
be despised, they will do nothing to serve it, and therefore will not be gu^ of
meeting hard measure to their kin^ Friends, which is one of the worst, ^vilest
practices in humane Society; (...) not strange if this plausible fancy (...)
tempted some of their familiar acqu^tance to consent to what they have ^red.
But this Flower withers under ^ Nose who smells it, and upon the Trial of its
worth changes Color. ^ tho the Proud hate nothing more (...) disgrace, yet
none mistake the way Honor more than they. Nothin^ more grievous to them than
conten^ and yet their course of life renders t^ most obnoxious to it. They min^
Law, but their own will, and while ^ proceedings are arbitrary they must be
controuled; nor can they patie^ ^ the report of that ignominy they have ^ght
upon themselves. They can af^ and indulge any kind of Vice while (...) abhor
the shame which is the Fruit (...). In their estimation all actions (...) be
honorable as they proceed from ^. Their Brow is bold enough to de^ all that
their hands can do; and (...) fancy so skilful in painting as to (...) a
Color in readiness for all pra^s. They can do wrong and impu^ly justify the
wrong which they have (...): They can act contrary to the ^s that are reposed
in them; and pro^n admiration, and astonishment at ^ sauciness, who should
expect any ^g from them. They can betray their ^est Associates, that have done
most for (...); and look upon such treacherous ^ng as good policy, to bar them
from ^xpectance of suitable returns. They (...) the courage, or impudence,
rather ^t a good face upon the foulest crimes; can wander where, and how they
^e, and yet have wicked Artifices to ^ all crooked ways concentrick to Glory.
Violations of rights; breaches ^ows, contempts of justice, most ^ndless
censures, and most unreasona^ quarrels with their kindest Benefactors are no
faults in these Men of ^nour, and often coincident in (...) high pursuits. They
strain not a^ greatest enormites if they can make ^ own game thereby, and their
Tumo^ gratified if their Memories may be ^ten in the Chronicles of fame, thoug^
be for their monstrous ill doing. If shall be so foolish as to heap cour^ upon
such frothy minds, they prese^ sink out of sight, and are forgotten ^ if they
shall request a good Office, boldness is derided: If they do a ^ness; and
expect a return they man treated with huffing, and scorn.

Proud cannot be obliged because think all that you can do is due to ^
greatness: And therefore they would served by all according to the dig^ which
is the Creature of their own ^gination. All their acquaintance ^ yield to their
imperious humor, ^ flatter their Vanities, applaud their pertinences, and
comply with their ^sires, or else they shall be reprobate stupid fools, who
know not what i^norable and brave. They are incap^ of gratitude, so that you
are suffici^ respected, and rewarded too, for all (...) services if they
vouchsafe to receive t^ and since a predominant Pride is preg^nt with so much
Evil, it is most safe ^ keep at a good distance from it. Who^er is convinced of
the frantic Vanity ^ the proud, or beholds the Sword of ^vine Justice that is
pointed upon them; ^ll surely be furnished with strong ar^ments of Caution, and
will beware ^at he have no hand in their concerns: ^r all that will yield to
become one with ^h empty bubbles in their Obligations, ^d Contracts; in all
probability shall ^ak together with them, and drop into ^ecoverable misery, and
trouble.

Secondly, Let no man be surety for a ^l, whose ignorance, and weakness of
^dgment makes him liable to sundry ^scarriages in all his undertakings: And ^
that cannot apply fit means to any ^rpose, will rarely observe right mea^es to
free himself from debts and Ob^ations. The worst folly that men are ^ilty of,
consists in Atheism, irreligion, ^ce, and naughtiness of living; which ^ay bar
men from venturing their effects ^ the same bottom with them. But the ^esent
warning is given against such who ^e fools in their secular concerns, who ^ve
no foresight in business, and com^only use improper means, and preposte^us
Methods in all purposes: Who are either unskilful in the lawful Arts of g^ting
Wealth; or improvident, in sav^ the Patrimony they are possessors of; imprudent
in the use, and disposal of Who are ignorant in their own way Life, not well
understanding their o^ calling and profession, and what ben^ is to be made of
it; whose weakness manifest to their Neighbors, who in ^rious intercourses
have frequent occasi^ of converse with them.

That man deserves to lose an Eye w^ will not see the danger of being Surety a
fool, whose thick skull leaves him (...) little brain, and whose gross mind h^
no clear prospect of any business or fac^ty, to weigh the circumstances which
long thereto, or to understand the pr^ of Reputation, and Liberty.

What hope is there, that any man concerns should happen well only throu^ a
fortuitous conspiration of accidents: were a lucky chance, if that a crowd
Letters should fall of themselves into Methodical discourse without a know^
mind to set them together; or a vast he of Stones, Timber, and other Materi^
should rise into a stately Edifice; or t^ Druggists ingredients should unite
the selves into most useful compositions; the business is best accomplished
wherein ^ll eyed prudence is concerned, in a due ^bservation of all
circumstances; for if (...) one of these should be neglected, it ^ay prove like
Watch-work, wherein the ^ss of one small pin is the cause of a dis^rder in the
whole frame. Who then ^all promise for him, whose folly makes ^m utterly unfit
for all business, and una^e to accommodate proper means to ^od intentions; who
lives by sense as a ^ute, and cannot respect a futurity, and ^erefore makes no
preparation for it: ^ho cannot be intent upon any Subject, ^t leaves his
thoughts as dry dust to scattered before every Wind that blows; ^d is as
unmindful of his concerns, as if ^e were an utter stranger thereto: Where^^ he
heaps inconveniences upon himself, ^d involves all others in trouble, that are
^aked with him. He cannot mind the ^alifications of persons, the Natures and
^nds of businesses, the extent of his pow^^, the condition of the place where
he ^th his residence, the Reasons by which ^ is obliged to take care of all
things ^ithin his proper Sphere, the best man^er in which every work is to be
done, ^d the right season for the doing of it: and in that he cannot comprehend
these ^ings, or so much as aim well at them, he must have great luck if he be
n^ guilty* of grievous miscarriages in (...) course, and can escape being the
cause affliction to his Friends: Whereas our n^tures are framed for Society,
the knowle^ of Men is a sort of Learning necessary the well being of it. The
principles the are sown in men's minds, and the affe^ons that rise from thence,
are so far c^cernible by the Tenor of their lives, the (if we attend thereto)
we may make p^bable guesses concerning the measures the will meet in their
dealing with us: A^ accordingly we may either shun their d^gerous acquaintance,
or close in a delig^ful correspondence with them. But whose giddy fancy shall
incline him be familiar with any person, without competent knowledge of his
Temper, a Morals, may be convinced of his own he less folly, when sad
experience shall c^strain him to wish, that he had never s^^ his face. He that
will venture much a^ game he is ignorant of, must have great F^tune if he win
much of those who are s^ful therein. The Nature of business sho^ be righty
understood as well as the qu^ties of persons with whom we have do. He that
cannot think what the W^ is, in which his hand is required, shall ^er comply
with all Temptations of di^ersion, or shall be guilty of sundry de^cts, and
imperfections in the doing of it. ^esides if men are ignorant of business ^hey
cannot discern how it does comport with the extent of their power, and so ^hey
may draw upon themselves the trou^e, and shame of undertaking more than ^hey
are able to accomplish: our Savior himself argues such guilty of folly in
point ^f Religion, who proceed without due con^^deration of that one needful
thing, and ^lustrates his Argument with apt simili^des. Whatever the kind of
our business ^, Luke 14.28, 29. etc.
our consideration and prescience should ^e proportionable, otherwise the
Noblest ^ttempts may soon set under a Cloud, or ^e dishonored with a blind
issue; and our ^ashness in the smallest matters may be^ray us to disgrace,
mockery, and derision. Moreover it is expedient for all who are ^oncerned in
secular affairs to understand ^he condition of the place where they have their
residence: What inhabitants are plan^ed in it, and how they are generally
im^loyed, what useful Arts are encouraged, and what conveniences there are for
gain^ul professions; how the people are affect^d, and what customs are
prevalent among them, whether Virtue, or Vice be in fashion, whether Pride and
laziness; (...) humility, and diligence be most cons^cuous: For where Arts, and
Mercha^dise abound, and the people are inclin^ to submission and labor; there
Rich multiply: Their Temper, and practice a good Conjunction are the best
progn^sticks of their plenty, and no maligna^^ Planet can interpose to Eclipse
their goo^ Fortune. He that joins in Society wi^ such a people, and has but
common parts, may find sundry opportunities (...) favor his own advantage. And
it is the part of a wise man to make the best improvement of all occasions; so
that if (...) Lot be cast in a plentiful Soil, it is almo^^ morally impossible,
but that he should a^vance his own interest therein, if he fa^ upon a barren
Plot, he must then set h^ invention to work and to extract wh^ Virtue he can
out of it. But a Fool is no^ capable of surveying the condition of any place,
and can neither thrive amon^ the rich, nor save himself among the poo^ Besides
he is not able to weigh the Reasons whereby he is obliged to take care (...)
all things within his proper Sphere: H^ cannot consider the Relation he has
(...) others, and with what kind of moralit^ it should be adorned, his own
Family ^t of his thoughts, and he is utterly void (...) that discretion which
should frame and ^commodate his manners to all respective ^bligations: And he
who cannot mind ^^ch good Offices, unto which by a throng (...) Arguments he is
almost compelled; ^ll in all probability be regardless of such ^ings, which by
reason of their distance ^ve but a weak influence upon him. A^in he that cannot
consider what he has (...) do will probably mistake his Method, ^d fail of
success in the issue. He that ^akes wrong judgments of things, and ^nnot weigh
them in a true balance ac^^rdingly, drives on silly Bargains for ^^mself, in
result whereof he proves a ^eat loser. He that understands not the ^orth of
what he sells, or buys; will sell ^^eap, and buy dear, until he has no^ing for
Sale, nor power for purchase ^t. Moreover he knows not how to ad^st every
business to a proper season, and ^ that will sow when others reap, must ^ravel
to another Clymate to find his ^arvest. All matters well marched to ^^eir times
are as the word in season, which the wise man compares to Apples (...) Gold in
Pictures of Silver; Pro. 25 11.
but if the ^ost important business be not well ti^ed, the advantage thereof is
lost.

Now then suppose a Fool have nee^ borrow Money; in that he understa^ not
persons, he takes it up of an an ^torting Usurer, who will not fail to sque^
him as much as possible. And not kn^ing the nature of what he does, he (...)
thinks not how what he has borrow shall be paid, or whether his Power
commensurate to the Obligation, and considering the condition of the pl^ where
he dwells, he can make no adv^^tage of it, but is liable to be a prey^ Knaves,
a footstool to the ambitious, a (...) of tool to the ingenious, and a spor^
spectacle to the youthful. He has (...) countermine for those that plot to b^
him up; no strength to break a chea^ conspiracy, nor art to prevent it. (...)
rich know how to make their advant^ of his folly, and the poor have good ^
macks to eat him up; though Na^ prompt him, he cannot learn the pr^dence that
is expedient for the comfo^ble support of his Family, and what t^ shall inspire
him with such a respect his Friends, as to save them from all in^^^venience. He
that knows not the (...) Methods of making necessary provi^ for his own house,
will take no care free his Neighbor from damage, and (...) cannot watch to the
right timing of (...) concern, will probably slip that sea^ wherein he should
render to others ^t is their due.

Thirdly, Turn aside from the slothful, (...) such who will take no care to
keep themselves out of Debts, will take less to them; when they know that
others obliged to do it for them. Their idle^ makes them Debtors, their sloth
can ^er make them solvent. They who ^ugh slothfulness suffer their building
^ecay, and their house to drop through; ^ng neglected the little care of a ^ly
reparation, must needs be very ^kward as to the great, and costly un^aking of
building a new. That Wa^ which wants some degrees of clearness ^n it may run,
can yield no sweet re^ment when-through stagnation it is ^^me a noisome puddle;
and if that air ^ch has the advantage of being fan^ by Winds be not wholesome,
what ^lth can be expected from it when be^pent up, it grows thick, and putride?
(...) Earth that may be improved by cul^ is soon overgrown with Brakes, and
^stles for want of it.

^uch Men who cannot well subsist of (...) own income (which by a Prudent
^agement may prove large enough for their necessities) but must give thems^
into Usurers hands, will have much ^ ability when the charge of interest i^ded
to their expenses; and will be dest^ of power to pay what they have bor^ed. The
things that are easy to an a^ hand, seem impossible to the slot^ whose way is
a Hedge of Thorns. Pro. 19.15.
S^ fullness casts into a deep sleep. And if dead can do nothing, little can
be e^cted from such who dwell in the sha^ of death, whose dark slumbers are
p^nant with fruitless (tho sometimes p^sant) Dreams. The Soul of the slugg^
desires and has nothing. His pha^ vanish, and his desires are abortive: ^
miscarrying whereof ties him so fa^ his Bed, that he cannot rise to open ^ door
to a Creditors demand. A lazy ^mour inchaineth a Man's hand and ^ with more than
Iron Fetters; and is ^ very intombment of a living man, de^^ring him from all
worthy actions: It ^ates a foul rust which cankers his facul^ seizes his whole
Body with an heavy weildiness; Stifles his Spirit with thic^ pours, choakes his
heart with dull p^sures, and renders all his parts listless, ^sty, weak, faint,
and languide: In a w^ he flags, and decays on all sides, an^ good for nothing.
Which minds me^ ^ia Servilius who was descended of a ^torian Family, described
to be remark^ for no other thing, save only, for his ^ness in which he grew
old; in so ^ch as it was commonly said, by such ^o passed by his House Varia
hic Situs ^ Not here lives Varia, but here he lies; ^king of him as of a person
that was ^ only dead, but buried because he lay ^is house as if he were in his
Grave. ^eve me the habitation of the slothful ^y more fitly be termed a
dormitory, ^ Charnel, than a dwelling: Their ^e so far dispirits them, as to
leave them ^ead; only their Soul being yet in the ^y, serves as salt to keep
them from ^ch, and putrefaction. Now if the ^^ful have need to borrow; it is
not ea^ for any man to guess whence they ^ld have power to pay: For it is their
^m to be poor, and beggarly. They ^ naturally inclined to imbezil that E^ which
is in their hands, and hate ^ very thoughts of that prudence, and ^s which may
increase it. The Ho^ Scriptures do not allow them either ^d Food, or warm, and
decent raiment. Pro. 19.15. Pro. 23.21.
^ it is written, that the idle soul shall suf^ hunger, and that drowsiness
shall clothe Man with Rags: Yea, that poverty shall come upon him with speed, ^
strength; it shall overtake him with ^ swift foot of a Traveller, Pro. 6.11.
and assault ^ with the strength of an armed man: ^ that evil which moves with
a swift p^ will soon reach him that rests idle; ^ that which marches with a
terrible for shall surprise, and seize him with a^ resistible violence, and
overthrow ^ There is no Treasure for such whose ^culties being disused turn all
to rust: ^ warmth for their Veins which are ^ num'd with their own dullness. The
^gent, and active hand makes rich, ^ indigency is the lot of the Slothful: W^
all our dependence is upon Divine p^dence, we must understand, that Go^ ^quires
such labors from us, which w^ capable to perform. He gives his ble^ to our
industry, and annexes prospe to our diligence in lawful, and hones^ deavours;
which is the common Me^ he is pleased to observe, in his Gov^ment of our
outward State. There they that follow a good calling in ^ Faith of his
favorable benediction, ^ grow thereby. They on the cont^ who neglect all
honest labors shall w^ For it is not to be expected, that ^ should work
Miracles for the preserva^ ^ heavy drones, or that he should open ^ Windows of
Heaven to those, who ^e their hand in their bosom. No ^ud now shall rain bread
from Heaven ^ that which rises from the sweat of ^ns brows. We may not look to
be ^ted, as the Israelites were in the De^, where no s^stenance was to be had ^
ordinary means. If we neglect all such ^irs which belong to us, and would ^ in
Divine providence, we shall break ^ selves: For God who has said that ^ idle
Soul shall suffer hunger, will not ^rpose his own mighty hand to infringe ^
Truth, and justice of his own purpose: ^ will never deny his beneficial
concur^ce with our industry providently ap^ed, and humbly persisted in. It is
well ^served by a late Author that it has ^en the care and practice of wise
Nati^ns, and Parents, not only to punish idle^ess as an extraordinary crime,
but to ^rmit no man to live but to show to the ^agistrate how he supported
himself, ^d no Child to be brought up without ^me Manual skill, by which he
might ^e able to get a subsistence and employ ^s mind whatever revolutions
should ^appen to him: For since the whole ^orld is full of contingencies, and
manifold changes it is expedient to carr^ the Nightingal of a good Conscienc^
the Breast, so the Mine of a su^ whence to be maintained in the H^ or Hands.
But they who through continued laziness not only consume^ they have a right in,
but waste others ^quisitions, must needs f^^l into fad ex^mities. They who take
no care to ^crease, will find occasions to dimi^ their Goods; and none commonly
^sume faster than they who will have ^ thing to do: For all their time vanish^
spending, and the greatest stock will le^ to nothing that is not well supplied,
(...) the largest Vessel will be empty that c^tinually runs. And I suppose the
sloth will never be so happy as to find out ^perpetual motion which will return
the all that they consume. And when t^ intemperate appetites (who love a^
indulgence; and ease) have as it were ^nihilated their present substance. I^
persuaded that their listless inven^ will be found too short to raise a N^
Fortune out of the Ashes of that wh^ is gone, and therefore whoever has joy^
in the delivery of a bond with the sl^ful, is in great, if not certain dange^
bearing the Burden.

Fourthly, Strike not hands for a Prodi^ who is the Whirlpit of all hopes, and
^ Gulf that devours all that are con^ned with him. He that is not faithful ^he
managing of his own property but ^ses it to give attendance to all his trans^ts
of pleasure, and Luxury; and pro^utes all his Power to the gratification all
costly humors, and expensive va^es; will soon find himself exhausted, ^ when
he cannot visit Theaters, or be ^com'd, at the houses of Game, and ^mperance
(which are commonly ^'d to empty pockets) he can then think no other expedient,
but to knock at Usurers door, and with big Words, ^ked with the security of
some unthink^ Friends, he gets a considerable sum in^ is possession; and
possibly treats his ^ditor, and pays interest out of this ^ck for a time: But
the Worm of Pro^dity is of so greedy a Nature, the ^le cannot last long: Then
the Sparks ^y Friends whose heads went easily ^ the broad end of the Horn begin
to ^ fast, and find that they cannot wind ^mselves out at the narrow top, or
re^ to the open air without great charge ^ trouble. The Prodigal who devoured ^
portion with Harlots, and wasted his substance with riotous living; Luke 15.16.
had she and swallowed his Fortune when ^ would fain have filled his belly with
h^ When the wise man instructs his So^ shun the Conversation of Wine-bibb^ and
riotous Eaters of Flesh. He g^ this Reason of his Counsel, for the D^kard, Pro.
23.2.
and the Glutton shall come to Pov^ They who consume their Treasure in ^
Tables, Glorious Apparel, and m^ bowls, without any respect to a cont^al
supply cut all their Veins at once, w^ unless they are timely closed, will ^
bleed to death. And they that hate ^ frugality, as an unfashionable stinginess
slavish drudgery, which is concerned in ^ning up the floats of gain, till it
raise ^ depth of an Estate, and flow abroad in ^ acquisitions, and great
purchases; ^riotously expend their time, parts, he^ strength, and substance in
courses of ^ bauchery, and dissolute living, till ^ shall come to need some
crumbs of ^ abundant increase, which a Pru^ thrift has preserved in her power.
W^ Plato saw a rude unthrift catching at^ snaps, (...) Plato apud Stobaeum
Sermon. 75.
and offals of a g^ housekeepers Table* (said he,) if you h^ tener dined
spari^ ^ou might have supped now more pleasing and plentifully.

It is an hard Proverb for the Prodigal ^o learn: That it is better to spare at
^rim than bottom. He looks upon that ^uxury as the Argument of a great, and
Noble mind, which his reason (were it ^ee from the smoke of his intemperance)
^ould condemn for a brutish, sordid, and ^ile sensuality. But he minds not the
ver^es, nor can comprehend the cares of is Ancestors, whose frugal management
^f a little to great acceptance, whose ^atchful Prudence in timing all their
con^erns, and whose active diligence in gain^l professions made them Masters of
that ^ower, which is devolved upon him; those profuse wasting of it, renders
him ^qually chargeable with foul ingratitude, and immense folly. They observed
and ^ok the first wind that blew, and put ^t all the Sails they safely might,
that ^eir Port might be soon made to, and ^eir Vessels fraught might be turned
into ^fect: But he casts all into the Sea of pro^seness; or betrays it to
Pirates (his de^uring companions I mean) that conspire ^ extract what pleasure
they can out of ^s profligate Humor. Thus Ctesippus ^on to Chabrias, a Noble
Athenian, after he had lavishly consumed all his Goods and other Estate,
Treasury of Ancient and Modern times l. 8. c. 20. p. 781.
he sold also the ver^ Stones of his Fathers Tomb; in the building whereof, the
Athenians had disburse^ one thousand Drachms. Fair Estates se^dom stand at a
stay; if the Owners an^ not inspired with so much Virtue as t^ increase them,
they are commonly posse^sed with so much Vice as to diminis^ them: And when
some are running dow^ they rarely make a stand till they com^ to the bottom. As
the Son of a Wealth Citizen being newly left the heir of h^ deceased Father,
Beard. Theat. of Gods judgments. c. 21. p. 60. Clarks Mir. c. 61. p. 241.
determined with himse^ at once to gratify his five senses: T^ which purpose
he allowed to the deligh^ of each sense one hundred pounds, in the first place
therefore, he bespake a cur^ous fair Room richly hanged, and fu^nished with the
most exquisite Pictures t^ please his eye: He had all the choice Music to
please the ear: All the Ar^matick, and odiferous Perfumes that cou^ be
procured, to content his smell; all the Candies, Sweetmeats, Preserves, an^
Junkets; even to the stretching of the Confectioners art, to delight his tas^
Lastly a fair, and beautiful young Lad^ to lodge with him in a soft Bed, and
the finest Linen that could be bought, to a^commodate his touch. All which he
enjoyed at one time. But his sensual Humor that was thus set a running, could
not be thus satisfied. For he spent thirty thousand pounds in three years, and
after all swore that if he had three times more than ever he had; he would
spend it all, to live one week like a God; though he was sure to be damned in
Hell the next day after. Whence it appears that prodigality is as a roaring
Devil that devours ^all it can, till there be nothing left but Poverty, and
shame. But I need not such ^avish instances to serve my present design: For
there is too much danger of damage to the Surety, who shall oblige himself for
such, whose expenses in any kind, or degree shall exceed their incomes. That
Estate must needs go to loss which is managed by the hand of a grubbish fancy,
or inordinate love. The best Treasure will be melted down before that object,
which is pursued with hot desire. The costliest Sacrifices are commonly
bestowed on our choicest delights: And it is ordinary for many to go beyond
their power, in gratifying the Humor they are most fond of. They that are
greatly affected to their sport, will spare nothing to follow it. Their
Recreation shall be more chargeable to them, than all their Domestic
provision, or their Hospitality: And every Bird or beast that serve their turn,
shall be almost Worshipped* for the pleasure they expect thereby. The Blind,
and superstitious Pagans who were become vain in their imaginations ^ changed
the Glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to corruptib^ Man,
Romans 1.23.
and to Birds, and four foote^ Beasts, and creeping things: And these change
their own, and their Families Glory, into an imagery of sportive Animal And I
wish too many who follow their sports in jest, were not guilty of Idolatry in
earnest. For all their concerns, an^ all business must give way thereto: An^
that is a man's God (whatever it be) which he loves with all his heart, and
follow with the greatest vigor. The time which Religion justly claims is
spent; the charg^ which would support a Family is lai^ out; yea, the Treasures
are too frequen^ly exhausted, that would portion Chi^dren, and procure good,
and comfortabl^ Matches for them: And all to feed, an^ maintain an intemperate
inclination for sports: which if they are innocent in the kind, should not
exceed the limits of a^ honest, and convenient Recreation. ^ is not my purpose
to declaim against their Tyranny, who stretch the power which God has given
them over inferior Creatures; or forfeit their prudence in long waiting upon
hazardous Combats, and contentions. Whoever is but inclined to waste his
incomes, or to hazard them upon such diversions; is not likely to thrive by
borrowing, or ever to pay what he has borrowed; for though he may have a
Fortunate chance to set him in good condition, yet that often proves no better
than a charming Temptation to lose all. They who eat, and drink, and rise up to
play; sometimes lose more in an hour, than would serve their Natural
necessities for many years; who being emptied by their losses, their Vanity
makes a long sounding noise in leting of their passions, wherewith they pour
thundering Anathemas upon their Fortune: but this blind chance was in no other
fault, than the delivering of a Treasure from hands that were too foolish, and
too unworthy to keep the possession. They who begun their sport in imagining
themselves to be fortunate, now curse the fancy wherewith they find themselves
deceived, and what Surety can be safe when all that power depends upon a
hazardous cast, wherewith he should be indemnified? some wi^ pawn Houses,
Lands, Jewels, and giv^ bonds for stakes to play with, and hold matter of
quarrel, or dishonor to bau^ payment of their losses, or implede the validity
of their Obligation: When ^ the mean time, their just, and due deb^ for
provisions fitted to the back, and bell^ are undefrayed; lie on score, or
perhap^ they put on a sturdy resolution (if any e^vasion or starting hole can
be found out never to discharge them.

The itch of gaming commonly prove the Scab, or Leprosy of a man's condition
which renders all his life uneasy, and ve^atious. There may be a sorry kind o^
pleasure in scratching, but a painful soreness is consequent upon it; as a well
taste^ poison, which for all its pleasing tincture on the palate, ends in
death; it is a practice fertile in nothing so much as in beggary, blasphemy, and
confusion. So scandalous were common Carders amongst the Greeks, ^ Ethic ad
Nichom c. 1.
that the Philosopher ranks them with Thieves and Villains; and with whom shall
an Evangelical Guide place them who has beheld the bitter, and il^ boding
Fruits of this profuse idleness, abounding with irreligion, profaneness,
vanity, fraud, peevishness, contention, and most irksom clamours. But
prodiga^ity breaks out, not only in such Tumors which have now been glanced at:
It Is not only seen in taking pleasure to riot ^n the day, or in the Night time;
in furnishing Tables, or filling ward-robes, in following chargeable sports, or
phancying hazardous Games: But sometimes in matters that seem less liable to
blame, but are no less burdensome to a Family: As costly Buildings or large
gifts which have nothing but humor, or fancy to justify the stateliness of
the one, or excess of ^he other. He that erects a Babel to re^st the fury of an
imaginary deluge, cannot save himself, and Family from confusion: and that Son
of M. Antony who gave a Cupboard of rich Plate to Philotas, only for the
pleasure he had by a Sophism wherewith a loquacious Physician was si^enced in
his presence, Plut. in Antonio p. 928.
might give away Kingdoms had they been in his Power to please his fancy. He
that intends to ^aise a Structure should first sit down, and ^ount the cost,
least he leave it to be a Monument of his own folly, and an Eye-^ore to all he
is related to. And he that be^tows a gift should consider, whether by ^is
largess he shall purchase the Honor of generosity, or undergo the disgraceful
imputation of lessening his power when he might have kept the staff in (...)
own hand. It is not safe to strike han^ for any one, whose hand is commonly
ope^ed more by fancy, than discretion; (...) has he a right to be esteemed
generou^ whose fond Humor is the only Stewa^ of his Treasure. He may be lavish
of (...) own, till he has need of others help support his inclination, and
then the ^mage will probably fall heavy upon (...) Friend who brought in
auxiliary For to his assistance. And further yet, it to be noted, that some of
the Nobl^ rank have dissipated vast revenues; a^ other considerable degrees of
men (wh^ expenses have been heavier than the Fortunes would bear) have entailed
more than an empty Name upon their P^sterity. It is well observed by Camb^ that
as virtue laid the foundation of ge^rous Families in the North of Englan^ and
elsewere, Cambden Brittannia p. 748.
and provident mo^ration with simplicity rendering the contented with their own
Estate, be preserved, and increased them; so the South parts, riotous expense,
a^ superfluity, usurious contracts, voluptuo^ and vicious Life, together with
indire^ courses, and crafty dealings have in she time overthrown most
flourishing Houses. Time was that Livius Drusus was thought a well poised
Roman, who would have his house pervious that the regularity of his Domestic
affairs might be seen; Waterhouse of the rise and decay of Men and Families.
Sect. 7. p. 61.
whose furniture, diet, clothes, equipage were all such as his Fortune would
bear, his degree answer, and his reputation not be impeached by. But a profuse
spirit ranges over the World; disdains all Virtue that is thrifty, and
chargless; contemns health, reputation, counsel, and preservation, to satiate
the rude importunity of a delicate Palate, a wanton eye, an extravagant brain,
a credulous humor, or a costly levity: All which as so many hungry Dogs tear
the surprised Carcass of an over driven Prodigal; whose breaking out far beyond
the modest bounds of Virtue, renders him a prey to the extorting Usurer, the
cunning Broker, the harpy Cook, the cozening Tailor, the deluding Steward, the
fawn^ng Tenant, the crafty Devil; till at last ^he become Lord and Master of
nothing but a Prison; and be denied pity even ^f those on whom he has wasted
his sub^ance; or if he descend not so low, yet ^e leaves his posterity
miserable, and un^rofitable to the Kingdom. Thus Gentlemen swollen big with the
flattery o^ great Fortune, a free Housekeeping, numerous retinue, full, and
chargeable creations, and often with notable sucki^ Vices, are so beleaguered
and over power with a multitude of excrescent expenc^ that they breeding their
Younger So^ and Daughters in proportion to, and love of these their treacherous
diversio^ leave them when they die, a great stock Ignorance and idleness, shame
and sorr^ It is also a great Vanity in this age, t^ men commonly exceed the
bounds of the degree. Nobles would be as petty Prin^ Gentlemen as Nobles, whose
Houses ^ so full of excess and Luxury, that they ^ ready to spue out their own
Maste^ Merchants and Mechanics strive to in common with them, yea very low
^grees would be as the gentile form; a^though in building, and diet they can be
equal; yet in raiment they must ^ as gay: And now reason, and prude^ have taken
wing, it is almost become ^cessary that there should be some sump^ary Laws, and
sanctions of the Supre^ Power, to restrain Men to their Ra^ and limit them
within the compass of the degree: For charitable reproofs of the Vanity are
Weak, and ineffectual; in the ^^ch who are so Proud as to affect a Gal^ntry
unbecoming their degree, are like^ise so insolent as to affront the Counsels
^at would bound their extravagance. This ^am afraid is one main cause of the
pre^nt general complaint of want, and po^ity, that Men are not contented with
^eir condition, and cannot maintain such ^gh living as they are ambitious of;
and ^nnot be clothed with as rich Robes, and ^rnaments as they have a fancy
for^ ^ould they learn to restrain their desires, ^ey might be better pleased
with their ^wn Fortunes; and their undertakings ^ope^ to their particular
callings might ^ing in a better increase. But prudent ^gality, and virtue are
now cast into a ^ep Lethargy: For most strive to raise their ^ort in proportion
to their self conceit, ^d are of opinion that nothing is fashio^ble, but what
is wasteful. Men have ^nds above their professions. The piti^ underling, and
the Vulgar Subject af^ts height and State of Life: The Law^r scorns to carry
his Bag, though it hold ^e Deity which he adores: The Citizen ^rns to wear his
Apron, though proba^ his shop be held up only by the Apron ^ings: The Peasant
casts away his frock, which possibly is his best defense against the Cold; and
the Vallet kecks at hi^ very when he is forced to put it on: ^ thus all degrees
are distempered wi^ Tumor which makes them impertine^ vain, or intolerable. And
the time is most gone, when some of the greatest not disdain to be at one end
of their fairs; and would permit as little to done by Servants as may be; and
wo^ do as much themselves as possibly t^ could, to pen up all the ways of gett^
that the stream of their Estates might and increase upon them. This they in
their Generation wisely, and throv^ ^cordingly; but since men are so dai^ and
choice that all Pristine diligenc^ grown low-rated, and forms of Pride, garb
are introduced. Gentlemen for their Rural Seats where they might both
thriftily, and charitably; and f^ to London and Westminster, where the ^riety
of idle diversions allures the^ sensual delicacies, and costly Vices, wh^
render them effeminate, and unservi^ble both to their King, and Coun^ there
they must comply with the folly fashions, and the witty contempts of Ancient
Modesty, and Virtue. The^ their persons are disliked, they are ^voked to
miscarriages which render the ^le to be punished with large Fines, ^
disgraceful confinements, if not more ^er sufferings. There, they are wound ^ a
multitude of acquaintance, and ^n the cunning conduct of fraud, and ^d ventings
of passion; by all which ^y burden their Fortunes with needless ^
insupportable charges, contract great ^bts, and leave their most intimate ^ends
in danger of Arrests, and troubles. ^t least this may be thought a bold cen^e,
for a private person to blame so ^at a conflux of Country Gentlemen, may be
seen in the City: I shall re^mber the judgment of two of the wi^ Kings that
ever sat in the Imperial ^rone of this Realm.

King James the First, An. Dom. 1614.
before Christmas ^s year, issued forth a Proclamation for ^s cause, that all
Gentlemen of Quality ^uld depart to their own Countries and ^uses to maintain
Hospitality amongst ^ir Neighbors; and his meaning was ^t this should always
continue, as he ^erprets himself, in his speech in the ^r-Chamber; wherein he
declares; ^t it was wont to be the old fashion of ^gland, and the Honor of the
English ^bility, and Gentry to live in the Country, An. Dom. 1616.
^d keep Hospitality, for which they were famous above all the Countries in the
W^ which they might the better do, having a (...) abundantly fertile to live
in: but by the (...) moderate resort of the Gentry to the City, their dwelling
there: P. 167. of his Works in Folio.
the Country was ^ desolate, and besides diverse other misch^ would arise upon
it. First if insurrecti^ should fall out, the Country would be unfur^ed with
Gentlemen to take Order the^^ Next the poor would want relief missing t^
Hospitality at home. Thirdly my Service neglected, and the good Government of
(...) Country for lack of the principal Gentlem^ presence that should perform
it: And l^ the Gentlemen lose their own thrift, for (...) of their own presence
in seeing to their (...) business at home. Therefore as every (...) lives in
his own place, some in the fresh, s^ in the salt some in the Mud: So let every
(...) live in his own place; some at Court, some the City, some in the Country.
Thus the lear^^ King James whose judgment not be^ so dutifully observed as it
should have b^ by good Subjects; his Meek and Pi^ Son King Charles the Glorious
Mar^sent out his Proclamation concern^ this matter. The Kings most Excel^
Majesty taking it into his Royal considerati^ the present State of the times,
together (...) the great decay of good Hospitality, and g^ ^use keeping,
Proclamation An. Dom. 1627. 3. Caroli dated November 28. 1627. Entitled A
Proclamation Commanding the repair of Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of
quality, unto their Mansion Houses in the Country, there to attend their
Services, and keep Hospitality.
which in ^er Ages was the ^^nour of this Nation; ^ too frequent resort, ^d
ordinary residence of ^rds spiritual, and tem^^ral: Knights and Gen^men of
Quality, unto ^ies and Towns; espe^lly in, or near our Cities of London, and
^estminster, and the many inconveniences ^^ich ensue upon the absence of so
many per^s of Quality and Authority, from their ^ountries; whereby those parts
are left desti^e, both of relief, and Government; and (...) Cities and Towns,
especially those of Lon^n and Westminster, are over burdened ^th inhabitants,
and residants, has thought to renew the course formerly begun by his ^r Father
of blessed Memory, and therefore ^mands them to their homes under penalty his
displeasure. And because this Pro^mation did not find a ready Obedi^ce, his
Majesty was pleased, with ad^e of his Council, to command Infor^tions against
some to be exhibited in ^ Star Chamber; where they were sen^ced, and fined.
Here are no mean ^thorities to justify a charge against ^h Gentlemen who
desert their Rural Mansions for their fancy, and plea^ And would they consider
that they the love of the Country, and their i^rest therein; that their absence
le^ room for many contentions, which their presence might be prevented; (...)
many who act under them, serve themselves more than their Masters, and greedy
Cormorants devour all they (...) and it is rare to find so faithful a Stewa^^
who either can or will keep up an Es^ to its true dimensions: Would they co^der
how they are accommodated to in the Country handsomely, and with g^ Credit upon
small expenses; and (...) their immoderate staying in the City ^cessitates them
to become Projector^ pressures, and wild ways to maintain t^ Luxury; to press
and wrack their ^nants to provide, and return their R^at all disadvantages: And
if this proo^ing will not suffice some part of the state must be sold; then the
diminu^ of the income, and the continuanc^ the same, or greater expenses makes
the subject to the Usurer upon hard Ter^ and there may be no stop till the Es^
be utterly gone, and Surety undone shall leave them to make the infere^ This
has been the Case of some Gen^^en who would strive to live bravely out ^f their
own Element. And though it ^ay be objected, that some have met ^ith great
Fortunes by doing so, yet for ^e who has caught a Lark, by the fal^ng of the
Sky, there are Thousands who ^^ve missed their Game, and fallen into ^ Ditch
by their too high gazing; and ^hen as I have the Authority of Princes ^
justify the blame that is laid upon those ^ho forsake the Seats of their
Honoura^e Ancestors, to pamper and indulge ^emselves with all the delicacies of
the ^ity: With good Reason, I may reckon ^em among Prodigals, and mark them ^r
such who go astray. But they would ^ as Gods, and their Will must be done; ^d
while they are ridden, and spurred ^ still by their own phancies, no won^ that
they run to the Devil; but let ^^y sober man take heed that he do ^t bear them
Company. Again there another Generation for whom it is dan^erous to engage, who
being of no great ^k, or power themselves, are wont to ^sociate with men of the
highest quality, ^ whom their Wit, and boldness armed ^^h their experience in
some gentile ^orts may commend them for a time; ^ some that are more prudent
than others of the same degree, are not a little jealous over this sort of men,
and esteem such who think themselves great enough to be their Companions,
worthy to bea^ equal shares with them in all occasional expenses, yea sometimes
to return the entertainments they have received, (...) chargeable presents must
keep up the co^respondence in Heart, and Luster: S^ that let such cast up the
whole charg^ of their company, and add thereto the loss of time together with
the hindrance of their own secular concerns they may discern a great dreyn made
i^ a small Estate in a short tract of time and if necessity drive them to
squee^ Wax for some drops of refreshment, ^ will suddenly harden upon them, an^
remain a sure mark of their own trouble and Misery. I need not say much of the
or any other kind of Prodigality which the Reader without a perspective man
discern as a Sea-mark to warn his Pinna^ of the danger of Shipwreck. That
A^vice (were it well observed) would pr^vent much unhappiness, which is give^
by the Son of Sirach. Ecclesiasticus 18.30, 31, 32, 33.
Go not after t^ Lusts, but refrain thy self from thine Ap^tites; if thou
give thy Soul the desires the please her, she will make thee a Laugh^^ stock
to thine Enemies that malign thee: Take not pleasure in much good cheer,
neithir be tied to the expense thereof: Be not made a Beggar by banqueting upon
borrowing, when thou have nothing in thy purse; Chap. 25.3.
for thou shall lie in wait for thy own Life, and be talked on. If thou have
gathered nothing in thy youth: How can thou find any thing in thine Age? I
have read that at Padua in Italy, they have a Stone called the Stone of
turpitude, which is placed near the Senate house, whither all spendthrifts, and
such as disclaim the payment of their debts are brought, Burt. Mel. part 1. 2.
p. 112.
and they are enforced to sit upon this stone with their thinder parts bare,
that by this note of public infamy and disgrace others may be terrified from
all such vain expenses, or borrowing more than they know they are able to pay.
Great pity it is, that there is not such a stone in all the Countries of the
World; or at least some other happy invention whereby it might be provided that
there should be no followers of such pernicious Examples, nor any great
sufferers upon the score of their Prodigality: For all places are now too full
of some sort of spend thrifts, whose fork merrily scatters: all that their rake
can gather by any means. And I am apt to suspect that the easiness of obtaining
Sureties, farthers prodigals in borrowing more than otherwise they could: As if
there were not so many Retainers, their would be fewer Thieves: So if the
Number of improvident Sureties were less, the Catalogue of proffligate, and
Licentious unthrifts would not be so great.

Fifthly, Be not Surety for any bad Man, for he that palpably transgresses the
Rules of Religion, or is a Notorious offender in any point thereof, breaks the
strongest Sinews of Justice in all Civil concerns. The Royal Psalmist observes
that the Wicked borrows, Psalm. 37.21.
and pays not again. And he doubtless was a Wise Man, who has told us,
Ecclesiasticus 29.16, 17.
that A Sinner will over throw the good Estate of his Surety; and he that is of
an unthankful mind, will leave him in danger, that delivered him. The greatest
Arguments for good dealings with Men, are fetched from a clear Conscience of
our Duty to God: And if men run contrary to their greatest Obligations, they
will not Walk uprightly in respect of the smallest. They that can dare to break
Covenant with God, can have no good Will to keep Contracts with Men. He that
can destroy a Temple, may soon pull down a Cottage: And he that strikes at the
Throne of God, will not strain at the Violation of the Rights of his Brethren.
If we search the Nature of that heart which is hardened for Wicked practices,
we cannot but discern that such who can dare to be Irreligious toward: God,
will be unrighteous toward Men: For where the greatest Devil Reigns, the
lesser can take their Rang. And though there may be some appearance to the
contrary, when such who Violate the first Table of Divine Commandments seem to
have some regard for the Second; yet their respect thereto rises not from a
Conscience informed therewith, which can have no Power in those, who are
poisoned with an Evil disposition against God: And had they the strongest Arm,
they would be altogether Arbitrary in all that they do: But Civil Laws, and
constitutions hold their hands, though they cannot ^ound their Wills. The fear
of being o^er-matched by others, bows their Bo^ies, though it cannot restrain
their minds. The Veneration they have for their own Credit, Masters the
Ceremonies of their ^eportment, but cannot moderate the affections that grow in
their Nature: If ^hey could tread down the sanctions of ^unicipal Laws: if
there were no power in their way greater than theirs; and i^ they could either
disdain the opinions o^ all about them, or conceal their proceedings from their
knowledge; I see no^ what Wickedness they would strain at in their conversation
with men, who ca^ swallow down any kind of Impiety against God. He that
wilfully sins in any point, says in effect, that he will not have God to Rule
over him, and he that ca^ affront the Divine Authority which is the most
Supreme, and most absolute, can b^ no Voluntier in his submission to an
inferior Magistracy, unless such instrumen^ are set before him, that can give
him su^cient warning of an Execution: And ye^ these are sometimes weak, and
ineffectu^al as to the stopping of his career who^ heart is set upon that which
is Evil. The he may be under some confinement b^ outward means, yet if he can
discern, o^ devise a way to break loose: He is read^ to run out with a swift
foot; and becom^ deaf to the Voice, that declares the n^cessity of his
returning back to his Du^^ This being the case of bad Men, whoev^ considers it,
shall have little Heart ^ plight his Faith for the satisfaction of ^
necessities: He cannot vouch for his h^nesty who is destitute of the main
sprin^ and principle thereof: And what he therefore promises in his behalf, he
himself must probably take care to perform.

Or suppose a bad man be so powerful in the World, that he can bear the Burden
of his own Debts; yet he may be guilty of such delays, and of so many tricks,
and spiteful contrivances which shall be as Thorns in the side of his Friend,
who in his pecuniary contract is Surety for him: For the hand of the bad is
commonly stretched forth to receive; but shut when he should repay. He
therefore that minds his own peace, must give Ear to the Wisdom of the Son of
Sirach. Ecclesiasticus 13.2, 3.4.
Burden not thy self above thy power while thou live, and have no fellowship
with one that is mightier, and Richer than thy felf; for how agree the Kettle,
and the Earthen pot together; for if the one be smitten against the other, it
shall be broken. The rich man has done wrong, and yet he threatens withal.
The poor is wronged, and he must entreat also. If thou be for his profit, he
will use thee; but if thou have nothing, he will forsake thee. In like
proportion the mighty man who is possessed with bad Principles, when he has need
of another Suretiship, will entertain him with lightsome smiles, sweet
complements, endearing Caresses, and plentiful Ba^quets: But this fair day may
end in thi^ darkness, and a tempestuous Storm: F^ though the mighty Principal
can answe^ the Obligation; yet when this Wor^ should be done he may neglect it,
either he cannot, or will not be spoken with* So that the Creditor provoked by
the slight, will not fail to make frequent Applications to the Surety, to whom
h^ has a more easy access. And if their Addresses succeed not, he will add
greate^ Weights until he has pressed all from him, he has a right to.

And now the Surety must bear such like repulses, and slights which the
Creditor sustained, or the great man is hid from him, and there is no
Reparation to be had for the damage he has suffered without sharp vexation,
and tedious trouble.

If an Estate can be so settled, as that it shall not be liable to the payment
of any Debts, the bad man shall not stick at the fraud, that is serviceable to
his interest* There is many times a show made of a fair inheritance, which
being charged with many, and great encumbrances is worth nothing, and in some
cases such an Estate may be offered to indemnifie a^ ^urety, which by many
unseen premort^ges is so far exhausted, that he shall not ^e able to obtain any
benefit from it. The ^itles of Lands are now more uncertain ^an in times past
they have been; for ^ey may be conveyed by Lease, and Re^ase; or disposed of by
private Settle^ents; or past away by Bonds given to ^e King; and while there is
no public ^egister of Lands established by Statute, ^ad men may make use of
all possible de^ces to deceive their Creditors, and op^ess their Sureties. So
that though some ^ho take up considerable Sums of Money ^e possessors of
apparent Estates, yet ^hile Men have cause to be jealous of their Honesty, they
have no Reason to ^ut any great confidence in their Power: ^or an Estate in
appearance should be no ^ighty Temptation, when an Integrity ^ substance cannot
be found. When we ^ok about us, and observe that the Gal^nts of our time appear
like men that ^^ve put on all the Armor of the Devil, (...) fight against the
great God of Heaven: that raging Blasphemies, and most hor^d execrations smoke
out of the Furnace ^ their most foolish passions; that their ^actice consists
of Bacchanalian Jovial^s, monstrous Amors, subtle frauds, furious quarrels,
and infamous shifts; a^ that they are Armed with a stout, a^ haughty resolution
to justify themselv^ and their courses against the most H^ Word of God, the
righteous Comma^ of Superiors, the wise Counsels of ^quals, and the modest
Exceptions of ^feriours: It is no Wonder that their ^midable manner of Life, be
a real T^ror to all sober Men, and that their ^baucheries lessen them to a
needy Gen^tion. For the upshot of their exorbit^ces not only proves a scandal
to their ^gree, and worse than a Battoon of ab^ment to their Honor, but a back
d^ to their Estates which are wasted by the Vices; and if impiety be so
destruct^ to great Fortunes, (of which there ^ sundry instances in the World)
what s^ become of the profane, whose con^on is already Weak to such a degree
(...) they can make no other Figure am^ Men, than what is drawn by their o^
Impiety. And if such who seem to ^ Masters of Estates are not to be trust^
because of the Naughtiness of their Li^ what encouragement can Men have confide
in the meaner sort who are no^ impious than they. If the prophane^ of the great
should set us at a conveni^ ^ance from such their concerns for ^ch they seem to
have sufficient pow^ of their own; we should shun all fa^arity with Men of a
lower Rank who ^ infected, with the same Plague.

^ have Read and heard some com^nts in this Age against the too Gneral ^lect of
the right Government of the ^ngue, that it is a very common thing ^ one Man to
speak Evil of another, I ^^ there were not too much Reason for ^ offense by the
almost Universal wick^ess that has covered the Land, Men's ^es being so loose,
and irregular, that ^ almost as impossible to fear them ^se, as improbable to
hope them bet^: And let it not be strange then, that ^re is so epidemical a cry
of want, when ^h a Flood of ungodliness has deluged ^ Kingdom, for God turns
Rivers into ^ilderness, Psalm. 10^, 33, 34.
and the Water Springs into dry ^bund. A fruitful Land into Barrenness ^ the
Wickedness of them that dwell there^

They who have first cast God out of ^eir thoughts are justly ejected out of
^eir possessions; and they who live with^t God in the World, must go without ^
Blessing. Never any Standard was set ^ against God but lost itself, and all
that ^hered to it; and no Man's either sagacious Wit, or prodigious Valor can ^
him from the blast of a provoked God was well said by on^ who was a very
c^siderable person in his time. Spanish ^mado's and Invasions he changes i^
Morris Dances upon the Waves of ^ luster, Sr. Hen. Wotton, p. 23.
and makes the very Engineer^ them to confess that Virtues though the are
within the chance; yet they ^ not ever within the Power of ill ^tune.

Whence is it that some who purpo^ hope for, and promise themselves g^ matters
(when they have many seemi^ probabilities of a good event) yet find t^ their
undertakings are unsuccessful, the Projects abortive, that their great
Pre^rations miscarry, and their expectan^ perish: There is most certainly such
a ^ Nemesis in the World, as a Divine M^diction, the force whereof no huma^ Arm
can resist, or repel. This (as it we^ sometimes pours Hell out of Heaven upon
the Heads of the ungodly: T^ puts out the light, and consumes the Te^ of Wi^ked
men: This assaults their E^cellency ^n the high Meridian of it, a^ scatters
them as dust before the Storm^ Wind: This strikes the Arms, and brea^ the Jaws
of the Enemies of all righteousne^ ^is darts Terrors into their imaginati^s;
pierces their hearts with Sorrows; ^ubles the Circumstances of their State; ^d
leaves them discontented, and un^e.

It must be granted that there are man Mysteries in Divine Providence suffi^nt
to assoil the rash and uncharitable ^sures of all private Tribunals usurped ^
blind Envy, or Malice: Yet it is not ^ly consistent with the Notion we ought ^
have of a most perfect Governor of ^ World, but with the sense of the Sa^d
Canon, whereby the Will of the ^hest Sovereign is revealed to Mankind; ^t we
believe, that he blesses the State ^ the just, and curses the Familes that ^ve
not the Knowledge of his Name.

If God be in our Adventures, and his ^ory rest upon small things, Aarons dry
^d shall flourish, Sarahs dead Womb ^ll spring forth a Son; and David's
in^cernibleness shall increase into a King^m. But all our Strivings are as
Babel ^thout God: We do no better than ^rite upon Dust, or Sow upon a Rock; ^
Role up a Stone that will retreat ^th Fury upon us. And if in our course ^ Life
we stand against God, our bright^ Glories shall vanish into contempt, our
Wisdom into foolishness, our po^ into Weakness, and our possessions i^
Beggary. The Crown of true Glory ^dorned with the sweet Flowers, and p^cious
Gems of plentiful Blessings, was ^ver made for the hairy Scalp of such one who
goes on in withstanding ^ Will of his Maker: But rather the fly^ Roll of
Curses shall rest upon his Br^ When Zachariah the Prophet had a Vi^ of a flying
Roll, an Angel gave him Interpretation thereof. saying, This is Curse that
goes forth over the Face of whole Earth, Zecha. 5.3, 4.
for every one that steals ^ be cut off as on this side according to it,
every one that Swears shall be cut off a^ that side according to it. I will
bring it f^ says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall enter to the House of the
Thief, and into the H^ of him that Swears falsely by my Na^ and it shall
remain in the midst of his H^ and shall consume it with the Timber the^ and the
Stones thereof.

The Prophet Jeremiahs Heart was ^ken, his Bones did shake, he was stra^ly
transported, and as it were intox^ted with astonishment: When he co^dered the
Wickedness of the Land, ^ and the judgment that should be Ex^ted upon the
Inhabitants thereof.

^ Land (says he) is full of Adulterers; Jerem. 23.10, 11, 12.
^r because of Swearing, the Land Mourn^h; the pleasant Places of the
Wilderness are ^ied up, and their course is Evil, and their ^rce is not right:
For both Prophet and ^iest are profane; yea, in my House have found their
Wickedness says the Lord. Therefore their way shall be unto them, as ^opery
ways in the darkness: They shall be ^iven on, and fall therein: For I will
bring ^vil upon them, even the year of their Visi^tion says the Lord.

The Prophet Hosea proclaims a Con^oversie which God had with the Inhabi^nts of
the Land; because there was no ^uth, nor Mercy* Hosea 4.1, 2, 3.
nor Knowledge of God ^erein: But by Swearing, and Lying, and ^illing, and
Stealing, and committing A^ltery; they broke out, and Blood touched ^ood.
Therefore shall the Land mourn, and ^ery one that dwells therein shall
languish, ^ith the Beasts of the Field, and with the ^wls of Heaven, yea, the
Fishes of the Sea so shall he taken away.

Remember also how Tyrus is threatened ^ the Pride, and violence that was in ^e
midst of it. The Glory thereof is ^st described, to give the clearer pros^ct of
the greatness of Her fall: Her ^ince was as an Anointed Cherub in the Holy
Mountain of God, walki^ up, and down in the midst of bright, an^ precious
Stones: His place as Eden t^ Garden of God. But when iniquity w^ found therein,
Ezekiel. 28.16, 17, 18.
and when by the Multitu^ of Merchandise, they had filled the midst her with
Violence, and She had sin* Therefore (says the Lord) I will cast the as
profane out of the Mountain of Go^ and I will destroy thee, O covering Cheru^
from the midst of the Stones of Fire. The heart was lifted up because of thy
Beauty thou have corrupted thy Wisdom by reason thy Brightness: I will cast
thee to t^ Ground, I will lay thee before Kings, the they may behold thee. Thou
have defiled t^ Sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniq^ties, by the
iniquity of thy Traffic; the^fore will I bring forth a Fire from the mi^ of
thee, it shall devour thee, and I w^ bring thee to Ashes upon the Earth, in the
sig^ of all them that behold thee.

The same Prophet tells us, that he h^ a Vision of a hand sent unto him; an^
Roll of a Book was therein, which w^ designed against the Children of Isra^ for
their Rebellion against God. A^ there was Written therein Lamentations, ^
Mourning, Ezekiel 2.10.
and Woe. And it is Record^ that the Metropolitan of the Holy La^ was made A
Reproach to the Heathen, Ezekiel. 2^.4.
and ^ mocking to all Countries. For the abominations that were committed
therein. And there being many more instances of Divine Justice in Gods
Government of Humane affairs (though there are diverse ^romiscuous dispensations
and Mysterious Cases, as they are represented to an outward Eye yet) we have
sufficient Evi^ence to conclude that God Rules the World; and as he Blesses the
good in a wise and merciful moderation of all ^ings for their either present,
or future ^dvantage; so he Curses the Bad, and Writes bitter things against
them: For ^hen as they have put themselves out of ^is protection, and by
walking contrary ^o his Laws, have in effect despised his ^avour, he justly
forsakes them; and though he defer their punishment, yet ^e time for the
Execution of it will cer^inly come. There is a just Vengeance ^ue to Sin which
will not rot in the Skies; and no Man knows how soon the Vials ^f Divine Wrath
may be poured forth: ^t is expedient therefore, for all who will ^e safe, to
take such measures, as that ^hey may not be involved in the Calami^es, and
Miseries which shall come upon ^rophane, and irreligious Souls. It has been
observed alr^dy, Si Lysias adempta part bonorum exulare jussus est, non nisi
pro part quam retinuerit creditoribus obligatus est. Verum qui pro eofidem
suam astrinxerunt, jure pristino conveniri possunt. Cod. l. 8. Lex. 1. f. 394.
that a Surety re^ders himself liable make payment of t^ whole Debt (wha^ver it
be) for whi^^ he is obliged. A^though the princi^ in some circumstances may be
spared, y^ the Surety has no favor thereby, I finds himself oppressed by his
own A^ and Deed: And what he feels to be oppression upon himself was genera^
esteemed a part of great Friendship another; but there is neither Piety, ^
Prudence in showing so much love to the who are Enemies to God, and liable the
stroke of his Almighty curse, and ^dignation. Be it most freely remembe^ that
God, who made all things has ^ven us a Commandment to love Neighbors as our
selves; Yet an in^cent, and prudential self love will rest^ us from burthening
our selves above ^ power; and from all such acts which prejudicial to our
lawful interest: And we would not overl^ our selves by any^ of our own,
Fidejussor seu mandator si in usuras quoque obligatus est justam causam
recusandi solvere eas non habet. Cod. l. 8. Lex 10. f. 394.
neit^ should we put it ^ another power to leave such an heavy yoke upon us
which our condition cannot well bear.

If then a just, and innocent self love be the Rule of our love to others, we
are not thereby obliged to enter into any Contracts greatly detrimental to our
selves. The Law requires our good Will to men of all Characters, and Nations;
but lays no engagement upon us to part with that circumspect prudence; and
necessary justice which we owe to our selves. In bad Men there is nothing but
their manhood that has right to our love; and while this is strangely
deformed, and di^honoured by their own practice we can take no delight therein.
Men can have ^o complacence in themselves, upon a conviction of their own
sinfulness, and fol^y: Nor can they then justly delight in others, whose
degeneration in their Mo^als is manifest to the World. Moreover ^t is
inconsistent with a just love to our Neighbor, to add fuel to the flame of
^is inordinate affection. While any man ^akes a bad course, it is improbable
that ^e will be a good Steward of any Trea^ure; and he that shall be
instrumental to ^ut it into his hands, may be accessory to ^he Wickedness he
shall be enabled to commit by the power of it. It is good Advice of the Son of
Sirach, Ecclesiasticus 8.10. Chapter 12.5 6, 7.
Kindle not the Coals of a sinner, least thou be burnt with the Flame of his
Fire. Do well to him that is lowly, but give not to the ungodly; hold back thy
Bread, and give it not unto him, least he over master thee thereby: For (else)
thou shall receive twice, as much Evil for all the good thou shall have done
unto him. For the most high hates sinners, and will repa^ Vengeance unto the
ungodly, and keeps them against the mighty day of their punishment give unto
the good, and help not the Sinner. For all that an Evil Man can by any means
compass, shall probably be wasted in the indulgence of his Lusts, and b^
Sacrificed to the Dalilahs he is most fond of: The greater help you give him,
the more Wicked he grows; and certainly i^ can be no act of true love to
furnish hi^ with matter wherewith to increase hi^ Damnation. Withdraw that
great assistance from him which he craves, and hi^ necessity may prove an
expedient to reform his course, and quicken him to such labor and honesty, as
shall render him worthy to be trusted in all such matter which are are needful
for his subsistence.

CHAP. IV. Describes the proper means to be used in Conformity to the Caution
against Suretiship.
HE that wisely considers the Nature of Suretiship, and mournfully ob^erves the
bad Morals that are in the World will doubtless Study the means of ^is own
safety with great application. And ^ the first place he must Religiously
re^ember his Creator, and Walk in the way ^f Life which is above: This Advice,
as to the Wisdom of this World) may ^em remote to the subject matter of the
^esent Caution: Ecclesiasticus 29.19.
But when I read that a Wicked man transgressing the Commandment ^f the Lord
shall fall into Suretiship. Though ^e word be Apocryphal, and therefore ^ort of a
Canonical Proverb, yet I am ^^t to believe there is a great Truth in the ^ery
Letter of it, and that God in his ^ost Wise and Righteous Government of ^e
World may bring this, as well as other punishments upon a Wicked Man ^ is none
of the least disasters incident to this Life to be a Surety in a dangero^ Case,
and therefore it may have a place among such judicial, and penal visitatio^
wherewith God afflicts the Enemies of h^ Kingdom; not that it is a certain mark
^ Divine Vengeance upon all that are tro^bled with it: For the same providenti^
Acts are capable of different interpreta^ons, and may be a savor of Death ^
some, but of Life to others, according ^ the predominant qualifications of the
minds. Eccle. 9.1.
No man knows either good, or ev^ love, or hatred by all that is before the^*
But must learn this Knowledge from T^picks of a more sublime consideration even
from the dispositions, and Temp^ of Souls, as being either agreeable with or
discordant to the perfect mind of in^nite Goodness and Truth. But this i^
Mystery which needs not my present ^^cussion; it is sufficient for my purpose
only to note, that any Temporal Evil may ^ an instance of Divine Justice to
some, ^ in respect of others, may be overruled incomprehensible moderation,
and me^ and made instrumental to a comforta^ effect. I make no question, but
that ^ blackest Waters may be changed into ^ ^uest Wine, and Oil, to make glad
^ Hearts of good Men, and to make the countenances cheerful; Adversity never
hurts where no Iniquity Reigns. To. Winchelsea Archbishop.
but shall remain bitter to men of a contrary Nature, and inclination: And now
if Suretiship may be inflicted upon bad men as a punishment of their
Wickedness, then on the contrary, a firm, and constant Virtue is a probable
means to save men from this trouble. And if Religion were rightly understood,
and as duly observed, all might soon be convinced, that it is the best
expedient for their Temporal happiness in all respects, as well as for their
everlasting perfection, and Glory. But Men have vastly different minds about
Religion, and all are prone to attribute the main Excellences thereof to their
own parties; and many therefore come short of the happiness which it promises,
because they mistake the thing.

I will not strive to rifle Men's mistakes in this matter, for such a task
belongs not to my present business. But I am persuaded that a real likeness to
God, in respect of his communicable Attributes is the best disposition that can
be in a Soul endowed with intellectual faculties, and a profound submission to
him in respect of the Prerogatives of his Heavenly Crown, is the best
qualification that can be in a thinking Creature: And there is good ground to
believe that this constitution of mind can be wrought by nothing but a Divine
Spirit forming the likeness, and imprinting the submission: And being God is
clearly revealed to us by his infinitely beloved, and only begotten Son Christ
Jesus, who has made all necessary preparation for this effect in our Souls, we
cannot draw near to God by any way better, than by minding him with the
strongest application, who can bestow the Divine Spirit upon us, whereby we are
made partakers of the Divine Nature and quickened to receive that Heavenly
Doctrine of his Gospel which is most wisely Calculated for the utmost
improvement of our Nature, and the building of us up in all goodness, which can
better all Relations, and sweeten all conditions. I cannot pretend that this
Brief, is a full Description of the best course, but I cannot think any way
well worthy of the Name of Religion that comes short of it. And by this small
pointing the Christian Reader may guess at the whole body of practical
Divinity. But when I look upon the Genuine Excellences of true Religion, the
manifold advantages, and most comfortable privileges that grow upon it, or are
annexed thereto: Methinks I am descending very low, when I would bow this great
and Sacred thing to my present undertaking: Yet though it be but a small Benefit
(if a real truth) I may represent Religion as a means to preserve men from
Suretiship. For First, This gives them the true measures of that Justice which
respects themselves, and their Families, which being timely thought on, and
kept in remembrance, can make a Strong Defense against all the solicitations of
needy Borrowers, who would make their Friends great Debtors for them.

He that gave being to the World has made his Wisdom, and Goodness manifest,
by implanting Laws in the things which he has made for their well being. He
has built our Nature with an instinct for our own preservation, and this Law
which (as it were) is incorporated in our ^rame is not abrogated, but highly
improved by our Religion; and as Nature prompts us to a vigilant care of our
^elves, so it propagates this care to the ^ranches that issue from us. The very
^ame natural principle which obliges us ^o our own good, diffuses it self
proporsionably to the increase and extent of our Families; in consideration
whereof we must avoid whatever may be damageable to our selves, or to those we
have a natural influence upon, and therefore should not consent to the
Imposition of any such Yoke upon us, the bearing whereof i^ inconsistent with
the Dictates of that principle our Nature is furnished with.

Secondly, Religion teaches us to be wise as Serpents, as well as harmless a^
Doves, and allows us to avoid all things hurtful to our selves, so far as we
can with safety to our innocence, which justly claims our principal care. When
no contract is concluded, or promise made, w^ have our Liberty, and in prudence
should shun all such Contracts, and promise which are either apparently
detrimenta^ or suspicious, as to our lawful interest* But when we have freely
contracted with others in matters prejudicial to our selves and within our
power, and have mad^ promises to our own hurt, we cannot r^treat with safety to
our integrity: For we have given away a right which wa^ once in our power, and
they, to who^ the right is given, may justly demand wha^ is their due. That
Wisdom which is without innocence; may be injurious to other that innocence
which is without Wisdom ^ay be hurtful to our selves. If we hurt ^ur selves we
must bear it; if we injure others we must make satisfaction. It is ^uch better
to suffer harm than to do wrong, but best of all to be clear from ^oth, and so
to save our selves as to keep ^ pure Conscience still: And the Wisdom ^f the
Serpent is a good preservative of ^he innocence of the Dove, as fencing Men's
condition from such difficulties and ^reights, whereby many are tempted to ^he
practice of frauds, and immoralities. A prudent conduct of all concerns might
^ave them the trouble of contriving many ^hifting tricks, which their rash and
heed^ess fol^y makes them guilty of. Had A^anias (of whom we read in the Acts
of ^he Apostles) been wise for himself, Acts 5.1. etc.
he might have kept the possession that was in his own power, and saved himself
from a sudden Death: But willing to reserve part of the Price for which it was
sold, and yet to appear as generously kind to the Church as other Christian
Disciples ^n his time; he was tempted to lie unto God, upon which he was
immediately struck with a fatal judgment. Such who will act well for
themselves, should consider what they are going to do: For it is a true saying,
that delay has undone multitudes for the other World; and have has undone
many for this: But seasonable consideration, and time well manage^ saves all in
both: The neglect whereof b^trays them, either to a pensive remembrance of
their foolish rashness, or to remediless Misery. That Wisdom is be^ placed,
which is at the head of all bu^ness, that which comes after, either degenerates
into craft, or sinks into Repentance* For dear bought experience is a very dry
Seed, that can yield little Fruit, unless i^ be bathed in Tears; and then it
man grow up for another use, but rarely ripen time enough for him that sowed
it. I^ all matters of moment, a precipitant setting out commonly runs down to a
sorrowful conclusion. Better then be Wis^ at First, and always prosperous, than
t^ learn Knowledge by the amazing ligh^ which flashes out of a sad miscarriage.
I^ is much more healthful, and pleasant to walk out into the clear Air, when
the Sun begins to gild the Mountains with hi^ cheerful Beams, than to catch our
way (when the day is gone) by the lightening which is darted from a Terrible
Cloud* That Light is most seasonable which shows us the safe, and right Path
when we begin to move: The greatest Luster ^ines too late when by a tedious
wan^ing we are quite gone out of our own ^owledge. Being we are made capable ^
deliberation, it well becomes us to ^ink over the matters that are before us,
and never to undertake any thing of im^ortance without such consideration which
is proper thereto; for so doing ^ell suites with the honor of that reason ^e
are endowed with.

Thirdly, True and Right Religion a^ounds with Graces that are of a thriving
^ertue, as Faith in God, and Devotion ^his Name: Temperance in the use of ^
things, accommodate to our Natural ^ecessities, or suitable to our politic
ca^acities: Discretion, and diligence in all ^siness: Justice, and equity in
all civil ^ansactions: Meekness, Peace, and sweet ^oncord in Society: Loyal
submission to ^overnment: Patience, and Fortitude in ^ such difficulties and
afflictions, which ^e common to mankind: Contentedness ^ every condition: In
Sum a most taking ^imility, and an Universal Love breath^g in all words, and
stirring in all actions. ^hese are Virtues that can win Fortunes, ^d when
obtained can keep them in sub^ction. A firm persuasion that God is a ^ost
bountiful Rewarder of those that diligently seek him, makes frequent Addresses
to the Throne of his Grace whereby men are rendered capable of hi^ Blessing;
and consequently are filled with hope of success in all good undertakings*
Temperance cuts off all luxuriant suckers all inordinate excesses, and vain
superfluities, and gives fair limits to all expenses* Discretion finds out the
most advantageous Methods in business: And diligence improves an handful of
Seed to a great increase. Justice links us with all person whose faculties may
be useful to us; and equity Adorns our conversation with a^ acceptable
presence. Meekness moderate the passions which are excessively wasteful in
their extravagance, and the Su^ can rise to his comfort, which has never gone
down upon his Wrath. Peace is the common Original of plenty, and keep^ Men out
of all such Contentions, and Brawls which prove costly to those that follow
them. A Loyal submission to superior powers, renders Men worthy of their
protection, that they may safely go about their own business; and enjoy their
rights, and properties in Peace. Patience has the best command over all
troubles; makes them easy while they last, and gives them the best remove.
Contentment of mind keeps all men's powers in life, and action warms their
Vitals, and distends their Sinews, so that they are fit for a laborious
continuance in their profitable Employs. Humility takes deep Root for a great
growth, and by stooping low, finds the Key of Paradise it self full of most
delicious Fruits: And an Universal Love streaming out of Men's Breasts procures
reciprocal kindness from others, whereby Men reap no small advantage. Thus
these ingredients are of so strong a Spirit, as to turn all things (as it were)
into Gold. It were a large task to Discourse so fully of the advantage of every
particular Virtue as it deserves: But this brief account may satisfy the
attentive Reader, that a truly Religious, is a very profitable course of Life;
and upon this ground it is a good fensure from Suretiship. For they that are
sincere therein shall enjoy the sundry advantages of the Graces thereof, and so
taking the best way to thrive, either shall have no need to borrow, or if an
urgent occasion happen, they shall probably be trusted without a Surety: And so
they are free from one cause of Suretiship very common in the World, which is
that Men needing Sureties for themselves, must return that civility and
kindness whenever it shall be desired.

That peculiar people (named Israel) upon their due observance of, and
obedience to all Divine Commandments had good assurance of this Blessing,
Deuter. 15.6. Chap. 28.12.
That they should lend to many Nations, but should not borrow. Though their
Encouragements to a course of Life conformable to Divine Rules, consisted much
of promises of this Nature which cannot be equally extended to all Nations: Yet
since true Religion is full of thriving Virtues, they that are Faithful therein
shall probably be Lenders rather than Borrowers; and so shall be free from that
exigence which commonly craves Sureties: And therefore shall be out of the
reach of one great, and almost irresistible Temptation to become Sureties for
others. True Religion needs not any private man's Letters of commendation: It is
in all respects most acceptable, giving Men the best, and most valuable comfort
in this, as a Pledge, and earnest of the highest Glory, and most transporting
fullness of joy in the other World. That present benefit I have spoke of is one
of the smallest fruits that grow upon it: But whoever shall consider what is
suggested in these few lines, will readily allow that right Religion is a means
to save men from the trouble of Suretiship; as making them just to themselves,
and Families; Wise, Circumspect, and Prudent in all their affairs; and
preserving them from the indigency of borrowing, whereby many are drawn to give
their security in compensation for another, which they themselves have been
compelled to make use of.

Secondly, Another means to prevent the danger of Suretiship, is a careful
shunning of the customary Temptation to excess and idleness, commonly called
good Fellowship: For some have no greater device to catch the unwary, than to
liquor them to such a degree as to make them flexible to any design; and to
fill them with so much moisture, that they ^ay take their opportunity to mold
them according to their pleasure. In this vicious practice many trains are
laid to blow ^p the Fortunes of easy, and compliant ^ools, particularly
Suretiship; and that which is most dangerous is set forward, whereby too many
are merrily undone. We need not Study much to read their destiny, who make
stout and jovial drink^ng the great pleasure of their Lives: For besides the
Treasure that is wasted, the health that is impaired, the business that is
neglected, and the time that is lost by this folly; Men that follow it are over
reached in bargains, and taken in sundry traps and snares which they do not
di^cern before they are caught. It is the opinion of good fellows who are
might^ men at Wine, and Ale; that such cor^ of Love are best twisted that are
first we moistened therewith. There is a Generation whose temper enclines them
to b^ mighty loving in their Drink, and wi^ then readily yield to any thing
that shall be desired; or if they seem to be some what cautious, it is but
alluring them t^ take the other Glass, and that will mak^ them bend. This is
monstrous Low which is pregnant with nothing more tha^ Frauds, and delusions.
This is most ridiculous Friendship, that invites Men to d^stroy their Estates.

The modest, and venerable Autho^ of the whole Duty of Man tells us That some
Men say it is necessary for them to drink in this one respect of Trading with
their Neighbors Bargains being most conveniently to be struck up at such
meetings; bu^ the bottom of it is an aim of cheating and defrauding others; For
when Me^ are in drink, they shall the better be able to overreach them, and so
they ^dd the sin of cozenage, and defraud^ng to that of drunkenness. Now that
this is indeed the intent is manifest, for if it were only the dispatch of
bargains were aimed at, they should choose to take Men with their Wits about
them, therefore the taking them when Drink has distempered them, can be for
nothing but to make advan^age of them.

It is as a most false, so a most absurd ^retence of the drunken Clubs of this
in^mperate Age, that meeting at the Pot ^most convenient for business; as if it
^ere necessary that they should become ^easts, that they might act as Men: And
^xpedient for them to besot, distemper, ^r drown their understandings that they
^ight come off with Honor in every ^ing they undertake. By the same Reason a
man may lame himself that he may ^n well, and the Labourer may wound ^is hands,
that he may the better fulfill ^is daily task. So far is business from justi^ing
intemperance, that it rather obliges Men to be sober. But there is just cause ^
suspect that many carry on the Trade of ^xcessive drinking upon fraudulent
de^igns, for they can indulge their purposes by the compliance of others
distempered and clouded brains; which they could never effect by any service,
which their s^rene, and clear Reason would afford. S^ they heap iniquity upon
drunkenness, an^ (as it were) put out their Neighbou^ Eyes, that they may pick
their Pockets and cast a mist before their understandin^ that their
Leger-Demain might not b^ discovered; and though this Project dot^ not always
answer expectation, becau^ some notable suck-spigots are over-matched, and
thrown into the Pit which the^ dug, or taken in the snare which the ^layed
for others: Yet as the High-Way^ Gallant follows on his petty conquest^ though
he be sometimes put to flight, ^ these Pot-companions are obstinate i^ their
vicious custom, and the subtle An^ of improving it, though they are som^times
outwitted in their own device, o^^ plotted in their contrivance, and mastere^
with their own Weapons. It is confess^ that some have more skill in this Myster^
of Wickedness than others; but they wh^ have least, may put great cheats upon
suc^ who neither think Evil themselves, n^ suspect danger from others. It has
bee^ an ordinary complaint with many: The they have paid great debts for
others, and never were made drink for their Money. ^ cannot think their
condition in any re^^ect more happy, who by too much ^rinking, are tempted to
bear the same ^rouble; unless by the strength of their ^toxicated imaginations
they can turn ^e guilt of intemperance, into a cause of ^ejoycing. But though
they came of free ^ost at their merry meeting, and went ^ut pleasantly having
nothing to pay, yet ^hen time brings them to an after recko^ing, the guilt of
their excess, added to ^e account of their Suretiship, lies heavy upon them;
and the weight of both for^s a confession of their folly, if not pres^s them to
Death. Wherefore since the ^o common practice of good fellows ^ives men reason
to be jealous that one ^me or other they may conspire in fra^ing stratagems for
their undoing, it is ^ighly convenient to keep at a distance ^om the haunts of
such Wicked Men; those loose, lavish, riotous, and expensive ^urse of Life
melts their own, and makes ^^em desirous of another Treasure; and ^ their own
Credit will not avail for the ^ctual possession, they must find Sureties among
their Companions, who must give ^^eir consent at the first motion, least ma^ing
them suspicious of their Friendship, they lose all the pleasure of their
acquai^tance, and be expelled this self applaudi^ Society with disgraceful
Taunts, and sladers. One man's security for another thought but a common
courtesy, an^ therefore must not be denied by those w^ are dearly united in a
Licentious fellowship; and cannot be refused least the sweet correspondence,
and merry famili^rity should utterly vanish.

The wise man describes their mirth b^ a very significant Metaphor, when ^
says, As the crackling of Thorns under a P^ so is the laughter of a Fool. Eccl.
7.6.
Let their joyalty be like the noise of flaming Thorn^ which soon flee away in
Clouds of smo^^ The troubles they bring upon themselv^ by their drunken
bargains are as the pric^ of Thorns which tear and wound the^ till they bleed,
not for their own health but another both profit and pleasure, an^ their own
damage, and misery. The same Author puts questions respectin^ this practice,
and Answers them, sayin^ Who has woe? Pro. 23.29, 30, 31, 32.
Who has sorrow? Who ha^ contentions? Who has babbling? Who ha^ Wounds without
cause? Who has redness Eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine; the that go to
seek mixed Wine. Look ^ thou upon the Wine when it is Red, wh^ ^t gives his
Color in the Cup, when it mo^eth it self aright, at the last it biteth like a
Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. And ^robably the Contract that was
consummated at the compotation has harder sees, a sharper, and a longer
sting. The Death that was in the Pot, was not dis^cerned till after the dregs
thereof were ^oured out.

Thirdly, They who would not be Sure^ies for others; to their own trouble must
^ot affect a numerous acquaintance, though ^en are framed for Society, yet there
being a great variety in Constitutions, Tem^ers, Inclinations, Qualities,
Affections, Educations and Customs, it cannot be ^xpected that any man should
readily ^ashion himself to the humor of all kind ^f Company, or procure any
considera^le benefit to himself, by a free conversa^ion with all sorts of Men.
Happy are ^hey who are endowed with a prudent sa^acity, and blessed with a
favorable op^ortunity to fit themselves with company ^greeable to their
G^nius, and accommo^ate to their business, and interest in the World: Wherein
the Heart of Man anwereth to man, as in Water, Face to Face. ^uch Friendships
must needs have the greatest efficacy, which in all respects are most
agreeable. The Light of that Soc^ety is warm, and pleasant wherein all affec^
and possess each other as themselves, an^ mutually tender their concerns as
the^ own, exercising their affections, desires hopes, fears, joys, and sorrows,
as about their own near and peculiar interests Whose minds are enlarged beyond
private considerations, and whose faculty are employed for others good as for
their own, compassing all their concerns within the Verge of their affectionate
Car^ Their Fellowship must needs be desirabl^ who well understand the full
Virtue of Divine Charity, and know how to practice it. Their presence is freely
access^ble, their countenances are affable, the Tempers tractable, their humor
sociable their behavior respectful, their comun^cations plain and profitable,
their heart are transparent, and their hands benefic^al, their correspondence
is amicable and their continual conversation kind, familiar, and pleasant. They
warmly lod^ themselves in each others hearts, and tak^ a sweet repose in each
others embrace When men as Jonathan, and David ar^ knit together in that love
which is the bond of perfectness, and are inspired with one Soul. When they
continually entertain each other with wise, and edifying Communications, with
lovely and char^ing occurrences, with consolatory and fervent endearments,
heartily endeavoring to promote each others prosperity, ^cting as faithfully
for them in their absence, as before their Eyes, walking not only without
offense in the meekness of ^ Lamb, and the innocence of a Dove, cut in the
Bowels of most ready Benefactors; Striving who shall love most, and ^ive best,
and do most good; not being disheartened at any difficulties, but still go^ng
on in a constant course of fervent love: When Society is thus actuated every
way, it is a real happiness to make one ^herein, and a man's dear acquaintance
shall yield him very valuable advantages: For true Friendship is no less than
the ^ure of melancholy, the relief of solitude, the support of weakness, the
Light of ignorance, the refuge of trouble, the recovery of losses, the comfort
of sorrows, the supply of necessities, the digestion of crosses, the ease of
Burdens, the mitigation of cares, the cover of Secrets, the extinction of
discontents, and the help of all infirmities: and as the black side of men's
condition is much mended, so the bright parts thereof are wonderfully
illustrated thereby: For Friendship makes the best paraphrase upon the
prosperity of its Members, doubles their joys, Triumphs in their good success,
increases their Fruits, improves their Talents, multiplies their Advantages,
quickens their parts, betters their Morals, enriches their understandings and
experiences, enlarges all their comforts, and is the Ornament, the Glory, and
the pleasure of their conversation; but a Society Animated with this sweet, and
strong spirit of love is a rare sight in the World. Wherefore men must choose
their Company the best that they can, that which is freest from selfish
designs, and comes nearest to the most Virtuous, most ingenuous, most faithful,
most wise, and sober Society: And it is prudent to take up with few Friends well
tried, and approved, whose company is the Glass in which the Beauty, or
deformity of every man's mind is transparent; the crucible in which the Loyalty,
or Adulterations of their addictions are tried, and the Mint that Coins
Treasures for all uses. Where Virtue is regent it herds with those only who are
Eminent therein, and such who observe, and follow the best, may be the wisest
of all their contemporaries, We see that all such Animals, with whom there is
an Harmony of Nature, and Union of tendency, associate together; neither Birds,
nor Beasts consort with their Enemies, but keep as well as they can out of
their reach. If our Reason will not be concerned in the choice of our company,
their Natural instinct should prompt us to take heed to our selves; that we
fall not into that which is the Seminary of Mischief, the Gulf of all Good
Hopes, the bane of preferment, the loss of Credit, and the broad way to ruin.
He can be no Bird of Paradise, who is a Brother to Dragons, and a Companion to
Owls. Nothing is more usual than for some to keep company at all Rates, and
with all persons. It may be they are confident of the strength of their
commanding Virtue, that they know what to take, and leave, and how to extract
sweetness out of all Flowers: And are wise enough to distinguish between the
date and the Stone; the Gold and the Dross, the benefit and the danger of
Company. But Vice is deceitful above all things, and has many devices and
Wiles to insinuate it self into men's affections, and sometimes by merry and
witty Stratagems, entices the well-parted, and self-confident Vertuoso into a
deplorable State. In all mixtures the composition rellishes much of the most
bitter ingredients, and that Field is commonly unfruitful where Tares are Sowed
together with good Seed. How near was an Apostle to great danger, who in the
High Priests Hall came almost to be one of those Fanatics, who cried out
against the Son of God, let him be Crucified. They that use any sort of
company, may by the power of Wit, or other bait suited to the gratification of
sense, be allured to delight in it; and then the company is so impressive, that
they are soon transformed into the likeness of it; and as Plants taste of the
Soil in which they grow, so they savor of their manners with whom they join in
conversation. Hence their minds are corrupted, their Lives are shamed, their
Credits are blasted, and their prosperity is overturned. For bad company is the
very sink and lurch not only of all Sobriety, and good morature, but of all
thrift and preferment, rendering all relations uncomfortable, by bringing down
their cares with sorrow, frustrating their endeavors, contradicting their
Counsels, and defeating their Hopes. Few are so well armed against the
infection of bad Livers, but by familiarity with them they may be led into a
conformity with their manners: For constant Fellowship is full of Charms and
Pleasures, which steal away Men's Hearts by indiscernible degrees: For which
reason as we should cherish great thoughts of the good; so we should strengthen
an aversion from Evil company. The great efficacy of a familiar converse is so
well known, that men commonly raise conjectures, and make probable guesses
concerning others Fortunes, by that kind of Fellowship they list themselves in.
We have good Reason to believe that Piety and Virtue make the best Friendships:
Which are as the Sunshine in the Cold, and as the shade in the Heat, as the
Mine of all supply, and as the Womb of all Fertility; for the Sea is not fuller
of drops, the Sky not more infinite in breaths of Air, and blasts of Wind; the
Sun not more replete with Rays, nor the Earth more stored with particles of
dust, than good Companions are of delight, of comfort, of profit and praise.
But the best friendships are rare Jewels, because that Virtue is too much
excluded out of Men's cares which should bring them to effect: and they who will
run indifferently into all Companies, take not right measures to compass the
Friendship that is most worthy of Esteem, Courtship, and Veneration; but betray
their own interest by a heedless embarquing of themselves too far in
unfortunate acquaintance. The greatest part of the World is vicious, and
therefore indigent, so that they who are ready to commence a familiarity with
all sorts of persons, are soon tainted with their Vices, and consequently
become partakers with them in their decayed Fortunes: For experience is full of
instances of the danger of Suretiship upon this account, that an easy
correspondence with the vicious and needy sort, abounds with plausible
Arguments to persuade those who are entered into it, to be yoked with them in
their concerns. No man knows how his affections may be entangled in his
Company, and when his heart is once taken, they who have won the prize, may
desire what they will, and they shall be gratified; and this point is gained of
the heedless by any casual circumstance that pleases their fancy. The habit,
the demeanor, the Features, the Looks, the Voice, the Songs, the merry Jests,
the witty Repertees, the fluant and pleasant Discourses of their Associates; or
any thing that may render them good company in their opinion catches their
Affections whereby they themselves are taken, and their Fortunes too: For such
a matter as Suretiship which may do their business shall not be denied. When a
man's company is become the most rel^ishing pleasure, and sweetest entertainment
of his Life; he must not be guilty of any disgust by denying any request, least
the whole matter of his delight be utterly lost, by such a defect in courtesy
which will be resented as a provocation. I wish men were not so easily caught
by their company, as the World knows they have been, and I am afraid ever will,
unless they learn more Wisdom, and foster no luxuriant inclination for all kind
of acquaintance: For if they indulge this idle humor, though they should be so
prudent as to withhold their security from him that needs it; yet they shall be
troubled with Solicitations, and Temptations thereto; and upon their refusal
shall be censured as men of an hard ill Nature that have Mammon to be their
God. It is easy to procure a multitude of acquaintance, but not so cheap to
entertain them according to their necessities, Appetites, and Desires; among
whom more hungry Wasps are found, than laden Bees, which is the Reason that
wise men ha^ a Rule to know, and be known not ^ much to the many, and most, as
to the few, and best of men, upon whose stoc^ all the delight, and profit of
Societ^ thrives apace. They choose them Friend who are Cordial, an^ cheap to
keep, Generosissima res est bonus amicus: Non verbis, non carminibus, magicis,
movetur: Non auro, aut gemmis, non ad extremum ferro flectitur amando vincitur;
colendoque. Petr. l. 1. dial. 59.
who can love as they ar^ beloved, and while they adhere to suc^ they admit
others only so far as civility requires, or commerce constrains; and keep them
at such a convenient distance as rather obviates, than encourages such near
approaches which may be costly and troublesome. But they who are addicted to be
familiar with all they can come at may be surprised with those who will
practice their ends upon them: So that besides the great expenses they are at
to make an acceptable show, and appearance to all men (which must be reckoned
among extravagances) they are liable to be foiled by sundry Temptations, and
subjected to others designs upon them* For no Moths are more injurious to
Clothes, no Worms to Vegetables, no Traitors to Princes, no Diseases to Bodies,
than multititude of acquaintance to Men's Temporal conditions: For hereby ^hey
contract Amities, which produce first charge, than trouble, and at last ^uin;
or what is little better, irregular Gamings; fretting and litigious quarrels;
expensive entertainments; vile incontingences, and wasting Suretiships; all
which ^re back doors to thrift, and quicksands ^o Estates. So that they who
covet to ^e known to many increase their sorrow, ^s they increase their
knowledge. They ^robably aim at a great esteem, and reputation among Men, and
their humor ^eing known, they may meet with Para^ites who shall feed their
phancies with applauses, which they shall not long enjoy without paying for
them; for these Trumpeters will not spend their Breath for ^ought: And there
are great odds Men cannot come off only with wetting their whistles; for if
they are not ready to offer them the courtesies which they need, they will be
confident to solicit for them, and when the request is granted, and they ^re
once deeply engaged, they shall be ^eft by those who sounded a March to their
generosity, and must be constrained ^o sound their own Retreat to their loss
and shame. So they that gape for popular Air, are often forced to swallow Ga^
and Wormwood; and whatever designs Men have in seeking familiarity with all
sorts of Men, there are some who will spy out their intentions, and will make
their advantage of them; or if they move without design, as not being capable
to project any thing for themselves, but are led by mere Vanity; their case is
the more extravagant and dangerous, and within a short time may be beyond all
Salve miserable; for he that is hurried blindfold through all ways, may either
fall into a deep Pit from whence there is no recovery, or shall rush into a
Wood of Briars and Thorns which shall tear him in pieces. Were men wise to know
many, and yet to keep such a convenient distance, as may help them to a good
prospect of all the best uses that are to be made of their acquaintance; the
more numerous it is, the more experience, skill and knowledge they might
obtain^ But they who will go too near, and suddenly contract a familiarity with
any face, may soon put their Necks under a yoke too heavy for them. They that
in this wise will venture at all, shall lose all The itch of too great, or too
much company, proves to be such a sore in Families, ^s corrupts all Relations
therein: For Parents by being too fond of many, become unnatural to their own
issue: Children by running into Temptations of diverse sorts, are so foiled
thereby, that they become disobedient to their Parents: Husbands in taking
their pleasure this way, either forget their Wives, or grieve their hearts with
a churlish rudeness, or a scant provision: Wives, by wandering from House to
House and tattling with all sorts, are either Tempted to be disloyal to their
Husbands, or neglect the business proper for them within their own Doors:
Servants also by this kind of wantonness, become Lazy and Licentious, if not
grossly perfidious and wicked. And all that are guilty of this looseness darken
their Credit, lessen their Treasure, weaken their power, and possibly are soon
reduced to such scantness, as that they are forced to practice shifts, which
hasten their Disgrace and Ruin. But I need not make a large Declamation
concerning all the bitter Fruits, and lamentable consequences of this
prodigious Folly: The common mischiefs whereof have forced thus much from me,
and the danger of Suretiship upon this account, is (I suppose) sufficiently
plain to every Attentive Observe^ Wherefore I shall trouble the Reader no
longer, presuming that the consideration of these few things which have, been
suggested to him, will be an effectual means to preserve him from the snare,
which his own interest will oblige him to pass by with a swift foot. If he
learn to be Religious toward God, he will find himself bound to be just to
himself and his Family, prudent in all business; and highly concerned in the
acts and exercises of all Graces, which are of a thriving Virtue. If he shun a
drunken fellowship, and by a constant sobriety keep a clear and serene
understanding, he shall not subject himself to the designs of mighty drinkers,
whose crafty bargains are extremely chargeable to such persons whose hearts are
easily overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. If he have a watchful eye
to his company, and do not affect a supernumerary acquaintance, his affections
shall not, (nor therefore his Treasure) be caught by those who watch and wait
for a favorable occasion to practice their ends upon him. If he be careful in
these things, I do not question, but by walking thus uprightly, he shall walk
surely, and keep himself from danger.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, Printed for, and sold by Samuel Heyrick at
Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn.
In Folio.
BVlstrodes Reports. Cooks Institutes 2d. 3d. and 4th. Parts. Saunders
Reports. Noyes Reports. Register of Writs. Hetleys Reports. Leonards Reports.
Littletons Reports. Modern Reports. Daltons Justice. Daltons Sheriffs. Cowells
Interpreter. Officina Brevium. Rolls Abridgment. Rolls Reports. Browns Entries.
Winches Entries. Cooks Entries. Crookes Reports, Three Parts. Kebles Reports.
Kebles Assistance to Justices. Cooks Reports in English. Andersons Reports.
Rastells Entries. Robinsons Entries. Vidians Entries. Hobarts Reports. Palmers
Reports. Moors Reports. Hansards Reports. Year Books Complete. Plowdens
Commentaries. Rawleighs History of the World. Clelia a Romance. Ricauts Royal
Commentaries, or the History of the King of Peru. Parthenissa a Romance. Bakers
Chronicle. Bacons Natural History. Dr. Browns Works.
In Quarto.
Brownlowes Reports. Doctrina Placitandi. Complete Clerk. Fleta with Seldens
Notes. Perfect Conveyancer. Attorneys Academy. Goldsboroughs Reports. Hughes
Original Writs. Brownlowes Judicial Writs. Callis reading of Sewers.
In Octavio.
Clerks Guide in Four Parts. Clerk of the Market. Davenports Abridgment of
Cooks Littleton. Irelands Abridgment of Cooks Reports Kitchen of Courts.
Nature Brevum. Terms of the Law. New Book of Instruments. Complete Justice.
Finches Law. Meritons Guide to Constables, Meriton of Wills and Testaments.
Lamberts Perambulation of Kent. Charter of the Cinque Ports. Doctor and
Student. Abridgment of Doctor and Student. Deggs Parsons Counselor. Hughes
Parsons Law. Browns Modus Intrandi.
FINIS.

