An Account of the Flight, Discovery and Apprehending George Lord Geffries,
Baron of Wemm, Lord Chancellor of England: Together With the Manner of his
being Taken, Examination, and Commitment To the TOWER; On the 12th. of December
1688.
UPon the News of the Prince of Orange's Approach, and the general Retreat and
going over of the King's Forces, an extraordinary Council was held at Whitehall
on Monday last, where, it is said, the Lord Chancellor was present: But
perceiving his Case desperate, and the King's Interest not capable of
supporting him, he, from the breaking up of that Council, retired himself from
Business, and from any Conversation, studying, as it is supposed, how and by
what means to shift for his Sasety, and avoid the Storm (that he no doubt
foresaw) hanging over his Head, and on Tuesday morning he was no where to be
found: So that it was conjectured he, upon Notice of the King's Retiring, was
endeavoring to make his Escape beyond the Seas. And so indeed it fell out: For
having made over some of his Goods, and otherwise disposed of what he could
with convenience in so short a time, he betook himself to find a Passage by
Water, and in order thereto went down to Wapping, there waiting for the
Opportunity in a Disguise, contrary to his former florid Equipage. However he
carried it not so secretly, but those who pryed into such Affairs,
understanding a great quantity of Treasure, and other things of Value were
stowed in a Vessel lying near the River side, it gave suspicion that something
more than ordinary was intended. Insomuch that suspecting it a Freight no ways
convenient for such a Vessel, it being said to be a Collier, spoke so loud,
that it came in Question. And thereupon they applied themselves to the Officers
proper for that purpose, to Arrest and Stay the said Vessel, till a further
Account could be given. And though it was not speedily done, nor without
further Application, yet upon Search it was plainly perceived, that no ordinary
Person was concerned therein. However he had Notice, as it is conjectured, or
at least suspected a Search, and Retired, in Disguise, to a House in Hope and
Anchor Alley in Wapping, where, by the Vigilance of the Neighbors, he was this
Day discovered through his Disguise; and some Constables being called and
consulted, it was on all hands concluded, (since they had heard he was one of
the principal Persons proscribed by the Prince of ORANGE, and Confederate
Lords, as an Evil Counselor, a Perverter of the Laws, and Betrayer of the
Liberties of the People) it was convenient to seize him, which they did without
any Resistance, between One and Two of the Clock, being then in a Furr Cap, a
Seaman's Neckeloth, and a Rusty Coat. So proceeding to carry him before the
Lord Mayor, they brought him into the City in a Coach guarded with
Blunderbusses, etc. preceded by one Coach and followed by another; as also by a
great Number of the Rabble, with shouts and Acc^^^tions. When coming to the
Entrance of Grocer's Hall, having then on an old Hat, instead of a Cap, he
alighted, and was conducted thither, hanging down his Head, and shedding some
Tears. And coming before the Lord Mayor, after a short Examination, etc. and a
Repast for Refreshment, he was committed to the Tower in the charge of a strong
Guard, where re remains to expect the Issue.

FINIS.

