An ACCOUNT of the EXAMINATION OF Capt. Holland, Before a Committee of Lords,
Upon the Murder of the EARL of ESSEX.
AS amongst the many Deeds of Darkness, which Providence in its Good Time will
bring to Light, None can be Blacker or more Hideous, than the Murder of this
Noble and Innocent Lord; So nothing can be of Greater, and more Universal
Satisfaction, (though of no less Horror too,) than the Detection of that Bloody
Assassination; in which, upon the Apprehension of Captain Holland, the Zealous
and Honorable Inquisitors, into that crying Blood, are now drawing to a
Discovery. An Account of whose Examination, take as follows.

About Three in the Afternoon, on Wednesday, he was carried in a Coach,
Attended and Guarded by several of Major Richardson's Men, (himself, and Mr.
Clerk, one of the Keepers of Newgate, going in the Coach with him) to
Bedford-House in the Strand, where the Committee of Lords then Sat. It was
observed, that he was so strangely Melancholy and Dejected, (and indeed has
been so all along in his Confinement) that he changed not one Word with his
Keepers, in the whole way going or coming. Before his Admission to the Lords,
he was carried to the Fountain-Tavern in the Strand, where he drank part of a
Pint of Sack; from thence, when called for, he was conducted to Bedford-House,
and Twice called in and Examined; where appeared against him, Mr. Bradon, John
Salisbury a Soldier, a Maidservant of Holms, another Person now in Newgate,
likewise, on the Account of the Earl of Essex's Murder. At his Appearance
before the Lords, he complained he was indisposed; and being asked by the Earl
of Bedford, if he would have a Cordial, he replied, he was only a Cold, and was
therefore ordered to have his Cloak put on, and had a Bottle of Sack called for
him. His whole Air and Behavior, is infinitely changed from that Gayety and
Jollity he appeared with, under his former Condemnation in Newgate, for the
Robery of Dr. Gattaker, where at the very Minute of receiving his Sentence, he
was observed to deport himself with that little Face of Concern, as if Death
had been the least part of his Apprehension. And though his Unfortunate Comrade
Davis, was hanged for the same Fact; such a shower of Mercy, and Court Bounty
powered down upon the Favorite Holland; that besides his Pardon, scarce any
Prisoner in many Ages before, at least that had so little Pretentions to
Fortune or Estate, to support such Extravagant Expenses, was ever known to
spend so high as he: Such a constant Affluence of Guineas daily flowing in from
the Lord Sunderland, and openly acknowledged to come from that Honorable Hard,
(for what Public or Private Merit, Time will show) That he half fed the Jayl;
and all Caps and Knees were so much at his Devotion, that nothing so honored
either at the Grate, or the Cellar Bat, as the Noble Captain Holland; and all
this from the extraordinary Largesses of a Generous Jayl-Bird-Patron, the then
Secretary of State.

London, Printed for R. Hayburft, 1689.


