An Account of the Execution of Brigadier Rookwood, Major Lowick and Mr.
Cranburn, at Tyburn. April 29th. 1696.
WHEN the Prisoners came first up into the Cart. Mr. Lowick and Mr. Rookwood
(being Roman Catholics) kneeled down together, and Mr. Lowick read ^ome
Prayers, for above half an hour, out of a small English Book of devotion, (writ
by an Abbot). And Mr. Cranburn, kneeling down by himself, prayed to this effect.

O Lord Jesus, forgive me all my Sins, and forgive all my Persecutors; Grant me
true Repentance, now I suffer for thy Cause; Let me have thy assistance and
support, now I suffer for thy Cause. Give stedfastness to thy Followers, and
Repentance to all their Persecutors. Carry me to those Happy Mansions prepared
for all those that suffer for me, and all I beg for Christ Jesus sake: Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Almighty and Most Gracious God, support, I pray thee, thy unworthy Servant in
this last and great business of laying down my Life. Let me not dishonor the
Cause and Truth that I suffer for. It is not my (...) of the Righteousness of
my Cause, but the (...) and Errors of my Life, which makes me (...) appear
before thy Righteous Bar. But cleanse (...) my Sins, and then I shall meet
Death with (...). I know, when the Sting of Death is taken out, there is an
aversion in our nature; but let the influence of thy Grace overcome it in my
Spirit. Possess my mind more and more with a sense of the Righteousness of the
Cause I suffer for: And whatever terror would otherwise strike into me, let it
arm my (...) with confidence, that I dye for thee, and thy Cause, (...) at I
shall be received into thy rest. Lord, into thy (...) I commend my Soul.

Mr. Sheriff. Mr. Cranburn, take what time you will, we will stay for you.

Then the Hangman tied the Rope about Mr. Cranburn.


Mr. Sheriff. If you will retire again, Mr. Cranburn, we will wait for you.

Then Cranburn kneeled d^wn and prayed again. And after a little the they all
(...) up, and kissed each other.


Mr. Sheriff. (...) own time, Mr. Lowick.


Mr. Lowick. (...) you, Sir.

Then Cranburn had the Rope put about his Neck.


(...). Have you got a Cap Sir?


Mr. Cranburn. Yes, I have. And the Executioner took it out of his Pocket, and
a Paper with it.


Executioner. What is in this Paper?


Mr. Cranburn. Nothing.


Executioner. Do you deliver no Paper to the Sheriff?


Mr. Cranburn. No. My Papers have been taken from me. There is a Paper in my
Bosom, which I would have you take out; open my Breast, and you will see it.
Which the Executioner did, and took it out, and asked him it he should give it
to the Sheriff.


Mr. Cranburn. No. There is nothing in it, but a Memorandum of what I would
say. My Papers were taken from me.


Mr. Sheriff. Who took them from you?


Mr. Cranburn. Tokefield.


Mr. Sheriff. You made it with your own hand, did you not?


Mr. Cranburn. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Sheriff. We cannot read this (it being Writ with a Pencil); make your self
as easy as you can. Will you speak the Words your self?


Mr. Cranburn. Yes Sir.


Mr. Sheriff. Read it audibly, and leisurely, for you see there is one Writes,
for we would do you no wrong and we will command silence.


Mr. Cranburn. Gentlemen, I am in a few moment to appear before the Great and
Righteous Judge of (...) men, to whom I am to give an Account of all my
Actions. I confess I have been a great and wicked Sinner but I hope to find
Pardon by the Merits and Intercession of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I
would advise all of you to be diligent and conscientious in your duty to God;
and whoever is so, it will make him a good Christian, and I am sure he that is
a good Christian, can never be a Rebel to his Lawful King. As to the
Assassination of the Prince of Orange, I had notice of it on Saturday, between
the hours of nine and ten, February the 22d. Mr. Charnocke, after I had carried
the names of the Persons to him, --


Mr. Sheriff. Who had you the names from?


Mr. Cranburn. From Captain Porter. And after I carried the names to Mr.
Charnocke, he made an addition of six of his own, and sent me back to Mr.
Porter, to acquaint him that it was necessary to come to him, and they two to
go to the Knight together.


Mr. Sheriff. What Knight was it?


Mr. Cranburn. That I cannot tell.


Mr. Sheriff. Go on.


Mr. Cranburn. The 22d I had knowledge of this Design, between 10 and 11.
Between 11 and 12 the time was over. And when I came from Mr. Porter to Mr
Charnocke, he told me the Knight had altered his measures; and he desired Mr.
Porter would take care of him self, and he would not have him make too much
have out, for fear of surprising any of the Gentlemen tha^ were with him. What
was sworn against me by Mr. Porter, Mr. Pendergrass, and Mr. La Rue, was true
1. That I sent a Sword to Mr. Pendergras^. And 2. was at the Sun Tavern. And 3.
I did carry the Note But I did not know what it was for. I wish they may have
repentance for the same. As I am to do justice t^ all men, so am I more
especially to my Sovereign King James; I believe he had no knowledge of the
Design And I doubt not but God will restore him to his Ancien^ and Rightful
Kingdoms. And as I am in duty boun^ to pray for him, (then he kneeled down) I
humbly beseech God to Bless, Prosper and Keep him, and giv^ him Patience under
all his Sufferings, and a happ^ issue out of all his Afflictions, and to grant
that ^n Plots against him may prosper. Be a strong Towe against the face of his
Enemies. As for those tha^ would not have him to reign over them, let them
(...) clothed with shame, but upon himself let his Crow flourish. Bless our
Gracious Queen M^^y, Kather^ the Queen Dowager, and His Royal Highness the
Prin^ of Wales; Prosper them with all Happiness, Inric^ them with thy Heavenly
Grace, and bring them t^ thine everlasting Kingdom through Jesus Christ o^^
Lord. (Then he stood up.)


Mr. Sheriff. Mr. Cranburn, take your own time.


Mr. Cranburn. I do believe that very few Persons kne^ of this Design, but
those that were the principal Prom^^ters of it; and I beseech God no more Blood
may (...) spilt. I beseech Almighty God to open the Eyes of the Nation, that
this Nation may not became a Pr^y to Foreign Power.


Mr. Sheriff. You say, you believe few Persons knew this matter, and that you
hope no more Blood will spilt.


Mr. Cranburn. I do so.


Mr. Sheriff. Do you mean that there may be no more ^lots against the
Government?


Mr. Cranburn. What I said, I shall not unsay. As to any Religion, I was born
and baptized in the Church of England, which Church always taught me to abhor
that damnable Doctrine of Deposing or Killing Kings; and I am sorry that any
that would be counted Members of it, should be guilty of Usurpation and
Rebellion, and I beseech God they may repent of the same. I have had a soul
Scandal cast upon me, that I behaved ^y self very indecently before the
Privy Council, which was never my Nature: And I appeal to my Lord Shrewsbury,
who is a Person of Honor, and I believe ^e will do me that justice as to
acquit me of it. I ^umbly beg Pardon of all I have injured, and I freely
^orgive all, and I would advise all to do as they would be done by.


Mr. Sheriff. You speak of the Doctrine of the Church of England teaching you
to abhor King killing; what do you think of the Assassination of our King? Will
the Church of England allow it?


Mr. Cranburn. As to the Assassination, I gave you an account.


Mr. Sheriff. Does the Word of God, or the Doctrine of the Church of England
allow of any Assassination?


Mr. Cranburn. Neither the Law, nor the Doctrines of the Church ever taught me
to Depose my Lawful Sovereign.


Mr. Sheriff. Did it ever teach you to Assassinate any private Man? Were you
not concerned in it? Or did you not know of it?


Mr. Cranburn. I knew of it February the 22d. between ^en and eleven, and
between eleven and twelve the whole Design was over.


Mr. Sheriff. If you had had an opportunity, would you have discovered it?


Mr. Cranburn. I would never have discovered any Man. ^f I would have been an
In^ormer, I might have been at^ ^iberty about the Town, as well as others.


Mr. Sheriff. Did you not know of the Design to Asassinate the King?


Mr. Cranburn. I did know of it.


Mr. Sheriff. Major Lowick, I have seen that ingenuity ^n you, that I hope you
have some good Advice to the People.


Mr. Lowick. I could never speak extempore.


Mr. Sheriff. Do you deliver any Paper?


Mr. Lowick. I have a Paper here, but I doubt you cannot read it. I humbly beg
the good Prayers of all the ^ood People that are here.


Mr. Sheriff. I only desire you to satisfy the People, whether you come to
Suffer justly, or unjustly.


Mr. Lowick. I am not guilty in that positive degree. I ^ust own I did know of
it, and if the thing had gone ^^ward, I do believe I had been engaged. In what
I ^ave done in drawing in any into the Design, I humbly ^eg their pardon, I
hope they will all forgive m^^ and forgive every one.


Mr. Sheriff. You do acknowledge you were concerned (...) it?


Mr. Lowick. I do acknowledge it, and I do beg the ^ardon of every one that
Suffers on my account.


Mr. Sheriff. You beg pardon of God, and of (...) King?


Mr. Lowick. I do, so far as I was engaged to do h^^ injury. And I forgive all
People.


Mr. Sheriff. The Lord grant you forgiveness, Sir. (...) would not make any
thing uneasy to you?


Mr. Lowick. I believe you will not.


Mr. Sheriff. Mr. Rookwood, will you say any thing?


Mr. Rookwood. I refer my self to the Paper (which (...) delivered to the
Sheriff) I acknowledge I was to a^ concerned.


Mr. Lowick. If I were to live again in the World, (...) would live by the
Grace of God to better purpose. (...) People know I am a Roman Catholic, and
was born (...) Roman Catholic Parents, and so was brought up; a^^ I beg of you
all your Prayers. I humbly beg pardon^ all the World, and forgive all the
World, and am (...) Charity with all men, and I beg pardon of all th^^ Suffer
on my account.

Then the Executioner asked them severally forgiveness To which they answered,
That they did freely forgi^^ him, and all the World.


Mr. Sheriff. You shall have your own time.


Mr. Lowick. O Jesus, receive me. And then he severa^ times kissed the Crucifix
in his Book, and delivered (...) to one to give one of his Friends.


Mr. Lowick. Shall we say some Pater Nosters more?


Mr. Rookwood. We cannot have time.


Mr. Lowick Jesus Maria, O Jesus, Son of God, ha^ mercy on me. I heartily beg
pardon for all the thing that I denied, that were true.


Mr. Sheriff. You mean at your Trial?


Mr. Lowick. In all places, when I was examined, i^ all places. I beg pardon of
all the World, in every thin^ I have offended.


Mr. Sheriff. I wish you had not given your self th^^ cause to be troubled.


Mr. Lowick. I wish so too. O Jesus have mercy upon me. So I wish. I am sorry
with all my Heart and So^^ that I ever did any thing like it; sorry from my
Soul^ O Jesus Maria; O Jesus, look upon us Penitents give us one view of
Heaven. O Jesus, Maria, have merc^ on me! Holy Mary, Mother of God! Our Father
wh^^ art in Heaven, etc. I desire the man to give me the Bo^^ again.


Mr. Sheriff. Give him the Book again, (which w^^ done, and he again kissed the
Crucifix, and gave ba^^ the Book again to the man).


Mr. Lowick. I humbly beg thee, Dear Savior, to forgive me all my Sins. Jesus,
who suffered for me, and all mankind, upon the Cross, pardon all my Sins.


Executioner. Tell me when I must draw away.


Mr. Lowick. We must not be our own Executioners God be merciful to us.


Mr. Sheriff. When the Executioner is withdrawn, give a stamp with your Foot,
give your own Sign.


Executioner. I hope you forgive me.


Prisoners. We forgive thee and all mankind.


Mr. Lowick. Jesus Maria, have mercy upon us.


Mr. Cranburn. Lord Jesus receive my Soul.


Then they continued in their private Ejaculations s^^ some time (after their
Caps were over their Eyes), and then the Cart was drawn away; and having hung
about half an hour, they were cut down and quartered.

London: Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1696.


