AN ACCOUNT OF THE EXECUTION, And last Dying Speeches OF Seven notorious
Traitors and Highway-Men, Who were EXECVTED at TYBURN, For High Treason,
Roberies on the Highway, Murders, and Fellonies, on Wednesday, the 25th. of
this Instant JULY, 1683.
As also their Deportment in Newgate, after their Condemnation; and what else
Remarkable happened.
THE many Examples of Justice upon Offenders, have not of late been of force
sufficient to deter or forewarn profligate Wretches from falling into the like
Disaster, as is apparent by these Persons, whose Crimes have forfeited their
Lives, and brought them to untimely ends, whose Names, Crimes, and Confessions,
were as follows.

John Mugleston, Roger Mugleston, and John Harris, having an Indictment of
High Treason preferred against them at the Sessions in the Old-Bayly, on
Thursday the 10th. of this Instant July, for Clipping, Filing, and Deminishing
the Lawful and Current Coin of England, as Queen Elizabeth Shillings, King
James Shillings, King Charles the First Half-Crowns, etc. which Clipping,
Filing, and Deminishing being proved against them by sundry positive Witnesses,
some that were Eyewitnesses of the actual Treason, and others, that they had
Silver being the Clippings of Money, offered them to Sail by a Youth sent from
the partys aforesaid; and that upon search, Sheers, Files, Rubbing-Stones, and
other Instruments usual on such occasions, were found in their Lodgings,
together with Melting-Pots, and pieces of melted Silver; upon which they being
Convicted, received Sentence as in case of High Treason the Law has provided,
which is, That they should be carried to the place from whence they came, from
thence be drawn on Hurdles to the place of Execution, there to be Hanged by the
Neck, cut down alive, their Bowels taken out, their privy Members cut off and
burnt before their faces, their Heads to be severed from their Bodies, their
Bodies to be divided into four Quarters, and to be disposed of at the pleasure
of the King.

Sentence passed, they were conveyed back to Newgate, where they were visited
by diverse of their Friends and Relations, to whom they expressed the deep sense
they conceived in perpetrating a Crime that was so prejudicial to the whole
Kingdom, it being not only Treason against the King, but a Defraud of his
Subjects in the highest nature, for which they expressed a more then ordinary
sorrow and remorse, grieving that the Devil should have so much power over
them, as to draw them from their Lawful Employments (the two former being
Butchers by Trade) to practice that which had brought upon them Ruin, Disgrace,
and Death, desiring, and being very attentive to the Prayers and wholesome
advice of such Ministers as came to give them Ghostly Counsel and Advice, in
order to prepare them for another World,

The next in this Tragic Sceen, whose transcendant wickedness brought them to
destruction, were Thomas Wilson and Miles J hnson, two Irish-men, who in the
Company of diverse others, Robbed one Mr. Hind of High-Gate, upon the Road near
unto Islington, of a Watch, Rings, Money, a Coat, and other things, valued at
80 l. and the same day Committed another Robbery at the same place, upon one
Mr. Abel, taking from him money, Rings, a Watch, and other valuable things, but
the Allarum given, the Townsmen of Islington beset the ways, and so it
happened, that they met the Prisoners, who looking like persons which seemed
very suspicious, they commanded them to Surrender themselves, which they
refusing, the Townsmen pursued them, and soon seized on Wilson, but Johnson
Armed with Sword and Pistol, getting over a Bank, stood upon his Defense, when
as one Charles Evans pressing upon him, he delivered his Pistol at his Breast,
and shot him Dead. This Evidence given against them upon their Trials at the
Old-Bayly, on Saturday, the 14th. Instant, they were found guilty upon three
several Indictments, two for Robery and Felony, and one for Murder, and on
the Monday following, received Sentance of Death; viz. To return to Newgate,
and from thence be drawn to the place of Execution, and there to be hanged by
the Neck till they were Dead; upon which they appeared greatly dejected,
especially Johnson, who had added Murder to his other Offenses. In Newgate
they continued sad, in expectation of their Execution, desiring the Prayers of
diverse that came to visit them: confessing that they had been Evil Livers, and
gone on in Profaneness and Debauchery, which in the end became Habitual, and
brought them to Poverty, which reduced them to many Extravagancies; when to
supply their Necessities, they had taken the Evil Courses aforesaid, and gone
on, for some time past securely, but at length Justice had overtaken them, to
which they patiently submitted, hoping for mercy at God's hands. To this, or
this Effect, was their Behavior in Newgate, from the time they were Sentenced,
to this 25th. of July, on which they suffered.

William Gratrix, and John Spittle, having committed a Robery upon one Mr.
Pitts, near Mile-End, taking from him a Watch, Rings, Money, a Silver handled
Knife and Fork, with diverse other things, hardly sparing his Life, by reason he
knew them. They were on the 14th. Instant Convicted of the Robery and Felony,
upon positive proof, though they protested their Innocence, and for the same,
on Monday received Sentence of Death, as the former; during the Intervene, they
seemed greatly concerned at the near approach of Death, and desired a longer
time to prepare for their Dissolution, but it was not granted. So that this day
they were conveyed to Tyburn by the Sheriffs Officers, all the way showing
signs of Penitence, and Remorse of Conscience; some of them more signaly than
others, desiring the people to pray for them, that God would be merciful to
their poor Souls. And being come to the place of their last abode in this
World, with elevated Hands and Eyes they begged forgiveness at Gods hands,
Confessing that they had been great and grevious Sinners, running on in a
course of Impiety, and refusing to be reclaimed, till at length they were
overtaken by Justice, and brought to be made miserable Spectacles; hoping, that
though themselves would take no warning, yet that they might be a warning to
others. That they had been Guilty of the Crimes they stood charged with, they
denied not, desiring to forgive those that had been Instrumental in bringing
them to their ends. Then the two first who were drawn in a Sledge, made their
Prayers publicly, owning the justness of their Punishments; As likewise did
the other, who was drawn by himself in another Sledge; but above all, Johnson
expressed his sense of sorrow for the Murder committed upon Evans, but said he
did it in a fright, and not deliberately, or in Malice, but that he hoped by
defending himself to escape. Mr. Ord nary gave them diverse good Instructions,
putting them in mind, that they were now upon the brink of Eternity, and but a
step on this side; therefore he earnestly desired them heartily to Repent, etc.
And so after the Prayers and Psalm was ended, the Sentences aforesaid were put
in Execution; The first Three was Drawn in Sledges and Hanged, and the other
Four Hanged only.

FINIS.
Printed for Langley Curtis, near Fleet-bridge. 1683.


