A SERMON Preached to the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners, IN THE Cities
of London and Westminster, AT SALTERS-HALL, Aug. 15. School.

Preached and Published at the desire of the said SOCIETIES.

By VINCENT ALSOP.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry, MDCXCVIII.

To the WORTHY GENTLEMEN Engaged in the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners.
Honored Sirs!
THE Preaching, Printing, Publishing this Discourse, is due both to God, and
you: He gave the Commission, you ministered the Occasion: The Authority is from
Heaven, the Opportuity from your selves. It would therefore be a piece of
Impertinent Modesty, and such whose sincerity you might well question, should I
frame an excuse for doing that, for which I could have made no excuse had I not
done it. What will Justify me, will Vindicate you, for both of us owe a duty to
God, and perishing Souls, to pluck them like Brands out of the Fire, upon whom
the Wrath of God, and the Malice of Hell, have begun to kindle; if at least our
God will honor us, and use us as his Instruments in so Blessed a Work: I know
well that they who most need our Help will least accept it; nay, most
desperately oppose it: But it is a charitable Severity to bind the hands of the
Distracted, though they rage at, and revile us, to prevent if possible their
destroying themselves.

I know also that the Persons with whom you deal, will imperiously demand, By
what Authority you do these Things, and who gave you this Authority? Now though
you might retort their Question: By what Authority do you Curse, Swear,
Blaspheme, and Profane the Lord's Day? And who gave you this Authority? Yet
seeing the most notorius Crimes committed against the Laws Divine and Humane,
ought to be Punished in a Legal and Regular Way, however they be, illegal and
irregular, you need not insist upon that Answer: Nor yet upon extraordinary
examples to justify your ordinary Proceedings; you need not plead the Zeal of
Phineas, or Samuel; your Cause and Practice need no such Defenses: That Law
which Enacts that such an Ossence shall be punished with such a Penalty,
limiting the Conviction of the Offender to the Deposition of one or more
Witnesses is your clear Warrant, and abundant Justification; for if there were
no Witnesses, it would be the same as if there were no Laws, no Penalties: And
because that which is every Man's Business is no Man's Business, you may
honestly agree, that where any shall dare to Transgress, you will dare to
impeach the Transgressor: It were a hard Case if Men might associate and
combine for Sinning, and none might unite in Societies for Reforming.

I remember a time when the Name of an Informer suffered some disrepute: But
it is unjust that you should fall under their Reproach, for a slender
understanding is able to distinguish between Praying to God, and Blaspheming
Him; between Sanctifying the Lords Day and Profaning it; between setting up the
Devils Kingdom, and pulling it down. There is a Text, which having been
sometimes abused in the Pulpit, and oft-times exposed by the Press, must not be
quoted without some Preface to remove Prejudice, though it stands legible in
our Bibles to this day: It Is Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz, (said the Angel of the
Lord) Curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not out to
help the Lord, to help the Lord against the Mighty. Say not, God needs none of
our Help: Tho his Enemies are mighty, yet in their closest Confederacies, and
strongest Combinations, they cannot make up one Almighty Enemy, and God can
plead his own Cause, and avenge his own Honor upon them without our
over-officious assistance: It Is true, if we consider his Absolute Power, he
needs no Kings, nor Princes, nor inferior Magistrates to come in as his
Auxiliaries; He can with more ease kill the Murderer, than he could his weaker
Brother: choke the Blasphemer with his own Blasphemies, and stifle the Swearer
with his own poisonous breath: But he has seen Good to choose other Methods in
which, other Means by which to govern his own World: As Kings Reign by Him, he
governs by them by Legislators and their Laws; Judges and their Sentences,
Magistrates and their Executions; in a Word, He governs the Physical World in a
Physical way; the Moral World Morally; the Spiritual World Spiritually.

But still you persist, and say: God needs none of our help: No more does
Christ need your Relief: And yet God calls for our help, Christ for our Relief:
And they both need what they call for; God needs help in his despised Cause:
Christ needs Relief in his poor distressed Members: and in these respects none
needs help more than God: None Relief more than Christ.

Now as God calls for our help, he does it under a dreadful Curse; and I hope
none of us will venture to stand in the Line and Rake of Heavens Artillery: For
God sometimes steps out of the ordinary Road, and punishes daring Sinners by
the immediate Hand of Heaven, that he may, by some few but notable Instances,
convince the World that he has not forsaken it, but regards Mischief, and
Spite, with his Eyes, to punish them with his Hand. Thus when Nadab, and
Abihu, offered strange Fire to God, which he commanded them not, he consumed
them with strange Fire which they expected not: Levit. 10.2. And when Ananias
and Saphira dared to commit Sacrilege, and palliate their Sin with a Lie,
Christ struck 'em both dead in a moment, Acts 5.

Gentlemen,

God needs your Help, he bespeaks it, offer your selves willingly to his Call:
And yet your Case is much the same with that of the Disciples, Matthew. 14.24.
when the Ship (in which they were) was in the midst of the Sea, tossed with
the Waves because the Wind was contrary. You see they went to Sea by Christ's
commission; nay, by his compulsion, v. 22. He constrained them to get into a
Ship: They were in the clear way of their Duty, and yet they met with a Storm;
and the Winds were not only high, but contrary; and yet they had some great
Encouragements, first, that whilst they were in the Storm at Sea, Christ was
Praying in the Mount, v. 23. And then that in the fourth Watch of the Night,
Jesus went unto them walking on the Sea: When Night was darkest, the Storm
highest, their Fear greatest, and their Faith weakest, then was the season for
Christ's coming: But their greatest trouble was, that Christ came to deliver
them walking upon the Sea; which though it might have been their greatest
Comfort, that their Lord was above the Waves, and had them under his Feet, yet
they cried out for fear: Were more afraid of their Deliverer, than of their
Danger: So true it is, that God comes sometimes to save us in such uncouth
Ways, that we are afraid of his Way and Means more than the Tempest.

But fear not the Devil, though he roars and rages, I would hope his time is
but short when he rages most: For thus when Christ came to eject and disposses
him, Mark 9.20. the evil spirit tare the young Man.

Let me seriously advise you from what point of the Compass you may expect the
greatest Danger, and I will conclude.

Your great Danger will arise from those public Nurseries, and Seminaries of
Debauchery: Where Fools make a mock of Sin, and a mock at all Sobriety; who
debauch more in one Night than you reform in a Year: You may prune off some few
luxuriating branches of Impiety, but till God shall cut up the Tree by the
roots, they will spring again thicker and stronger: Pull up what you can, these
Nurseries will replenish all again: For here that Art and Mystery of Sinning is
taught, as if it were a science to be Profane; and if the Christian Religion
have not power and interest enough to suppress them, they will suppress all
Religion: But I must leave the Blasting of these, and the Blessing of you to
Him, who loves Righteousness, and hates all Iniquity. I am,

Gentlemen, Your Faithful Servant in the Work of the Lord, V. A.
October 31. School.
A SERMON Preached to the SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of Manners.
Isaiah 1.6. From the sole of the Foot to the Head there is no soundness in it,
but Wounds and Bruises, and putrefying Sores, they have not been closed, nor
bound up, nor mollified with Ointment.
THESE words describe the dangerous, if not desperate State of Judah and
Jerusalem: It Is true, it was the case of a People some thousands Years ago; but
whether it may agree, or how far it may agree to the present state of Things
among our selves, I must leave to your serious and impartial Judgments.

The Evils here bewailed, and complained of, had these several Aggravations to
render them deplorable, and almost incurable.

1. That they had overspread the whole Body from the sole of the Foot to the
Head: And thus it is expressed, v. 5. The whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart
is faint: Now whether we may from the order of the words infer, that this
Corruption began at the Foot, amongst the Populacy, and from thence rose up to
the nobler parts, the Heart, and Head, I shall not determine: Most certain it
is, that in the Body Natural, a vitiated Stomach disturbs the Head with
Vapors; and that again pours down showers of Rheums upon the Stomach; so the
depravations of the inferiors will creep up amongst superiors, and the
Vitiousness of Superiors will probably descend to the Commonalty. 2. There was
a Concurrence and Complication of all manner of Evil, Wounds, Bruises,
putrefying Sores; which though they be Metaphorical Terms, are yet so easy and
natural that they interpret themselves: In a word; Evils political and moral;
Sin and Punishment; a People breaking out upon God, and God breaking out upon
them; their lifting up their hand against God, and his laying a heavy hand upon
them, sore Provocations, and sore Afflictions, are the things which fill up
these expressions. 3. That which rendered the case most deplorable, was, that
these Wounds were not closed, nor bound up, nor mollified with Ointments, which
implies (1.) either that there was no private charitable Hand, that would
concern it self; but a poor Nation might bleed to Death, and no good Samaritan
would do that Office of Love to bind up its Wounds, or (2.) that there was no
hand of Authority stretched out to apply more potent Remedies, or (3.) that
they judged the case was desperate and the wounds incurable; and therefore
thought it more advisable, to let the Patient die of its Disease or Wounds,
than by its Physician, or Surgeon. Or (4.) whether they presumed the Kingdom
was of a sound Constitution, and would work it self whole in time; or (5.)
whether all means that had been used proved ineffectual, the Evil would not
obey any Applications, but despised the most potent and proper Remedies; yet so
it was, the Wounds were become Ulcers, the Sores putrefying Sores; no Ointments
would mollify them, or no gentle skilful Hand would apply them.
Such was their Case; and it must be confessed it was a deplorable one, and had
been utterly desperate, but for some small hope, yet left upon one account; v.
9. Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a very little Remnant, we should have
been as Sodom, we should have been like unto Gomorrah; like for Sin, and like
for Punishment, but God had graciously left a Remnant, a little, a very little
Remnant; a praying Remnant that yet solicited Heaven for Remedy when there was
none on Earth; a sound sincere and uncorrupted Remnant, that labored to give
some check to the growing Corruptions, and such a Remnant would have saved
Sodom, and might yet save Judah and Jerusalem.

The words thus opened, and cleared, afford us this

OBSERVATION. The case of a People is deplorable and almost desperate, when
they are so universally corrupted, and their Corruptions so obstinate that they
will not obey the most proper and potent Means of Reformation.
In all Diseases of the Natural Body we account those the most fatal symptoms
of Death; when the Distemper defies the most sovereign Remedies; especially
when it perverts all Medicines in materiam, and fomitem morbi; when Physic
becomes the food of the Malady; and the Disease is so strong that it seduces
the Remedy to its own faction; to which we may add, when the deluded Patient
cannot be persuaded he is Sick, and needs the Advice and help of the Physician:
How dangerous then, how desperate is the Case of a Political Body, when
Profaneness grows more Profane by Corruption and Correction; when those Rebukes
which should reclaim the Swearer, provoke him to Swear the more; which the
Prophet ( v. 5.) declares to have been the case of Judah, Why should ye be
stricken any more, ye will Revolt more and more?

This Observation I will endeavor to manage in this Method.

I. I will show when the Case of a People may be said to be deplorable, and
whence it is that their Corruptions became so incurable. II. What it is that
renders the Case of a People so deplorable, when their Corruptions are become
incurable. III. What may further be done (if any thing may be done) when a
Peoples Corruptions are become, or seem to become incurable? Which will lead us
to the Improvement of the whole.
I. When the Case of a People may be said to be Deplorable, and whence it is
that their Corruptions become so incurable.
(1.) The Corruptions of a People become incorrigible incurable by Inveterate
Custom: When Immoralities by long standing have taken deep root, as a green
Wound by neglect grows into an old obstinate Ulcer: Verecunda sunt scelerum
initia; the first beginnings of Profaneness are a little modest; but frequent
Practice renders it impudent. As long custom in Sin takes away the sense of it
in the Conscience, so it takes away the shame of it before Men. Those Impieties
which once sought the Twy-light, nay the Midnight, in process of time will
face the Sun, and defy the Midday. That Text 1 These. 5.7. The that are Drunk,
are Drunk in the Night, was calculated for another Meridian than that of
Jerusalem; for Men would then dare to be Drunk in the open Day; of which the
Prophet complains, Isa. 3.9. The show of their Countenance does witness against
them, they declare their Sin as Sodom, they hide it not. And the Prophet
Jeremiah bewails the same Audaciousness of Sinners, Ier. 8.15. Were they
ashamed when they had committed Abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed,
neither could they blush: Their Consciences were Steeled, and their Faces were
Case hardened; they had lost all sense of Sin in their own Souls, and all shame
of it before the World; and that Man, that People, which have lost all Shame,
are utterly lost as to any hope of Reformation.

Those Sins which at their first appearance would humbly plead for some
mitigation of Punishment, when they are Fleshed, and Flushed with long usage
will insist upon justification of themselves, and their plea is from
prescription.

Those Immoralities which might easily have been crushed in the Egg, when time
has hatched them, will break out into a Cockatrice: Those sparks which might
with ease have been stifled; by Neglect and Connivance will become a Flame, and
defy all our Engines. The first breakings in of the Sea, may be soon stopped,
but when it has gotten head, will not be reduced without great Labor, and
Charge, if it will be reduced by them.

(2.) The Universality of the overspreading Corruption renders the Case yet
more deplorable if not desperate. As when the Pestilence first appears, the
shutting up of one infected House, may probably secure thousands, but if it
once becomes Epidemical; when it has invaded a whole City, when the Sound are
not able to govern the Infected, and perhaps its not known who are Sound, who
are Infected, and so a promiscuous Conversation is allowed, or cannot be
hindered, the Case is then Hopeless and Desperate.

Now in the Case of universal Degeneracy, if we attempt a Reformation, it must
either be by Advice and Reproof, or Punishment: But 1. Reproof and Counsel give
us little hope; because the Corrupt Majority will easily scorn the mildest
advice, and sharpest Reproof of the Sounder few: Which was the wretched Case of
Sodom. Genesis 19.4. The Men of Sodom compassed the House, both old and young, all
the People from every quarter. Here was a City universally Debauched, all Ages,
all Quarters were involved in the common Villainy, and when Lot ventured to
reprove them mildly, alas! too mildly; for his expedient was the same they use
at Rome, and upon the same ground, who allow or tolerate the Stews to prevent a
greater Evil. Now observe what success his Counsel had upon these obstinate
Wretches, v. 9. They said stand back; and they said again, this one Fellow came
to sojourn, and he will be a Judge; now will we deal worse with thee than with
them: Whence you may easily note, I. That they thought it a justifiable Plea,
that there was but one single Reprover against multitudes of Transgressors: And
a single Reformer may as well hope to Stemm the Tide with his strength, or to
repel the Wind with his own breath, as to shock an universal Deluge of
prevailing Abominations. 2. That the Corrupt Majority instead of submitting to
the Reproofs of the Minority, will rather punish the Reprovers: Now will we
deal worse with thee than with them. 3. That the greater Number will defend it
self well enough by keeping out of the way of Conviction, for they that have
too little Grace to Reform themselves, will have so much wit to keep out of the
reach of the Means of Reformation; if they can but keep themselves secure from
the Magistrates Warrant being served upon their Persons, they will keep
themselves safe from the Warrant of Gods Word ever being served upon their
Consciences:

2d. Nor Secondly can we hope for much success where the Wickedness is
universal from legal Punishment, because the Punishing the diffusive Body,
would be next to the depopulating a whole Nation: Sinners defend each other by
their Numbers, being closely united in a common Confederacy against God, and
their own Souls. They are like the Scales of the Leviathan, Job 41.15, 16.
Whose Scales are his Pride, shut up together as with a close Seal; one is so
near another that no Air can come between them; they are joined one to another,
they stick together that they cannot be sundered: Which was the Observation of
the Satyrist: Defendit numerus, janctaeque umbone phalanges. Juven.

(3.) That which renders this Universal and Inveterate Profaneness more
incurable, is when its patronized by great Examples; for as Holy Bernard
observes, Men will go, non qua eundum, sed qua itur, not which way God commands
them, but which way their Superiors Examples lead them:

If the Master will Swear, the Servant thinks he has a good Warrant for his
Swearing: If a Minister will Drink, his Hearers will be Drunk: If a Magistrate
will Profane the Lord's Day, the People will quote his Example, and justify
their practice by it; for they live by Precedent, not Precept.

The scandalous Sins of Superiors carry in them both a strong Temptation to,
and a plausible Justification of those Sins. A Strong Temptation; because most
Men, whose hearts are not established with Grace, nor possessed with the fear
of God, besides the humor of sinful compliance, and accommodating themselves
to the Vanities of great Men, do study to insinuate themselves into their
favor, in hopes of some notable Advantage by their Obsequiousness. Thus Haman
when a great Honor was but once mentioned by Ahasuerus, Esth. 6.6. said in his
heart, To whom would the King delight to do honor more than to my self? for
having wrought himself into the King's affections he concluded that the first
Preferment which fell, would certainly drop into his Mouth. And so also it
affords a fair Justification, Shall I be Wiser than my Teachers? Holier than my
Governors? More Precise than my Betters? May-I not go as near the brink of the
Pit and never fall in, as my Superiors? Shall I be a ^recisian when the
Grandees are Latitudinarians? Can I think there can be Poison in that Dish that
comes from my Lord's Table? And why should I be stiff, and morose, when he that
affrights me from Sin by his Preaching, invites me to it by his Example? Let us
never dream that Reformation will make any considerable progress in a
degenerate Age, till God shall send us Holy Magistrates, who by their Regular
Examples shall invite us to Reform, as well as by the secular Arm, punish those
that Transgress. For 1. How is it possible that Person should heartily punish
an Offender for that Crime of which his own Conscience accuses him to be
guilty, Romans 2.1. For when he judges another he condemns himself, for doing
the same thing. 2. But if the Law obliges him to punish an Offender under a
severe Penalty to himself, which he would not willingly incur, and yet he
cannot fairly avoid: His partiality will teach him to invent a thousand
Evasions, either by brow beating the Witness, or finding some flaw in the
Evidence, or some creep-hole in the Law, so that all endeavors for ^eformation
shall be defeated, and made ineffectual.


(4.) That which renders Debauchery incorrigible, is to Punish it, merely as a
violation of a Human Law.

The Authority of God is infinitely greater than that of any Human Legislator,
and so does His Threatenings carry a greater Terror, and strikes a greater Awe
upon the Conscience: If therefore we wave the Divine Authority in the
Preceptive part, and conceal the Divine Sanction in the Comminatory part, the
Offender has no more to contend with than the Authority of Man, and what
Punishments he can devise and inflict.

The great end of Human Laws for Reformation of Offenses against the Moral Law,
is to apply the Law of God, and set it home by Punishment upon the Conscience.

Suppose we would lay the Penalty of the Law upon one that profaneth the Lord's
Day, in the mean time denying the Morality of the fourth Commandment, what a
slender Business should we make of it? He that denis the Ius Divinum, does in
effect repeal the Ius Humanum too, for thus the Transgressor argues: If I can
either escape the Temporal Penalty by secrecy; or satisfy the Law by a poor
Mulct, I need not tremble at the future Judgment, or that I shall stand before
the Tribunal of God for the breach of a Law, which is not immediately his own.

The Apostle therefore in that great Question about Subjection to the higher
Powers, charges it upon the Souls of Men, Romans 13.5. Ye must needs be subject
not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake: That is, you are under an
Obligation to obey not only on the account of what Man can threaten or inflict,
but out of Conscience of the Authority which God has over you, and that
dreadful Penalty which he can lay upon you.

And thus in a few particulars I have showed whence it is that National
Corruptions become so incorrigible, 1. From Inveterate Customs. 2. Universality
of the Contagion. 3. The Patronage of great Examples. 4. That Humane Laws are
not seconded and backed by the Law of God.

II. What is it that renders the Case of a People so deplorable when their
Corruptions are become incurable?
(1.) It looks very black upon a People when Profaneness grows very
incorrigible, and scorns to obey the proper Remedies, because God will soon be
weary of using further means to Reform them, and leave them to their own
crooked and perverse inclinations.

It Is the saddest Threatenings when God will threaten no more: the forest
Punishment, when God will Punish no more: And though the Debauched World could
be content, that he would spare both, and let 'em alone, they will soon find it
had been their true Interest to have continued under his Discipline, and
reclaiming Methods than to have been left to themselves, and their own foolish
ways.

Let us consult that terrible Word: Hosea 4.1, 2, 3, 4. The Lord has a
Controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land, because there is no Truth, nor
Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the Land, By Swearing, and Lying, and Killing,
and Stealing, they break out, and Blood touches Blood; therefore shall the
Land mourn, etc. This is terrible, but the most terrible Judgment is that of
the 17 th v. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. It Is as if a Surgeon
when he sees an inveterate Ulcer become obstinate, and will submit to no
Remedies, should say, What my Art could promise or perform is done, but I see
my skill is baffled, my patience wearied, my hope defeated, and the gangrened
part must be cut off, or the Patient perish.

Whilst God will practice upon a People, there is some hope of a blessed Issue
at last: But if once he throws up his Care, we may throw up the hopes of a
Cure; and God is pleased sometimes to express himself, as if he despaired of
effecting a thoro' Cure, Isa. 1.5. Why should you be smitten any more, ye will
revolt more and more? All my Blows are but like those upon the Anvil, which
make it still harder: And this was the desperate Case of Israel, Ps. 81.11, 12.
My People would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me, so I gave
them up to their own hearts Lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels. How
dreadful then is the Case of a People when God shall cease to inflict Temporal
Judgments, and leave them to their own Hearts Lusts and Ways, which is the
greatest of Spiritual Judgments, and the forerunner of Eternal Judgments.

(2.) The Case is Deplorable when God's own Servants, whom He imploys as his
Instruments to Reform the Degenerate Age, shall meet with those
Discouragements, that they are ready to throw it up as desperate.

And to this pass have the Prophets been reduced, Jer. 20.8. I cried out
Violence and Spoil, because the Word of the Lord was made a Reproach to me, and
a Derision daily. Then I said: I will not make mention of Him, nor speak any
more in His Name. When the Word of the Lord, the Preaching of it, and the
Preachers of it shall become a Derision; when Sinners are got into the Chair of
the Scornful, they can rise no higher: And when the Ministers of that Word
shall resent this Treatment so tenderly that they resolve to Preach no more,
and their Faith can sink no lower, what must the end of these Things be?

I would willingly look upon it as a Token for Good from God, that he has
raised up such Instruments, who out of Zeal to his Interest, have laid out
themselves with unwearied Diligence to reduce the Profane to some tolerable
Consistency with the Profession of the Christian Religion, but if we should see
them despond, their hearts faint and fail within them, because little or no
success answers their pious endeavors, and to hear them cry out, Lord what
would thou have us further to do? For Ps. 11.3. If the foundations be
destroyed, what can the Righteous do? Why surely no more than, good
Fehoshaphat, 2 Chro. 20.12. We know not what to do, but our Eyes are toward
thee: Either to tell us what thou would have us do, or because we can do
nothing more, to take thy Work out of our Hands into thy own and do it, who
only can do it effectually thy self.

The Servants of Christ are sometimes reduced to that extremity to which the
Mariners were, Acts 27.15. When the Ship was caught, and could no longer bear
up into the Wind, we let her drive: We may conceive the Master of the Vessel
speaking to his Passengers thus, Friends, I had hoped to have weathered this
Storm, but I can do no more, and must now commit our selves and the Vessel, to
the merciless Mercy of the Winds, and Waves, and let her run a Drift! Such is
the Language of some of Christ's faithful Servants in the Work of Reformation;
Holy Lord, thou have sent us forth upon thy Work: No sooner were we Lanched out
into the Deep, but a sore Tempest fell upon us: We have labored against the
Wind with what Skill and Resolutiion thou gave us: But we are overset, and
now commit the Church, that Vessel, in which all thy concerns in this World are
ventured, to thy own Conduct: Yet will we not utterly give out, but in hope
labor against hope, leaving the issue of all to thy Holy Will, and Wisdom: The
Vessels are thine, thy Concerns are in it, it cannot totally be Ship-wreck'd;
howsoever we will not use the expedient of the CockBoat, Except we abide in the
Ship we cannot be saved.

(3.) And it speaks the Case more Hazardous, and as to Humane Reason desperate,
when the wise God has run through a Course of Means to Reform a Nation, and yet
the symptoms are as Threatening as ever, so that God is pleased to speak as if
he were at a loss what further to do for their Reformation. Hos. 6.4. O
Ephraim, what shall I do to thee? O Judah, what shall I do to thee? I have
proved thee with Mercies, I have tried thee with Judgments, with War and Peace,
with Plenty, with Scarcity. When I indulged thee abundance of Corn, and Wine,
and Oil: It was perverted into Luxury, Riot, Wantonness: When I humbled thee
with a little Scarcity, nothing was heard but Repining and Murmuring: When I
let loose upon thee a dreadful War, thou would not make Peace with thy God.
When I restored Peace, thou still maintained a War with Heaven: The Drunkard
would be a Drunkard still, both in Peace and War: The Swearer would Swear still
whether in a Storm or a Calm: Though God changed his Providence, they were
uniform in their Provocations, so that it came at last to a Trial, whether
Mercy and Judgment, or Sin and Profaneness should have the Victory: Lev. 26.23.
we read there of a People that walked contrary to God in all his Ways: and as
they thwarted him in all his, He crossed them in all theirs: and it came at
last to this push: If they would act Seven times more contrary to him, he would
try if he could not yet act Seven times more contrary to them: And certainly
the Case must be deplorable when the Question shall be, Whether Sinners can be
more potent in Sinning, or God in Punishing? 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the
Lord to Jealousy, are we stronger than he? It was excellent Counsel that
Solomon has given, Eccles. 6.10. That none should be so Foolhardy as to
contend with one more mighty than himself: And our B. Savior, Luke 14.31.32.
lays it down for an infallible Maxim: That when a King goes forth to make War
against another, he should first sit down, and consult whether he be able to
meet him mith Ten Thousand that comes against him with Twenty Thousand: It
deserves the consideration of all Sinners to advise well with themselves,
Whether Ten Thousand Sins will be able to stand against Twenty Thousand
Judgments; and whether it be not more advisable, whilst God is yet afar off, to
beg Conditions of Peace, to send God a Blank that he may prescribe his own
Terms? for how will the Chaff contend with the Whirlwind, or the dried Stubble
with the consuming Fire?

(4.) The Case of a People is deplorable ^ when Profaneness is incorrigible,
and Religion toward God fails, because all Faithfulness toward Man fails also:
If Conscience toward God ceases, Confidence among Men will expire: For
Religion is the Foundation of all secure Converse, all Safe-dealing in the
World. Him whom the Bonds of Divine Fear will not hold, nor Covenants, nor
Contracts with his Neighbor, will hold; He that breaks with God, breaks with
all the World.

Suppose we that a Man makes no Conscience of taking Gods Name in vain, but by
Swearing, Vain-Swearing, False-Swearing, profanes that Holy Name of his God,
shall any one persuade me to believe that he makes a scruple of Murder,
Adultery, Stealing, bearing False Witness; can I be so vain as to think he will
be true to his Neighbor that is false to his Creator? The Prophet, Hos. 4.2.
gives this as the Reason why there was no Truth in the Land, because there was
no Knowledge of God in the Land.

This Doctrine Abraham was not afraid to justify to the King of Gerar's face,
Genesis 20.11. I thought surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they
will kill me. And his thought was reasonable, that where there was no awe of
God upon the Conscience, such Profligates would boggle at nothing.

We may easily admit, that some extrinsick obligation may hold a Man, where the
fear of God has no hold upon his heart: He may perhaps accept a Bill drawn upon
him by consulting with his Reputation: Perhaps a double Bond may advise him to
make payment of the Debt, because he dreads the Forfeiture: Yet could he be
assured the Bond were lost or burnt, or the Witnesses dead, you should soon see
that no Religion bound him, and he would put the Creditor upon the proof of the
Specialty; and, if he can evade the Law of Man, he will easily give himself a
Discharge in the Court of Conscience. The Psalmist cries out as in a desperate
Case, Psalm. 12.1. Help, Lord, for the Godly Man cease, the Faithful fail from
among the Children of Men: Where Godliness, and the godly Man cease,
Faithfulness and Faithful Men will fail; that is, where the Duties of the First
Table are not regarded, there will be as little respect to those of the Second.

Psalm. 14.1. The Fool has said in his heart, there is no God: And the next
tidings you hear of our Atheist is, They are Corrupt, they have done abominable
Works; there is none that does good, no not one. If once this flood-gate be
plucked up to let Atheism in, Principle, and Practice; a deluge of all Treachery
and Falsehood breaks in with it: And as we may argue from the cause to the
effect: If that unjust Judge fears not God, he regards not Man, Luke 18.2. So
may we from the effect to the cause, where there is no faithfulness to Man,
there is no fear of God, Ps. 36.1. The transgression of the Wicked says within
my heart, There is no fear of God before his eyes.

(5.) I add one account more: It Is a deplorable Case when Profaneness is grown
incorrigible, because God seems angry with his own Instruments of Reformation.

It frowns most sadly upon a People that God should send his Servants about his
own Work, and yet not be with them in their Work; and they are ready to argue:
Surely we have done the Lord's Work negligently, because we have done it so
unsuccessfully. If the Lord did send us, why is he not powerfully with us? If
he be not with us, why did he send us?

God's Dealings with his Servants in the Success and Reward of their Service is
very mysterious, and that on these accounts: 1. God is angry with his Servants
when they refuse to go when he calls, and sends them; and yet sometimes he
seems angry too, though they do go at his call and sending: If at least we may
judge him angry by Interpretation and Construction, when he succeds them not in
the thing he sends them about. Exodus 4. God calls, and sends Moses to bring
Israel out of Egypt: Moses, whether from a sense of his own unmeetness for the
Work, or apprehension of the Danger of the Service, makes many excuses; one
while he pleads his own Insufficiency, another time that there was some other
Person better qualified for the Work: And though God refutes all his
Objections, yet still he is loath to engage, till v. 14. the anger of the Lord
was kindled against him: Well! At last he Addresses himself courageously to the
Service, and yet v. 24. It came to pass, by the way in the Inn, the Lord met
him, and sought to kill him. Mysterious Providence! The Lord is angry when his
Servant would not go, and God is more angry when he goes. But let us know that
God will have his own work done in his own way. Moses is sent upon an Errand of
Reforming others, but Moses must first Reform his own Family. Could he be a
meet Person to bring Israel into Covenant, when his own Children were out of
Covenant? Let it give a serious Caution to all of us: The Lord will be
sanctified in all that draw nigh unto him, Levit. 10.3. And if he be not
sanctified in our hearts, he will be glorified upon the Heads.

2. It Is a mysterious Providence that God should reward his Servants for their
work, when he denis them success in it.


Isa. 49.4. Then I said I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for
naught, and in vain, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my Work with
my God. Here are two things that may bear up the Spirtis of God's Servants in
undertaking and prosecuting his Work, whatever the success be.

1. Their Judgment is with the Lord. Man shall not be their Judge, and their
God will judge them, not by the success of their Labors, but the integrity of
their hearts in undertaking, and prosecuting it. 2. Their Work is with their
God. That Labor of Love, That Work of Faith, wherein they have laid out
themselves is with God, it lies before him, is laid up with him; it shall not
be lost; its gone before them to the Throne; it shall follow after them to
Judgment; it shall meet them in the day of recompense. And this is their great
encouragement to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the
Lord, knowing that their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.
III. I am now come to the Third and and Last Inquiry, What may be further done
(if any thing may yet be done) when inveterate Corruptions, universal
Degeneracy seems to have made the Evils incurable: And this has brought me to
The APPLICATION.
Brethren!

I address my self to you, whom our gracious God, in Mercy to a Sinful Nation,
has raised up, and distinguished by a Spirit of Holy Zeal to appear against, and
give some check to the daring Spirit of Profaneness which has overspread the
Land; Iniquity is come in like a flood, and God has lifted up a Standard
against it, Isa. 59.19.

We see you laboring against great oppositions, and under great
discouragements from those Oppositions, and you may justly complain with the
Prophet: Ier. 6.28, 29. They are grievous Revolters, walking with Slanders,
they are Brass and Iron, they are all corrupters, the Bellows are burnt, the
Lead is consumed of the Fire, the Founder melts in vain, for the Wicked are
not plucked a way.

Now as I pray that God would strengthen your hearts, so I will endeavor to
strengthen your hands, and for this great end do exhort you.

1. To look inwards to your own Hearts. 2. To look up toward your Faithful
God. 3. To look outward to your Discouragements. 4. To look upwards again to
the Divine Encouragements.
I. Let me entreat you to look into your own hearts, and when you have narrowly
made a Scrutiny there, and found all right within, or set that right which was
wrong, you may more comfortably look upwards to your God, and more courageously
outward upon all the Oppositions and Discouragements, you shall meet with in
your Blessed Work, from this wretched World.
.1. Look inwards narrowly, search your Hearts severely, whether they be right
with God, and for God; that is, whether the Honor of God be the great
commanding end which governs you in this great Undertaking? Whether this be
the main Spring, the first wheel that gives motion to all your Actions: Though a
good end will not justify an evil Actions, yet an evil End will pollute and
spoil a good one.

The best Heart, like the best VVatch, has need to be often set right, and
besure you set 'em both right by the Sun, and not by the example of other Men's
Dials. And though I hope you did once set them true when you entered upon this
good Work, yet examine them whether they have not gone wrong in the prosecution
of it.

The heart of Man is an intricate Labyrinth, and without the Clew of Divine
Directions, we may easily lose ourselves, lose our way, lose our God, and the
works that we have wrought in the many windings, and turnings, the secret
recesses that are in it. When therefore you have searched your selves, while
you are searching, and before you search, lift up David's Prayer, Ps. 139.23,
24. Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me, know my thoughts, and see if
there be any evil way in me, and lead me in the Way that is everlasting.

. 2. Look again inwards, and examine your selves strictly, whether in
subordination to the glory of God, you desire, design, and pursue in this good
Work the Prosperity and flourishing Estate of your Native Country?

It was the glory of Nehemiah, though it was to the Regret of his malignant
Enemies; That there was a man come, a man to seek the Welfare of the Children
of Israel, Nehem. 2.10. Do you proceed upon this generous Principle! Knowing
that Righteoosness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a shame to any People, Prove.
14.34.

Righteousness infuses Courage and Gallantry into a People; but Debauchery
makes 'em Cowards, Effeminates, Enervales, Dispirits them: A good Conscience is
the best shield for a great Confidence. Prove. 24.1. The Wicked flee when none
pursues; but the Righteous are bold as a lion: And though the Spirit of Wine
may inspire some Men with a huffing, hectoring, a blaspheming Valor, yet these
Debauchers, that dare God to his face, will turn their backs upon an armed Man:
Holiness renders a People truly Honorable; but Profaneness stains and
tarnishes all their Glory, renders them despicable in the eyes of judicious
Persons, Deuteronomy. 4.7. What People is there so great, who has God so nigh unto
them in all things that we call upon him for: Holiness makes a Nation wise, for
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, a good understanding have all
they that do his Commandments, Ps. 111.10. But Wickedness makes it little,
foolish, silly, and ridiculous, and to make no Figure in the World. There is
nothing a Nation should be more ambitious of, than to outwit their subtle
Enemies, to countermine all their Politics, and it is Holiness that infuses
this holy Policy, 119. 98. Through thy Commandments thou have made me Wiser than
my Enemies.

Let this Ambition therefore fill your Sails to recover the Glory of a Nation,
which Wickedness has eclipsed: To restore the Valor of the Nation, which
Profaneness has baffled, by the vigorous Suppressing that which is the Reproach
of any People.

. 3. Examine your selves further in this your Work. Have you cordially espoused
the Interest of Christ in opposition to that of the wicked one, and the wicked
World?

There are two great Interests which divide the World: That of Christ and
Holiness, that of the Devil and Profaneness. These two have been contending
from the beginning, and whatever the specious pretenses have been, all the
Wars, all the Contentions that have been managed ever since, were nothing but
the Bickerings and Skirmishes of that old enmity put between the two Seeds,
Genesis 3.15.

These Interests can never be reconciled, Christ glories in the Title of a
Savior, and the Devil in that of a Murderer and Destroyer: The Enmity of
Satan is founded in this; he hates Holiness, he envys the happiness of Immortal
Souls, he therefore hates Christ whose design it is to save those Souls, and to
deliver them out of his paws. The Enemy understands thoroughly his true
Interest, and can never be mistaken in it: Namely; to draw over to his Interest
poor deluded Souls, wherein, though he cannot hope to mitigate his own Torments
by the multitudes of those he draws to Hell with him, yet he takes some
pleasure in the Revenge he supposes to have got upon Christ, by robbing him of
the Glory of Saving Sinners. Wonder not then that he is so unwearied in going
up and down seeking whom he may Seduce, for those whom he seduces he devours.

His Interest therefore lies in the wicked World, and in the wickedness of the
World. For the whole World lies in Wickedness, (...), which may be rendered,
The whole World lies in the Devil: Or the whole World as degenerated and gone
off from God, has espoused the interest of the wicked One.

Set therefore your hearts true and right in this particular, to suppress that
of the Devil, and to Advance the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ; and let not
your Zeal transport you against Men, but against Sin; not against their
Persons, but their Wickedness, the wickedness of the World, and that wicked
One.

. 4. Look once more into your Hearts; and examine whether that Reformation
which you would carry on abroad, be begun, and proportionably carried on in
your own Hearts, and Houses: That so you may give a good example of that
Reformation, to which you would draw others.

Assure your selves you will never be able to look the Magistrate in the face,
before whom you shall appear; nor the Offender in the face when he stands as a
Delinquent before the Magistrate; nor Conscience in the face when you shall
view your selves in that glass; nor God, in the face before whom you must give
an account of what you have done for him, as well as what you have done against
him, if it may be Retorted upon you. Physician heal thy self, before thou
pretendest to heal others: Look therefore into your own hearts, into your own
Conversations: Look into your Families, to your Children and Servants, begin
your Reformation at home, and let David's Rule and Resolution be yours: Psalm.
101.2. I will behave my self Wisely in a perfect Way, I will walk in the midst
of my House with a perfect Heart. Read that whole Psalm, and it will fully
convince you, that the Psalmist was not only a Reforming King over Reformed
Subjects: But a Reforming Master of a Reformed Family.

II. Let me now encourage you to look upwards: which you may now comfortably
and confidently do, when you have faithfully and impartially inspected your own
hearts: And
. 1. When you look up to God on high, lie very low, and be humbled that God
has sent you about so excellent a Work, his own Work, and yet crowned your
Endeavors with so slender Success: The Wicked will still do wickedly: It is an
amazing Dispensation that he should so little prosper a Work so good in it
self, of so great Concern to his own glory, and wherein the Interest of our
Lord Jesus does so eminently lie: But yet I admire more that Divine Grace which
has spirited you with so generous a Principle, so noble Zeal that you could go
out, and still go on in the mere conscience of your duty toward God, expecting
your Recompense from him alone, whatever the success shall be.

. 2. Look up again to him, and bless his Name that he has honored you in
calling you to this Service, fitting you in some good measure for it, and given
some success in it: You will say, Alas! it is but little: Account it so, and
God will have you account it little till you have reformed the whole Nation,
till all Impiety shall hide its face, and stop its mouth: But however little
the success of your Pious Endeavors shall be, it has this great Thing in it,
That God graciously accepts and approves of your Work, and has put his Seal to
it: Thus Christ owned the Service of her, Mar. 14.6. Let her alone! why trouble
ye the Woman, she has done what she could. This was the excellent temper of
that holy Man's Spirit, Ezra 9.6, 8. O my God I am ashamed, and blush to lift up
my face to thee my God, for our iniquities are increased over our Heads, and
our Trespass is gone up to the Heavens; yet now for a little space Grace has
been showed us from the Lord our God, to have a Remnant to escape, and to give
us a nail in his Holy Place, that our God may lighten our eyes.

Keep it therefore settled upon your hearts, that God's Gleanings are better
than the Devil's Vintage; God's first Fruits, than his Harvest, and Christ's
small Remnant more precious than his vast multitudes.

. 3. Lift up your eyes, your hands, your voice, your hearts to God in the
Heavens, in most servent believing Prayer; and give me leave to recommend these
few Things as proper materials to fill up your Prayer.

1. Pray earnestly that God would strengthen your Hearts and Hands against all
discouragements you may meet with in this difficult Service: You shall find God
more able to encourage, than the rage of Men and Devils is to discourage you:
if* he will be with you, and for you, no matter who is against you. David
argued thus, Ps: 41.11. By this I know that thou favour'st me, because my enemy
does not triumph over me. Either your Enemies shall not fight against you, or
if they will fight not conquer; or if they conquer, not triumph, or if they
seem to triumph, their triumph shall be short. He that would overcome the Devil
must first prevail with God: which was Holy Jacob's method, Genesis 32.28. who
first prevailed with the Angel, and then easily persuaded Esau: 2. Pray again,
and pray earnestly that God would put a Spirit of Zeal into the hearts of all
those into whose hands he has put Power and Authority. David's complaint will
suit your case, 2 Samuel 3. 39. I am this day weak, and these Men, the Sons of
Zerviah, are too hard for me. You have the Law of God, the Laws of Man for you,
and yet the Enemies of both, these Cursing, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking
Wretches, are in many instances too hard for you: But when it shall once please
the Lord to stir up the Magistrates more generally, and heartily to assist and
abet you, your work will be more easy. It is a serious Question, and not rashly
to be determined, Whether the Corruptions and Profanenesses, which abound at
this day, may be justly called National Sins? Of which I would give my Opinion
without any positive or peremptory Determination.

1. It is too evident to be denied, or excused, that there is a general
declining, of the Power of practical Religion; and an increase of Sin in one
kind or other, amongst all sorts of Men. 2. That it is thankfully owned that
our Legislators, by their good Laws against the most prevailing Abominations,
have acquitted themselves of the guilt of these Corruptions: All that the
Lawgivers can do, as they are such, and further they cannot go, than to appoint
proportionable Penalties for these Crimes, and to enjoin the Magistrates
respectively to put those Laws in due execution: So that we must acknowledge
they have approved themselves clear in this matter. 3. His Majesty, by many and
strict Proclamations, has charged the Magistrates to execute the Laws with
effect, and to proceed vigorously therein, so that the Guilt will not lie
there. 4. God has raised up a considerable number of faithful Magistrates, who
have appeared freely in this Service: Upon whom God will we hope put some
distinguishing mark of Honor as the Reward of their Zeal: For such as Honor
God will be honor, but they that despise him, shall be lightly esteemed. 5.
You that have engaged in these hopeful Societies for Reformation, have
contributed to prevent these Immoralities which are too much National by their
extent from becoming National by Guilt and Condemnation; not only by willingly
offering your selves as Assistants to the Magistrate; not only by crying to God
mighty to stir up Men fearing God, Men of Courage to help you, but by bearing
your open Testimonies against those Enormities which you are not able to
Suppress, or Redress.
3. Pray without ceasing, that God would pour out of his Spirit upon all
Ministers of his Word and Sacraments, that by their unwearied Labors the
consciences of the Profane may be strongly touched, and they brought to a sound
and saving Repentence: And I must say that in Praying for them, you Pray for
your selves.
This would supersede much of your great trouble, and give you a Writ of Ease
from the fatigues of your difficult Province, and I question not but you would
rejoice to see convinced Sinners converted, rather than to have the stubborn
punished: There is joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents, and the
rejoicing of Holy Ones on Earth would echo to theirs above, when the natures
of such are changed, more than their hands are restrained, and chained up by
Poenal Laws.

III. I shall not need to advise you to look outward to that Treatment you are
to expect from those Flagitious Ones, whose Crimes call for your most severe
Animadversion. I hope you have fate down and reckoned it up with your selves
what it might cost your before you entered upon, and engaged in this Work, yet
I will present you with a Bill of Fate of the Entertainment which I believe you
have found, and may further expect.
. 1. You will meet with a generation of Men, who though they have been emptied
from Vessel to Vessel, are yet settled upon their Lees. A sort of Sinners
represented to the Prophet in a Vision, Ez. 24.6. By a Pot which had long been
on the Fire, yet the scum remained in it: Of whom another Prophet speaks as a
generation of intractable and incorrigible Sinners, Ier. 6.28. They are all
grievous Revolters, walking with Slanders, they are Brass and Iron, they are
all Corrupters: Now of these he tells us how little could be hoped, v.29. The
Founder melts in vain: Let him make never so strong a blast, the Bellows
shall sooner be burnt than their flinty hearts be made fusile: Nay that they
will sooner be consumed themselves, than their scorious parts separated from
them: The Lead is consumed of the Fire.

The Prophet Isaiah, chapter 48. v. 4. acquaints you in what part the inflexible
Iron, and the incorrigible Brass does lie: I know that thou art obstinate; thy
Neck is an Iron Sinew, and thy Brow Brass. Now what success can you hope for
when you must practice upon such as these? Would you put the Yoke of Divine and
Humane Laws upon them? Their Neck is an Iron Sinew! The Sons of Belial will
never bend, or stoop to any Yoke; Or* do you fancy you may shame them out of
their scandalous Habits? No, their Brow is Brass. Upon these your Arguments and
Reasonings are all lost, and your more Rigid Methods thrown away.

. 2. Though your Work is your Honor, yet expect to be Reproached for it. You
shall be censured that it is a pragmatical Humor that engages you, popular
applause that fills your Sails; you would make a Figure, be some great thing in
the World* It Is your comfort that they who usurp a Judgment over you in their
Day, shall not be your Judges in the great Day, 1 Cor. 4, 5. It Is a very small
thing that I should be judged of you, or of Man's Judgment -- He that judges me
is the Lo^. And in this hard case I know not w^t you can obtend, but the Shield
of your own Integrity, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our Rejoicing is this, The Testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our
Conversation in the World.

3. Expect to be ridiculed by those who would pass for the Wits of the present
Age: Jesus Christ has not a more pernicious Enemy than unsactified Wit: Now
this sort of Men will dart many a sharp pointed Scoff at your Proceedings, and
the Success of them: Which may pierce as deep in some ingenious Breasts as the
ruder Blows of opprobrious Language: This went as near the Spirit of Holy Job,
and provoked his patience equally with mo^e rustical Entertainment, Job 17.2.
Are there not mockers with me, and does not mine eye continue in their
Provocation? Especially this affects the innocent Soul, when scorn is mixed
with a malicious Indignation, Psalm. 35.16. With hypocritical Mockers in Feasts
they gnashed upon me with their Teeth. And when Nehemiah came to Reform Matters
at Jerusalem, he could not escape the virulent insults of Tobiah, and S^ballat,
Nehem. 4.2, 3, 4. What will these feeble Jews do? Will they make an end in one
day? Even that which they build, if a Fox go up, he shall even break down their
stone Wall. Poor Reformers! What a stir do you make about your fanatic Models?
The edge of the Laws will soon be turned, and your own Zeal quickly cooled, and
then when the restraint of these Laws shall be a little relaxed, you will see
all things run in their Old Channels, and Nature for a while curbed, will
return with more eagerness to its own Inclinations; To all these, and a
thousand more of these Scoffs, you have nothing better to return than what they
then did, v. 4. Hear O God, for we are despised, and turn their Reproach upon
their own heads.

. 4. And may you not reasonably apprehend a Spirit of bitter and bloody Revenge
already boiling in the hearts of those whom the Laws have met withal in their
Exorbitancies? Some Sparks of that temper even now breaks out at the mouth of
the Furnace from when you may easily conjecture at the desperate Heat that
burns within: Do they not watch for your Haltings? And more narrowly observe
when you trip in any punctilio of the Law, than you do when they scandalously
fall, and lie wallowing in the Mire? Assure your selves, if you Record their
Convictions, they Register all the Errors of your Prosecutions, and only wait
for a happy day, and welcome juncture, when they may wreck their Malice upon
you: You have great need therefore, with the Psalmist, to pray, ( Ps. 5.8.)
Lord make thy ways straight before me, because of my Observers.

. 5. Nor is it a little part of your Discouragement, that upon the matter you
stand alone in this Work: Which was the sad Case of David, Ps. 94.16. Who will
rise up with me against the Wicked; who will stand up for me against the
Workers of Iniquity? But be not afraid with any Amazement, you are not alone,
for God is with you.

In a word: All the Dissolute and Flagitions are your declared Enemies: The
indifferent Gallio's, the Neuters in Religion, cannot be numbered amongst your
Friends: Whether you stand or fall, sink or swim, they are wholly unconcerned:
The Men of Politic Principles, know not yet whether they are for you, or
against you, the issue determines their Judgments; like those wary prudent
Ones, ( Esther 3.4.) who waited to see how Mordecai' s matters would stand: The
cooler sort of Professors are rather, of the two, for you than against you,
only the Sincere of all Persuasions and Denominations wish you good success in
the Name of the Lord, and God himself, who is more than all that are for you,
or against you, will be with you, and Bless you, and make you a Blessing.

IV. Give me so much more of your Patience, whilst I set before you the
Encouragements of God, against all these Discouragements, and I will conclude.
I. Let God's Call and Commission for your Work, afford you sufficient Courage
and Confidence against all the Discouragements of the Work: It Is a notable
evidence of Sincerity, when we go on in the way of our Duty, upon the security
of God's Authority, whatever Difficulties we meet with in the way, or how
little appearance of Success there may be in the end: Ezekiel. 2.6. Be not afraid
of them, neither be afraid of their words, though Briers and Thorns be with
thee, and thou do dwell among Scorpions; be not afraid of their words, nor be
not dismayed at their looks, though they be a Rebellious House. 2. When your
Fears begin to rise in your Hearts, act your Faith upon God: Fear arises from
the sense of your own Weakness, and the apprehension of your Enemies Power: But
Faith knows how to set the Strength of God against your own Weakness, and the
Strength of Enemies: Ps. 56.3. What time I am afraid, I will put my trust in
thee. 3. Let tender Compassion to Souls, that are destroying themselves, whet
your Zeal, if at any time the edge begins to turn; it would move Pity in the
Heart of any one to see how contemptuously the Devil insults over those Souls
he has got into his own power: 2 Timothy 2.26. They are taken Captive by him at
his will: As if he would adorn his Victory by dragging them behind his
Triumphant Chariot: Mark 9.22. He casts them into the Fire, and into the Water,
as if he would make sport with immortal Souls. Let this lamentable sight engage
all your Zeal to rescue them: Jude 21. Others save with fear, pulling them out
of the Fire. 4. Let the glorifying of God and your Redeemer be enough to
influence you to the highest Endeavors to promote it: You cannot sacrifice
your All to a more agreeable Object: Phil. 1.20. As always, so now also Christ
shall be magnified in my Body, whether it be by Life, or by Death. 5. If you
take the Counsels of God's Word, you shall certainly have its Comforts: Let the
Precepts Guide you, and the Promises shall Support you. Ps. 119.24. Thy
Testimonies are my Delight and my Counselors. 6. A good Conscience, and its
Testimony, will be responsible for all the Evil you may incur, all the Good you
may hazard or lose for the asserting it: This was the Apostles Practice of
Piety, Acts 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self always, to keep a Conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward Men. 7. Lastly. The Cause of God, the
Interest of Christ makes up a powerful Motive to the most difficult Duties, and
a sufficient Security against the strongest Temptations. Go on therefore,
Brethren, as you have begun, in no wise terrified by your Adversaries, and the
God of all Grace and Peace shall be with you. To whom be the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever.
Amen.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry.
MR. Pool's English Annotations in two Vol. Folio. The Works of the Reverend
Mr. Stephen Chenock, B.D. in two Vol. Folio.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, written by himself. Folio.

Mr. Lorimer's Apology for the Ministers, who subscribed only to the Stating of
the Truths and Errors in Mr. Williams's Book. In Quarto.

Mr. Lorimer's Remarks on Mr. Goodwin's Discourse of the Gospel, proving that
the Gospel Covenant is a Law of Grace, and answering the Objections to the
contrary. Quarto.

Mr. Samuel Slater's earnest Call to Family Religion, being the substance of
eighteen Sermons. Octavo.

Mr. Addy's Stenographia: Or, The Art of Shortwriting completed, in a far more
compendious way than any yet extant. Octavo. The Bible is also Printed in the
same Shorthand.

Mr. Nath. Taylor's Preservative against Deism. Octavo.

The Faithful Rebuke to a False Report, Octavo.

Vindication of the Faithful Rebuke against Mr. Lob. Octavo.

Mrs. Williams Funeral Sermon by Mr. Calamy. Octavo.

Mr. Showers Reformation Sermon. Octavo.

Mr. Williams's Reformation Sermon. Octavo.

Mr. Showers Funeral Discourses. Octavo.

Mr. Woodhouse's Sermon at Mrs. Papillons Funeral. 8vo.

Mr. Doolittle's Saints Convoy to, and Mansions in, Heaven, in two occasional
Discourses. Octavo.


