A VINDICATION OF THE Faithful Rebuke TO A False Report AGAINST The RUDE CAVILS
of The Pretended Defense.

Titus 1. 13 Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith.

Tum si quis est, qui Dictum in se inclementius, Existimavit esse, sie
existimet; Responsum, non Dictum esse, quia laesit prius.

Terent. Eunuch. Prolog. (...)
(...).
Arist. Rhet. 3. LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the
Poultrey, School.

To the Author of the Defense to the Late Report.
SIR,
IT IS somewhat a hard Case, that having just cause to complain, I must complain
to your Self of your Self, and make your own Conscience Chancellor in your
Cause, placing you upon the Bench, who in Justice ought to stand, and Plead at
the Bar.

But my Appeal will lie from your Self in the height and heat of Passion, to
your Self, when the ferment is a little dashed with due Reflection: From your
Self as Laccar'd all over with the (...), to your Self, when you shall think
fit to reassume your innate Ingenuity; of which benign Moments I can not wholly
Despair, because you must needs have some good Nature yet to spare, having
spent so little of it in your Defense: Now when I have done this, I have
nothing more to do, but to repose my Self in the Comfort of my own Innocence,
committing the Concerns of that Truth which I espouse and vindicate, to Him,
who has the greatest Interest in it.

. 1. And first I must seriously and sadly Complain that having given us. Rep.
p. 5. The Substance of the Gospel of Christ, the Ground and Foundation of our
Faith; for which you received a faithful Rebuke, that yet when you pretended a
Defense of your Report, you should not bestow one Word in Defense of your own
Gospel: Who will ever believe your Report in Matters of Fact, when you believe
not your own Gospel in Matters of Faith? And I assure you Sir! They who knew
your excellent skill at Fencing, and Defencing, did expect you should have been
the Defender of your own Faith; and wondered you should no better fortify your
own Frontiers, when you invaded another Territories: But such was the Method
of your Great Friend, religiously pursued two Years ago.

(1.) You cannot but remember, that the Rebuke Charged you, that out of the
Substance of your Gospel, you had quite expunged, Regeneration, Conversion,
Repentance, Holiness, Sanctification, a new Heart, new Obedience, and good
Works: And would not the Gospel look Meagre, Lean, and Consumptive, had our
Lord Jesus Christ left them out of his Gospel, as you have out of Yours? And
are these great Matters grown so inconsiderable with you now a Days, that they
must first be left out of your Religion, and then left to shift for themselves
as they can; to sink, or swim, without your least Care to Defend them?

(2.) It was charged upon that Scheme of yours, that it gave great and just
Cause of Suspicion to those who were of no Jealous Inclinations, that you had
utterly discarded Faith, from any concern in the Justification of a Sinner,
made it unnecessary to our Union with Christ, that so we might have an Interest
in his Righteousness, and only gave it a place in our escaping Wrath to come,
and having Everlasting Life.

Whoever pretends to give us the Substance of the Gospel, is obliged to give us
all the Essentials that Constitute it, and if you Cashier Faith from any Part
or Lot in Justification, which Christ, and his Gospel make so necessary to it,
your Draught is defective in an Essential Part, and then I may leave it you, to
Judge whether it can be any Religion at all.

I have ever thought this Point to contain the Venime, and Poison of all
Antinomianism: That a Sinner may be justified without Faith in Jesus Christ,
for if this be so: (...): Tell us where we may safely fix! How far we must go
back for the precise Moment of Justification; some send us as far as the Decree
of Election: Others are Content to bring it down as low as Christ's making
actual Satisfaction. And some will abate us three Days, and date it from
Christ's Resurrection, and others will reduce it, yet lower, to the Minute of
our Conception and Formation in the Womb; but take the rise where, and fix the
Moment when you please, if you conceive of Justification one Moment before our
Union with Christ by Faith, you may as well make it bear Date from any of the
other Epocha's which the Teeming Imaginations of Antinomian Brains have
invented.

I know not therefore how to believe you in what you say. Defense, p. 85. That
the Reporter about seventeen Years ago wrote against Antinomianism: For most
certain it is, that either the Reporter is not the same Man that wrote that
Book; or is not the same Man he was when he wrote the Book: Either you was not
the Author, or you are Metamorphosed into a Reporter: Heu, quantum mutatus ab
illo Hectore! What a lamentable Commutation of Persons is here made, from a
Hyperaspistes of Truth, into a Hector for the Antinomian Errors: So easy is
the Conversion of a Hector into a Ranter! I will therefore charitably undeceive
you, and plainly Convince you, that you was not, whatever you Fancy; no, you
was not the Author of that honest Book: Display, Epist. The first Work of a
Minister of the Gospel, is to Preach up Repentance toward God, and then Faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ: Your Gospel Minister was then to Preach up
Repentance, but now he must Preach it down; then he must Preach it first, but
now he must Preach it neither first nor last. Then it was in the Ministers
Commission, now its left out of the Gospel: Again! Every Elect Soul while under
the Power of Unbelief, and other Lusts is Unpardoned, and in a State of
Condemnation; whence notwithstanding your Election, if you would receive actual
Pardon, you must go to God through Christ for it: Nay you must receive Christ
in your Heart by Faith; and that you may, we must beseech you as in Christ's
stead, that you come unto Christ, but come unto Christ, you cannot without
Faith and Repentance.

Now Sir! I appeal to your own Conscience; do you, can you believe that you
wrote the Display, when you read your own Report? That you were the Author of
these two inconsistent Pieces? Is it possible you should know your own Face,
when you see it in such different Glasses? I hope, I may use your own Words,
and say, O Blessed Change! Repentance is necessary to Pardon, Faith to
Justification in the one; but no News to be heard of either of them for those
Ends in the other: So that you fall under the Censure of Origin, Ubi been, Nemo
melius: Ubi male, Nemo pejus.

(3.) You cannot but remember Sir! That in your Substance of the Gospel you
affirmed, that it was our State, and Condition by Nature to be under the Curse
of the Law, and destitute of a Righteousness to entitle us to Eternal Life: And
that therefore Christ put himself into our State and Condition. Now hence it
was argued against you, and your Scheme: That if it was our State and Condition
to be destitute of a Righteousness: And that Christ put himself into our State
and Condition; then Christ must be destitute of a Righteousness also: And then
how Christ should give us a Title to Eternal Life by his Righteousness, when he
had none, I could not then, nor can I yet understand: And yet you Reply to this
with a Profound and Prudent Silence.

(4.) It was further Objected against your Systeme of the Gospel: That therein
you asserted, That we were Sin; and hereupon it was modestly asked: How are we
Sin? That we are Sinners is acknowledged; that we are sinful is bewailed, that
we are under the Curse, and Condemnation of the Law for Sin, is Confessed; but
why must it be thus Phrased? We are Sin? We are not Sin, in the same Sense that
Christ was made Sin; that is, a Sacrifice for Sin, nor was Christ Sin in the
same Acceptance that we are, for then he must be sinful; a Sinner, nay the
greatest Sinner that ever was in the World. We do freely, thankfully, and with
astonishment believe, that he was made Sin for us; that he bore the Curse of
the violated Law due to our Sins: And that this is so expressly the Language of
the Scripture, that he who denies the former, must disbelieve the latter. And
here Sir, I have another Demonstration, that you was not, could not be the
Author of Free Grace displayed, whatever you Dream, for that Orthodox piece: p.
38. Vehement concludes that there was no Spot in Christ. But of this you may
hear further in due Time, and proper Place.

And now Sir, I renew, and prosecute my Appeal to your own Conscience, to your
own Ingenuity, and whatever there is yet left in you of Humanity and Learning;
whether you was not obliged in your Defense, to have Defended the Substance of
your Gospel, which you gave us as the Ground and Foundation of our Faith, and
by Consequence of all our Hopes of Eternal Life; for he that is wrong in the
Foundation can never be right in the Superstructure; or would you be as
unnatural as the Ostrich which leaves her Eggs in the Earth, and forgets
that the Foot may crush them, or that the wild Beast may break them, she is
hardened against her Young Ones, as though they were not hers, Job 39. 14, 15.

. 2. I must further, and grievously Complain of you even to your Self; that
whereas it was then, as it is now again, fairly proposed to you; whether does
this Phrase of Christ's taking on him the Person of Sinners signify more, or
less than his taking on him our Sins, and Suffering in our Place and Stead; or
does it signify neither more nor less, but is just Adequate with it, and
Commensurate to it: This was a Modest Question, and would have reduced that
disputable Phrase to a determinate Sense, to a certain Meaning: And then we
might have made a Judgment, whether it might with safety be entertained, or
otherwise fairly, and civilly dismissed. And there was Reason expressly
assigned, why the Question was so earnestly Pressed: For if that Phrase
signifies less, then it narrows the great Ends of Christ's Sufferings, and will
only serve the turn of a Socinian: If it signifies more, then it leads us into
the Dregs of Antinomianism; but if it signifies neither more nor less than
Christ's Suffering in our Place and Stead, when he offered himself a Sacrifice
to God, we embrace and subscribe it with our whole Heart, and Soul.

Now good Sir! Was not this a Reasonable Motion? Would you have us subscribe
Phrases we understand not? And is it not equal, that you who so confidently
Propose, nay so vigorously Impose them upon us should first explain them? And
would not this have put an End to the Debates and Disputes upon this Subject?
For if you will once secure us, that by Christ's taking on him the Person of
Sinners; you intend thus much, and no more than that Christ in his Sufferings
offered himself up to God as a Sacrifice to Gods Justice, to satisfy for our
Sins, tho we are not so overfond of the Phrase, yet being secured in the
Orthodox Meaning, we could and would have complied. But if indeed you intend to
perpetuate Controversies: Or if you find it your Interest to Eternize Quarrels:
Or if you feared that the hopeful Trade of scribbling Reports would hereby be
totally Ruined, I Will never blame you, that you would not afford a few gentle
words to determine an Easy Question: So Cheaply and Honorably you might have
worn the Title of an Industrious Pacificator, whereas you must now carry the
Brand of an Industrious Vitilitigator.

I have Great and Weighty Reasons why I have been, and am still, so Importunate
with you to Fix the Meaning of these Phrases: A Commutation of Persons between
Christ and Sinners. And the other, Christ's suffering in the Person of Sinners.
And because I will gratify you in what I am able, I will here freely impart
them to you.

1. One Reason is, because this August Phrase of A Commutation of Persons
between Christ and Sinners, has been so miserably Debauched, that it must bring
good Vouchers and Compurgators, that it is now become Chaste and Sober, and of a
more Reformed Conversation, than it was about Fifty Years ago, when it dwelt in
Dr. C's Family; for at that time it carried this Sense, p. 70. 71. Here is a
direct change of Persons, Christ takes our Person, and Condition, and stands in
our stead; we take Christ's Person, and Condition, and stand in His stead; so
that if you reckon well, you must always reckon your selves in another Person,
and that other in your Person.

Now, Sir, I appeal to you, whether we might not reasonably Expect from you the
Explication, before you could Exact of us a Subscription to these Terms,
especially seeing we have now greater Reason than before, from your
Tergiversation, which has increased our Jealousy, that there is A Snake in the
Grass.

2. A Second Reason is, That there are other Phrases of known Integrity, of
approved Honesty, which have been scanned upon more fingers than the Man of
Gath could number, and sifted as narrowly as ever Peter was; and having been
thoroughly examined, have been at last received into the Public Confession of
the Faith of all the Reformed Churches. What need then can there be to Use, how
much less Reason to Impose these dubious ones on the Faith, and Consciences of
Christians?

I am mightily taken with the thoughts of that Judicious, Wise, and Learned
Person Dr. Owen, and therefore will not grudge to Transcribe them at large,
Ans. to Biddle's Preface, p. 18. If any shall make use of any Words, Terms,
Phrases, and Expressions, in and about Religious Things; requiring the
embracing and receiving of these words by others, without examining either the
Truth of what by those Words or Phrases they intend to signify or express: Or
the Propriety of those Expressions themselves, as to their Accommodation for the
signification of those things. I plead not for them. It is not in the power of
Man to make any word, or expression not found (...) in the Scripture to be
Canonical, and for its own sake, to be embraced: -- And this we further grant,
that if any one shall scruple the receiving or owning any such Expressions, so
as to make them the way of Professing that which is signified by them, and yet
do receive the Thing or Doctrine, which is by them delivered, For my part, I
shall have no contest with him: For instance; The word (...) was made use of,
by the first Nicene Council, to express the Unity of Essence, and Being, that
is in the Father, and the Son; the better to obviate Arius and his Followers,
with their (...): and the like forms of speech, no where found in Scripture;
and invented on set purpose to destroy the True, and Eternal Deity of the Son
of God: If now any Man should scruple the receiving this Word, but withal,
should profess that he believes Jesus Christ to be God equal with the Father;
one with him from the beginning; and does not explain himself by other Terms
not found in the Scripture, viz. That He was made a God, and is one as to Will,
not Essence, and the like; He is like to undergo neither Trouble nor Opposition
from me. Thus far that great Man. And surely we come under the equitable
Construction, and Benefit of this Paragraph:

1. The Phrases questionable are not Canonical, nor found in Scriptnre. 2. We
question the Propriety of these Phrases to express the things they are
pretended to signify. 3. Some of them express more than any Scripture Phrase
does express. 4. Whatever Truth can be really contained in them, we readily
receive. 5. These Phrases are not to be compared, nor named in the same Year
with the expression of (...) which has a place in the Nicene Creed, whereas
these never showed their Face in any Creed whatever. 6. These Phrases stand
justly suspected of Hiterodoxy, and carrying an Antinomian sense, and therefore
we are not obliged, nay, Be it known to all Men by these Presents, we will not
be Compelled to subscribe to them, without better security.
3. Reason: You ought never more to insist upon these Phrases, because after
all your windings, and turnings, all the rounds you have run, all the circles
you have made, you are forced to come to me, and the Truth at last: And your
Commutation of Persons between Christ and sinners; His taking upon him the
Person of sinners, amounts to no more, in good earnest, than that Christ died,
suffered satisfied in our place, and stead. Will you be persuaded to peruse
your own Words, p. 80. It was Objected by the Rebuke, that if you look into all
the Confessions at Home, and Abroad, you should not there find any of these
Phrases, etc. To this you answer: What though I cannot? Why then, say I, you
should have let them alone, and not trouble and divide us more, who are but too
much divided already with these Arbitrary Expressions; which if they signisie,
and so far as they do signify any thing of Truth, are already owned by us, in
owning those Confessions. O but, say you, Is it not enough that the
Controverted Phrases are included in the acknowledgment of Christ's making a
proper satisfaction to God's Justice for us? Why truly, Sir, it is enough for
us, but not enough for you! For we contend for the Necessary Truth; but your
Zeal is for the Unnecessary Phrase: And though I cannot agree with you, that
these Phrases are included in that Truth, yet if they be, and so far as they
be, we must necessarily own them, because we own the Truth, which you say
contains them. But how, I pray, are these Phrases contained in the Grand Truth?
A Man may Meditate upon that Truth, and beat it out to its utmost length, and
yet these Phrases may never come in his way, nor his thoughts fall upon any one
of them: And when our B. Savior, when the Apostles Preached this Truth, when
the Churches in all Ages bore their Testimony to it, yet not one of these ever
hit upon any of these Phrases: But still you go on! They are all virtually
included in the sundry Confessions, which have openly Received the Phrase of
Christ's suffering in our stead. But why then do you Revile and Rail at us,
more than the Compilers of those Confessions? For we own the Confessions as
well as they, and if those Phrases be really, though but virtually contained in
them, we by owning the Confessions, do own virtually whatsoever is contained in
them.

Whereas, therefore, you tell us, p. 4. Def. that A desire to Accommodate, so
far as possible, upon the bottom of Truth, lies so much upon your heart; I
earnestly beg of you, never to intermeddle more with Accommodation of matters.
Really, Sir, it is not your Talent; your special Gift is to embarras, confound,
and perplex whatever you meddle with: And assure your self, He that is born in
a storm, will never live easily in a calm: If the Fire was the Element of which
you were made, and in which you have been bred, you will never endure to dwell
out of the Flames: Every Creature we see, dies, when removed out of its proper
Element: To remove you out of the Quarters of Division, and Contention, into
the milder Regions of Peace and Union will be your immediate Dissolution; what
is the peaceable soul's Temper, is your Distemper; what is his Food, will be
your Poison; and what is his Life, will be your present Death.

. 3. I will not complain of you that you call me Brother, and sometimes for
Variety sake, your Reverend Brother. But yet I will complain, that whilst you
Complement with Ioab, Art thou in health my Brother? You discover the Byonet in
your other hand, and aim at the fifth Rib to shed my Bowels out to the ground.

And what more Mortal Blow could you aim at my soul* with all that palpable
Hypocrisy, than to Represent me an Unitarian, a Socinian, thereby to blast
what of Reputation God has given me, and which I value chiefly on the Account
of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that I may yet be further serviceable to
the Interest of my Blessed Redeemer; and yet there is nothing you more
studiously drive at, nothing you more industriously prosecute, than to take,
and make occasions to misrepresent me to the thoughts of all sober and sound
Christians.

Had I left out of my Creed Christ's perfect satisfaction given to Divine
Justice, as you have left Regeneration and Repentance out of yours: Or had
omitted the Necessity of Christ's Righteousness imputed by the Father, and
received by faith in order to our Justification before God; as you have Faith
as necessary to Justification in the Sight of God, you had had some just color
for your vile Aspersions: But when I have openly avowed my firm Adherence to
the Confession of the Church of England: To that of the Assembly of Westminster
and the Savoy; and only scruple some Phrases not generally known, nor well
understood, and yet am willing to Admit that its possible there may be
something sound in them, to which I am ready to subscribe, but shall never
yield that these Dubious, and Disputable Phrases, shall be impoposed as the
Test, and Standard of Orthodoxry, or the Terms of Union in these Matters. I can
see no just Reason to call my soundness in the Faith into question: And yet
notwithstanding, by Wyre-drawing some Expressions, forcing others above their
true Level, distorting them against their evident intention, and fastening on
them Remote Consequences which the words will not bear, by these unworthy Arts,
you have endeavored to persuade your easy and willing Reader. That I have
given the Protestant Religion in the Article of Christ's satisfaction a
sensible wound; and if you can once wheedle this kind of Readers, that your
Antinomianism is the true Protestant Religion, you have spoke to the purpose:
Know you, therefore, I have given no wound to the Gospel of Christ, to yours
perhaps I have: Nor shall you thus mangle and mutilate the Christian, that is,
the Protestant Religion in the grand Doctrines of Regeneration, Conversion,
Faith, and Repentance, but I shall endeavor to pull off your Palliating
Plasters, which I cannot hinder you from Nickmaning, a Wounding of the
Protestant Religion.

I will not complain of your Rude and Barbarous Treating me, through the whole
Course of your Defense, I impute it to your inflamed passions, fomented by your
fiery Temper, which yet might have been a little moderated by a Civil
Education, if not subdued by your Profession: You style Mr. W's. my Instructor,
my Guide, my Teacher, and at last my Master. I wish you had informed me what
Office I bear under him, that of Foot Boy or Valet de Chamber, or what other
Post you will graciously assign me, that I may legally demand Livery or
Sallary: You say I have been Tool'd by him: The Elegancy of the Term I complain
not of, because Witticisms and Elegancies are great Rarities with you. But the
Malice of it, I will obviate: I declare therefore freely, I account it no
dishonor to be his or your Servant for Christ's sake, though I dare not give up
my Understanding, nor resign my Faith to him or you: I have Learned to
surrender my Reason to Revelation; my Will to the Authority of God speaking in
his Word: My whole Interest to his Honor and Glory; but yet I call none my
Lord and Master but Christ; nor any my Father, in matters of mere Religion, but
him that is in Heaven.

. 4. In your Preface, you have favored us with an Elegant Panegyric and a
Bitter Satyr: The former you bestowed upon your own dear self; the latter upon
your Contemned Brethren; I will not dare to complain of your Panegyric; Enjoy,
without my Envy, the pleasing Caresses of your own heart, and hugg your self in
the Delicious Contemplations of your own Excellencies: But I may have leave to
Complain of that Bloody Satyr you have penned against all your Brethren,
Presbyterian and Independent, excepting and foreprizing always out of it your
own beloved, and admired self: A Word or two I will venture upon each.

(1.) Your Elegant Panegyric upon your own Dear self. I cannot forbear telling
thee (Reader) that I desire to bless and praise the Lord for the insight he has
given me into the Mysteries of the Gospel; since these Controversies have been
stated: And I do now plainly see how the very Truths, we were, through an
unjustifiable supineness, in danger of losing, will hereby be more clearly
discovered, and effectually secured. Dixi.

Now Sir! In my poor Judgment, your own Tongue is most unfit of any to be the
Trumpet of your own Praise: and you had better have hired some Mercenary Pen,
of which I perceive you have good choice, to have Recommended your great
Natural Parts, your Acquired Abilities, and above all, your Inspired
Accomplishments to the Notice of the Age, than have pressed your own
Goose-quill to the Drudgery. I offer you my Service Gratis, which if you
accept, I Will try to give the Vulgar the Analysis of this your self-exaltation.

First, Let them observe how full you was of your Visionary Raptures: You could
not forbear, but out it must come before all the Company: This is the Tympany
you have so long gone with; but though this vent may give you a little ease, do
not mistake it for a Cure. Secondly, The next is the Imminent Danger of losing
the great Truths of the Gospel, (that is, your own) if by a Miracle, this
Defender had not been raised up to clear, and secure them: For an unjustifiable
supineness had crept over the Hearts of all Learned Men and Ministers, and all
had been Lost, without hope of Recovery, had not this Great Man appeared to
Rescue them either out of the Iaws of Oblivion, or the Paws of Heretical
Opposition. Thirdly, In this Critical Juncture, this Great Soul was enlightened,
and inspired, in these Mysteries of the Gospel: For when he wrote his Display,
he knew nothing of them more or less, 'twas since the Controversy was stated
that he received these Glorious Discoveries: A Privilege to be Envied that he
could gain that Illumination in one moment, which other poor Mortals hardly
Compass, and in a lower measure, with obstinate study, and earnest prayer: But
this Gentleman lay down over night, slept in the dark, and in the morning rose
up clearly Illuminated with these Ravishing Mysteries. Fourthly, Do not inquire
which those Mysteries were, he has been Enlightened in; they are these great
Ones, That Regeneration, Conversion, and Repentance, are but the Accidentals of
his Gospel; they may Adesse, vel abesse absque subjecti interitu: Let Ministers
leave them out of their Sermons, as he has done out of his Gospel, they will
never be missed. That there is no such Thing as Justifying Faith, that
Repentance is not necessary to Pardon of Sin, that Christ was made sinful, etc.
These are the Manifestations he has received of Gospel Truth! 5. That therefore
he desires to Bless the Lord for these great Discoveries. But why then does he
not do it? Who hinders him? True indeed, he has not done it, does not do it,
never intends to do it, yet he desires to do it; for generous Spirits Love not
to be too much in Debt, nor is there any need for it, when they have one that
has paid all for 'em, past, present and to come, without the Condition of
Repentance. 6. And now Sir, having directed the Vulgar, I will offer one Word
to your Self. We earnestly beg, that you would let our Gospel alone, you may do
what you please with your own; the Gospel of Christ has been sufficiently
Cleared, irrefragably Proved, Vindicated by such Instruments as Christ has
raised up since the Reformation, beyond the Policy of Socinians, or Antinomians
to Undermine it, or their Power to shake it; but your Excellency lies not in
Clearing but Clouding, not in Defending but Betraying the Doctrines of the
Gospel.
(2.) Your bitter Satyr against all your Brethren. Discourses from the Pulpit,
even when about the most Evangelical Parts of Christianity, have been of late
Years rather to move the Affections, than inlighten the Judgment, and are but a
slender Fence unto Truth, and an Observance how they who are sound in the
Faith, through a Zeal for Populacy have neglected that close Study which is
necessary to a through Understanding the Important Doctrines under Debate, has
imboldned the Adversary to oppugn them.

Sir, let me speak freely to you: In this bitter and bloody Satyr, you have
taken upon you the Person of one, who Glories to be the Accuser of the Brethren.

1. You Accuse them, or rather Calumniate them, without excepting a Man, that
they have adjusted their Preaching rather to move the Affections, than to
enlighten the Judgment. The common Fallacy, a Vein of which runs through your
whole Book, that subordinata sunt opposita: Their common Method is to enlighten
the Judgment, and then to move the Affections: They pretend not to loud
Vociferations, to make a hideous outcry against they know not what, nor why:
They work not upon the (...), nor stir up blind and brutish Passions and
Affections; no Sir! they lay down some great Doctrine of Christ's Gospel, this
they explain, then labor to prove, and to improve it, by engaging their
Auditors first to receive the Truth, then to reduce it to Practice, which
however you scorn it, is the end of all Gospel Preaching.

2. You Accuse them, that through a Zeal for Populacy, they have neglected that
close Study which is necessary to the Understanding the Important Truths under
Debate: The plain English of which is, that they are a Crew of Hypocrites, the
vilest of Hypocrites under the Sun; for what can they be else, who not moved
with the Glory of their Redeemer in the Conversion and Edification of Souls,
nor at all influenced with the great Ends of their Office, only hunt for
Popular Applause; that when they come reeking hot out of their Pulpits, they
may be fanned and refreshed with the cooling Breezes of Men's Praises; and if
they may but receive, the Euge! Belle! and the grande (...), that is all they
Regard. Now if this Accusation be true, they must be the worst of Men; if false
(as I am Confident it is) you Sir, must be one of the vilest Calumniators. And
if the Tenth Part of what you Accuse them of, be true, its Pity but all the
Dissenters were once again Silenced, and I have some Reasons inclining me to
think that this was the Design of the Satyrist, in all the Disturbances he has
given the World.

I am well assured, the Reverend Brethren can justify themselves in the sight
of God, and before their own Consciences, always allowing too much Matter for
Repentance, on the account of their sinful Infirmities. That they have received
Grace to be faithful from him, who put them into the Ministry by the Door, not
by the Windows: That they feed the Flock committed to their Charge and Care
under the Eye of the great Shepherd, expecting from him their Reward at his
appearing: They dare not feed the Flock of Christ, with the Chippings of the
Schools; nor with the dry Husks of Heathenish Morality: They Preach a Crucified
Christ, and God, in and through him Reconciled, and they press instantly upon
their Hearers that they would be Reconciled to God: And this is what Holy Souls
expect from them, that their Hearts may be thoroughly searched; the State of
their Souls Examined, and Cleared; their Evidences for another World made out
with good Satisfaction to an awakened, and well enlightened Conscience: To be
taught how they may walk worthy of God to all pleasing, and how they may keep
Consciences void of Offense toward God, and all Men. And to say Truth, they do
not Love to hear of such sublime Stuff, that is too high for this World, and
too low for the next: Nor to see their Teachers Vaulting or Dancing upon the
high Rope ('it was the Expression of a Grave Learned Divine) lest after all their
Capering Tricks, they should break their own Necks, and perhaps the Peoples.

Reverend Sir, let me solicit, and prevail for a few Favors, which though not
for mine, yet your own Credits sake you ought to grant. That you would admit a
few Corrections in your Eloquent Harangues. And first for Observance lets read
Observation, for with us Englishmen, Observance is that Respect and Deference
that we give to another for some greater Excellency, than we are conscious to
our selves of. But as it stands here it is broad Nonsense, and Observation had
been the proper Word for any but him who affects swelling Bom-bast. Secondly,
For Populacy, give us leave to read Popularity; so, besides that it will be
Sense, it will be more Picquant, and severe upon your insulted Brethren, and
therefore more suited to your own malicious Intendment against them. And to
tell you true, we are afraid, lest in a while you should introduce these Terms
into Divinity, and that we shall be Condemned for Renouncing the Gospel,
because we cannot admit these non-sensical Terms too. Thirdly, We Pray, that
for since the Controversy was stated, to make it Sense and Truth, we may read
started; for indeed the Controversy has been started by you some while ago,
but to this Hour it was never stated: Nor can we persuade you to state it, but
like AndabatarianFencers we are cutting and slashing Blindfold: And could we
but once at length persuade you to state the Question fairly, and honestly, the
Question would decide, and determine it self: One Inconvenience perhaps you
foresee, that if the Controversy were well stated, and judiciously answered,
it would put a Period to your useful and gainful Trade and Employment.

I doubt not, but you will freely own your self the Aggressor in this
Paper-War; nay, that you Glory in it. It had been more desirable that you had
let Matters to have sunk into Silence, and not have blown Sheba's Trumpet, to a
fresh Alarm: But when you drew the Sword against the Presbyterians, no doubt
you threw away the Scabbard. Though it had been advisable, when you buckled on
your Armor in this vapouring Gallantry, to have considered how you might as
honorably put it off. In the mean Time, I thank you for the Honor you have
done us, in giving us the Initial Letters of your Name; could not some Friend
of yours have contrived them into an Ingenious Cyphar, which would have adorned
your Chariot, when you are to ride in Triumph over the Heads of the Conquered
Presbyterians: Such a Cyphar would have given you a great Figure.

I have read, that these two Letters S. L. which you have now stamped upon your
Book were once Printed with a Red Hot Iron upon the Cheeks of a famous Patriot,
who was a Confessor, and hugely Ambitious to be a Martyr for his Country: His
Enemies did Interpret S. L. to stand for slanderous Libel, and one of the Wits
of that Time would needs give us the Etymology of the Word Libel; that is, A
lie with a ^ell hung about the Neck to Ring the scandalous Story up and down to
his Friends in the Country, and really it would as decently have set upon your
Front, as his Cheeks.

I wonder not at your Desultory Humor, that Ebbs and Flows like the Euripus in
frequent Vicissitudes, and is constant in nothing but Inconstancy: Sometime you
are so smooth, as if you would cut my Throat with a Feather: And by and by, so
cruelly severe; as if you would saw off my Head, with an old rusty Hand-saw: It
is some Comfort to be railed at in handsome Language; but its the worst of
Deaths to be Assassinated with dull insipid Reflections, destitute of Wit and
Truth. So that when we can meet with nothing, but ill chosen Words, dark
Phrase, illturn'd Periods, and the Language all over Leprous, and Scabbed; the
best Defense I can Recommend to the Reader against your Defense, is a good Pair
of sharp-long-Nails.

Sir, I have appealed to you, but because I understand I must expect no Redress
of Greivances; I do hereby Appeal from you, to the Impartial Reader: At present
I take my Leave of you, and Rest as you see,

Your Servant, etc.

A Vindication of the Faithful Rebuke, from the Rude Cavils of the Pretended
Defense of the late Report.
THE Author of the Defense has so strongly immured himself, and entrenched his
Cause in Dung, that we have more occasion for the Scavenger than the Scholar,
for the Shovel than the Pen to remove it.

. I. And the first Nuisance I must remove, is an Invidious Misrepresentation of
his Rebuker, as if he charged the Congregational, in the bulk, without a Salvo
to the Reputation of any one of them, Def. p. 82. Now to give some color to
this Calumny, he has recourse to his wonted Artifice, a piece of pure impure
Forgery: from Reb. p. 56. The true Reason of their (the Congregational
Brethren) severe Displeasure against the third Paper is, that it has so clearly
and fully born its Testimony against the Antinomians: A single Observation will
remove this Dirt; that those Words (the Congregational Brethren) are his own
Gloss, no part of my Text: His own Suppositious Antecedent, obtruded upon my
Relative; and I would leave it to his Conscience to determine of the Honesty of
this dealing, had I not had too frequent experience of its partiality.

I have ever embraced the Orthodox and Godly of both Denominations with equal
Affections; nor could I ever yet see cause from their Principles or Practices
to Abate those Affections: Tho the same Notions in the hands and management of
those of a due Temper, are clear another thing when they are got into the power
of those of a fiery Spirit and bigoted Zeal: But yet more particularly.

1. I return this: There needed no Exception, where there was no general
Impeachment; nor was there occasion for a Salve where there was no Wound given
to any but the Reporter and his few Antinomian Partisans.

2. And yet whether it were from my own good Nature, or a foresight of this
Objection, I had timously and sufficiently obviated this Cavil, Rebuke page 23.
It Is an unquestionable Truth that some of them had vented such strange
Doctrines, that it gave Umbrage to them (the United Brethren) that there might
be found among them, one or two, or so, that had dipped very deep in the Crispian
Heterodoxies.

3. Nor ought he to take himself to be of that Consideration and Bulk, (bulky
enough tho he be) as if the whole Body of the Congregational, was stowed in his
Prominent Belly: For although his Discourse generally runs in the Style of We,
we, yet it is no other Language than what Emperors, and Reporters, Princes, and
Defenses do use, when yet they design no more than a single Person.

4. He will hardly allow the same liberty to interpret his own words in his
Preface; where he scandalously exposes the Discourses from the Pulpit of late
Years, to have been Adjusted to move the Affections, rather than to inform the
Judgment: And yet this he has done without any salvo either to Presbyterian or
Congregational Learned or Unlearned, Ordained or Un-ordained, Linnen-drapers,
Barbers, or Tailors.

5. I will add, that I know many of the Congregational Brethren, who are sound
in the Faith, holy in their Conversation, eminently useful Ministers of Christ
in the great Work of the Gospel, and wholly remote from all Antinomian
Tincture: But he shall pardon me if I say that others have more grievously
corrupted themselves, their Doctrine, their Hearers with these Speculations: A
brief Specimen whereof was given, Reb. p. 25. A much larger by the Answer to
the Report, p. 22, 23. and a much larger yet remains ready to be given in due
time.

This filth, it is true, affects not the Cause in the least, but was thrown to
cast an Odium upon the Person of the Rebuker, which being removed, the Reader
may now breath in a freer and fresher Air; I dismiss it therefore with this
short Note: That the Defense in this Paragraph has proved himself a Person
hugely versed in the Oriental Tongues; for the second Language spoken in
Paradise, by the grand Enemy of Mankind, was the Lying and Slandering Tongue;
and the elegant Figure with which our Author has imbellisht his whole
Discourse, is Purus, putus, Satanismus.

. II. There is one gross Mistake more in the Defense, p. 85. (If it be proper
to talk of one more, when the whole is but one grand continued complicated
Mistake) when he would persuade us, that the Reporter about seventeen Years
ago, wrote a Book against Antinomianism; meaning, no doubt, that well meaning
Piece, The Glory of Free Grace displayed; I will now once for all rectify his
Error, and evince that the Display and the Report, could not possibly be
Indicted from one Head, nor conceived in one Heart, nor written by one Hand and
Pen.

Display, p. 30. assures us, That God's punishing Sin, is founded in and upon
his Rectoral Justice, the Excellency of his Laws, but the Report grounds it
upon his Essential Justice.

Again, Display p. 75. asserts, That Faith and Union (with Christ) is in order
of Nature antecedent to an actual Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and
consequently before our Justification in the sight of God: But the Report tells
us quite another Story; for tho Believing is allowed some place in escaping
Wrath to come, and having Everlasting Life, yet he assigns it no Service, no
Interest, no Concern at all in the Justification of a Sinner. But further,
Display Epist. informs us, That our coming to Christ, is our believing on him;
but come unto Christ we cannot without Faith and Repentance: But then the
Report leaves out Repentance wholly, Name and Thing from his Substance of the
Gospel; either as necessary to pardon of Sin or Salvation: And yet further, p.
66. Prop. 1. On the Account of Christ's Sufferings in Humane Nature, all
Mankind in some sense, is so far Redeemed from the Misery, in which
antecedently unto the Promise of Christ's Death they did lie; that they are now
in a much happier Condition than the fallen Angels; not only on the Account of
their receiving at least a temporary Reprieve from everlasting Flames, but also
because their Salvation is become possible; and yet now poor D. W. shall be
persecuted for an Arminian, a Socinian, a Baxterian for one Moiety of this
Doctrine. Once more p. 68. They who receive least, receive one Talent, and have
given them sufficient for the enabling them to do more toward the saving of
their Souls, than they actually do; and if those Men do actually improve the
Common Helps vouchsafed them, they may (for ought any Man can prove to the
contrary) receive such further Assistances, as may have a special influence in
enabling them to turn sincerely to God, through Jesus Christ. This was Arminius
all over, Facienti quod in se est, Deus non denegat gratiam! So that the
Reporter, if he be the Man, was in those Days a downright Baxterian, and an
upright Williamite, if common Grace could have kept him so.

What strange Revolutions may seventeen Years produce! In half that time, a
Man's Interest may change, and that may warp him; his Dependences may change,
and that may pervert him: New Friends and Alliances may beget new Counsels, and
above all, this blessed Change may be the Result of an implacable Enmity
against some one Man; which may oblige him to alter his Principles in mere
spite, and to face about to the other Extreme. However that be, it shall be no
Concern of mine to compromise the Quarrel, whether the Report and the Display
came from the same Mint; and if so, the Report has wretchedly Clipped what the
Display had Coined, and the Display is now splayed.

. 3. A third Thing to be removed, is what will administer a pleasing Diversion
to the Reader, so it will discover much Malice or Ignorance in our Author.

In p. 72. The Defender of the Faith, for diverse Reasons to himself best known,
is pleased to revive the Memory of an Affair depending between the Reverend Mr.
R. Baxter, and a certain Author, who above twenty Years ago appeared in Print
with an odd Title, Antisozzo: This Author you must know, had confidently enough
asserted, That never any Man in his Wits affirmed, that the Righteousness of
Christ was the formal Cause of our Justification: And for ought I can yet see,
he had sufficient ground for his Confidence; for all the Reformed Divines I
have yet met withal, do with one consent maintain: That the Imputing of
Christ's Righteousness is the formal Cause, but the Righteousness of Christ it
self, is the Material Cause of our Justification; that is, it bears some good
Analogy with, or proportion to the Material Cause: But Mr. B. treats this
Assertion and the Asserter with some scorn, and tells him, That Dr. Davenant,
who was far from being a Madman, assures us, That it is the Common Sense of all
Divines, that the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us is the formal Cause of
our Justification: Now I appeal to all that have a small glimmering of
Understanding, and an equal quantity of Impartiality to use it: Whether these
two Propositions, Christ's Righteousness is not the formal Cause, and Christ's
Righteousness Imputed is the formal Cause of our Justification, do carry any
the least face of Contradiction? The Righteousness of Christ is the Material
Cause, the Imputing of the Righteousness is the Formal Cause. The Righteousness
of Christ is the Matter or Thing to be Imputed, the Imputation of the Matter or
Thing is the Form: The Righteousness of Christ is the result of Christ's Active
and Passive Obedience, which he as a Priest offered up to God for us; but
Imputation is an Act of God, by which he adjudges that Righteousness to a
believing Sinner, and thereon accepts him as Righteous in his sight: And surely
Men may easily distinguish between the Act of God, and the Undertaking of the
Mediator: I can readily conceive a difference between a Robe laid up in the
Wardrobe, and the putting on that Robe by the Hand that has Right to dispose
on it: Christ's Righteousness is this Robe, but it is God's putting it on the
believing Sinner that covers his Nakedness, Let me give the Reader one
Quotation from Wollebius Compend. Christ. Theolog. lib. 1. cap. 30.

. 11. Materia justificationis active sumptae, est tota Christi Satisfactio, qua
and peccatis nostris, paenas debitas persolvit, and obedientiam Legi perfectam
praestitit.

. 13. Forma ejus, active intellectae, est totius satisfactionis Christi
imputatio; quae tota quoque nostra est, non secus ac si ipsi praestitissemus.
So that Christ's Righteousness is the Matter, the Imputation of that
Righteousness is the Form of our Justification.

Thus much has been said to clear that Author from Mr. B's Indignation, but I
will defeat our Authors Design, to commit me with that great Man's Memory; I
will not contend with his Ashes, but draw the Curtains softly about him, and
leave him to his own Everlasting Rest.

Yet give me leave to Animadvert upon our Authors Confidence, who calls this
Assertion, That Christ's Righteousness is not the formal Cause of our
Justification: An overbold, rash, and untrue Assertion: Whereas nothing could
be more modest, wary, and true: But we see to what height of extravagancy,
interest, vainglory, and the concupiscence of Cavilling, with other Vanities,
will transport a Reporter, or Defender.

I am Confident that these Truths, Christ's Righteousness is the material Cause;
the Imputation of that Righteousness the formal Cause of our Justification are
owned by this Author in his Heart; what Temptation therefore he could have to
debauch his Pen to call it, or them an Untruth, I cannot Conjecture, unless he
was resolved, through Thick, and Thin, over Shoes and Boots, through Truth,
and Falsehood, per fas aut nefas to Defame, and if he had had Wit enough to
ridicule that Writer or the Rebuker.

. 4. But now all Hands aloft! our Author has brought from the Neighborhood of
the Lay-stall at Puddle-Dock, to his Printers, all those Ordures, which will
employ all the City Scavengers. I hope the Reader has his Florentine Balsom, or
whatever defensative may be more Potent, ready to secure him against the Stench.

Page 84 Def. He informs us, That there is not the least pretense for his
Insinuating, that the Reporter is a Favourer of Dr. Crisps Notions. No? It Is
well! an Insinuation is a small Matter, a pretense for it is less, but that
there should not be the least pretense for such an Insinuation is next to
nothing: But I think I have proved, that he is not only a Favourer, but a
vehement Abetter of those Notions; and this I have not only insinuated, but
demonstrated to himself in the Epistle, and that from his own Substance of his
own Gospel, and for this I refer the Reader to the Rebuke, and the said
Epistle; and to this he has not been able to Reply one Syllable, to avoid or
evade the Charge managed in the Rebuke.

It has been Charged upon him and proved. That he left out Faith from having
any Concern or Interest in Justification, according to his Gospel; and that is
more than a Pretense of his Syncretism with Dr. Crisp that he has excluded
Repentance as unnecessary either to Pardon or Salvation, and that is a Notion
beyond Dr. Crisp; he has made Christ a Sinner, and the greatest of Sinners, and
that does savor of, and favor Dr. Crisp's Notions; he asserts a Commutation
of Persons betwixt Christ and Sinners, and that is Dr. Crisps darling Notion.

It Is an old and prudent Maxim, if your Enemy will fly, make him a Bridge of
Gold: If our Author will be no Antinomian again, he shall have my free Leave,
nay my Assistance; for I cannot approve their Politics, who when an Adversary
would retire in the Covert of the Night, cut of his Retreat, and force him to
Fight in Desperation, which has many Times wrested a hopeful Victory out of the
Hands of the almost Conqueror, for force a Coward to Fight, and he will kill
the Devil. Provided always, that his coming over to Orthodoxy, be by way of
ingenious Confession, by a plain Recantation, and not by little subterfuges and
evasions.

But I must now look to my Self: Our Author will proceed by way of
Recrimination; and who shall hinder him from taking his own Method? p. 85. The
Rebuker is not free from the Suspicion, if not liable to the Charge of giving
Countenance to Dr. Crisps Notions, and so stands bound to clear himself? Now
did I never understand this before; that any Man is bound to clear himself of
all the Suspicions that will come into Idle, and Addle-Heads; for Suspicio est
in alieno pectore sita, etc. Suspicion is in another Heart, not in my Hand:
And what is not in my Power to prevent, I ought not in Prudence to regard; for
what if he will suspect that I stole the Crown from the Head of Jupiter in the
Capitol, as the Crochet came into his Head, let it come out again: Iniqua
suspicio neminem gravari debet, but thus these Men have dealt with Mr.
Williams, and I did really expect the same Treatment: They imitate the Process
of Nature, first they Flyblow the Peoples Heads with a Suspicion, that Fly-blow
in a while becomes a Maggot of violent Presumption; which being fed with
Mulberry-Leaves thrives into a Caterpillar of downright Accusation, and but at
last proves a sorry Butter-fly. But still (says he) I stand bound to clear my
Self; whether I stand bound or no, as I can easily do it, so I will freely do
it, and the Accuser himself has already sufficiently done it.

In the former Part of his Discourse, he either craftily Insinuates, or broadly
Suggests, or plainly Asserts, that I am a Socinian, an Unitarian, and what not?
And now he would raise a Suspicion, and thence form an Accusation that I am an
Antinomian: These two whether Suspicions, Suggestions, or Accusations, though
both notoriously False, yet do very honestly Confute one the other: If he Loads
me with the latter, he Exonerates me of the former: If he insists on the
former, he acquits me of the latter: For these two Heresies like a hot and a
cold Poison are each others Antidote: Both singly Deletorious, but in
Conjunction mutually Defensive: And my Witness is on high, and within, that I
detest both really, I cannot say equally: But I must not presume to carry it
so, he has several things to produce, which he hopes may at least
Accumulatively amount to a Suspicion, and then let him alone to plump it up to
a formal Accusation.

(1.) He tells us a fine formal Story, that when the Reporter did about
seventeen Years ago write against Antinomianism, the Rebuker gave him
sufficient encouragement to expect his Mid-wifing it into the World with an
Epistle: Truly this is a Matter of huge concern to bring the present Age to
Repentance for its Ingratitude, that it has taken so little notice of that
precious Piece, to call for a second and third Impression, with Additions,
Corrections, and Enlargements by the Author: It Is an Ungrateful World we live
in, that never understood a valued Merit; but I humbly conceive it had been
more for his Credit to have let it sleep, than to tell the present Generation,
he once writ a Book, which after seventeen Years he has seen good Virtually to
retract; for he now openly avows, that the Reporter was the Displayer; and if
he be not the Author, he is the Confuter.

But his Brother (meaning the Rebuker) promised him, that he would Midwife his
Book into the World: Why really I cannot charge a frail Memory with such an
idle Story for seventeen Years, but its the most improbable Tale that ever was
told; for I never knew that this Gentleman had ever such hard Labor in Teeming
of Pamphlets, that he should need a Man-midwife: it is certain he is always
Big-belly'd, and more fear he should be Delivered in the open Streets, like
Pope Joan, than to need my Manual Operation; and his Printer can do it without
my help, who never professed, or was guilty of the obstetrical Talent: The
Countess of Holland was brought to Bed of an Almanac, as many Children as
there are Days in the Year, and I doubt not this parturient Author can exclude
as many, without my holding his Back, tho perhaps I shall need to hold my own
Sides, that they split not with Laughter.

However I will admit there might be some small truth in his Story; let us now
hear how he will improve the Molehill into a Mountain: He proceeds thus; That
when I heard some noise of Dr. Crisp' s Name in it, I refused to do it: Well!
It may be so; I might have some respect to a Gentleman that was an Antinomian,
and so I have still to many, yet none at all to Antinomianism: I may be a
Friend to the Person, and yet none to his Errors: Take therefore this Account.
Dr. Crisp had been then long Dead, and left the World with this Fame, that he
was a Godly Man: What Works he left behind him were not much taken notice of,
and for my self I never read but a few Pages of one of them, which carried as I
remember, no great evil in them. This Doctor left behind him two Sons whom I
well knew, Persons of good Report and Repute for Religion, Men zealous for God,
and of much usefulness in their Generations; and perhaps, I might judge it more
advisable, as I now do, to Confute Errors, if there be occasion for their
Confutation in Thesi, as they stand abstracted from their Author, than for me
to write a Prefatory Epistle against a Person long since dead, which must be a
Grief to the living; these or some of these might be Considerations, why I did,
if I did refuse that Drudgery, but I can truly say, I remember not one Syllable
more or less, of this Impertinent Story.

But the Reader must acknowledge this to be one of the most fordid pieces of
Baseness in the World, had any such Imparlance past between us, to betray
private Conversation; who can plead to be treated as a Gentleman, that rudely
reveals the most Innocent Passages of Friendly Correspondence, when he thinks
he can do a Mischief? It may teach some of his Friends more prudence than to
entrust him with any Important Secret, upon which he may perhaps come in as an
Evidence after seventeen Years silence: Such Villainy ought to be banished all
Conversation and Commerce: I do now bless my self, that I am not conscious to
my self that I had ever any intercourse with such a one, the Reflection on which
might cause me to blush, or expose me to danger: He that has a Memory so
Tenacious, may for ought I know, or he himself knows, be tempted to Trump up
something to his Friends prejudice, perhaps his Ruin at the seventeen Years
end: He that is now entertained as a Friend, may delate, impeach me some Years
hence as an Enemy. And that which renders it more odious in him, is this; That
he himself was near Destruction by Words spoken at his own Table, revealed by a
false Friend* 'Twas this gave occasion of that Saving of a considerable Person,
(...). But from my Soul I bless my God, that gave me so signal a Deliverance
from his Clutches, and Mischievous Hands, and do at once detest the Malice, and
scorn the Impotency of it.

There is not a more subtle and devilish Art of Slandering, than when a
Calumniator says little, but with a Nod, or Shake of his Head, with an
Ill-favored Grimace, he leaves you to suspect all imaginable evil under those
Intimations. Ay! the good Man could tell dreadful horrid things; but out of his
respect to his Brother he forbears, and will be silent: This is the old Trade
of murdering Men and their good Names with an Innuendo; and this carries more
of the Politics of Hell in it, than if he called me a thousand Rogues and
Rascals: He that accuses openly, leaves room for a just Defense; but he that
Slanders by Insinuations, allows no place for Vindication: This is the Arrow
that flies in Darkness, wounds where it is not seen: This is the way of
Assassinating by white Powder, that kills without a Report; and in this case
the Accuser can Retreat upon any Attack, and smoothly say, Alas, my Brother, I
meant no harm. But what he means by a Letter of mine written to PH. X. I know
no more than the Man in the Moon; no more than if they had been ps. O. or any
other Letters of the Alphabet: This I know, I never held Correspondence with
Friend, Fenwick, or Charnock, or any other of the Digamma's.

(2.) A second thing he has thought fit to pitch upon, to raise or confirm the
Suspicion of my favoring Dr. Crisp's Notions is, that upon a second Impression
of Dr. Crisp's Works, it (the Impression) was attested by me. To which I only
softly return, That it is a loud and lewd Falsehood; I never Attested the Book,
the Doctrines of the Author, the Principles contained in it: The Matter of Fact
is thus: Mr. S. C. the Doctor's Son desired me to give my Hand, that I thought
he would not impose upon the World in those Ten Sermons, which from his
Father's Original Manuscripts, he added to his Father's Works in that
Impression, I did believe him, and do still to be a Man of Honesty and
Conscience, and that he durst not cheat the Reader with counterfeit Sermons:
This is what I attested, and I have that Confidence in the Gentleman, that he
will aver as much.

But this is the way that our Author and his Accomplices have chosen in other
cases to Reproach us: Some Brethren gave their Names thus far to Mr. W's Book
of Gospel Truths: That in the main the Truths and Errors were rightly stated,
in opposition to the Errors of the Doctor's Book: Immediately a Clamor is
raised, as if they had subscribed to the whole of the Book it self; and yet
after all the Outcry, when the Antinomians have made the severest Scrutiny,
they can find nothing but some dubious Expressions, some disputable Phrases,
and some things perhaps darkly expressed, to quarrel with: Thus some Attested
the Son's honesty, and it must be interpreted an Attestation to the Father's
Hetorodoxy; but if any of us had transgressed in subscribing the Doctor's Book,
they could not do Penance, nor make satisfaction in a more reasonable way,
than by attesting that of Mr. D. W's, which was so full, and clear a
Confutation of it: And this I am very confident of, that whatever has been the
pretense, the real cause of all the Enmity manifested against Gospel Truth, was
chiefly, that it gave a mortal Wound to the Antinomian Opinions: And that is a
Crime shall never be forgiven him, but prosecuted with Vatinian hatred by the
Reporter, and all of the same Kidney.

(3.) A third color for his suspicion of me to be savouring of Dr. Crisp's
Notions, is that I put my Hand to a Paper prefixed to Mr. Flavell's excellent
piece, called A Blow at the Root: To make short work, and give a Compendious
Answer to this Charge, take it thus. That Paper was drawn up by a learned and
able Hand; in whose Judgment I presumed I might acquiesce; and if that Reverend
and Learned Person shall think fit to move out of his Retiredness, and appear
concerned in this Affair, he will easily justify it: The Accessory is not to
be Tried and Condemned before the Principal; and it would seem Presumption in
me to vindicate his own Draught, who is much more able to do it: I will
therefore say no more but this. I judge that Paper capable of a fair
Vindication, and may be justified by an Ingenious Interpretation; but yet, I
confess, I am not well pleased with my self that I have put my Hand to that or
any other Trimming Paper.

The Defense p. 85. enforces his Charge, That he cannot easily forget when, and
where I was charged with giving my Attestation to Dr. Crisp's Book, and called
upon to give satisfaction; but that I was so inflexible that no other could be
obtained, than that the Charge was Rude and Ignorant, and so braved it out: I
agree with him perfectly, that if there was ever any thing, the Remembrance
whereof would do a shrewd Turn, he could never forget it* And I shall softly
return this; That of all Men living, a Reporter has need of a good Memory; but
here, his Memory or Conscience, or both, failed him: For tho it be true, I did
say the Charge was Rude, yet 'twas this Reporter who added, that it was
ignorant; and thus I must be accused by him of the Crime, if it was a Crime, of
his own Expression; and of this I have the Evidence of many Brethren, whose
Faithfulness in Witness-bearing is Incontestible, and not to be mentioned in
the same Day with his; for the thing was not spoke in a corner, and it was at
that time when this Reporter frequented Little St. Hellens, before he fell, and
left his first Station.

. 5. How I have Acquitted my self of the Charge of Antinomianism brought
against me, the Reader has heard; whether there be any pretense for an
Insinuation, that the Reporter is a favourer of Dr. Crisp's Notions, the Reader
shall now judge.

The Difficulty of making a clear Judgment upon this Trimming Author's Opinion
in this matter, lies chiefly in this; Whether we are to take our Measures of
what he is from his visible Book, or his invisible Heart? What he is in his
Heart and secret Inclinations, falls not under our Cognizance; what he appears
to be in his legible and intelligible Writings, comes under our Notice: But
still, whether we are to proceed by the strict inflexible Rule of Judgment, or
Reason; or whether we are to allow some Latitude in our Thoughts according to
Charity, may admit of a Debate.

And 1. my Charity inclines me to think him no Antinomian, from what a Friend
of his and mine assured me the other Day, since I awarded my self the Penance,
and my Pen the Punishment of these Lines. Sir, (said he) the Reporter is no
more an Antinomian than your self. It may be so (replied I) but for all that,
he may be Antinomian enough, for he has endeavored to prove me one: But if he
be none, why does he write at this rate? If he Preaches one thing, and Prints
another; if he be one Man in the Pulpit, and another from the Press; if he
writes one thing and means another, how shall we possibly make a Judgment of
his Faith? It Is not the sense of his Soul, but the sense of his Book, in which
I am concerned; if these two be at odds, they must either agree it, or fight it
out as well as they can. Well! Well! (replied our Common Friend) I can assure
you he is no Antinomian in his Judgment, tho he writes a little squinting that
way, to gratify some great Friends that are strongly biased that way. Ay, but
(said I) this is to pluck the Thorn out of one Foot, and thrust it into the
other; for now you allow him sound in his Head, but then you render him rotten
at Heart, and thus while you clear his Orthodoxy, you accuse him of Hypocrisy;
and what Account can you give of his halting and doubling thus in a matter of
the greatest Importance? But here our Discourse was interrupted.

2. Therefore not daring to depend upon our Friends Opinion, I sought Relief
from the Defense it self, hoping I might rely on his own Judgment of his own
self, and as I find, I will nakedly Report to the Reader, without taking his
Office out of his Hands.

The Author of the Rebuke did think, and now is confirmed in his Thoughts; that
the United Brethren, after they had given such incontestible Demonstrations of
their soundness in the Faith against all Arminian and Socinian Errors, might
reasonably expect that those other Brethren should give some good account of
their stedsastness in the Faith in opposition to the Antinomian Heterodoxies:
Nor did they want cogent Reasons for their Expectations; that if they gave
satisfaction upon slender and sleighty Surmises, the others ought to give the
like, where the Proofs were Notorious and Flagrant.

Now the Defense could not but take some notice of this Passage, and thinks it
not amiss to show what fell under Consideration, when this Point was to be
debated: Now Reader mark well what he says.

[1.] It was thought conducive (says he, p. 66.) to the great end, to avoid as
much as possible, a running into the Discussion, and Determination of
Differences of lesser moment; and therefore to keep to those Matters, which did
more nearly concern the Essentials in Matters of Faith. Now to set the Reader
right herein, he must Note,

1. That tho the United Brethren valued Peace as high as any, they know they
might buy Gold too dear, and therefore durst not purchase Peace with the loss
of Truth* The great end therefore which they had in their Eye and upon their
Heart, was that they might secure their Union, upon good security that
Antinomian Errors were not secretly lodged in the Hearts of some Brethren, or
if there harbored, it might by a sound Test be discovered: And therefore a
Test was drawn up to obviate all possible Evasions. See Rebuke P. 25.

2. Whereas this Defender tells us of Differences of a lesser moment: This will
bring our Author's Faith to the Ordeal, and we shall now see what are the
Differences of lesser moment, in his Opinion; and to speak plainly, they were
such Trifles as these, Whether Faith be necessary to Justification? Repentance
to pardon? These were our Author's Punctilio's, his Matters of lesser moment.
And thus we have gained this one Point, That a Justifying Faith and Repentance
in order in Pardon, are none of the Essentials of the Gospel of Christ, as they
were but Accidentals in the Gospel of the Reporter.

3. To trim up this matter handsomely, and find out a due Temper as the Phrase
and Practice was in the Conventicle of Trent; both Parties are deluded, under a
color of pleasing both; and thus things stand in the first Paper: Although
Regeneration, Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and a
holy Conversation are by God's express Word manifestly necessary to the
Salvation of a Sinner, etc. These things then are necessary to Salvation; but
not so to Pardon, Justification, Acceptance with God; for in that respect they
are Matters of lesser moment, which must not be discussed, much less
determined, but avoided as much as possible, because that was conducive to
their great ends: Now I would modestly ask, Whether the Ends of both these
sorts of Brethren were the same? For it is most evident, that the end of one was
to conceal, the end of the other to discover latent Antinomianism? And secondly
I would ask, If the Care and Caution was so great, not to come to a Discussion
of these lesser Matters, why was the Zeal so hot to come to a Determination of
far more inconsiderable? They could discuss and determine upon a Phrase,
Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners; but could not, or would not
determine by any Means, that Faith and Repentance were absolutely necessary to
the Justification of a Sinner.

4. The Author would give us a Reason, why they would not run, no nor came, nor
crept to the Determination of these Things of lesser Moment, because they were
agitated among the Godly (rthodox themselves: This Gentleman has a knack above
all Mankind, he can Canonize, and Anathematize, whom he pleases. They shall be
Godly or Ungodly, Orthodox or Heterodox, Learned or Unlearned, just as they
approve, or disapprove themselves to his Humor; but here I do enter my
Dissent: That however Godly they might be, Orthodox they could not be, that
admitted not Faith, and Repentance as necessary to Pardon: But from hence we
might infer from his Premises, that a Man may be Orthodox, and yet deny Faith
necessary to Justification; and Orthodox too, though he maintained it
necessary; but we see through these Cobwebs, and this was a Contrivance to
secure the Orthodoxy of that Reverend Brother who Asserted, that Pardon is
rather the Condition of Faith; and much more, having a causal influence
thereunto, than Faith and Repentance are of Pardon.

5. Although the Defender has made these Things of lesser Moment, the Word of
God has determined it that they are Matters of the greatest Moment and Weight,
even Fundamental Articles of Faith; Heb. 6. 1. Therefore leaving the Principles
of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on to Perfection, not laying again the
Foundation of Repentance from Dead Works, and of Faith toward God: I assure
you, I tremble to think what we are coming to, nay what we are running to, nay
what we are already come to; that Repentance from dead Works, which was once a
Doctrinal Foundation, must be crowded, and jostled among the Things of lesser
Moment, adiaphorous Things, we may be Orthodox, and assert it, Orthodox and
deny it; and thus they have degraded it to a Ceremony, and so by their
Principles to be exploded.

But because the Order of these Things is hugely considerable, if we may have
leave to believe the Scripture; Though of lesser Moment if we durst believe the
Defense. I will briefly inquire with Reverence, into the Mind of God in this
Matter of Repentance.

1. If we observe in what Order our Blessed Redeemer has commanded his
Apostles, and in them all his Ministers of the Gospel to the End of the World,
to proceed in their dealing with Sinners in Order to their Conversion, and
turning to God: And this is punctually laid down, Acts 26. 18. The Gentiles
unto whom I now send Thee (Paul) to open their Eyes, to turn them from
darkness, to light; and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of Sins: Where we cannot but observe. That the first step that
Effectual Grace takes in Concurrence with the Ministers is to Open their Eyes;
that they may see their Sin and Misery; The next step he takes, to turn 'em
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God; in which
Repentance is included, nay, this Turning is Gospel Repentance: And all this
Work is expressly in Order to the Receiving of Forgiveness of Sin.

2. And as this was the express Order, in which Christ commanded his Apostles
to Preach the Gospel, so it was the same in which he himself Preached it, Mark
1. 16. Jesus came into Galilee, Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and
saying, the Time is fulfilled, the Kingdom of God is at Hand, Repent ye, and
Believe the Gospel: Thus was the Gospel Preached, in and from the beginning,
thus Sinners Repented and Believed in Order to Pardon.

3. And in the same Order is Christ represented dispensing Repentance and
Pardon from the Throne, Acts 5. 30, 31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and
a Savior, to give Repentance to Israel, and Remission of Sins.

4, The same Method the Apostle Peter pursued in his excellent Sermon, Acts 3.
Where when he had first, ver. 14. urged it upon their Consciences. That they
had denied the Holy One, and the Just, and desired a Murderer, yet he invites
them, ver. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be Converted, that your Sins may be
blotted out, etc.

5. And though the Old Testament, will not sway much with an Antinomian, yet
methinks they might allow that Evangelical Chapter of the Evangelical Prophet
to be good Gospel, Isa. 55. 7. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the
unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have Mercy on him; and to our God for he will abundantly Pardon.

6. And its a little considerable, though not much, that our Author did once
prescribe this very Method to his Gospel Minister, Display, Pref. The first
Work of a Gospel Minister is to Preach up Repentance toward God, and then Faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Upon the whole Matter then, It evidently appears, that the first Paper, did
not at all Answer the great End of the United Ministers, viz. To remove their
Jealousies, which upon good Grounds they had justly conceived of some that were
inclinable, and more than inclinable to Antinomianism; and therefore might
demand Satisfaction of their Faith in these Points, in the Name, and on the
behalf, of their Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

[2.] Our Authors adds, That there being a Controversy among the Reformed
themselves about the Order between Faith and Repentance, and which has the
Priority, and Antecedence, and whether Repentance was a necessary praerequisite
to Pardon. The Composers of the first Paper waved the Determination thereof: To
which I return, This is not to Answer but to Praevaricate. For:

1. Who were those Reformed ones that Controverted, Whether Repentance be a
necessary Praerequisite to Pardon? None but the Reformed Antinomians; and the
great End of the Articles sent by the United Ministers, was to discover whether
there were such Latent among them, or rather because that was sufficiently
discovered, to Discover who they were. 2. Had this Gentleman dealt honestly,
and plainly, he should have said there are some Antinomians among us, of whom
we are tender; some of these never joined in the Union, and others are gone
off, now for their Sakes, we would a little dawb with our untemper'd Mortar and
Plaster over this Point of the Antecedence of Repentance to Pardon; to this it
would readily have been Replied: Sir, we know it well! their Writings, their
Preachings sufficiently inform us; but these we will either Reclaim, or
Discover. 3. And if he had that Art to find out a Temper to palliate Matters
which were really of great, though by him made of lesser, of no Moment; why
could he not have given us a Cast of his Office in Matters were really of
little Moment? But here lay the Partiality; on the one side they screw up
Articles above Ela: On the other they sink 'em below Gammut. They insist
stiffly, inflexibly upon a worthless Phrase, in the Doctrine of Satisfaction, as
if all Religion depended on it, must Live, or Die with it: When it was of no
Moment at all to the Explaining or Confirming that Doctrine, which had been
fully and faithfully provided for in the several Confessions of the Churches;
but for the Doctrines of Faith and Repentance in Order to the Pardon of a
Sinner, these they wave, and leave them undetermined.
[3.] Whereas he says, The Composers of the first Paper, waved the
Determination of these Matters, which was no more than was done in the
Composing of the seven Propositions, which were renounced to the End we might
express our Abhorrence of Antinomian Errors: What will not this Gentleman
attempt in the Twy-light, who imposes thus upon us at Noonday? Let us make a
Query or two upon it.

1. Was there no more required in the seven Propositions than was in the first
Paper? For shame! The Fourth Proposition of the Seven was this: We Renounce
this Doctrine, That any may expect Pardon, without Repentance: If God had
promised Pardon without Repentance, we might have expected it; and if we may
not expect it in Faith, I conclude, God never promised it: Upon what Grounds
then do Men delude the Souls of others and their own, who encourage them to
expect Pardon without Repentance: But was there any Word in the first Paper
tending, sounding this Way? 2. Where or when were the seven Propositions
Renounced, especially the Fourth? By the Orthodox United Brethren it was, by
the others never; but he that can be false will be fallacious.
[4.] Whereas he adds, That Mr. W's insisting on the Assertion, of the
Necessity of Repentance in Order to Pardon, about which the Orthodox have
differing Sentiments, it was at last Agreed to Assert the Necessity of
Repentance, and leave this Controversy undetermined.

But this is but his Coleworts boiled so often till they are Poison: For we
deny that the Orthodox have different Sentiments about this Matter, and affirm
that they are Heterodox who deny the Necessity of Repentance in Order to
Pardon: And herein he manifestly contradicts himself; for in the Paragraph
before mentioned, he asserts that the seven Propositions were renounced to this
End, that we might express our Abhorrence of Antinomian Errors, among which
seven, this was the Fourth, That we may expect Pardon without Repentance; and
yet now he asserts with equal Confidence, that this was left undetermined:
These were some of his confused and disturbed Thoughts at that Time.

I will shut up this Head of Discourse with a Remark or two:

1. The first Thing I observe is, from a certain Author whom our Defender
thinks, at least asserts to be his own Self: Append. to Display, p. 18. where
he quotes the Reverend and Learned Dr* Owen in his Treatise of Justification.
Who can be (says he) more express than the Doctor, for he Asserts. 1. The
Necessity of Faith as Antecedent to our Actual Justification in the sight of
God. 2. That this Faith includes in its Nature the entire Principle of
Evangelical Repentance, so that its utterly impossible that a Man should be a
true Believer, and not at the same Time be truly Penitent. 2. My next Remark
shall be from an Author, who I am most certain is his own Self, and that is the
Defender: Who p. 86. tells us There may be very Material Difference about that
Order of Things, and reference to one another though there be agreement as to
the Things themselves: Now its probable this is the same Author, for I assure
you it is in the same Book, who says, p. 66. The avoiding as much as possible a
running into the Discussion, and Determination of Differences of lesser Moment;
viz. The Controversy about the Order, between Faith and Repentance, which has
the Antecedence and Priority, and whether Repentance be a necessary
praerequisite to Pardon: Now Though I with my Self, and so will the Intelligent
Reader think; how comes it to pass, that the Priority of Faith and Repentance
between themselves, and their Antecedence to Pardon, should be a Matter of
lesser Moment in one Case, and yet make such a Material Difference in another?
This puzzled me for a while till I found out the Mystery: That in the one he
was purging himself, and his Antinomian Brethren, of their Errors, and then
they were Matters of lesser Moment; but in the other Case he was loading with
Reproach the Subscribers to Mr. Flavell's Blow at the Root.
The Truth is, some of the most Important Controversies that have given trouble
to the Church of Christ, have been about the Order of Things: The Order of the
Divine Eternal Decrees have ministered as much matter of Dispute, as the Decrees
themselves; and the great Controversies about Faith and Repentance, have been
in what Order they are to be placed in reference to Justification; Thus when
our Defender has occasion for it, they shall be material and momentous; and
when he has no such occasion, they shall be trivial matters, and of lesser
moment.

I have done with our Defender at present, because he has done with, and undone
himself: He himself has Determined this Point, That Repentance is necessary to
Pardon. Dr. Owen has Determined it too; and the Scriptures of Truth have
Determined it long before them both, and yet now for the sake of his dear
Antinomian Brethren, he has undetermined it again: So true is the Observation
that some have made of this Gentleman, that he can shift his Sails as the Wind
Veres, and Determine and Undetermine, and if need be Re-determine the
Controversy over and over, to the end of the Chap ter,

. 6. It is seriously and sadly to be lamented, that Disputations should not be
managed among us, for their true and proper ends, to search after, and find out
the truth, but in a cunning way either to disguise Errors, that they may look
like Truths; or to misrepresent Truth, that it may look as deformed as Error.
But thus it has fared with Trade, which from a fair and equal way of dealing,
has degenerated into a Mystery of Stock-jobbing; and with the Trade of War too,
which is changed from fair Combating in the open Field, to Marching,
De-marching, Counter-marching, and a thousand Subtilties without fighting; such
are all our Modern Disputes, perverted into a Course of Cavilling and
Sophistry, to subserve the Interest of a Party; a notable Instance of which
Artifice I shall now present to the Reader.

The Rebuke had said, That the Phrases of a Commutation of Persons between
Christ and Sinners; and his taking on him the Person of Sinners, were wholly
unknown to those Confessions of Faith, which were made the Test of soundness in
the Faith, by the United Ministers. Nay, he went higher, That if you searched
all the Confessions of the Reformed Churches, you should not meet with these
Phrases, no not one of them.

To answer this Challenge, the Defender has compased Sea and Land, rummaged the
whole Harmony and Body of Confessions, and after all his tedious Inquiry has
found, or thinks he has, or would persuade us he has found at least one that
will furnish him with Matter for a Triumph: It Is in the Confession of the
Church, (Who would believe it?) the Church of Scotland, the National Church of
Scotland! But thus he glories: We shall find the very Phrase of Christ's dying
in our Person, inserted into the Confession of their Faith. Well! we long to
hear the Words! He quotes them thus. It became the Messiah and Redeemer to be
true God, and true Man, because he was to suffer the Punishment due for our
Sins, and to appear in our Person before the Judgment Seat of the Father, to
suffer for our Transgression, and by Death to destroy him that had the Power of
Death: Why then here is an end of this business, unless our Author be as
deceitful a Translator, as he is a Reporter. No doubt the mere English Reader
thinks he has now done his own Work, and my Business; and that he has produced
one Confession which really asserts that Christ suffered in our Person; and I
confess my self one of those Credulous Souls, that thought, and many others do
still think, that either his Conscience or his Credit would have checked him
from imposing upon us by a False Translation. But I am now once more convinced,
that Interest, and the Good Old Cause will overruled both those sorry things,
Credit and Conscience; for the Latin Article runs thus: That Christ did
appear, Quasi in persona nostra; As it were in our Person: Did he then flatter
himself, that none of his Readers could read or construe a word of familiar
Latin? Or did he think it worth his while to sham the World for an Hour? Or is
there such great Advantage gotten by a Lying Tongue that is but for a moment? A
poor sorry moment, till his Neighbor comes and searches him out with his
Falsifications: The Reverend Fathers of that Synod, who Penned that Article
were wise, and well knowing that the Phrase of Christ's dying in our Person,
was harsh, and might suffer evil Constructions, did mollify and qualify it
with a quasi, that it might not grate the Ears, nor grieve the Conscience of
any, nor choke the Faith of the Subscribers or Assenters; and I cannot but
wonder, that even our Author should give it us true in Latin, and yet
prevaricate in the English, unless he considered that not one in twenty that
would be cheated by the Version, could undeceive themselves from the Original.

I only add, That if this Phrase sweetened with a quasi, or some such limiting
Term will do him any Service, I can help him to one from the great and
judicious Calvin, who upon 2 Cor. 5. 21. thus expresses himself: Christus
quodammodo personam nostram suscepit.

But I will expose this Fraud no further at present, only will note, That tho
he pretends to have found one, and but one, or to speak correctly, not one
instance for this Phrase; yet he cannot pretend to have found one Example in
any Confession, no not a Shread or Scrap of one for his other celebrated Phrase
of a Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners.

But these things we shall meet withal again and again, when we come to the
main of the Cause, let this suffice for a taste of our Author's Integrity, and
to teach us what we must expect from him in the sequel of his Defense.

Reader! Perhaps thou have seen how the Heron pursued by the Mounting-Hawk,
slices upon her Enemy; or heard how the Hollanders routed the poor Iaponese, by
charging their Artillery with Excrements, when all their Ammunition was spent.
Or of that Creature in Germany that defends it self against the Hounds, with
the Artillery of its Posteriours; The same Defense has our Author made; and
whether his Close-Study, or his Closestool affords him better supply, I must
leave rather to the Arbitrament of thy Nose, than of thy Understanding.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
HAving received many Letters from Persons of great Learning, relating to the
Matters in Controversy between the Reporter and my self. I have composed my
Answer to the Defense out of those respective Returns to the said Letters,
which Method, I conceive, will contribute not a little to the Diversion and
Delight, the Ease and Refreshment of the Ingenious Reader, who may now at his
own Choice entertain himself and his Thoughts, with which of the Subjects he
shall please.

LETTER I. Of a Commutation of Persons, between Christ and Sinners.
WOrthy Sir, You assign me a difficult Province; and I fear, it is not A single
Paper that will absolve this Business: But that I may set you Right in this
Matter, which the Report and Defense have so wretchedly perplexed and
imbarrassed, give me leave to proceed in my own Method.

. 1. I have readily granted, That there is a Change of Christ's Person for
sinners: That God the Father graciously admitted a Mediator to undertake the
desperate Cause and Case of Sinners, to suffer and die in their room and stead:
That our Lord Jesus Christ readily accepted of, and consented to this Overture;
and accordingly in due time, did actually offer up himself a Sacrifice to God,
by which he made a proper, full and perfect Satisfaction to the Divine Justice:
Now as this is freely owned by all that wear and deserve the Name of
Protestants, so it fully, tho briefly, expresses The Doctrine of Satisfaction.

To this the Defense says, That the Rebuke knows not what to make of it: which
you are to look upon as one of his Insolent Huffs; to which contemptuous and
opprobrious Language I am now so habituated, that I am almost hardened against
it: But is it so hard to know What to make of a change of Christ's Person in
our stead? Then 1. How shall we know what to make of the Doctrine of Sacrifices
under the Law? which will teach us, that where God allowed the Sacrifice to
die, he permitted the Offender to escape; and if Christ was admitted to suffer
for our Sins, and in our stead, then we shall not suffer for our own. 2. But if
it be so difficult to make any thing of a change of Christ's Person for us: how
shall we make any thing of A change of Persons between Christ and us? seeing
that a single change must be presupposed to a double one. And this was all that
Grotius knew to make of it, De satisf. p. 71. Actus Dei de quo agimus, est
Punitio unius; ad impunitatem alteri consequendam: Thus Christ suffered that we
might not suffer, and Divine Justice punished him that he might spare us: Thus
much Grotius made of it, and let our Author make as much more of it as he can.

. 2. This Phrase, A Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners, is a
Phrase of no necessity at all: There are others of tried and approved
signification, which have been examined by critical Heads, and scanned upon
curious Hands; such as have passed Current in all our sound Confessions of
Faith. Now, why we should venture upon un-common Terms, when the World is wide
enough, and our own Language copious enough, I can see no Reason to oblige us:
But if they who enforce it, have any secret Reasons to themselves, to contend
so passionately for a Phrase never delivered; it is enough for us to contend
zealously for the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and let them fight for a
Phrase who have need on it.

. 3. This Phrase has been miserably abused by the Antinomians; and I think it
prudence to keep a jealous Eye upon it, when we see it not only contended for by
them, but imposed upon us too, with such desperate Fierceness, as if all
Religion must stand or fall with one sorry Phrase. Let me Sir, once more
re-mind of Dr. C's. Acceptance: Here is a direct change! Christ takes our
Person and Condition, and stands in our stead; we take Christ's Person and
Condition, and stand in Christ's stead; so that if you reckon well, you must
always reckon your selves in another Person, and that other in yours: This is
a Commutation of Persons with a witness! 1. We stand in Christ's Person and
Condition, that is, we suffered in Christ's Sufferings; not only Christ
suffered for us, and in our stead, but we also suffered in him, satisfied in
him. And then 2. From that Moment in which Christ suffered for us, and we
suffered in him, we must in strict Justice be discharged; for since we stood in
his person, as well as he in ours, what should hinder our Actual Discharge? And
at this Door all the Antinomian Speculations rush like a Deluge in upon us.

. 4. This Phrase admits of a Socinian Sense too, Report p. 9. Socinus and
Crellius granted there was a Metaphorical, or rather, an improper Change of
Persons: but this is more fully evidenced from the Rt. Rd. Bp. of Worcester in
his Letter to Mr. W. p. 57. Such a change of Persons as implies, that one is
appointed and allowed to act on behalf of others, and for th ir advantage, the
Socinians never denied. It Is not therefore the use of the Words, but the Sense
of them that is to be inquired into: Some may affirm a Change of Persons, and
yet be Socinians, and others may deny a Change, and yet be far enough from
Socinianism. Seeing then this Phrase has been Pressed, taken the Press-Money
and Clothing, and Served on both sides: Seeing it has been true to no side;
seeing it is capable of being interpreted to a twofold evil sense, and can have
but one good sense, and that when we force a good sense upon it, it sits uneasy
under it, and is scarce able to support it, we may reasonably demand, That it
be bound to its Good Behavior; and that we be not compelled to swallow a
Phrase without Chewing, which may possibly stick in our Throats, and choke us.

. 5. Nor can we yet find, after all our search, no, nor the Defender, after all
his more curious Inquiry, That this Phrase has appeared in any Confession of
Faith of any Church of whatever Denomination. We have those extant of
Episcopal, Presbyterian and Congregational Persuasion, of England, Scotland,
France, Ireland and Holland, Compiled by Persons, Learned, Godly and Wise, and
if they knew this Phrase, and judged it either necessary to confirm, or useful
to explain the great Doctrine of Satisfaction, wherein they were so express,
clear and full, they would not, they could not have omitted it.

. 6. And among those Articles which were pitched upon as the Test, and Standard
of Orthodoxy, and upon which the Brethren did Unite, did this Phrase never
appear; nor was the Rejection of it numbered among the Objections brought in
against Mr. Williams's Book; and its more than probable, had this Expression
been insisted on in the previous Debates among the Brethren, in order to their
Coalition, it had prevented their Union; and we now find it has been made an
Engine to widen the Breach among them that were once, and might have again been
United, had not this, and some other odd Terms of Art, been skilfully managed
to keep it open.

. 7. Nor can I understand how this Phrase of a Commutation of Persons between
Christ and sinners, is either serviceable to the explaining or confirming the
Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction, that is, his suffering and dying in our
Stead, to expiate our Sins, or satisfy Gods Justice. 1. Not to the explaining
it: Because wise Men always endeavor Non fumum ex fulgore sed ex fumo dare
Lucem. they explain a Thing less known, by that which is better known, and
think it absurd to Comment on the Twylight by the Beams of Midnight. Nor, 2.
To the confirming or proving it: For seeing the best that can be made of this
Phrase is, that its equivalent to that of Christ's suffering and dying in our
Stead; if it be so, it will be hard to prove a Thing by it self: For this is
but the Learned Argument, Christ suffered in our Stead, because he suffered in
our Room; and he suffered in our Room, because he suffered in our Place: But of
this kind of Argumentation we shall find the Defense fruitful to a Miracle.

. 8. And this Phrase when all is said, and done, is but a Phrase, and never yet
had its Signification Authentically fixed and stated by a competent Authority;
The Trumpet gives an uncertain Sound; so that if we subscribe it, it must be by
an Implicit Faith in its own good Meaning.

. 9. Much less can we submit to its being imposed upon our Faith, to be
believed upon the Pains and Peril of Heresy. And we know that by this Method,
the most abominable Heresies in the World, were Canonized for the greatest
Truths: That Monster of Transubstantion was at first in its Infancy, a mere
Opinion that floated up and down in the Brains of Private Persons; it became in
a while to be tossed upon the Tongues of Scholastic Wits, till at last it got
firm footing in the Lateran Council; and in process of Time became settled in
the Conventicle of Trent, and has since been the Neck-verse to many thousand
poor Protestants: Thus we fear, that this Notion which now they play withal,
should in Time become the Test of the Faith of sound Protestants, and all shall
be damned that cannot subscribe the Antinomian Creed.

There was a Time, when the Presbyterians were blamed as too Rigid in imposing
their Sentiments, and the Congregational magnified themselves, as Persons of a
better Temper, and more Christian Moderation: But we have now gotten a small
number of Antinomian Independents, who are far more Imperious, Bigoted, and
Tyrannical than ever the Presbyterians could be justly charged to be: I will
give you one Passage from the Preface to the Declaration of the Faith of the
Brethren at the Savoy. Such a Transaction (the compiling of their Articles) is
to be looked upon, but as a meet, or fit Medium or Means, whereby to express
their common Faith; and no ways to be made use of, as an Imposition upon any:
Whatever is of force or constraint in Matters of this Nature, causes them to
degenerate from the Name and Nature of Confessions, and turns them from being
Confessions of Faith, into Exactions and Impositions of Faith.

. 10. Whereas there is such an exact Harmony between all the Confessions of the
Reformed Churches, in the Articles of Satisfaction, and Justification; that he
that believes one believes all; yet we see they are drawn in great Variety of
Expressions and Phrases, and Penned Diverso stylo, non diversa fide; a strict
Conformity there is in the Sense, no Uniformity in the Words: Now what a
Confusion would it make in Men's Consciences, to suppose a Christian sound in
the Faith, that believes according to the Confession of the Church of Scotland,
and yet Heterodox again, as soon as he sets his Foot over the Tweed, because he
has not yet formed his Thoughts according to the Words of the Church of
England? Or that a Professor should have been sound in the Faith at
Westminster, and yet by that Time he could walk as far as the Savoy, he should
be unsound again: Truth is Truth all over the World: Whereas Phrases are of no
farther use, than to express our Conceptions properly to others, and that they
be adapted to signify the Orthodoxy of our Minds.

. 11. I must insist upon it still, that this Phrase, A Commutation of Persons
between Christ and Sinners, does really carry a Mutual and Reciprocal Sense: If
Grammar may have leave to judge; thus it sounds to English Ears, let 'em be of
what Bore they will: It Is not long that this Phrase was common amongst us:
There is a Commutation of Prisoners between France and England: And not one
Man, no, not an Antinomian, but understood it, that the English Prisoners were
exchanged for French, and the French for English, mutually and reciprocally;
and that the Transport Ships passed mutually, and reciprocally, between
Plymouth, and St. Malo's; St. Malo's and Plymouth: And I doubt not but our
Lawyers will stand by us: If Articles of Agreement be drawn, that there shall
be an Exchange or Commutation of certain Lands, between A. and B. they will
Construe it, That A. shall exchange Blackacre with B. for White-acre, and that
B. shall exchange mutually White-acre with A. for Black-acre: And if we should
walk the Exchange of London, where a Bargain is driven thorough, between C. and
D. of certain Goods, Wares, Commodities, and Merchandises to be exchanged
between them. Its supposed, that if C. Exchanges his Malt for Hops: D. does
Exchange his Hops for Malt: And the Story is famous in Homer, of an Exchange
of Armor between Glaucus and Diomedes, where the former Commuted his Armor of
Gold, for the latters of Brass, and was sufficiently laughed at for his Fools
Bargain; (...). But let us seriously apply our Thoughts to the Phrase: A
Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners: Here are Two Persons
expressly in the Phrase; here is a Commutation between these Two Persons. That
which is Commuted is their Persons, for here is mention of nothing else: If
therefore the Commutation be not mutual, what Necessity is there that the
Phrase should import Christ's being exchanged for Sinners, and not that Sinners
were exchanged for Christ.

Against this, the Defense rouzes up all his Zeal: Where is the Man (says he)
that ever gave such a Sense? Be patient Sir. He show you the Man, no worse a
Man I assure you, than Dr. Crisp, the Man of your Counsel; who makes the Sense
mutual: We must reckon our selves in Christ's Person, and Christ in ours: Where
the Dr. speaks like an honest, plain-hearted Man; the Sense of whose Words is
conformable to his Phrase; whereas our fine Sparks have couched a Sense under a
Phrase that will not bear it: Now though I can be Content that every one should
abound in his own Sense, yet if I could help it, no Man should abound in his
own Nonsense.

Ay, but (says the Defense) The Learned Witsius is persuaded that no Man in his
Wits, did ever Dream of such a Sense (pray Mark the elegant Quibble, Witsius
and Wits) To which I say, it is not my fault that Men run out of their Wits; but
this makes my Argument so much the stronger. If no Man in's Wits will say it,
why should any Man not out of his Wits say that which inferrs it? All will say,
Christ suffered in our stead, none will say we suffered in Christ's stead, pray
then invent a Phrase that will express Christ's suffering in our stead, and not
ours in his; but then you must resign all your Right, Title and Interest in a
Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners; for that signifies either
both or neither.

We might therefore justly wonder, but that we must wonder at nothing in such a
Writer, that he should take this for a good Answer: I affirm, that if there be
a Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners, this must according to
Grammar be Construed mutual and reciprocal; O but says he, none ever affirmed
the Consequent; why then do you affirm the Antecedent from which by just
Consequence, the Consequent follows? If an Argument be brought, which by clear
Consequence brings the Respondent into a gross absurdity, impossibility or
blasphemy; He that brings it, shall not be responsible for the absurdity, or
blasphemy which follows, but he that asserts that which, if true, would infer
it.

I can easily from hence Retort upon himself that Charge of Blasphemy, which he
would fasten upon me, p. 33. The Blasphemy is his own, not mine. It Is not the
Result of my Assertion, but of his own Phrase. Thus my Argument proceeds, if
there be a Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners, that Commutation
according to the Letter of the Phrase must be mutual: If it be mutual, then as
Christ suffered and died in our stead, Sinners must be supposed to suffer in
Christ's stead: O but the Consequent is Blasphemy! Is it so? Then thank your own
Self, and your Antecedent that inferred it: For if there was a Commutation of
Persons between A. and B. then A. was commuted for B. and B. for A. and other
Grammar, of this Phrase, nor he, nor you, nor I, nor any Man else can make.

12. Lastly, And yet after all this, as we have told him, so we tell him now
again: If a proper Orthodox Sense, which shall express neither more nor less,
than that Christ died in our place or stead, to make Satisfaction to Divine
Justice, can be settled, and entailed upon this Phrase; and that the Truth be
not betrayed either to a Socinian or Antinomian Construction, I could be
Content to admit the use of it, though otherwise I would choose one of a more
determinate Sense, and obvious Meaning: And this I would do not for the sake of
the Phrase, which I look upon as improper, but for the sound Meaning, which may
be (if it can be) settled upon it.

As suppose my Subscription was demanded to this Sentence, in the Polaski;
Acciam croc solerouch Alla Moustaph gidelum a manahem varakini onssere
Carbutath. Of this now do not I understand one Word, more or less; but our
Learned Divine, who is well skilled, I perceive in the Lingua: Assures me upon
his Honor it signifies no other than this: If Riches increase, set not thy
Heart upon them, for he that loves Silver shall not be satisfied with Silver,
nor he that loves Riches with increase: Perhaps I might subscribe: And just
thus would I deal with this Phrase; I look upon it as very ill turned; as oddly
expressed, as that which has been abused to an ill Sense, yet upon the Credit of
one I can trust, that it intends what is Orthodox, and that the Mercury is
Corrected and Dulcified, so far it may be tolerable.

But I have detained you Sir too long; Excuse if you please,

Your Servant, etc.

LETTER II. Of Christ's Suffering in our Stead, and for our Good.
SIR, had I ever once denied that Christ suffered in our stead, or affirmed,
that he suffered only for our Good, the offense you speak of had been Just; but
as the Case really stands, it is nothing but the common Artifice of my
Antagonist, who has summoned in, and mustered up all the little Tricks of his
fruitful Invention to represent me a Socinian; and the whole strength of his
Argumentation lies in this sort of Cunning, which I shall neither Envy nor
Imitate.

To give you a clear Account of this Matter, I will deduce it from the
Original: Mr. Williams had owned that Christ suffered in our stead: The United
Brethren did judge, that that Expression was sufficient to justify his
Orthodoxy, in the Point of Satisfaction: But the M. S. who had resolved before
hand that Mr. W. should never be sound in the Faith as long as he lived, found
something to Object; viz. That our modern Innovators had assumed to themselves
a Privilege of Imposing an Heterodox Sense upon sound Terms: This Answer I
thought was the most disingenuous that ill Nature could ever give: And I
replied to it, as it deserved: That then it seems, Mr. W's Words were Orthodox,
and sound in themselves; and what would these unreasonable Men have him do? How
shall he speak to please 'em? Must he use Heterodox Terms, and then qualify
them with a sound Meaning? They that revile him for speaking soundly, because
others put an ugly meaning upon his Words, how would they have reviled him, had
he spoken Heterodoxly, and then thought to salve all, with a sound meaning?

Ay, but (says M. S.) In our Place and Stead, with some signifies no more than
for our Good: To which the Rebuke answered, it is impossible they should. And
these are the Words that have raised the hideous outcry, that he is a Socinian,
an Unitarian, and whatever else, this Gentleman's Rancour is pleased to bestow
upon him: Now a few Words would serve to satisfy any one in this Point, whose
Ill Nature had not made him peevish, and whose Interest had not instigated that
Ill Nature.

For as nothing was, so nothing could, be further intended by those Words, than
that our Lord Jesus, in every Particular, in every Branch of his Sufferings,
had in his Eye, and did keep upon his Heart, the Spiritual and Eternal Good and
Happiness of all those whom the Father had given him: And though he transacted
the whole affair of Redemption, nextly, and immediately with God, yet all did
terminate and issue out ultimately in the Good of the Elect and his own
Redeemed ones.

Tota Mediatoris Natura est Relativa: All that Christ did or suffered was
Relative: It respected God or Man: As his undertaking respected God, it was
satisfactory; as it respected Man, it was Beneficial and Saving: In respect of
God, all was in our stead; as it respected Man, all was for our Good: And
whatever direct and immediate influence they had on God, yet in their last
Resort in their Fruits and Effects, the Benefit would redound to Man.

And I would gladly see these Men try their Wits, and assign us one single
Instance of the Sufferings of Christ, but it did Terminate in our good: Let 'em
name any one branch of those Sufferings, which were really in our stead, and at
the same time I will prove, that they were for our good, and for nothing more,
nothing beyond our Good.

The Defense it self has dropped a word, P. 13. that unawares will clear this
business. Christ's suffering for our Good, respects only Man; very true, and it
was in respect of Man only, that I affirmed, It was impossible it should be for
more than our Good.

Could our Author have considered, as he could not but see, P. 35 of Rebuke; he
could have given himself Satisfaction what my Judgment was in this matter; but
then it would have spoiled the Glorious Design to represent me a Socinian: Thus
I express it. That which Christ suffered in our stead, was for our Good: To
bear the Punishment due to our Sins, was certainly for our good, that we might
not bear 'em in our own Persons: To make Satisfaction to Divine Justice, was
undoubtedly for the good of lost Sinners, that they might not be eternally in
Hell, always satisfying, but never having satisfied. That by his Death and
Sufferings, he delivered us from the greatest Evils, and purchased for us the
greatest Blessings, was certainly all for our good. So that he argues against
me, just as the Socinians do against the Orthodox. If for our Good (say he and
they) then not in our stead; whereas I will invert the Argument, If in our
stead, then, and therefore for our Good, because in our stead: And I must add,
Had not those Sufferings of Christ been in our stead, they had not been for our
good, as to any thing but what perhaps we might have had without them.

Sir, Tho thus much might satisfy you about my Orthodoxy, yet I cannot
satisfy my self, without a further clearing this great Truth of Christ's
suffering in our stead against the Socinians, and I bespeak your Patience in
perusing these few Particulars.

1. There are many Scriptures which expressly Assert, That he died and suffered,
gave himself for us, for us sinners, Matthew. 20. 28, The Son of Man came to give
his Life, a Ransom for many, (...): 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who gave himself a Ransom for
All: (...). A counter-Ransom for All, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Christ has once suffered
for sins; the Just for the Unjust to bring us to God: (...). Now the Rebuke
did, and does still judge, that these Phrases from the force of the
Prepofitions (...) and (...), especially in conjunction with Christ's
Sufferings, do necessarily import, and imply that Christ suffered, died, gave
himself properly and penally in our place and stead; and this we are ready to
maintain against the Socinians, p. 9. And Mr. Williams has owned as much as
this comes to, in acknowledging Christ in his Sufferings was an (...), that he
gave Life for Life, Soul for Soul, Person for Person, and for our Sins too,
that is in our ordinary received Phrase, he died in our stead. 2. That the
Socinians have wretchedly perverted the true Intendment of these Texts, by
glossing and diluting their true Intendment thus; he died for us, gave himself
for us: That is, say they, for our Good indeed, but not properly in our stead.
3. That they may give some color to their Subterfuges, they assign some
certain Benefits to the Death of Christ; as to give us an Heroic Example of
Suffering whatever Persecutions for the Profession of the Christian Religion;
and to confirm the Truth of his Doctrine by sealing it with his Blood, and some
few others. 4. In return to which, we say, 1. That it was a far greater Good,
that Christ by his Death procured for us: Dan. 9. 24. To finish Transgression,
to make an end of Sins, to make reconciliation for Iniquity, to bring in
everlasting Righteousness: In order to which, p. 26. The Messiah must be cut
off, but not for himself: And Heb. 9. 26. Now once in the end of the World,
has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. 2. We say that
these and other ends of his Death and Sufferings, could never have been
procured, had not Christ according to the Father's Ordination, and his own
consent, suffered in our stead, and made himself an expiatory and propitiatory
Sacrifice. And 3. We say, that all the Ends which the Socinians have assigned
to the Death of Christ, might have been attained without the Death of Christ,
the Doctrine was confirmed by Miracles; and the encouragement to suffer the
utmost for the Christian Religion, was from the Promises of present assistance
under them, and the Recompense of Reward to them. 5. That the satisfying Divine
Justice in our stead, and procuring thereby our good, are by no means to be
considered as opposite, but subordinate: For as I would answer an Antinomian;
let him give us one Instance in which Christ suffered in our stead, which did
not Terminate in our Good: So would I say to a Socinian; let him show me an
Instance of any Spiritual Good, which he could possibly procure or purchase,
without suffering in our stead. And here is the great Demonstration of the
Divine Goodness, that he has not separated his own Glory from the Spiritual and
Eternal Good of the Elect; and thus has our Blessed Redeemer secured both the
Demands of Justice, and at the same time the Salvation of the Elect.
To draw to a Conclusion of this Discourse: You observe that our Author's
singular Gift and Talent is, Misrepresentation; and this great Gift (wherever
he had it, or how he came by it, I know not) he exercises through his whole
Defense, to revile me as a Soc inian, an English Unitarian; this he brings in
by Head and Shoulders, Vapors with it, Triumphs in it, over looking that through
the whole Rebuke this Calumny had been abundantly obviated, of which I will now
give you overabundant evidence.

Reb. p. 6. That Christ was made Sin, a Sacrifice for sin, that he bore the
Curse due for sin, is so express the Language of the Scripture, that he who
denies the former, must disbelieve the latter.

Reb. p. 8. Certainly when Christ our only and ever Blessed Mediator, stood in
our place and stead, when he made his Soul an Offering for sin; when the Lord
laid on him the Iniquities of us All: There was a Change of Christ's Person for
Sinners: He was substituted in their room and stead.

Again, ibid. There is a Change, all own it; there was so under the Law,
Justice allowed that the Offender should live, the Sacrifice die: There is so
under the Gospel, that Christ suffered, the believing sinner is discharged,
just as Abraham sacrificed the Ram by God's own appointment; for, that is in
the stead of Isaac.

In a word: As I have always uniformly asserted, that Christ suffered and
satisfied in our stead, so shall I always Assert, that Christ suffered and
satisfied for our good; and tho I never affirmed that Christ died or suffered
only for our good; (which is the falsehood the Author would impose upon the
Reader and my self) so I did Assert, That it was impossible he should die for
more than our good; seeing he was pleased to make the Salvation and eternal
good of those whom the Father had given him, whom he had in his Eye and upon
his Heart, the great Commanding End unto which he referred all his Obedience,
Active and Passive; so that Christ had nothing more, nothing farther, nothing
beyond that in his Eye: But of these things thus far.

Sir, I am yours, as you know, etc*

LETTER III. Of Christ's being our Surety.
SIR, You come a little too quick upon me; other and better Work engaged my
Thoughts and Time, that I lost the last Post; and 'twas with some Difficulty
that I saved this: I will not dispute with you, why you caused me to break the
Thread of my Discourse about Commutation of Persons, etc. and are now urgent to
give you my Opinion about Christ's Suretiship; however I will comply.

I had but little concern with the Reporter in this Matter; only I offered my
humble Advice, Reb. p. 46. Not to insist so strictly upon the Terms of Debt and
Debtor; because if he supposed sin to be only a Pecuniary Debt, and the sinner
to stand obnoxious only as such a Debtor to God, as the Creditor; he has
betrayed the Cause he seems so Zealous to defend to the Socinians: And because
I thought he might give some Deference to the Learning and Authority of the
Bishop of Worcester, I seconded my Advice with a Caution from him: The true
state of the Controversy (says he) has been rendered more obscure by the
Mistakes of some, who have managed it with more Zeal than Judgment: -- That
Christ paid a proper and rigid satisfaction for the Sins of Men, under the
Notion of a Debt: This was the Caution the Bishop gave, and that was the
Counsel which I gave, to both which the Defender was too proud to hearken: But
the same Learned Person has in a late Letter to Mr. D. W. superadded weighty
Reasons to his Caution, p. 60. This (Christ's putting on the Person, and
standing in the place of a Debtor) I have showed long since to be a very wrong
Notion of Christ's Satisfaction, which in effect gives up the Cause to the
Socinians: For if Sins be considered as Debts, God may freely forgive them,
(without disparagement of his Wisdom and Justice) without Satisfaction. And the
Right of Punishment then depends on God's absolute Dominion, and satisfaction
must be by way of Compensation; but I cannot but wonder at the Author of the M.
S. that he does at the same time assert our Sins considered as Debts, and (yet)
the Necessity of Vindicative Justice; for what Vindicative Justice belongs to a
Creditor? May not a Creditor part with his own Right, and forgive what, and
whom he pleases, without any violation of Justice? I can hardly think that
those who write so rudely and inconsistently, ever penetrated into these
Matters in their Thoughts, but only take up with a set of Phrases and common
Expressions among those they converse with, which they look on as the Standard
and Measure of Truth about these Matters.

From this Day forward I give up the B -- as a lost Man among all the
Antinomians: but tho they can easily despise his Authority, they cannot so
readily answer his Reasons.

And yet there is one Argument against their Notion of a Money-Surety, which
will probably prevail more with them, because it is drawn from the Prejudice it
does their own Interest, than twenty drawn from the mischief it does to the
Cause and Concern of God, or Christ.

There is a Notion that obtains among the Antinomians; That God in that black
and sorrowful juncture when our Savior bore the Punishment of our sins, hated
his Son, as a Man hates a Toad: Now if Christ paid the uttermost Farthing of
that Debt, whereof all the Sons of Adam were non-solvent, not able to pay the
least Farthing, what reason can be assigned why God should hate him, or be
angry with him? I am well assured of our Author's good Nature in this case,
that if any one would pay him the desperate Debt of a sorry hundred Pounds, on
the behalf of a Decocted Bankrupt that was not worth a Groat, he would love him
(so far as ill Nature is capable of love) as long as he lived.

Yet still the Defense adheres to the Good Old Cause, p. 16. That Satisfaction
taken strictly and properly, is solutio Debiti; the Payment of a Debt wherein I
take the liberty to differ from him, and that Satisfaction and Solution are two
things, and differ as much as the giving the idem and the Tantundem do; but in
this unnecessary Quarrel, I have no call to engage; and yet after all, the
Defense seems to stagger and totter, as if he had no plerophory in the Case,
but that this very Solutio Debiti, is nothing but a suffering the Punishment
due to our Sins.

It may be seasonable to hearken to the Reverend and Learned Dr. Owen upon this
Subject in his Appendix to the Doctrine of Satisfaction, p. 221. It is
otherwise in Personal guilt, than in Pecuniary Debts; In these the Debt it self
is only intended, the Person only obliged with reference thereunto: In the
other, the Person is firstly and principally under the Obligation: And
therefore when a Pecuniary Debt is paid, by whomsoever it be paid, the
Obligation of the Person himself unto Payment cease ipso facto.

Let the Reader hence see the true Reason why all our Antinomians contend so
earnestly that sin must be considered as a Pecuniary Debt, because then upon
Christ's Satisfaction, which they call the Payment of the Debt, all the Elect
must be discharged; and then indeed there is no need of Faith or Repentance in
order to the Pardon of sins; but the Doctor goes on: But in things criminal,
the guilty Person himself being firstly, immediately and intentionally under
the Obligation to Punishment, when there is introduced by Compact, a vicarious
Solution, in the substitution of another to suffer, tho he suffer the same
absolutely, which those should have done, for whom he suffers, yet because of
the Acceptance of his Person to suffer, which might have been refused, and
could not be admitted without some Relaxation of the Law: Deliverance of the
guilty Persons cannot ensue ipso facto, but by the intervention of the Terms
fixed on in the Covenant or Agreement, for an admittance of the Substitution.
It appears from what has been spoken, that in this matter of Satisfaction God
is not considered as a Creditor, and Sin as a Debt, and the Law as an
Obligation to the Payment of the Debt, and the Lord Christ as paying it, etc.

To subjoyn any thing of my own to the Reason of two such great Men, would be
but to light a Candle to the Sun, and yet it may be permitted to observe a few
things about Christ's Suretiship.

1. The Term Surety is Sacred, Canonical, not to be violated with profanc and
unwasht Hands: We therefore give that Reverence to it, which we owe to Divine
Revelation; and if those other Terms and Phrases, about which the Quarrel has
been so scalding-hot, could plead the same privilege that they had the Stamp
of Ius Divinum upon them, it had prevented, or soon silenced the Debates about
Words: tho some diversity of Thought might have arisen about the extent of the
Signification. 2. The Apostle is express Heb. 7. 22. Jesus was made a Surety of
a better Covenant, (...), And yet the same Apostle continuing to entreat of the
same Subject in the next Chapter, Heb. 8. 6. styles the same Jesus, the
Mediator of a better Covenant, (...); which would tempt one that is used to
search out the Mind of God, by comparing one Scripture with another, to think
that a Mediator of a better Covenant, and the Surety of a better Covenant, are
Expressions of the same Latitude, and exactly equivalent one to the other. 3.
This better Covenant, whereof Christ is Mediator or Surety, being a Mutual
Covenant, wherein God engages to be our God, and engages us, as we engage our
selves to be his People: Christ undertakes on the behalf of both; for Gal. 3.
20. A Mediator is not a Mediator of one; He therefore undertakes with both, and
for both; nor can any be meet to bring God and Man into one Covenant, and
preserve them both inviolably in that one Covenant, but he who is God and Man
in one Person. 4. The word (...), which is but once found in the New Testament,
as applied to Christ, receives no prejudice thence, as to its Divine Authority,
(as to whatever Truth is contained therein) for even the (...) are of Divine
Inspiration. 5. Yet that it is but once used, is some inconvenience to our
understanding the just and adequate import of it; for when we meet with a word
frequently used, it stands in diverse References to the Antecedents and
Consequents, which by a due comparing them may reflect much useful light into
its signification. 6. We have not much relief from its Etymology; only that he
that is our Surety, must be one near, or near of Kin to us: for seeing that Sin
was committed in the Humane Nature, it seems reasonable, that if God will so
far Relax the Law, as to admit a Surety or Mediator, yet that he must be of the
same Nature with the Offenders, for whom he is so, Heb. 2. 14, 16. For as much
as the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also took part of the
same -- For he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham he
took: And the Hebrew word (...), which is parallel to the Greek (...), denotes
one near of Kin, who thereby had a Right to Redeem, Ruth 3. 13. 7. It is a most
perilous Course which some have taken; who when they meet with a Word or Term
that carries Allusion or Metaphor in it, spin out the Metaphor as far as ever
it will run, and sometimes so far and sine, that the Thread breaks* and force
the Allusion as far as ever a fruitful Fancy can carry it; and hence they raise
Doctrines, build up Observations, and wring out Consequences and Conclusions
till the Blood comes; and then entitle all those Doctrines to Divine
Revelation, and lay the Brats of their own begetting at the Door of the
Scripture: Thus has it fared with many sacred Terms, especially with this of a
Surety; a Popular way of Tickling the Humors of People, but of no small
prejudice to the Truth; where Men gather what God never sowed, and believe what
he never revealed. 8. Tho Surety and Mediator are Terms belonging to the same
Person, yet that of a Surety, is commonly restrained to the Sacerdotal Office
of Christ, as he made Satisfaction to Divine Justice, and stood in our Place
and Stead for that great End; yet whether Justice be the Essential or Rectoral
Justice, or rather the Rectoral Justice of God, as grounded upon his Essential
Justice, I dare not determine, nor is it so material, for both the one and the
other are Vindicative, and that is enough to exclude for ever the Notion of a
Money-Surety. 9. Lastly, Those Expressions of some Learned and Godly Divines,
who have mentioned a certain Bond, wherein Christ and the Elect are said to be
jointly bound to God; may for ought I know, intend no more than a Recognizance
to Divine Justice in a Criminal Cause, not a Money-bond to a Creditor: However
that be, I could never yet see, or get a sight of that Bond; no more than of
our Original Contract, or the Pacta Conventa in a Remoter Kingdom, where our
Author having greater Acquaintance, may possibly have better Intelligence.
But Sir! as I intimated, I have little concern with the Defender in this
matter, and therefore this shall be all the trouble you shall receive from me
in this Affair. Only I am

Your humble Servant, etc.

LETTER IV. A farther Account of the Phrase, A Commutation of Persons between
Christ and Sinners.
SIR, You pretend that I am a little in Debt, either contracted by my own
Promise, or your Demand, to give you some farther account of this troublesome
Phrase, A Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners: and admitting the
Debt, I am now furnished wherewith to pay it.

You may remember, that the Rebuke, p. 30. had said, A Change of Persons
between Christ and Sinners, may possibly be capable of receiving a sound sense,
and yet is more sounding toward a dangerous one: And therefore the Brethren
did unanimously agree, to grant as much as the sound sense would bear, and to
pass by the other, which was liable to be interpreted to a sense of Malignity,
etc.

Now, Sir, I refer it to your Judgment; What could be more fairly spoken? More
honestly asserted? More liberally granted? And yet the Defense shall rack, and
wrest, and torture and vex these innocent Words to a meaning as odious and ugly
as his own Heart can invent.

Thus p. 14. he infers from hence, That the Paragraphs, Terms and Phrases which
were in the first Paper, and were waved in the third, could not (according to
my Judgment) bear a sound sense; That is, I must needs affirm, the Phrase could
not bear a sound sense, because I affirmed expressly, it could: What then must
we do? Or how must we speak to please this Man? If his Logical Abilities be so
formidable, so miraculously great, who from an Affirmative, can conclude a
Negative, or his Honesty so little, that he hopes to persuade his easy Reader
that he has done it, its high time to lay aside all Endeavors to answer him.

For more particular satisfaction, I desire you to consider.

. 1. The third Paper declares the Brethrens Adherence to, and Approbation of
the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, the Consession of the Assembly
at Westminster, or that at the Savoy; and I will confidently say, That whatever
of a sound sense can be found in this Phrase, is found in some one or other of
those Confessions: If therefore these Confessions be owned, that sound sense is
owned; if any unsound sense be waved, it is also equally waved in those
Consessions.

. 2. The Brethren in their third Paper, have expressly given us both the evil
sense which they reject, and the good sense which they own; and how then could
he boldly face it out, that they have left out the good sense, or supposed that
it could not bear one?

1. They provide in some measure against the evil sense. This Commutation of
Persons with us, was not natural, in respect of either Nature, by which his
individual Substance should become ours, and ours his: Nor moral, in respect of
Qualities or Actions, whereby be should become inherently sinsul, and we
immediately sinless: Nor was it any Change, whereby his Office of Mediator
should be transferred in us: And they had good reason to provide against these
Implous Senses.

2. They propound a good sense, (if the Phrase will bear it) That Christ by
agreement between the Father and Him, came in our room and stead to answer for
our Violation of the Law of Works; he being made Sin for us, who knew no Sin,
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Now this
is a good sense; that is, it is a great Truth; but whether it be the sense of
the Phrase, is reasonably doubted, and will need much Charity to help it out;
for a good-natured Man may be content to put that sense upon a Phrase, which is
not really in it.

. 3. If the Defender says true, That this and some other Phrases are virtually
included, in that of Christ's dying in our place and stead; then the Brethren
have not left out, but virtually taken in either this or whatever other sound
sense the words are capable of; for whoever takes in the thing containing and
including, takes in whatever is contained and included therein.

. 4. Whilst my Eye is upon it, I will give you a Rare Specimen of our Author's
Argumentative Excellencies, which I am sure will surprise you: It Is in p. 46.
where after a hideous Outery, like that of Micah, when the Danites had
plundered him of his Gods. Alas Sirs, (says he) if you will allow us no sense
of the Phrase of a Change of Persons between Christ and us, but that we dyed
for Christ's Sins; [as he died for ours] This is Blasphemy! But have a little
patience, good Sir, do not discompose your self! they have allowed you a far
better sense, that he gave himself for us; that he died in our stead, to
satisfy God's Justice: This is a sense you may have, and imports no Blasphemy;
but if you will have a Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners, in
the true, proper, literal, and Grammatical sense, you must avoid the Blasphemy
as well as you can: And now for his Argument.

If there be not a Change of Persons between Christ and us, there cannot be a
Substitution of Christ's Person in our room: To which I softly return, I deny
the Consequence: There may be a Substitution of Christ's Person in our Room,
and yet no Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners; and that upon
these Reasons. There may be a Substitution of one Person for another, where
there is no Commutation between those two Persons: Substitution and Commutation
are not Terms of equal latitude, the latter is larger than the former; and
therefore the granting the former, will never infer the latter.

But still he argues: If there be no Substitution of Christ's Person into our
Room, Christ could not suffer in our Stead: I readily grant the whole. And he
might have concluded, that if there be no Substitution of Christ in our stead,
Christ could not suffer in our room; and so again, if no Substitution in our
Place, then no Suffering in our stead, and these are all Meridian
Demonstrations.

But yet he is resolved to give this a more Genteel Turn: Here is the very
natural, and irrefragable Consequence which flows from my Brothers denying a
change of Persons between Christ, and us: Truly the Rebuke is not willing to
invade any one of his just Titles, much less that of the Irrefragable Doctor
which is the due of the Defender; but he does absolutely deny, that his denial
of a Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners, does infer that there is
no Substitution, no Suffering, no Satisfaction, for the Reason before given:
However let us hear him argue, if Christ suffered not in our stead, he could not
make satisfaction for us. Well! it is allowed: Go on! If there was not a
Substitution of Christ in our place, he suffered not in our place: As true as
Gospel, and much truer than our Authors Gospel: If he had not been in our
place, he could not have suffered in our place: Now comes the mortal blow! If
there was no change of Persons between Christ and us, there could not have been
a Substitution of Christ in our place. And here again I deny the Consequence:
That though there was a Substitution of Christ's Person in our place, there was
no need that there should be a Commutation of Persons between Christ and us:
Thus much is true, if Christ had not suffered in our stead, he could not have
satisfied for our Sins; if he had not been substituted in our stead, he could
not have suffered in our stead; and if an exchange of Christ for us, had not
been allowed by the Father, and consented to by himself, he could not have been
substituted in our stead; but that a Commutation of Persons is necessary to
support any of these Conclusions, I utterly deny. In a word, the Doctrine of
Satisfaction has stood firm on its own Basis, many Centuries before this
untoward Phrase was known, and shall stand unshaken when this, and all
arbitrary Expressions shall be banished out.

You see Sir, Our confident Defender for all his Hectoring has not been able to
produce one Article of any one Confession to vouch for his great Phrase; A
Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners, and whereas in other Cases,
when his Common-Place-Book will furnish him, he uses to press us to Death with
Quotations from Learned Men* Yet upon this Head, he is modest and sparing, and
has only named, not cited three mighty Names, the Bishop of Worcester, Hugo
Grotius, and Dr. I. O. three great ones I confess, and might have formed the
Tresviri de Republica Literaria Constituenda; but now as for the Bishop, he has
cleared himself out of their Hands, and for the two other, I will do them the
same Service.

1. For Grotius: He is indeed named in the first Paper, named in the Defense,
but yet not quoted, no Words of his alleged, that own a Commutation of Persons
between Christ and Sinners: And there is a mighty Reason for it, because there is
no such Sentence to be found in him, I mean in his Book, De Satisfactione; a
Commutation of Christ's Person for Sinners, that I find; that Christ suffered
and dyed in our room, that I find; that he was substituted in our room for this
end, I find too: And all these fully, and solidly cleared and vindicated from
the Cavils of Socinus, I find; but a Commutation of Persons between Christ and
Sinners, I can no where find.

In cap. 9. de Satisfact. he mentions a Surrogation; As when Christ is said,
Heb. 2. 9. To taste Death for every Man, (...). To die for the People. John 11.
50. That he suffered for us, (...), 1 Pet. 2. 21. And whereas Socinus had
pleaded, that the Preposition (...), and the Latin [ pro] are ambiguous, and
oftentimes denote no more than for the Benefit of another; Grotius answers,
that as to those two Words it may be true, yet the Preposition (...) utterly
rejects that Evasion, and signifies properly a Substitution in the room of
another, or the Commutation of one for another. So Math. 20. 28. Mark 10. 45.
Thus when its said, Math. 2. 22. That Archelaus reigned in Iudaea, (...), in
the room of Herod his Father; there must be imported a Substitution of one in
the Place of another: And thus (says he) its taken in profane Authors, (...),
one in the room of many; I may add that of Virgil, Unum pro multis dabitur
Caput: And this (says Grotius) Socinus cannot deny, but that the Phrase (...),
Commutationem quandam indicat: It does imply, that there is some sort of
Commutation: But Grotius contends earnestly; that the Expression (...), denotes
veram Commutationem, a true Commutation. Now the only Question with us is this:
What that Commutation is? Whether it be a single or a double Commutation? And
through that whole Chapter he carries it thus to the diligent Observer, that he
means only a Commutation of Christ's Person for us in our stead; which is the
Truth we contend for, but yet is an utter stranger to that Phrase of a
Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners; and this is most evident
from his concluding Words of the whole Discourse. Ea autem quae de
Commutationis ^^gnificatione in Particula, pro a nobis hactenus dicta sunt, ex
sacrificii expiatorii natura multum illustrantur: What we have hitherto
discoursed of the meaning of a Commutation, in the Particle Pro, is very much
illustrated from the Nature of an expiatory Sacrifice: Now then, we appeal to
all Mankind, whether there was not a Substitution of the Sacrifice in the room
of the Offender; but withal we deny, that it could be said there was
Commutation of Persons between the Offender and the Sacrifice.

(2.) Consider we next his Quotation from Dr. Owen, p. 38. Here is (says the
Defense) a Commutation or Change of Persons which in some respect is mutual but
not in all respects so: Now here are some Things that I am obliged to make a
Particular Remark upon.

1. That our Author is now run into the same Contradiction, that he once
charged Mr. W's with: A Commutation, and no Commutation! a Change, and no
Change! What will bring off the one, will bring off the other. 2. Observe the
strong Inclination our Author has to make this Commutation mutual; it is in some
respects so! Its Pity it is not so in all; for the Phrase requires it should be
mutual and reciprocal; only the Mischief is, it can never be proved. 3. If a
mutual Commutation between Christ and Sinners, would imply (as he says)
Blasphemy; then this various respect serves to this end, to prove that in some
respects it is Blasphemy, though in others not. 4. It Is evident, he quotes the
Dr. with a guilty Conscience knowing that his Words will never reach the Proof
that its produced for: Let us therefore hear the Dr. himself, A change of
Persons between Christ and us, as to Sin and Righteousness, whence Christ is
made our Sin, and they who believe are made the Righteousness of God in him:
Now I would ask, what is here in the Doctors Words to his purpose? Christ is
made our Sin: So he is in the business of Satisfaction; We are made (we who
believe) his Righteousness: yes, so we are in Justification: But these two are
not ad idem; they relate to, speak not of, one and the same Thing; for the
Question is, whether there be a Commutation of Persons between Christ and us in
satisfaction? and in that respect, which is the only respect in which the
Question stands, there is nothing mutual, nothing reciprocal, which yet should
have been proved, if he would prove the Propriety of this Phrase, A Commutation
of Persons between Christ and Sinners.
Thus fallaciously has he quoted, so miserably has he wrested that Learned
Persons Words, and I doubt not we should have discovered far greater Fraud, had
he dared to direct us to that place in the Doctor's, where he supposes him thus
to speak.

You see, Sir, at what Rate this Gentleman Argues, and how he quotes his
Authors; a notorious vein of this Fallacy runs through his whole Discourse: I
have already observed to you some of 'em, and I reserve many others for a
particular Paper: At present you see upon what Terms I am willing to serve you,
who am,

Sir, your Faithful Servant, etc.

LETTER V. The most Horrible, and Uncharitable Censure, which the Defense
passes upon the Distressed French Churches.
SIR, you will forbear to wonder that the Defense, p. 78. has past so severe a
Censure upon the distressed, and almost extirpated Protestant Churches of
France, when he has usurped upon God's Throne, and dared to give a Judgment
upon God himself, and his Tremendous Providence: What the Psalmist complains
of his Implacable Enemies, the same may our poor afflicted Brethren complain of
theirs, Psalm. 69. 26. They persecute him whom thou have smitten, and talk to
the Grief of those whom God has wounded. They that are at ease in Zion, are
ready to insult over the Ruins of the desolated Temples, and triumph over the
dead Bodies of the Saints that lie in the open Fields, and there are none to
bury them: And as if this were a little matter in his Eyes, he pretends to have
got the Key of the Divine Secrets, and to pry into the Awful Judgments of the
Glorious and Holy Jehovah: And whereas we all see and bewail their calamitous
Estate, he can assign the very sin, for which the Lord has thus severely tho
Righteously dealt with them: so easy a step is it from the Seat of the
Scornful, to the Iudgment-Seat of God.

But you shall hear him in his own Language. I cannot but reflect upon the
Calamitous Condition into which our Brethren in France are fallen, since they
omitted to Witness so fully as they should have done, against Amyraldian
Encroachments made on the common Faith of Protestants; wherein you may observe
some notable things.

1. He could not but reflect -- No doubt of that, where the Fever of
Uncharitableness burns in the Heart, it will break out at the Lips; and
commonly it leaves a Blister upon the Tongue. A Soul full of fermenting
Passions, must have vent, or it will break: Thus when he was full of his own
Self-Admirings, he could not forbear, but must be a Blab of his Tongue, and
proclaim them to all the World, Preface, etc. 2. He will still call 'em
Brethren, whence you may interpret his frequent Complement to his Rebuker,
Brother, Brother, all along, and yet it is but the Prologue to the Tragedy, or
the Prefatory Kiss to the Assassinating his good Name. 3. You may please to
inquire at your leisure by what Warrant he dares to annex this particular
Judgment to this particular Sin: It becomes all the Sons of Men to stand upon
the Shore of this Infinite Abyss, and adore his unsearchable Judgments; but we
have got one that dares to leap into the Gulf with a strong Conceit: Si ego
non capio te; tu capies me: The Psalmist would teach us all more becoming
Modesty, Psalm. 36. 6. He does great things past finding out: His Ways are in
the Sea, his Paths in the great Waters, and his Footsteps are not known: But as
deep as God's Counsels are, we have a Gentleman, whose Line and Lead will
fathom them. 4. It Is most certain, the Hand of God has been stretched out
against, and laid heavliy upon his precious Servants in that Kingdom; but so it
has been in former Times, when in the Parisian Shambles thirty thousand were
butchered in a few Days, and in the rest of France near a hundred thousand; and
yet they then kept Religiously close to the Confession of their Faith; and God
had secret Reasons why he permitted that Massacre, which he has not acquainted
our Author with, notwithstanding his pretended great familiarity with his
Creator. 5. Nor does it appear that the French Churches did now decline in
their Zeal for their Professed Principles, but in every Synod avowed their firm
Adherence to their Confession, and if I mistake not, solemnly ratified it with
an Oath by all the Elders and Pastors. 6. And when Information was given in,
that some of their Articles had been contravened by some Passages in Monsieur
Amyrault, the Synod of Alanson charged him home with the Matters gathered out
of his Writings, which he interpreted into a more Commodious Meaning; and yet
the Synod severely decreed against his plausible Palliations, and gave him a
strict Charge to forbear them, which he promised to do. 7. And yet this
Amyraldus seems not so great a Heretic, that he and a few more should be able
to draw down such dreadful Judgments upon the whole Protestant Churches there;
for I perceive Dr. Owen looked upon him as one holding the Foundation, upon
which he and others had erected the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction: See his
Epistle to the Reader to his Declaration of the Doctrine of the Trinity; upon
the same Foundation does proceed, Paraeus, Piscator, Lubbertus, Lucius, Camero,
Voetius, Amyraldus, Placeus, Rivetus, Walaeus, Thysius, Altingius, Maresius,
Esenius, Arnoldus, Turretinus, and -- Baxter, with many others. If this
Amyraldus was such a desperate Heretic, that he could corrupt a whole Nation,
Dr. Owen has placed him in very good Company. 8. And I pray what could the
National Synod have done more to prevent the growth and spreading of his Error?
And to render themselves clear in this matter, they censured him, brought him
to Repentance, etc. and what more than this do the Protestant Principles allow
of? Should they have delivered him up to the Secular Power; or erected a Holy
House of Inquisition among the Reformed Churches? 9. Supposing they had been
guilty of some Connivance, yet it is a presumption, none but such a High Flyer
would be guilty of, to tack this Judgment to that sin, and be positive that it
was inflicted on them for this sin of Omission: It becomes us all, who are so
purblind, even in common Providence to Adore, and not to search into the
Mysterious Labyrinths, of the Divine Dispensations, where we may sooner loose
our selves, than find out God; and forfeit our Eyes by a curious prying into
God's Ark, than to satisfy our own Curiosity by such inquisitiveness. 10. And
why could not this Gentleman be as favorable to God, as he was to Mr. M. and
Mr. C? Who when they declined Subscription to the first Paper, yet he brings
'em off cleaver with some reserved Reasons, not to us, but themselves best
known; and might he not have been as tender of his Creator, and allowed him his
Sovereign Reasons to justify his own Acts? Seeing he does not always, nor is
he bound to give an Account of any of his Matters, Job 33. 13. we acknowledge
and bewail our Brethren had their Provocations, and we yet hope our Gracious
God will, and do pray that he would at last look on their Distresses, and not
leave them to be a Scorn to Fools. But to affirm that this Punishment was the
Produce of that Sin, is more than he can prove, and therefore should have been
more than he had asserted. 11. And surely we have reason to look at home, and
advise whether we have not more scandalously omitted to bear our Testimony
against Socinian, and Antinomian Heresies; when this censorious Person has
published a System of the Gospel, which has neither Regeneration, Conversion,
Justifying Faith, Repentance, nor good Works in it: Now if their Sin of Omission
brought destruction upon them, what must we expect for these Commissions? and
if the green Tree was hewn down, and cast into the fire, what will become of
the dry? and if they be punished because they gave not so full a Testimony
against Amyrault, what must become of them who have given so full a Testimony
to Antinomianism?
But, Sir, you shall not rely on my word in this matter. I will give you a full
and faithful Account as it stands on Record, from the National Synod of
Alanson, Anno 1637. Synodic. in Gal^ia Peformata.

1. Monsieur Amyrault appeared, and presented himself in the Synod, to give an
Account of his Doctrine; offering to submit to its Judgment, yet professing he
was persuaded in his Conscience that he had neither taught by word or writing
any Doctrine repugnant to the Word of God, or the Confession of Faith,
Catechism, Liturgy, or Canons of the National Synods of Alez and Charenton,
which had ratified those of Dort, and which he had Signed with his Hand, and
was ready to Seal with his Hearts Blood.

2. The Sieur de la Place, (our Defender's Great Placaeus) gave an Account of
the Reasons that induced him to approve and license the Writings of Amyrault;
which he did according to the Privilege granted by the Discipline of the
University; where the said Amyrault, and de la Place, were Pastors and
Professors: But hence it may be inferred that this great Placaeus was of
Amyrault's Judgment; for the University could not give him a Privilege to
License a Book against his Judgment and Conscience.

3. The Synod having read the Papers, and heard Amyrault diverse times, and
considering the difficulty of the Questions, did constitute a Committee of
diverse Learned Pastors and Professors, to digest Matters, and to reduce into
order the Explications given by the said Amyrault of his Doctrines, and when
finished to make their Report to the Synod.

4. After the Committee had made their Report, Amyrault being called in,
professes with the deepest seriousness before God, that it was never in his
Thoughts to Propound, or Teach any Doctrine, but what was agreeable to the
known* and common Expositions of the Creed contained in the Confession of the
Faith, and in the Decisions of the National Synod held at Charenton, 1623. all
which he was ready to sign with his best Blood.

5. Hereupon he explains his Opinion ahout the Universality of Christ's Death,
Conditional Decrees, and about distinct Decrees in the Counsel of God, etc. of
all which Points he gave the most Plausible Interpretations he could.

6. The Synod not satisfied with those Interpretations of dangerous and dubious
Expressions; enjoined him and all others to refrain from those Terms of
Conditional frustratory Decrees: and further enjoins him not to use the Terms
of Velleity, strong Affections and Desires which he ascribed to God, of those
Things which he has not, nor ever will effectuate, with that Sobriety and
Prudence, that they might not give the least occasion of Offense to any Person,
or cause them to conceive of God in a way unsuitable to his Nature: And the
said Amyrault professed his Acquiescence in all as aforesaid; and having Sworn,
and Subscribed it, they gave him the right Hand of Fellowship.

Upon the whole Matter, what justifiable Grounds our Author had to justify his
Censure and Sentence upon the French Churches, for their not bearing so full a
Testimony against Amyraldus his Encroachments, I cannot discern; much less can
I see upon what Reasons he could ascribe their Miseries to this Provocation.
But nothing is more common with bold and rash Men, than to engage God in their
little Quarrels, and entitle God and his Gospel to their petty Notions; and
could they but borrow the Thunderbolt for a Day, O how would they avenge
themselves upon those saucy Wretches who have dared to control them in their
Pretensions: Thus have they carved out for God, a Remunerative and Vindicative
Justice; the former of which shall Reward them and all their Friends; the
latter, Avenge them of all their Enemies.

But, Sir, I shall not need to desire you not to grieve those afflicted ones
whom God has wounded; not to trample upon the dead Bodies of the Saints, whom
the Antichristian Enemy has slain; nor to insult on the Ashes of their
Habitations burnt, or the Ruins of their Temples demolished; nor join with the
Bloody Papists in crying out, Aha! Thus would we have it! But of this matter,
thus much.

I am Yours, etc.

LETTER VI. Of the Curious Artifices employed by the Defense, either to Blanch
his own Errors, or to Blacken the Truth.
SIR, Your Letter comes like an Interloper, to disturb the settled
Correspondence, and Epistolary Trade, now for some time driven between me and
my old Friend; yet because you promise we shall receive no more such
Interruption, you shall for this once be gratified.

You observe in my Author's Discourse more than ordinary Cunning; and it is
true, I have been more puzzled to find out his Fallacies, than to detect and
answer them when once found out: And if I can but clearly lay open to you the
Intrigues of his Defense, you will easily answer his Book, nay the Book will
answer it self, and you will always find there is the same Difference between a
Poaching Sophister, and a Close-studied Divine, that there is between a
Pettifogger* with all his Chicanery, and a profound Lawyer.

. 1. His great Artifice, is to be operose and voluminous (if a Pamphlet may be
styled a Volume) in Proving what his Antagonist never denied; sweating at an
Argument, when he might as well be cool; and freezing, where 'twas expected he
should have more warmth. Now do you not wonder, what he can propound or promise
to himself from such a Procedure? I assure you Sir, it is the best piece of
Policy he is guilty of.

1. An ingenious Reader will be so Civil to him as to think, sure I have
denied, that Christ suffered and dyed in our stead, or else a Learned Divine
would never take such Pains to prove he did; for no Man would be at all this
fatigue to prove what was never denied; and if he can gain this Point upon his
easy Reader, he has prepossessed him with an Opinion, that his Antagonist is a
wretched Heretic.

2. And what if the discerning Reader sees through the Fraud, its worth the
while to deceive him for an Hour, though he sets himself to right in the next:
And for the most part, he that Calumniates stoutly leaves some Prejudices
behind, that will stick, and defy all after-Vindication.

3. And he gains this at least, that he shall be Reputed, a well-read Man, That
can bring such Legions of Authors into the Field, though he has no Enemy to
Fight with: Which was the Vainglory of that Emperor who drew up his Army in
Battalia, marched to the Sea, and though he had no other Service to Command 'em,
but to gather Cockle-shells.

4. Besides its absolutely necessary, that some or other should be daily made
Socinians; for propagating the breed, as the individual wear out; for as a
sorry Wisp, is a Theme copious enough to engage an Harangue for an Hour long to
a well studied Scold; so these two Letters D. W. shall serve to Equip a whole
Fleet of Pamphlets: And had it not been for him hitherto, and now for poor Me,
I know not what the Club of Revilers would have done for a little scribbling
Practice, or where they would have had Bread, but I will Address my Self to
evince this great Artifice.

Page 15. Def. What more evident than that, if the Lord Christ had not made
Satisfaction of Gods Justice for us, there is nothing left for the Relief of a
convinced Sinner? p. 16. Its Christ's Righteousness alone that can pass the
Examen in the great Day of the Lord, ibid. If Christ endured not the Punishment
due to us for Sin; there can be no proper Satisfaction made to the Justice of
God. And now to prove what none that deserve the Name of Reformed Protestants
ever denied, he pours upon us a whole Brigade of Authorities, Rivet,
Turrentine, Dr. Edwards; and thus, p. 44, 45. he is Copious in proving, in his
way of Proof, by inartificial Arguments, That Christ dyed properly in our
stead: And asserts from B. Reynolds, That Christ had the guilt of Sin, so far
upon him, as it Notes the Obligation, and Subjection to Punishment: And after
all these pompous Quotations, I have no other Answer to give, than what was
given to Mr. Impertinent, when he made that starcht elaborate Oration in Praise
of Peace; Quis enim unquam vituperavit? I pray Sir, who ever spoke one Word
against it?

. 2. Another of his familiar Artifices is, to advance very fair and modest
Premises, and then to hook in more to the Conclusion (even the Question it
self) which was not contained in the Premises.

Thus he quotes Grotius to prove, that Christ suffered truly and properly in
our stead, and that there was a real Commutation of Christ's Person for us, all
which we grant, and earnestly contend for; but then he draws in his great
Phrase, a Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners; which should have
been solidly proved, not shamefully begged. Thus he speaks, p. 37. Here Is not a
Word of the change of one Person only; it being a Commutation, which is a
change between one Person and another. No Sir, this is your own Fallacy: It Is a
change of one Person for another, which Grotius proves, but not a Commutation
of two Persons, for each other: Which you should have proved, and if you could,
no doubt would.

. 3. His famous Artifice, which had better become the Chaplain of the Copper
Mines in Sweden, than one that styles himself a Minister of the Gospel, is a
down right Falsification.

The Rebuke, p. 30. had asserted, that the Brethren did unanimously agree to
grant as much as the sound Sense could bear; ( viz. in these Phrases a
Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners, etc.) Now he charges the
Rebuke, p. 16. as if he said, they could not bear a sound Sense: And p. 26, 27.
If we may believe our Brother. The Assertion of the Necessity of a Commutation
of Persons between Christ and us, in order to a due Explication of Christ's
Satisfaction, and our Justification, cannot bear a sound Sense! Is it possible,
that the Reader however prejudiced, however biased, should not observe? 1.
That it was granted, that the Phrase might possibly bear a sound Sense. 2. That
the other Sense (and that only) which was liable to a Sense of Malignity, was
waved; and yet he asserts, that the Rebuke affirmed, it could bear no sound
Sense at all; and is at it again, p. 29.

Again, whereas the Rebuke had affirmed and proved (nor has any Thing been
offered in the least to invalidate the Proof) That Mr. W's did not deny a
change of Person universally, but restrictively; i. e. he denied nothing, was
concerned to deny nothing, but what the Dr. had affirmed; Reb. 38. he
nevertheless affirms, Its clear enough to me, (but to no Body else) that Mr.
W's does deny a change of Persons in every Sense. Why then (say I) to what end
do we Write, or Discourse or Dispute; if whatever we say, or however we express
our selves, our Words must be interpreted to a Sense and Sound clear contrary,
and contradictory to what they Literally carry?

One Instance more shall conclude this Subject. The Defense, p. 76. tells us:
That one Error embraced by the Remonstrants was (The same which his Brother has
in his Rebuke) that to Dye for Sinners, must not be understood, as if Christ
died loco, aut vice ipsorum, in their place and stead, sed bono tantum; but
only for their good. Now I challenge this false Accuser to produce the Place,
where I ever denied that Christ died loco nostro, vice nostra; or wherever, I
affirmed that Christ dyed only for our good; I did indeed say, it was
impossible that Christ should dye for more than our Good: That is, that there
was nothing beyond this, nothing more than this upon the Heart of Christ, than
the Benefit of those he dyed for; even when he offered himself, a Sacrifice to
Divine Justice, when he made his Soul an offering for Sin, when he was wounded
for our Transgressions, when he bore the Iniquities of us all in his own body
on the Tree, yet all this Terminated ultimately in our good; He was wounded for
our Transgressions, that by his stripes we might be healed; and beyond these
spiritual and eternal Benefits, our Faith cannot believe, our Hope cannot
expect.

I will yet add one more: The Rebuke, had owned a change of Christ's Person for
us, that is, in our place and stead; and to make sure work, that no false gloss
might be put upon it: It was explained from the Bishop of Worcester, who calls
it a Substitution of one Person (Christ's) in the room of another (Ours.) Now
how wretchedly and falsely does this Author represent this, p. 35. As the Phrase
of a change of Persons between Christ and us, is entirely denied. (There Is one
Rapper! It was never entirely denied in the Rebuke) so, A new Phrase is
invented and put into its place, of a change of Christ's Person: That Is another
loud Rapper, for the exchange of Christ's Person in suffering for us, is no new
invented Phrase, but the Invention of the Holy Ghost, who assures us, that
Christ gave himself a Ransom for us, Math. 20. 28. But then he adds a third,
Interpreting this change of Person into a Socinian Sense: As if all we allowed
was, that the change was in Christ's Person from Ease to Pain, whereas what we
asserted was a change of Christ's Person for us, in our stead.

. 4. It Is a little pretty Device, and he makes much use of it: To Vest himself,
and his Friends, with the splendid Titles of the Godly Learned: And then to be
sure all that oppose their Sentiments, must be Ungodly Block-heads. Thus when
the Pope had arrogated to himself the Title of Infallible, he has in that one
word determined all Controversies, for what can be reputed Orthodox which is
Condemned by the Infallible Chair? The same use the Romanists have made of the
Word Church: So that whoever detains their pretended rights is a Church-robber,
and guilty of Sacrilege. These Terms our Author has engrossed to himself and
party, p. 12. Def. These are the Phrases pitched upon by the Godly Learned; p.
17. This is Matter of grief to the Godly Learned among us; p. 48. It has been
the Practice of some to reject the use of such Phrases as have been pitched upon
by the Godly Learned: It would be a great kindness to inform us, who these
Godly Learned Persons are? How we may meet with them? Where we may speak with
'em? For those Reverend Divines who Composed the Articles of the Church of
England; those who Compiled the Confessions of Faith at Westminster, and at the
Savoy have been reputed by us, to be Godly and Learned too, but not one of
these is to be spoken with; and which is worse, none of these did ever pitch
upon these, or any of these controverted Phrases; but did conceive according to
the Light of the Age, that they had fully and clearly explicated the Doctrines
of Satisfaction and Justification, without these Pen-andInk-horn-Terms; but our
Author having monopolized Learning and Godliness to his own Party, runs away
with the Question, and they that boggle shall be censured for Profane and
Illiterate Coxcombs; and thus has he dealt with his Rebuker.

. 5. It Is an useful Piece of Art, which yet needs some Application of Mind to
discern it: That he secretly yields the Thing in Question, and then proclaims
himself Victorious and Triumphs in his Victory: Thus when he has made a hugeous
Bluster to justify his Phrases; yet he melts them down at last into that
Expression of Christ's Suffering in our place and stead. And this we call
stealing of a Fall.

P. 80. Defense, he speaks thus: Is it not enough that I have showed that the
controverted Phrases are included in the acknowledgment of Christ's making a
proper satisfaction to God's Justice for us? Is it not enough? No indeed, Sir,
is it not! For the Controversy was about the Phrase; whether that was proper,
adequate to the things pretended to be signified by 'em; but your Solution
speaks to the thing, about which we have no Controversy, but do zealously
contend for; tho we dare not with equal Zeal contend for a Phrase that was
never delivered to the Saints, nor they obliged to contend for it: But if it be
enough for you to own the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, without proving
the Phrase, it must be enough for us to own the Doctrine, tho we should reject
the Phrase.

But again, ibid. All these Phrases are virtually owned in sundry Confessions
and Synods, which have openly owned the Phrase of Christ's Suffering in our
stead. Why then does he quarrel? For if the owning the Confessions, be a
virtual owning of these Phrases, we who have openly owned these Confessions,
have virtually owned the Phrases; and why may not we be Orthodox upon as easy
and cheap Terms as himself?

But yet the Truth is; this Phrase, A Commutation of Persons between Christ and
Sinners, is not in my Judgment so much as virtually included in the Phrase of
Christ's dying in our stead. That which is larger, cannot be included in that
which is narrower; but this phrase, A Commutation of Persons between Christ and
Sinners, is larger, wider by one half, if I have admeasured right, than that of
Christ's dying in our stead, as I have already made it appear: Therefore if we
could persuade this Gentleman to wave his fine Phrase; and adhere to, and be
content with that other which he says virtually includes it, we should soon
adjust all Controversies, by resting in the Confessions and Synods; but that
would utterly spoil the gainful Trade of Doubtful Disputations.

. 6. It seems it is a necessary, though I humbly conceive an Impious Artisice, to
Depreciate the Sacred Scriptures, that he may magnify his Phrases of Humane
Invention: And if the Word of God be a perfect Rule of Faith and Obedience, (as
Protestants have ever hitherto maintained) we cannot allow the Imposing upon
our Faith any New Phrases, which carry not a sense evidently supported by the
Word of God.

But our Author tells us, P. 59. Defense, That the most pestilent Doctrines
have been oftentimes communicated in the Language of the Scripture: I must
declare my abhorrence and detestation of the Position, as Scandalous and
Blasphemous; and will maintain the contrary: That the Language of the Scripture
never communicated one pestilent Doctrine. Heretics may force, impose, obtrude
an Heretical Gloss, Interpretation upon Scripture Language, but the Language is
still sound, Orthodox and pure: And he quotes St. Hierome, Think not the Gospel
to be in the Words of the Scripture; but in the sense. Well: The Gospel lies
not in the Words of Scripture; then farewell the Sacred Canon! I did always
believe, that (...), 2 Timothy 3. 16. That the (...), the Writing was Divinely
inspired; and to what purpose do we inquire for a Divine Sense of Words that
are not so? This Principle would cut up all Revealed Religion by the Roots, at
one Blow. It Is this Principle the Jesuits have proceeded upon, when they
blaspheme the Holy Scriptures, as a Nose of Wax, a Leaden-Dagger, a pair of
Seamens-Hose; from this Principle have risen those audacious Attempts to fetch
new Senses from the transposing of Letters, Words, Sentences, of which
Meibomius has given some desperate Specimens.

But he goes on higher still, p. 60. and labors to prove his Error from
Biddle's Scripture Catechism: For there he has (says he) delivered in Scripture
Words very gross Errors. But this is a gross mistake; for Biddle does not
deliver his gross Errors in Scripture Words, but applies the wrong Scriptures
to his own captious Questions. Dr. Owen observes accurately upon this very
point: Biddle's Errors, his Body of Religion, lies not in the Answers; (which
are the Words of Scripture) but in the Interpretations and Conclusions couched
in the Questions: And it is most evident, that in all the Heretical Catechism,
had he applied the proper and pertinent Texts of Scripture to the Question, the
Scripture would have delivered it self from the Heresy insinuated in the
Question. See Dr. Owen Pref. to Brid. p. 11. 41.

At these horrid Rates must the Holy Word of God be reproached, that he may
advance his darling Phrases into the Throne: And they say, it is the Custom in
some Countries, That a Virgin must never be executed for any Crime, till the
Hangman has defloured her.

I add yet further, If the Word of God be not so secure, but that Men of
corrupt Minds, Reprobate concerning the Truth, may vitiate it with Heretical
Glosses, what security can we expect, that Phrases of Humane Invention should
escape better? And we have seen already a deplorable Instance in this Phrase, A
Commutation of Persons, etc. from whence such erroneous Inferences have been
drawn.

. 7. The last I shall mention is, That he has wholly altered the state of the
Question and Controversy; for whereas all that I opposed, was some odd Phrases
of dark and dubious Meaning, and as the Words seem to sound of dangerous Design
and Tendency. Keeping my self still Religiously to the Good old Doctrine of the
Gospel, proposed in the Holy Scriptures, in the public Confessions of the
Protestant Churches, even all we can meet withal in the Harmony, or Body of the
Confessions; and further, I do not know that I am obliged or allowed to go.
This Gentleman makes a heavy noise about the Doctrines we all own, waving the
Controverted Phrases: Thus fighting with his own shadow he is secure of the
Victory, and running alone, is sure to win the Prize.

Sir, I cannot forbear to give you a further taste of the excellent Temper and
Moderation of Dr. I. Owen, Diatrib. de Iustit. Divin. cap. 16. Summam rei quod
attinet, nos sententiae Piscatoris, suffragamur, sed quoniam nullius, in verba
jurare Discipulis Christi fas est: Omnium Phrasium, Argumentorum, Rationum,
quibus in sententiae istius Defensione utitur Piscator, patrocinium suscipere
Obligatos, nos esse minime Arbitramur? As to the Main of the Cause, I agree
with Piscator's Judgment; but because it is not lawful for the Disciples of
Christ to swear implicitly to any Man's Words, I do not judge my self obliged
to justify all the Phrases, Arguments and Reasons, which Piscator makes use of
in the Defense of his Opinion.

Sir, I can safely trust you to apply this Passage to the Case in Hand; and
only shall desire you to admire the Defender's singular skill, that can draw
Water, and strike Fire out of the same Flint, and can find Draining-work for
his Engine upon Salisbury-Plain: Tho I must aver it, That none do more
Disservice to the Truth, than by adding Humane Inventions to Divine
Revelations; and where the Golden-Chain of Salvation ends, to Eke it out with a
Thumb-Rope of Sand. Thus much in haste, from

Sir, Yours, etc.

LETTER VII. Of Christ's Suffering and Dying in the Person of Sinners.
SIR, That Correspondence which the Importunity of a Friend interrupted for a
Return or two, I shall now gladly reassume, and let the Matter be about another
Phrase. Since Theology is now adays turned into Phraseology; Christ's dying in
the Person of Sinners, or sustaining the Person of Sinners in his Sufferings;
for the Author's Phrase Book speaks with some variety: You may please to take
the Matter thus.

The Rebuke had said, p. 11. We ought in the first place to Inquire what they
mean by the Person of Sinners? And then to enquire about Christ's taking it up?
Does it import that all Sinners are United, and are to be supposed, conceived,
considered as one Person? And so Christ died, suffered, satisfied for that one
Person. Very good! Then I perceive we are tackt about to the Tents of the
Arminians, and do suppose that Christ died for all equally: For if all Sinners
be one, and are to be reputed as one Person, and Christ took on him that one
Person, it will be difficult for all their dividing and prescinding skill, to
make it out, how he died for one, and not for another; seeing all these
Sinners, as in Christ's Eye, are but one single Person.

Now to this Reason assigned against the Phrase, our Author returns not one
word; only tells us, That Christ and Sinners are here considered as one Moral
Person. Very right! And so did the Rebuke consider them, and that Consideration
gave the strength to the Objection against the Phrase; for if all Sinners be
considered as one Moral Person, and Christ be considered as dying in that Moral
Person; he must be considered as dying equally for the Moral Person; and then
how one Limb of that Person should be an Elect Limb, another a Reprobate Limb;
and how we shall avoid Universal Redemption, it is his Duty to take care: How
odly will the Elect and Reprobate look, when he has thus kneaded 'em into one
Lump? What a Monster will that Person seem, made up of such Integrals; and such
a Person as Mr. Hobbs represents his Commonwealth to be, an Aggregate of
Copper-Farthings, or Guinea's.

Of this Objection our Antagonist is so civil as to take no notice; the wisest
way in the World, unless he could have given an Answer: What does he then? For
a noise must be made! Why, he multiplies Quotation upon Quotation, Author upon
Author, and such a Lumber of Modern Testimonies, as if the Cause were to be
pressed to Death with number, not with weight; but this was the Logic of Job's
Friends, who proceeded eternally upon an Ignoratio Elenchi, Job 6. 25. what
does your Arguing Reprove? Thus all his Learned Divines are of this Faith, That
Christ dyed in our stead: But that this Phrase, Christ dyed in the Person of
Sinners, was necessary to the Explication or Confirmation of that Truth, they
prove not: But let us hear him speak; Defense, p. 11. The Phrases of a change
of Persons between Christ and us, and of Christ's taking on him the Person of
Sinners; and suffering in their Person, room and stead, are most apt to convey
unto our Understanding the True, the Orthodox, the genuine Sense of those
Texts: Christ dyed for our Sins, and for us: This he asserts with great Bravery
and Confidence enough, I hope we may have leave to wedge in a few Words.

(1.) As for one of these Phrases, viz. That Christ's suffering in the room and
stead of Sinners, is apt to convey to our Understanding the true, and for ought
I know, the genuine Sense too of Christ's dying for us, and for our Sins; I
agree with him perfectly, because every Expression in the World, is apt to
convey its own self to a humane Understanding.

(2.) And yet perhaps it had been more properly said, that Christ's dying for us
and for our Sins, is apt to convey to our Understanding this Truth, that Christ
dyed in our room and stead: For when all is said that can be said; it is the
Holy Scripture divinely inspired, that must convey to our Understanding
whatsoever we are to believe and build our Faith upon; nor ought we from Terms
of humane Contrivance to conceive of the Scriptures, but by, and from the
Scriptures of Truth to judge of, and to Measure those Terms and Phrases; and
from thence to form such other Terms as there is really need of, and occasion
for, which must clearly and adequately express the Mind of God therein
contained, and from hence they receive all their Value and Authority.

(3) I must nevertheless enter my peremptory Dissent to what he says; That
those Phrases, A Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners, and
Christ's suffering and dying in the Person of Sinners, are most apt to convey
to our Understanding the sense of those Scriptures, Christ died for our Sins,
and for us. And I advance these opposite Positions, That these Phrases are not
apt, nor more apt, nor most apt to convey to our Understanding, the aforesaid
Truths.

1. They are not apt in themselves, but inept and unproper to convey to our
Understanding those Truths; for that Christ dyed for us, and for our sins,
conveys to our Understanding, That there was a Change of Christ's Person for
others; but the phrase, A Commutation of Persons between Christ and Sinners,
conveys to my Understanding this Falsehood, That there were two persons
exchanged mutually each for the other; They are inept and improper to convey to
my Understanding the import of those Scripture Expressions, because they are
less known, less understood than those Scriptures which they pretend to
illustrate. 2. Nor are they more, but less apt to convey to our Understanding
the sense of those Scripture Expressions, Christ suffered for us, for our Sins,
than the other Phrase so well known and approved, Christ suff^red, dyed in our
room, place and stead, [loco nostro, vice nostra.] 3. Nor can they be most apt,
to do this Service, because Scripture Expressions and Phrases are more apt,
much more apt for that end than they, unless we should be so vain as to fancy
that the Spirit of God was not able to choose the most apt and proper Phrases,
to convey to our Understandings, whatever it was his Will we should believe
with our Hearts to Salvation: At this rate the Apostle spoke, and taught, and
argued, 1 Cor. 2. 13. Which things we speak, not in the Words which Man's
Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing things Spiritual
with Spiritual: Nor did St. Paul fear he should vent Pestilent Heresies so long
as he kept close to the Words of the Canon dictated by the Holy Ghost.
But it seems these Persons, whom our Author has Dubbed to be the Godly
Learned, have a privilege to render their Terms of Art more expressive, more
signisicant than the Canonized Expressions of the Holy Ghost. I must beg their
pardon! Men may deceive, and be deceived: What the Psalmist spoke in his haste,
the Apostle spoke in cool Blood, that all Men are Liars; that is, we can have
no infallible certain^y, no good security to rest our Faith upon them, further
than as they propose to our Belief, what is conformable to the Word of God

Sir, I need not give my self or you any further trouble in this matter. It Is a
Phrase, and but a Phrase that all this pother is about, and a Phrase none of
the best that ever was invented, and a Phrase that has been, and may easily be
interpreted to an evil sense; and the World has been troubled about some
fruitless, barren Controversies about it; and if any has occasion for it, let
'em use it, and for my self, I will use my own liberty.

But yet, Sir, because I am no Hider, but open-hearted, I will therefore deal
frankly with you, and give you what satisfaction I am able in this phrase.

1. I firmly believe that Christ took on him our Nature, the Nature of Sinners,
but not their sinful Natures: He was made like unto us in all things, yet
without sin, Heb. 4. 15. I believe the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us,
John. 1. 14. (...). The Eternal (...) condescended to dwell in the Humane
Nature as in his Tabernacle: That this Assumption of the Humane Nature into
personal Union with himself, was a Foundation laid in the Counsel between the
Father and the Son for his suffering in his Holy and Sinless person, for and in
the stead of Man.

2. I believe also, that according to the Compact and Counsel that was between
them both, the Father and the Son, Jesus Christ did take on him our sins; that
is, he bore the punishment due to them, and therefore in some sense bore the
Guilt too, as the R. R. B. B. of Norwich and Worcester have explained the Term,
from Isa. 53. 5. He bore our Sins, and carried our Sorrows.

3. I have read, and probable 'twas true; There was once a Crew of lewd
Heretics, who affirmed, That Christ took on him the person of sinners; and
these from the first Author and Founder of their Sect, were called Nestorians;
who maintained that Christ was constituted of two persons; the one the Eternal
(...), who did assume, the other a Humane Person, who was assumed* And I
confess my self prejudiced against the phrase of Christ's taking on him our
Person, because it carries an odd sound that syncretizeth with the Nestorian
Gibberish.

4. Let any Man use the phrase that is fond of it, he shall not offend me, but
none shall assume to himself the power to impose upon my Faith or Conscience
those Arbitrary Terms; for with the same ease that they propose or impose them,
I can reject them, and stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made me
free, nor will I be entangled in, and with that Yoke of Bondage; for since
there are choice of phrases, whose signisication is clear, and not so obnoxious
to Misinterpretation, which convey to my Mind the Import of the fundamental
Truth: I will choose, while I am at my own liberty to choose, some other, and
will never gratisie, never humor these Tyrants over, and Usurpers on
Consciences.

5. And because the Public Confessions of all the Reformed Churches, have not
thought fit to use this Phrase of Christ's dying in the Person of Sinners: Its
a strong Argument to me, that they neither judged it necessary to the
Explication or Confirmation of that Doctrine of Christ's dying in our stead; and
that either they were Strangers to it, and it to them, or at least had more
Discretion, than to vex and torment the Faith of Believers, with a Term
borrowed from the Civillians, or the Stage Players.

6. And its safe to govern our selves in all such Matters, by the Rule and
Reason of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. where he assigns one and the same Reason, for
his Advice to a clear contrary Practice; ver. 25, 26. Eat (says he) making no
question for Conscience Sake: For the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof: And yet ver. 28. Eat not for Conscience sake; for the Earth is the
Lords and the fullness th^reof: This has been, and shall be the Rubric of my
Behavior, where it is reasonably applicable: If any Phrase be dubious, i will
take the safer side and forbear it, and leave it to them who have greater
clearness: It may possibly be Innocent, therefore i will not Judge another: But
it may be dangerous, therefore I will judge for my Self; there are other
Phrases of better Credit: The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.

I have heard of a plain honest Man that Addressed himself to a Learned
Casuist: With this Question, Pray good Sir! Is it lawful for me to Marry my
Cousin Germain? Ay, said the Dr. I would have you Marry her, if there was never
another Woman in the World: Implying that Necessity may justify some Actions,
which yet a wise Man would not venture upon where there is variety of Choice; if
there were never another Phrase in the World to express that Truth: I would, I
must use it; but seeing we have good store, I will choose elsewhere, till I be
satisfied that a competent Power has determined me, and my indifferency about
it.

7. Though I am not averse to the Phrase, yet I am really afraid of it; ever
since I observed Dr. Crisp, and his Disciples are so enamored of it, we must
reckon our selves, if we will reckon Right, to be in Christ's Person and Christ
in our Person: Now, what can he mean less, than that Christ dying in our
Person, had all our Personal filth upon him; and that we suffering in Christ's
Person, must needs be pardoned, acquitted, justisied from the Moment of his
Death without more ado? But he that reckons without God, and the Scripture,
makes a very unconscionable reckoning.

8. And I will add this further, which is common to all the suspected Phrases,
that as they have been made subservient to Antinomianism, an Engine of
Division, so have they been introduced into the first Paper to persecute, and
run down Mr. D. W's. and I am abundantly confirmed in my former Suspicions from
Defense, p. 42. If Mr. Williams had taken this Phrase [ in our place and stead]
in the ancient and genuine Sense it would have argued that he was sound in the
Faith: Would it so? Why then (say I) prove it, and prove it like a Scholar, as
you would be thought to be; without Tricks, Quibbles and bare Suspicions that
he has taken it in any other Sense than the ancient and genuine, and for my
Part I will throw up Mr. W's and your Self, and all the World besides, that
shall be found equally guilty.

When some Years ago I heard a general Clamor from one sort of People, against
Mr. Ws his Book of Gospel Truth; I was tempted to think, there could not be
such a loud outcry, but there must be some Wool; nor such a Smoke and
Smoother, but there must be some Fire, and therefore I confess I came with no
small prejudice to the Reading it, and upon my Impartial Perusal I found this
Noise, was only the shearing of Hoggs.

But they have found an Art to render Mr. W. or any Man alive, guilty of
whatsoever Heresies they shall please to clap upon them in spite of their
Teeths: He was charged once by the six Brethren, to deny the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, otherwise than in the Effects: To this he answered, that
besides the Effects of Christ's Righteousness made ours, he had expressly
affirmed, that the very Righteousness of Christ it self is imputed to True
Believers. Shall he be sound in the Faith (...)? No! never while he Lives and
Breaths! for they can draw and wire-draw some Consequences from some of his
Words, in some place or other, that shall evince that he believes otherwise
than he intends; and this Art is the Sheet (...) that never yet failed the
Defender at a dead lift: I could wish it might be seriously considered, 1.
Whether these Men may not possibly be mistaken in the Inferences they draw from
other Men's Words? Especially when they are not direct and immediate; and more
especially when the Eye that pretends to discover them has the Glaucoma, and is
all over tinctured with the Jaundice, which makes all the World of the same
Complexion. 2. Whether any Man as well as He, may not be mistaken in the
Consequences of his own Words? Which may perhaps be such as the Author could
not foresee, and which if he could have foreseen, would have abhorred and
retracted, what he had before asserted? 3. Whether there is not a great
Allowance to be made to humane Frailty, whose acutest Eye cannot always see to
the end of a long Train of Words, and Thoughts?

The first Paper expresses a good Temper (if the Authors had seen it meet to
govern themselves by their own Canon.) Not thinking it reasonable or Just, to
charge upon any Brother such Consequences of any Expression or Opinion of his,
which he shall disown. O Sincerity! Whether art thou fled! Mr W. owns Christ's
Righteousness it self imputed to us: He disowns the contrary, and yet contrary
to Reason and Justice, they charge him with, persecute him for some imaginary
Consequences: But of this I suppose the intelligent Reader has by this Time
received Satisfaction from Mr. W's himself.

I have sometimes wondered with my Self, what should inflame all this
Indignation against Mr. Williams? I know its easy to assign justifying Reasons
for Malice, when yet there are Motives that lie deeper and feed the Flames:
After all the Observations I can make, I am forced to resolve all into Envy,
Prove. 27. 4. Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand
before Eavy? If God has given him, an useful, prefitable way of I reaching the
Gospel: He may be maligned on that account: If Providence has indulged him a
plentiful Estate; some may look upon him with an Envious Eye on that Account:
If he has made too great a Figure, and born too great a Port; that might easily
draw upon him the evil Eye: Against all which, I know no other Remedy under the
Sun, but to entreat him that he would Preach indifferently like his Neighbors,
and that they would endeavor to Preach better, that so both may stand upon the
same Level: And then, that he would make over one half of his Estate to the
Defender; and lastly, that he would be Content to Draw in the Thillers Place,
in the Team; and let another walk gravely before him, with the high Foretop,
and the melodious Collar of Bells, and all the gaudy Trappings; and this may
probably assuage the high Ferment of Passion, and suffer him to live in a more
temperate Climate.

Sir! I must now strip and prepare for the fiery Furnace: Which he has heated
for me seven times hotter than ever in Smithfield; and you see how I am
encompassed with Multitudes of Faggots: Thus he [The Phrase of Christ's
sustaining the Person of Sinners Rejected]

But, 1. The Phrase was not Rejected: Only suspended, not excommunicated; and
that only till they who have invented it, shall Interpret it: First, Then he
produces Du Moulin; Christ sustained the Person of the Elect upon the Cross:
It Is well! and thus I had rather have it worded, than that he sustained the
Person of Sinners: Because I know not how to make the Elect and Reprobate unite
and coalesce into one Person: Dr. B. next, The Surety and the Person for whom
he is Surety are in the estimate of the Law but one Person: So then they are
both but one Person: And if so, to what purpose do they talk of the Person of
Christ suffering in the Person of others, when indeed they are but one Person?
And again if this be so, That they are both but one Person; and it was but one
Person that suffered; these Sinners may as well be said to dye and suffer for
Christ, as he for them.

We have next Rutherford, Noells Catechism, Grotius, Hoornbeck, and a whole
Regiment poured in upon us, and yet when they are all put together. 1. They are
but Private Persons, all of 'em cannot make a single Church. 2. It Is in their
Polemicks they talk thus, not in Articles of Faith. 3. They talk at this rate,
when they are fighting, not uniting; 4. They none of 'em give any Reason for
their using of the Phrase, but run away with it, as a word of Course: To all of
them, and as many more I return.

1. That as the Ancient Fathers, ante mota certamina Pelagiana minus caute
locuti sunt: Spoke less warily about Original Sin, and Effectual Grace, before
the Pelagian Heresies were started: So might some of our Protestant Divines
overlash a little in some Phrases, before the Antinomian Heresies were Broached
amongst us: Alas! these good Men never Dreamed of Saltmarsh, Crisp, or our
Reporters Substance of the Gospel, where Faith is left out from any concern in
Justification; they never read Mr. C's Coalescing into one Person with Christ
upon believing: Nor of the Eternal Life of God communicated to Believers in
Time, which contains all the Fopperies of Familistical Fancies. So true is the
Observation, that the Atheists Heaven has no God in it; the Socinians Hell has
no Devil in it; and the Antinomians Gospel no justifying Faith in it.

2. I must repeat it, and will abide by it; that this Phrase its not being
found in the Confessions of Faith of any of the Reformed Churches, is a greater
Prejudice to its Currency; than its being used, if it had been used, by ten
Thousand single Persons: We have carefully inspected all the Creeds,
Confessions, Articles of England, France, those at Westminster and the Savoy,
to which as we can cordially subscribe, so in none of them, or any other can we
meet with those Idolized Expressions: Nor are they adapted either to the
Explication or Confirmation of the great Doctrines of Satisfaction or
Justification; which thing was nevertheless pretended to in the first Paper,
but I suppose I have sufficiently dismounted that Presumption.

3. This Gentleman, when he has run through his endless Tautologies, and lost
himself (and as he hopes his Reader too) in a thousand Mazes, and intricate
Labyrinths, comes at last, as I have showed, to this, that all his Phrases are
virtually included, in that one Phrase of Christ's suffering^ and satisfying in
our stead; and as there he is forced to rest at last, he might as well have
suffered us, without disturbance, to have rested at first.

4. We dare own no Writings absolutely for the Reason and Rule of our Faith,
besides the Holy Scriptures, where his Phrases never yet showed their Faces.
And for the Antinomian Sense we cannot meet with that either in the Old or New
Testament: We have learnt to be wise unto Sobriety, not above what is written,
lest we become Learned Fools: And shall rather choose with the Poor to receive
the Gospel with meekness, than to descend Learnedly to Hell.

Sir, I will give you a welcome Intermission from this tedious Scribble, what
remains, if any thing remains worthy your Notice, you may expect by the next,
from Sir,

Your Faithful Servant, etc.

LETTER VIII. Of Christ's Sustaining the Person of Sinners.
SIR! There is indeed a small matter in Arrear upon this Chapter, which with
good Husbandry, will furnish our this Paper, so that you shall not grudge the
Postage.

One Caution will be necessary to guide your Thoughts herein; that it is not
the Phrase of Christ's sustaining the Person of another, in every respect, that
gave occasion to this Discourse, but his sustaining the Person of Sinners, of
all Mankind as one Person, when he suffered, dyed, and satisfied the Justice of
God.

But our Author, Defense p. 25. gives us an account how one person may sustain
the persons of others, according to the phrase of the Civil Law: One single Man
being put into the different States and Conditions of many, puts on their
Person: For instance, Ambassadors, Viceroys, Syndics; and in the more
inferior Stations, the Tutor sustains the person of the Pupil; the Guardian of
the Minor -- And they are such as do somewhat for the Advantage of them whose
persons they b^ar, etc. When I read these words, I was surprised and startled
into some warm Thoughts; What is this all the Fruit of his pompous Ostentation
of the Civil Law? That to sustain the person of sinners, is to do somewhat for
their Advantage? Why this is Socinus and Crellius all over; what they and the
rest of that Bran and Leaven contend for; they will allow; nay, they plead that
Christ acted in the Name, and for the sake, for the Benefit and Advantage of
others; but by no means that he died properly in their stead: They readily
grant, that Christ came as an Ambassador from God, to reveal his Will to the
Sons of Men, and to treat with them about their Return to God; for this belongs
only to his Prophetical Office; and herein Christ sustains not the Person of
sinners, but of the Father who sent him: And because the R. R. B. of Worcester,
has spoken so fully to this point, I will once again transcribe his words.
There is (says this Learned Person) such a Change of Persons, as implies that
one is appointed, and allowed to act for another, and for their Advantage: And
this sort of Change of Persons the Socinians never denied. (N. B.) It is not
therefore the Use of the Words, but the Sense of them that is to be inquired
into: For some may affirm a Change of Persons, and yet be Socinians; and others
may deny a Change of Persons, and be far enough from Socinianism, according to
the sense in which they are understood.

But further: The Socinians will allow that Christ has undertaken to appear for
sinners, to plead their Cause as an Advocate, and Intercessor; as a Guardian
who takes care of the Affairs of a Minor in his Nonage; as a Tutor, who
espouses the Concerns of his Pupil: But the Orthodox affirm, That Christ was
our Priest, that he was so on Earth on the Cross; that he osfer'd himself up as
a Sacrifice to Divine Justice; and that he executes the other part of his
Sacerdotal Function in Heaven, by Intercession; but the Socinians contend, that
he was a Priest only in Heaven; and for any proper Sacrifice offered on the
Cross, they are no more concerned than our Author.

I come now to an Instance of the Defender's Vanity, which perhaps was never
paralleled; P. 23. This phrase Sustinere personam alterius, is Tully all over;
Tres personas unus sustineo; Meam Adversarii and Iudicis: which I must render,
if I will render it appositely. I Cicero, do act three Parts; my own, that of
an Accuser, and that of a Judge: What does the Orator intend by three persons?
Surely, no more than three Relations, three Respects, three Parts, which all at
once he acted; his own part, the Accusers, and the Judges. Well then: Tully
alone acted three parts, sustained three persons; Christ alone sustained three
Millions, and all these as one Person, Is not the Parallel most exact? Again,
Christ suffered really properly in the place of all their persons for whom he
suffered; but Tully sustained these three Persons Figuratively, Metaphorically;
that is, in that very sense wherein Socinus would have Christ to be a
Sacrifice, and make satisfaction.

But I shall not dismiss this Matter upon these cheap Terms; I would let the
Reader know where he picked up this Blasphemous Notion of sustaining three
persons; for so I will call it, one moment before I prove it.

The Modern Socinians, especially those of our own Degenerate Nation, are risen
up to the height of Blasphemy in exposing and ridiculing the Tremendous
Doctrine of the Trinity in Unity, Three Persons in One, and the same undivided
Essence: And this they have done in the most scurrilous manner that the Malice
of Hell could suggest to Debauched Wits.

Now this very place of Tully, which our Author so much glories in, and values
himself upon, is their Text from whence they preach their Blasphemies, and of
which he could not be ignorant: Of which I will give you an account from the B.
of Worcester, in his late excellent Vindication of the Trinity, Pref. p. 4, 5.
The Socinians, (says he) have formed a Fivefold Trinity. 1. The Ciceronian. 2.
The Cartesian. 3. The Platonic. 4. The Aristotelian. 5. The Trinity of the
Mobile.

Now for the Ciceronian Trinity, they form it thus; because Tully had used the
word personae for different Respects Sustineo ego tres personas. And according
to this Acceptance, Three Persons in the Godhead signifying no more than
Relations, Capacities, or Respects of God to his Creatures; which (say they) is
downright Sabellianism, and is no manner of Mystery, but the most intelligible
and obvious thing in the World. Now let the Considerate Reader observe what our
Gentleman has made of Tully's Ego sustineo tres personas. That is, Christ bore,
or sustained, or acted in three Capacities, three Relations, three Respects;
but how will this come up to his sustaining the person of sinners, in the
offering up of himself a Sacrifice to God?

And then secondly for the Cartesian Trinity, let us see a little how our
Author falls in with that. The Cartesian Trinity (as the same Learned B.
proceeds) is that which makes three Divine Persons, and three Infinite Minds,
Beings and Spirits to be but one God.

Suppose we then that any person who has versatile Ingenium Rota figulari
versatilius; one that can act all parts, and turn himself into all shapes, as
they subserve his various Occasions; and that this Man so given to change,
should personate a Lifeguard Man, and together with his broad-lac'd Hat, his
Blew-Coat, and swashing Blade by his side, should put on to humor the business
more to the Life, the Spirit of him he represents: And when that Turn is
served, should personate a Quaker, making Christ a mere Light within, denying
the Scriptures to be the Word of God, vilifying Ordinances as poor Carnal
things, and below the Dispensation of the Spirit; and all this only to do an
odd Job, to come off with a Subscription, and save an Oath to the Government;
and presently should assume and sustain the Person of an Antinomian, and give
us their System of the Gospel as his own, to accommodate his Faith and
Conscience to the present Juncture, and gratisie some special Friends. Here
would be a Man of Three Minds, and to Morrow, if occasion call for it, he has a
fourth to put on; only its happy, they would be far enough from Three Eternal
Minds: This is surely a Person notoriously given to Change! De Te narratur
Fabula!

I conclude with one Observation more from the same Learned Author, where he
proves, That such a Change of Persons, and Christ's taking on him the Person of
Sinners, has no foundation in Scripture; and that it is contrary to the Tenor
of it: All that our Savior says to this purpose is, That he came to give his
Life a Ransom for many, Matthew. 20. 28. And that his Blood was shed for many,
for the Remission of Sins, Matthew. 26. 28. What other Change of Persons is here
implied, but that of a Ransom, a S^crifice of Propitiation. He that knew best
sor what ends he suffered, says not one word of his taking upon himself the
Person of Sinners in any other sense, than as he suffered in their stead, and
for their Advantage.

There is yet an odd Farthing on the Score, which I must account for. This
Phrase of acting in the person of another, or sustaining the Person of another,
has ordinarily a sense not very creditable; and commonly signifies to
personate, or represent the Person of another, or take on the Disguise, Mask,
or Vizor of another: Thus Tully in that place so celebrated, so mistaken by our
Author: Ego unus tres sustineo personas; I act three parts: So those
Counterfeit Persons in the Roman Comedies, were called, Dramatis Personae; and
those other which only appeared, but spoke nothing, were called, (...), Mutae
Personae, Dumb Persons. Now this minded me of the Counter-scuffle between
Salmasius and Milton, where the latter picks a Quarrel with the former, for
this very expression in Persona. De parricidio apud Anglos in Persona Regis
Admisso. Now there is no doubt but Salmasius intended it of a Parricide
committed upon the Person of that King; but because he used that Phrase, Milton
falls on him with his usual briskness. Quid, quaeso, est parricidium in Persona
Regis admittere? Quid in Persona Regis? Quae latinitas unquam sic locuta est?
But our Author to vindicate this expression, gives this Answer, p. 27. The
Reason why Milton was so severe upon Salmasius, was not so much because
Salmasius used the word Persona, as because he mistook the Ablative for the
Accusative Case, and wrote in Persona, when it should have been in Personam
Regis! Risum teneatis? Was ever any thing spoken more Ridiculously? I am
satisfied Salmasius designed to write as he actually wrote, in Persona, and
Milton had no Quarrel with him about the Case, but exagitates the Phrase as
improper, and unbecoming so great a Grammarian as Salmasius had then the Vogue
for in the Learned World. And so the Answerer to Milton, whether Father, or
Son, p. 26. Ubi ille multiplex Barbarismus, non simplex? Fortasse an quod non
dixerit Salmasius in Personam Regis, sed in Persona? O Barde! Where the
Answerer rejects this supposal with Scorn and Indignation, that he should be
thought to have mistaken the Ablative for the Accusative Case.

In a word; Milton was a Person whose excellent Latin, terse and smooth, has
recommended his Style to all that understand the Language: The Merits of the
Cause between him and his Antagonist I am not concerned in, but this has been
taken for granted by many, that his sharp and pungent Repartees pierced that
great Critick's Heart, nor could he long outlive that stinging Phrase with
which he was persecuted by Milton: It Is highly improbable to me, that the Old
Man, under this discomposure of Spirit could dress up a formal Answer to his
Enemy in that short time of Hurry that he lived. His Son might possibly out of
his loose Papers stitch up that Cento, which in a Postumus Piece appeared under
his Name, which saw the Light when King Charles II. was Restored; but whether
it turned to account from his Patron or Client, I am no more concerned, than I
am what becomes of all our PhraseDivinity, and this is particular, which our
Author has so verbosely and operosely managed.

The Defender pretends highly to more than a smattering in the Civil Law, and
accordingly makes a huge chattering with the Terms of it. The Socinians and our
Author presume they have great advantage by 'em. My Opinion is this, that when
they fall into judicious Hands, good use may be made of them against the
Socinians: Our Gentleman has put 'em to the worst use that ever they were put
to by any Protestant; he gives us many Instances of Persons representing
others, managing and transacting the Cause of others, which may illustrate
Christ's undertaking for his Church upon a Throne of Grace; for he has promised
he will be their faithful Guardian, John 14. 18. And not leave them Orphans,
(...): But tho this Civil-Law tells us of Ambassadors that act by Commission
and Instruction, of Tutors and Pupils, etc. yet they do not furnish us with any
Instance of any that laid down his Life in the stead of those they were
entrusted by.

Nor indeed can we reasonably expect that the Body of the Civil-Law, which out
of two thousand Manuscripts, or Fragments of MSS. was compiled into one, in
Iustinian's Time, should have its Terms and Phrases adapted and suited to those
sublime Mysteries; or that the Inspired Penmen of the Holy Scriptures of the
New Testament, should accommodate their Writings to that Body of Laws, which
they had never seen, nor could have any Regard to.

But, Sir, I beg your pardon for this Digression, and will hardly give you the
like Offense: However I am,

Sir, Yours, etc.

LETTER IX. MISCELLANIES.
SIR, There are a few Parcels scattered up and down our Author's Discourse,
which either I could not conveniently reduce to any Head, or possibly thought
'em not worthy my notice or yours, which upon second Thoughts I have comprised
in this Letter.

. 1. The Report, p. 8. has charged Mr. W. that he denied a Change of Persons
between Christ and the Elect; and that this Denial is so express, that he
leaves no room for a Distinction, Limitation, or Restriction, or for owning it
in any sense. To this the Rebuke answered, p. 38. That Mr. W. has left room
enough for all the Distinctions that are proper to the matter in hand. That Mr.
W. denied nothing but what Dr. Crisp had affirmed of this Change, that there is
no Contradiction between affirming a Change, and denying a Change, unless they
be both ad Idem. That he did not deny a Change simply and absolutely, but only
in a certain respect, and restrictively. That these things are obvious, and
plain to an ordinary Understanding. Nor is there a more a futilous or foolish
fallacy than to conclude a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter: Now this
Argument the Bishop of Worcester in his late Letter has abundantly cleared. How
can any Persons in common Ingenuity understand this otherwise, than that he
denied such a Change of Persons as Dr. C. affirmed? Why then should such a
sense be charged upon him, which he disowns at the same time? There must be
something farther in th^^ matter, than appears to an indifferent and Impartial
Reader. And so there is something farther, something that lies deeper;
something that presses harder than appears to every one.

But still the Defense insists upon it, p. 31. and to illustrate his Mind,
speaks thus: He must own that the Apostle Peter was a good Man in some respect,
because he does not say, St. Paul was evil in every respect: I considered
seriously with my self, what Temptation the Man could be under to drag these
two blessed Apostles by the Head and Shoulders, into our pitiful Squabbles; or
where the Wit, the Policy, the Reason should lie to introduce them into our
sorry concerns: I knew not what real harm they had done him, but that I find
the one, 1 Timothy 5. 15. pretty severe upon the (...) Busybodies; and the other
as sharp, 1 Pet. 4. 15. upon the (...), Busybodies in other Men's Matters; and
that might justify a Peek, and involve them both in guilt, which shall never
be forgiven. But then why should a Man be Impertinent, that he might be
Profane? For the Argument is Nugatory, and very Childish: St. Peter was a good
Man in some respect, because he does not say, St. Paul was evil in every
respect. Nor can I find that St. Peter ever charged St. Paul to be evil in any
respect. I find indeed that St. Peter says, 2 Ep. 3. 16. That in his Brother
Paul's Epistles there are some things hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned, and unstable, wrest, etc.

And I know the Papists when they would decry the Perspicuity of the Scriptures
in things necessary to Salvation, do argue at our Author's rate; A dicto
secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter: Some things in those Epistles are (...),
therefore all are so. The unlearned, and unstable wrest them; therefore the
humble that depend on the Spirit of God, must needs wrest 'em too. Now look
what Answer the Protestants gives the Papists, I give to this Gentleman. Mr. W.
denied a Change of Persons in Dr. Crisp's Sense, but it follows not that he
denied it in every sense.

. 2. In the Report, p. 5. we have a distinction between Punitive and
Remunerative Justice; and this Distinction he creaks with up and down. Now its
a Rule among all Logicians, That Membra dividentia, non sunt coincidentia: The
Members of a Division, must never be Coincident: But our Reporter is so hardy
to run his Head against this Canon; and divides Justice into Punitive and
Remunerative; or into Vindicative and Rewarding; whereas God does as truly
Reward in punishing; and all Vindicative Justice is Remunerative: Now for this
we have the most express Scriptures that can be desired. Compare these two,
Heb. 2. 2. Every Transgression received a just Recompense of Reward, (...),
Heb. 11. 27. He had an Fie to the Recompense of Reward, (...): Now when the
Recompense given to the greatest Trangressions; and that given by Grace to
Faith, are by the same Apostle termed a Recompense of Reward: It Is apparent to
an ordinary Eye, the Terms in our Author's Division must be coincident, and
therefore absurd, and improper. Nor can there be a solid Reason given for the
Distinction of Justice into Vindicative and Remunerative, when Vindicative
Justice is Remunerative; save that they make a kind of a Rhyme, and that at any
time with our Author shall compensate the want of Reason.

. 3. Report, p. 4. There is a Passage which I am assured will give you
Diversion, and perhaps force a Smile from your Gravity. Had a Change of Persons
been but a (...), a Bar or Hedge, about the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction,
the Explosion would have amazed them; but the Commutation of Persons being so
essential to a proper Satisfaction, they dread what the Pursuances are like to
be. You see here, Sir, a Comparison formed between the Essentials of
Satisfaction, and the Accidentals; or to keep nearer to his Allusion between
the main Castle where this Doctrine of satisfaction is fortified, and the
Outworks that are raised at some distance round about it: Now, Sir, observe,
how they stand affected to both these: If the Hedge, the Out-work had been
broken down, it would have amazed them; but if the Main Fort had been stormed,
then they would dread the pursuances: As if Amazement were not the highest
degree imaginable of Fear and Dread: And that they should have a higher concern
for some slighty Redoubts they had built about it, when the main Doctrine is
safe, than if the Doctrine it self were overthrown, or blown up into the Air:
The highest degree of Christ's trouble of Soul in his Agony, is called
Amazement, Mark 14. 33. And that degree of Fear which is almost inconsistent
with Faith, is called a Fear with Amazement, 1 Pet. 3. 6. Whose Daughters ye
are, while ye do well, and are not afraid with any Amazement, (...).

I never knew a Man give up himself to an Affected Pedantry, but he was guilty
of Nonsense: A famous Instance you have here, in his new-coin'd Term
pursuances; we that are old-fashioned People, should not have scrupled to have
said Consequences; and they are but such things as easily follow and flow from
a Proposition; but these pursuances are clear of another Nature; active,
vigorous things that pursue and follow after another to overtake him: Just such
another piece of affected stuff we had in Observances for Observations; and one
of the same Humor, Explosion, which to English Ears signifies the shooting of
a great Gun.

. 4. Prepare your self now, Sir, for a glorious Scene: Our Author has summoned
a Congregation of his Junior Brethren, Def. p. 9. who either by disuse have
forgotten, or by reason of a too early, and constant Application to practical
Preaching, never thoroughly understood the necessary Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction: This practical Preaching is a great Grievance which ought to be
Redressed: Truly, Sir, it will do you good at heart to see our great Gamaliel
in the Chair; and all the small Fry sitting at his Feet in Imis Subselliis,
with huge Devotion waiting for the Oracular Reveries that drop from his Lips;
just as they painted blind Homer vomiting up his Rhapsodies, and the Minor
Poets licking up his Recrements and ^gastions: Thus shall you see him pouring
out whole Floods of Learning, while the Inferior Clergy lap up his Notions
with wondrous greediness.

(1.) And first he instructs his Pupils from Grotius, That those words Christ
suffered for our Sins, cannot be understood of a final, but of a Meritorious
Cause. That Is a thousand pities! Now thought I, what implacable spite has he
conceived against poor Grotius, that he should seldom or never give him a true
word; but I had tried him too often to trust him any more; and therefore
hastily catching up Grotius, the first Sentence I cast my Eye upon was this, De
satisf. p. 4. Nam (...), non minus significare solent, Causam impulsivam quam
causam finalem; These two Prepositions do usually signify no less the
Impulsive, than the Final Cause. So then, no less the Impulsive than the Final,
must be construed by a Learned Divine, not the Final, but the Impulsive Cause:
Well! Tho I knew Grotius's Judgment well enough in this matter, yet I would
needs look farther for fuller satisfaction; and p. 33. I read thus. Finis Rei
de qua Agitur, secundum Dei and Christi intentionem, duplex est, justitiae
nimirum Divinae De^onstratio; and peccatorum Remissio quod-ad nos: Hoc est
i^punitas nostra. The end of this Affair, where^^ we now treat, (Christ's
suffering for our Sins) according to the I(...)ndment both of God and Christ,
is twofold: To wit, the Demonstration of Divine Justice, and the Remission of
our Sins, that is our indemnity from punishment. And having discoursed at large
of the former end, the Demonstration of Justice, he comes, p. 36. to treat of
the other. Finis alter, ut Diximus est impunitas nostra, which the Apostle
emphatically expresses, Romans 5. 9. Much more being justified by his Blood, we
shall be saved from Wrath through him.

(2.) He proceeds in his Learned Lecture to instruct his Novices. That the
Preposition (...) [For] when its said Christ suffered for us, signifies a
Commutation or Change of Persons between Christ and us. But had our Dr. pleased
to become a Learner, before he commenced a Teacher, he might have known better
Things both from Grotius and the Bishop of Worcester. They would have informed
him, that the Preposition (...) imports contrariety, as well as Substitution,
and that therefore it does not from its own force necessarily import
Substitution, but as it is in Conjunction with the Sufferings of Christ; but
because I know he will not believe what I say, I recommend to him the judicious
Dr. Owen, Appendix to the Doctrine of the Trinity, p. 232. (...) in the Greek
is also used in this Matter, and ever denotes either Equality, Contrariety or
Substitution: The two former Senses can here have no Place. The latter alone
has: Thus its said, that Archelaus reigned (...), in the room of Herod, his
Father: And this Word is used also in expressing the Death of Christ for us;
Mat. 20. 28. Mark 10. 45. And both these Notes of a succedaneous Substitution
are joined together, 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who gave (...), a Counter-ransom for all. Now
that his Disciples may neither be deceived by him, nor he deceive himself; he
may be pleased to know that this and some other Prepositions, do not signify a
Substitution merely, ex vi vocis, but as they are limited and restrained, by
the Coherence and Context: But perhaps I know who laid a snare for him in this
Matter.

. 5. His Method for the Cure of a wounded Conscience may pass amongst his
noblest Discoveries; p. 15. Defense, What more evident than that if the Lord
Christ has not made Satisfaction to God's Justice for us: There Is nothing left
for the relief of a convinced Sinner, or for healing a wounded Conscience: But
there is Satisfaction made by Christ. But what is the convinced Sinner, the
wounded Conscience nearer a Cure! If there be no justifying Faith to apply that
Satisfaction to the Person? The most sovereign Plaster will not heal a wound,
till it be applied: Nor the choicest Food satisfy the craving Appetite, unless
it be taken down: Nor the richest Robes cover our Nakedness, unless they be put
on. Christ with all his Merits and Righteousness, will not answer the demands
of an awakened and enlightened Conscience, till Faith gives us an actual
Interest in them, and Repentance shall qualify us for them. The Soul sees its
Misery and hears of Mercy, but as to any solid Comfort from them it is as far
off as ever: St. Augustine describes this as the wretched state of the
Platonists. Patriam viderunt, viam ignorarunt: They saw there was Happiness in
the Enjoyment of the one God, but how to come to that Enjoyment they knew not;
but must pine away in their Sin and Misery, and in this sad plight has our
Casuist left his wounded Conscience: And why could he not have directed the
convinced Sinner to the same Remedy the Apostle directed the Distressed Jailer
to? Acts 16. 31. What must I do to be saved? Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thou shall be saved. This was Gods own Direction from Heaven; Math. 17. 5.
This was St. Peter's Method, Acts 2. 38. See also Isa. 55. 3.

. 6. I am very unwilling to enter upon any thing that relates to my Self, and
indeed the Indignities, Calumnies, he has bespawled me with, are so many, that
they would require more Paper to wipe them off than I can now spare; one or two
I will observe.

1. The M. S. had insulted magisterially over Mr. W. that he was guilty of a
broad Contradiction. What a change, and no change! Yes, said the Rebuke, a
change, and no change, make no Contradiction, when they are not directed ad
Idem: This gave the Defender a happy hint, for his flippant Wit: p. 29. He had
little Reason to speak of no Change, seeing he is the Man, so much given to
Change: Now I will wave the witty quibble, and only note the Malice of it: He
insinuates all along his Discourse, that I have changed my former Principles;
am become a Socinian, an Unitarian, and what not? This Falsehood has been
industriously and dexterously spread abroad the Town; so that if all that know
my Doctrine and Conversation, could not have confuted the Slander, my
Reputation had been sunk, or for ever blown up: I know not how he could
justify his own stedfastness in Principle; should I retort the Impeachment,
and Recriminate, and throw back some of that Dirt he has thrown at mine, in his
own Face: For he that once Preached that Faith and Repentance were necessary to
Pardon, has now quite Cashiered Faith from any concern in Justification; and
Repentance from any Interest in Pardon or Salvation.

2. He has represented me, by his Alter Idem, to be Delirous, and by his Ferst
Self, to be a Person of disturbed Thoughts, Ignorant, Unlearned, and all this
with abundance more, from the same Principles of their new Christianity has
been craftily whispered, and buzzed abroad, and sent in Letters to their
Friends in the Country; that I was Crazed, Distracted, and that the next News
they must hear of me, would be from Hogsden or Bedlam. But Blessed be my
gracious God and Father, who has given me a sound Mind, in a sound Body; and
who knows, but that the Lord has thus blessed me, and therefore blessed me for
the Curses of Shimei. But when this Gentleman upbraids me with my great Age, he
extorted a Smile from me; for the saddest effect of that will be but to spoil
an Old Man's Preferment; which I would have taken Care of without his
Officiousness.

But Sir! I will give you no farther trouble with my private and personal
Injuries: But commit you and yours to the same faithful Hand, to whom I have
committed my Good Name, and my All.

Sir, I am yours entirely, etc.

LETTER X. Of Matter of Fact.
SIR, For your Satisfaction in this Point, I must refer you to the Rebuke, who
has faithfully, and to Mr. W's his Answer, who has more fully, and yet with
equal faithfulness given you an Account of it: And I judge it to be a safe Rule
by which to govern our belief in Matters of this Nature, never to give Credit
to him that Writes a Report not from Principles but from Ends; or if you
please, whose Ends are the commanding Principles from which he writes. For as
you know, we had a Company of designing Folks, who in the last Age contended
earnestly for the Reunion of Protestants and Papists, and with that sort of
Men, all our Differences were Minutes, and inconsiderable Trifles; so in this
present Age, we have been plagued with a Generation of People, who were all for
Division, and with these all Differences were Fundamental; every Scratch was
Mortal; an Atome was a Beam, a Wart was a Wen, and a Molehill a Mountain.

But my Present Province is only to clear those Accounts, you have already
received from those few Exceptions, the Defense has made against them.

. 1. The Rebuke, p. 13. Objected to the Integrity of the Report, which affirms,
That the most Learned of each Party received Satisfaction, viz. in the first
Paper: That it gave no Satisfaction at all to Mr. Cole, and Mr. Mather: Now to
this he Replies thus, That their Hands were not to the first Paper, was not
because they approved not the Doctrines therein contained; for they both in the
hearing of many declared their approval; though for some other Reasons they
declined Subscription.

Sir, I desire you would seriously consider it, whether this Answer satisfies
the Objection.

1. What is it to the Ends of Peace and Union what they approved, or
disapproved in their own Souls? Its our Public Approval must compose our
Public Differences, if ever they be composed: Its not secret thinking, or
opining that will serve this turn but open Subscription: If they had openly
subscribed, it had Contributed more to Peace, than openly to refuse, and
secretly to Comply. The Rule hold good in this Case, De non Apparentibus and
non existentibus eadem est Ratio; and what if all the rest had approved only at
this Rate, who would have called it an Approbation? 2. But is not this the
wildest Answer that ever was given to an Objection; which does not refute but
strengthen it? It was objected, that they did not subscribe and approve, and he
gives you a Reason why they did not: It was enough for the Objection, to say,
they did not, and he will be so officious as to give us a Reason, why? 3. He
says, the Reason was not because they did not approve the Doctrines. No doubt
of that! the Doctrinal Part was so contrived that it could not stumble, or give
offense to an Antinominian: The Doctrines were exactly calculated for their
Meridian; but yet there might be, and there were other Reasons drawn from some
other Parts of the Paper, that prevailed with them to refuse Subscription. 4.
And to what purpose does he talk of other Reasons, which they reserved to
themselves, when there are no Reasons, no not one Reason offered to our view? I
had thought that other Reasons should have presupposed some, at least one
single Reason that had preceded! What those other Reasons were, the Defense has
not given us, and perhaps the Refusers have not given them to him; but I can
help him out at a pinch: Those Gentlemen were both of them Dissenters to the
Union, and it was not this or that Union, but all Unions they disapproved,
unless they could have met with such ductile Souls as would have complied with
their little narrow Sentiments; and yet none could ever get it out of them what
those were: There was once a Meeting at Pinners-Hall, to compose the
Differences arisen about Mr. Williams's Book, where I heard Mr. M. say openly,
Away with your Union! And away he offered to be gone in a great Huff: Now that
Reason which was then openly avowed, might be no, and now doubt was, secretly
reserved. 5. That they declined Subscription, is a Term to sweeten and mollisie
a harsh and rugged Matter; but the Truth is, they both of them refused to
Subscribe all the Days of their Lives, nor will they ever do it to the Worlds
end.
. 2. Whereas the Reporter's Words sounded very high and big, That this
Instrument was gladly embraced by the Congregational, and gave satisfaction to
the most Learned of each Party. The Rebuke asked modestly and humbly, as became
him, Whether it had Redintegrated the violated Union? And that all Differences
and Distances were removed? And whether a Coalition between both Parties had
hereupon ensued? For what could those pompous swelling Expressions, suggest
less? But he was assured, that not one word of all this was true! To this the
Defense replies, P. 3. We had no reason to judge thus, but the quite contrary.
To what end then was all this Pother? However this is honestly spoken: For now
it appears, That the design of this Paper was not Falling in, but a farther
Falling out: It was not to stitch up the Rent, but to tear it wider: They
expected the quite contrary; 'twas not Peace, but a more Bloody War: Not a
Coalition, but a Collision: To make the Differences which had already smoaked,
now to flame, and blaze out before the whole World: It is honestly done, I say,
to confess under his Hand, that in his Heart he meant not honestly. I will
never go about to confute him in this particular, because his words do
irrefragably prove, what one of the Number spoke, That they never intended to
enter into an Union with the Presbyterians.

. 3. But the most pleasant account he gives is this, That the Reunion was but
in prospect. This Gentleman must have a long Head, and a longer Reach with his
Eye, that could have that in the prospect of his Eye, which he never had in the
Thoughts of his Heart, but the quite contrary. Thus our Watermen Look one way,
and Row another; and from this sort of Men he has borrowed both his Rhetoric
and his Conscience. He had it in prospect; not as Moses, who had a
Pisgah-prospect of that good promised Land of Rest and Peace; but like Balaam,
who saw afar off, what he hated, and wherein he had no Interest.

. 4. It was objected to the Reporter, That he had given a lame account of
matters of Fact, and nibbled off things at both ends. Whereas a faithful
Narrative should speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth:
To which he answers, That he never pretended it? What a Faithful Reporter is he
like to prove, that never intended Union in what he did; nor never pretended
Integrity in what he said? But I intend, and pretend too to rejoyn.

1. That where there is a connection of matters of Fact, where the present state
of Affairs has a clear dependence on the former; so that the one cannot be
understood, nor a due Judgment of them made without the other; in this case an
entire Report of the whole matter is absolutely necessary, and to give us a
Fragment or two, is to bilk us, and give us just nothing.

. 5. But because the Defender is so importunate and troublesome, I will give
you and him a farther account of the Falsehood of his Report.

1. I must judge a Forgery to be a Falsehood; a practical Falsehood. Now when I
find the Names of some Reverend Persons affixed to this Paper, whose Hands and
Hearts never were to it, nor any consent given, that any other should do it for
them: A Forgery must lie somewhere; and where to six it but upon the Report,
who printed their Names as subscribed, I cannot imagine. It Is certain that the
Reverend Mr. M. Barker, and Mr. Sclater, do deny that ever they subscribed
their Hands, or ever gave allowance to any other to do it for them.

2. Nor is it true, that this Paper was gladly received by the Congregational;
for all that their Subscription does import, is but this little; That they are
glad to find so good an Agreement amongst us, as this Paper expresses: But what
Agreement that Paper expresses, is so next to nothing, that it is a Wonder they
should be glad at it: And I presume any Moderate Man, of whatever Religion he
may be, might be glad that Men are not falling together by the Ears.

3. Nor is it true, that all the Nine among the Presbyterians did gladly
embrace and receive it; for some of the Nine, upon my knowledge, at the time of
their Subscription, did openly declare, That what they did, was with Reference
to the Approbation of the United Brethren, in a just Assembly; so that they
subscribed conditionally, not absolutely, and therefore this magnified Paper,
was but a Probationer at best; it stood upon its good Behavior, to live or
die, as their Brethren should absolve or condemn, approve or disapprove it: In
a word, it was an Escrow, not a formed Deed; an Embrio, till the general Assent
should give it life; and this will furnish the Reporter with another Instance
of a Contradiction: It was a Subscription, and no Subscription; it had a rude
unformed matter, but wanted the Form to give it Existence.

. 7. The Defender is now resolved to make sure work, to take away the Subject
of the Question, and to cut up the poor Presbyterians Root and Branch, by one
Mortal stroke. For (says he) P. 5. we know of no such meeting (of United
Ministers) that has been of late Months at Little St. Hellens. That Is hard!
Are they all dead, or fled for the same? Have they broke up House, and left the
Key under the Door, and let the Landlord take his Rent, where he can find it?
Or was this Report calculated for that happy Iuncture, when they had Adjourned
themselves for some few Months? O no! That was not the Business: A Meeting
there is, but not made up of United Brethren; In that the Congregational, who
are Essential part of the Union, have not met with an them. This is indeed
Mathematial Demonstration! For if an Essential part be wanting, the Essence
vanishes with it: By the same Token, that when the Report left out
Regeneration, Conversion, and Repentance out of his Substance of the Gospel,
which are Essentials of the Christian Faith, he utterly annihilated
Christianity; so if the Congregational were an essential part of the Union, and
they be gone, the Union must of necessity go with it. But may we not be allowed
soberly to examine what he so confidently asserts, That the Congregational are
an Essential part of the Union?

1. I freely grant, that if the Design of this Industrious Pacificator had
succeeded, this had been, to our Sorrow and his Triumph too true! But blessed
be the God of Truth and Peace, who has hitherto, and I hope and pray that he
will yet teach them to preserve the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace,
to defeat the unwearied Malice, and malicious Endeavors of all such as would
divide, and thereby destroy them.

2. That the Congregational were an Integral part of that Union we grant, that
they were an Essential part we deny: The United Brethren are perhaps less in
number, but not less united: Nay, their Union has been more firmly compacted
and strengthened: Nor can we conceive how the Separation of some Individuals
should dissolve the Union.

3. I must again assert, what I have fully and clearly proved, That the
Secession of those Brethren, was their own fault; and it is an acknowledged
Maxim in our Law, That no Man shall have Advantage by his own Fact, to
justify his Cause, much less shall the Innocent suffer any prejudice by it: I
could never yet meet with any tolerable Reason pleaded, as cause assigned to
justify their Departure; what they have pretended to, has been only some
suspicion of Heterodoxies in Mr. W's Book; but Suspicions are airy volatile
things, which none ought to regard, because it is not in their power to prevent
and hinder them.

4. That these Suspicions will not warrant this Separation from the United
Brethren, is evident from the Defense it self; which confesses, that the
Brethren as such did not set their Hands to the Offensive Book; nor ever
expressed any other way their Approbation of it; and can this justify their
separation from a Body of Ministers, when it is owned by the Accuser, that they
never approved it? And supposing there was some guilt contracted by the
Individuals, that attested the Book, (which yet appears not) there could be
none contracted by the United Body, who as a Body never yet gave their
Approbation to it.

5. And it is most certain, That there was once such an Union, and such a Body
of United Ministers; it is also well known upon what Terms they United; and it is
as certain that these Terms and Articles of Union continue the same, not in any
one point altered, not a Word erased, not a Sentence interlin'd, and upon the
same Terms they continue to act: If any will depart, we cannot help it, let 'em
depart! The separation of some may prejudice, may blemish, but cannot dissolve,
cannot annihilate the Union; so vain is the Allegation of this Defender, that
there is no such thing as a Body of United Ministers, because some of the
Congregational have been pleased to desert it.

6. Nor is it true that all the Congregational Brethren, have deserted the
Union; there are still some, and those of great Name for Learning and Holiness,
who adhere actually to their former Relation: Nay, there are others whose
Judgments, whose Hearts are still in the Union, tho dunned and staggered by the
continual Importunity of the bigoted Antinomian Faction, they suspend their
Appearance with their Brethren.

7. And it must be remembered, that when in the Year 1692. some slender
Objections were made against Mr. W's Book, that Matter was seriously debated,
and at last all Differences were amicably composed, all Offenses removed, and
the whole Body of the United Ministers were abundantly satisfied, or declared
that they were: Since which time what new Matter they have picked up, raked and
scraped together after all their Scrutiny into, and Rummaging of that Book, is
below all Considerations, and next to nothing.

8. To shut up all in this one Observation. The withdrawing of some of the
Congregational Brethren, can never be construed or interpreted a Dissolution of
the Union; because by the very Form and Tenor of that Union, they who had
formerly made two Parties, did Coalesce into one Body, and laying aside the
former Denominations, Terms and Marks of Division, and utterly abolishing the
Memory of them, they joined together in that Honorable Name of the United
Brethren, all the old distinguishing Notes being swallowed up in that one more
commendable: And therefore whosoever should go off, must be supposed so to do,
as single Persons, as so many Individuals, not as a Body, which the remaining
United Brethren cannot own them to be; and still the Door stands wide open as
before, and their Brethren stand with their Hearts and Arms wide open to
receive them, with the most Cordial Affections, whenever they shall please, and
the good Spirit shall incline them to return.

You see, Sir, the Defense (according to his poor power) has represented the
Brethren, as to their Union, dissolved and annihilated; whether they will
Acquiesce in this Determination, I know not: If they be of that Sheepish
Complexion to bear it, they do by Interpretation yield the whole Cause, and lay
themselves down in the Dirt, for every Insolent Scribler to Trample on them;
but I would hope, and most do expect they will at length awake, and rowse
themselves out of this Lethargy, and assume a more Masculine Spirit.

This, Sir, at present is all I shall say as to Matter of Fact; if any thing
further accrue, you may receive a second Trouble from,

Sir, Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant, etc.

LETTER XI. Of the First and Third Paper.
SIR, I perceive by your last, you are inclinable to put a Period to our
Correspondence about this Controversy (if a Squabble about Words, may be
dignified with the Title of a Controversy) and I confess my self as willing as
your self; and when I have made some Remarks upon these two Papers, which have
made such a Noise, I see nothing that should give you or my self any farther
Disquiet.

. 1. Some Account of the First Paper.
(1.) I cannot but look upon it as a piece of Incivility, which no Ingenious
Spirit would have been guilty of: To publish a Narrative of an Affair wherein
two Parties had an equal concern, without their joint consent, and concerting
of Matter of Fact between them both.

I have known of some, and heard of more Conferences, Debates, Disputes, where
both sides have mutually agreed to the Truth of things, before either of them
durst be so hardy as to publish the whole: But I am now convinced that there
are some Men, whom no Laws of Civility or Decency can oblige to what is Comely:
Our Author was never indeed very Costive, in his Scribbling Humors, but of late
he is grown so Laxative, that all the Astringents in the Shops, will not check
his Scripturiency; but out it flies, without the Preface of Saving your
Presence.

If Prudence might have been heard, it would have Advised not to roll that
Stone, which when it is once in motion, he could not be sure to stop: If the
(...) might have been his Counselor, it would have suggested that there were
others deeply concerned besides himself, whose leave might have been modestly
asked in a matter of common concern: If Conscience might have spoke, it would
have obliged to a severe Regard to Truth, in the most liable way of Writing,
which is that of the Narrative. But Prudence, Decency, and Conscience are never
consulted, when Men are full of Wind, and think they can leap over Nine Hedges.

(2.) It Is most certain, that this Paper was never drawn up with the Knowledge,
Privity, or Procurement of the United Brethren; and that the Cabals wherein it
was Contrived, Hammered, or rather Forged, were never under the Inspection, or
Authority of the said Brethren; they were a few, a very few who set the Wheel a
going, that put the Intrigue on foot; tho some others were afterward wheadled
in to bear some part in the Farce, and rather jogged on Passively than Actively.

(3.) You must always bear this in your Mind, that several of those Persons who
were then actually of the Number of the United Brethren, subscribed this
Unhappy Paper, with a Declaration and Protestation antecedent to their
Subscription, that they did it with a Reserve to the Judgment of the Body of
the United Ministers. So that if those Brethren should not give their Fiat, it
should be looked on as a Non-factum, a mere Nullity.

(4.) The great Inducement to some of those Brethren to subscribe, was a
Whisper, that this would redintegrate the Union; and from hence they conceived
some glimmering hopes of so great a Blessing; which hopes, tho they were Faint,
and Leucophlegmatick, as if they were giving up the Ghost, yet they were
willing to call 'em Hopes, or any thing rather than black Despair. Tho others
that knew with whom they had to do, had their greater Fears, that it would
never produce the boasted effect; such especially as knew that one of the
Company had declared, That they never intended an Union: And we may be assured,
that not one of the Nine would have put Pen to Paper had the Defender freely
told them that he has since published, That they never intended, or pretended
to Union, but the quite contrary.

(5.) You must farther knew, Sir, that tho this Paper might have been seen, and
no doubt was so, by many Individuals of the United Brethren, whose curiosity
might tempt them to get a sight of a Secret; as we naturally have an Itch to
see those Pamphlets which steal abroad sans privilege; yet it was never laid
before the Brethren in a Body, never debated by them; and therefore could not
be said to be rejected by them, because the Truth is, they never concerned
themselves to Advise about it.

(6.) And yet the Brethren at Little St. Hellens, might have rejected it; upon
their own Right, without rendering a Reason, as well as those two Brethren
declined their Subscription to the same Paper, for diverse Reasons to themselves
best known, and let our Gentleman with all his Fragments out of Calvin's
Lexicon, whereof he so unmeasurably glories, give us a solid Reason, why Titius
should not have the same Law with Sempronius.

(7.) Supposing the Brethren had waved their own Rights, and proceeded upon the
Merits of the Paper, and Reasons intrinsecal to it, they might have found many
Causes for its laying aside, and rejecting it with Abhorrence.

Now because, Sir, I will not deal niggardly with you, but frankly as a Friend,
I will as briefly as I can, show you, both the Deficiencies and Excesses of
that First Paper, which because they have made an Idol of, I will prove to be a
Nehushtan.

1. The Deficiencies of the First Paper.
1. And here the fatal Deficiency discovers it self, that it Provided no
Barriere against Antinomianism: Really, if in a Day when Socinianism is
rampant, the Reporter was so Amazed, that the Hedge about Christ's Satisfaction
was Invaded (tho 'twas but an Imaginary Hedge) why might not the Brethren, in a
Day when Antinomianism was far from Couchant, be amazed too to see a Paper
appear, wherein was neither Hedge nor Ditch to keep out that Heresy?
Repentance in order to Pardon, was superseded; especially when it was so well
known, that some of the hottest Zealots for this Paper, were double dipped in
that Infection. Let these things be considered.

1. The United Brethren had given, and often given abundant Evidence of their
soundness in the Faith, in opposition to the Arminian and Socinian Heresies;
and might therefore justly expect the like Evidence of their Brethren, in
opposition to the Antinomian. 2. When the other Brethren had but some feeble
Suspicions of the Heterodoxy, of perhaps but one of their Brethren, yet they
were willing to gratify the Noise that was made, so far as to put themselves
under the severest Trial: And yet they who from the Press and Pulpit, by
Printing and Preaching, had vented their wild Notions about these Points, would
not give the least satisfaction in those tender Points, whereof the United
Brethren had the fullest and clearest Evidence; and had then before them a
Numerous Catalogue of those Errors. 3. Especially when the United Brethren had
passed a Vote, That whenever they should be again Attacked with the old Demands
to give Satisfaction, they would insist peremptorily upon a Renunciation of the
Antinomian Errors, which lay in their View. 4. And having been so often
disappointed in their just Expectations of Satisfaction from time to time, they
did insist, and had Reasons to justify their insisting upon that
Abrenunciation. 5. They had Charity to believe that the far greater Number of
the Dissenting Brethren, were sound in the Faith as to these Points, and did
therefore hope, that they would not stand off from a Syncretism with the
Brethren in Fundamentals, in tenderness to those few who were otherwise minded,
whose Number was inconsiderable: and they do, and must always judge, that all
respects ought to be laid aside, when the Great Truths of the Gospel shall come
in competition with private Affections, and Personal Inclinations.
2. The Excesses of the First Paper.
But the Excesses of this Paper were far more Numerous than the Deficiencies.
As,

First, The Brethren found the Doctrine of Justification clogged and encumbered
with Novel Expressions, of which they could make no certain Judgment: And as
they did not know that they were bound to inform themselves that they might be
able to make a Judgment; so they knew not where to make application to any that
were able and willing to give them light into this obscure matter; they judged
themselves sound in Faith in this great Article; if either the Article of
Justification, drawn up by the Reformed Churches in Europe, might be Judge; or
if the Confessions of Westminster, or the Savoy might determine; or if this
Article, as drawn up by these very Brethren, might be heard speak; or if the
Holy Scriptures, which we all own, or pretend to own to be the only Infallible
Test and Standard of Orthodoxy, might be allowed to be Umpire; and yet they
must needs add the Phrase of a Subordinate Righteousness, to which all those
Confessions are utter Strangers; and yet the Paper agreed to in 1692, had
expressly renounced, Al Righteousness whatever, in the Business of
Justification, except the Righteousness of Christ. Secondly, It was surprising
that they should surcharge a Paper, which was pretended to be an Instrument of
Pacification, with strange Phrases, such as a Commutation of Persons, between
Christ and us; and Christ's Dying in the Person of Sinners: When it is more than
probable, most of us, shall be in our Graves, before the true meaning of them
can be liquidated, and the sense ascertained; and that yet they should quote
Grotius for the use of the former, who never once mentioned it; and the R. R.
B. of W. who indeed mentions the Phrase, but never in the sense the Antinomians
contend for; of which he has lately given an Account to the World; and when
there was neither any need, nor any good use to be made of it, either for the
Explication or Confirmation of the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction; and when
these Phrases had been so wretchedly perverted to such pernicious Ends, by Dr.
Crisp, and some of his professed Disciples, it will be most Advisable to give
it a Civil Dimission. Thirdly, The First Paper treated a Brother undecently,
uncivilly, not to say barbarously; They put upon him such hard Terms, to
purchase a little uncertain Quiet, which I believe no Man who had a Grain of
Spirit in him, would ever submit unto: And it may be questioned too, Whether
any who had defecated their Souls from Passion, and were in a calm Temper of
Mind, would ever have imposed: Let us Read and Blush! If therefore, Mr. W.
shall concur with us in what we have declared touching the Doctrine of
Justification; and in the Sense we have given of a Change of Persons between
Christ and Believers; and of Christ's undertaking the Displeasure of the Father
for our Sins; and shall give Satisfaction about any thing else, that any
Brother excepts against in the rest of his Writings, agreeably to the abovesaid
Articles and Confessions, we shall so far Acquiesctherein, as not to make them
the Matter of further public Contest, or Altercation, amongst our selves. So
then, the poor Man must be Teazed and Baited all the Days of his Life, and
never be sure he has performed his full Penance, whilst one Antinomian can be
found to demand farther satisfaction; and to be placed as a Shrove-Tuesday Bird
Five Throws Two Pence, so long as any Man can find a Cudgel to bestow upon him;
but the fuller exposing of these cruel Terms, will invite you to the Tostscript
of the Rebuke, to which I refer you. Fourthly, The first Paper carries an
Apparent Contradiction to it self, and to the Practice of those who so
Zealously espouse it: For whereas, it seems to commend, A bearing with one
another's Infirmities, and different Sentiments about Logical, or Philosophical
Terms, or merely Humane Forms of Speech; yet it makes a Commutation of Persons
between Christ and us, to be one of the Terms upon which Mr. W. must expect a
little rbitrary and Precarious Rest, as long as he Breaths: And yet this is a
Humane Form of Speech; Humane, I say, for its Weakness and Infirmities, tho not
for its Rationality; and the only Excuse they can pretend to make for it is,
That it is neither Logical, Philosophical, nor Theological.
. 2. Some Account of the Third Paper.
This Paper was drawn up with great Judgment, upon good Advice, and serious
Deliberation, becoming Ministers of the Gospel, and the Servants of Jesus
Christ, who desired to Approve themselves to him, in their Work.

(1.) Their Faithfulness to Christ and his Gospel, appears eminently in this;
That they provided against both the Extremes, whereas the other Paper only took
care of One. It has secured the Article of Justification, even to the
satisfaction of the most Scrupulous; provided always those Scruples are the
true Issue of Conscience, not of some Worldly Interest, and Carnal Design, to
create and foment Divisions, because by that Craft they get their Living: And
it has secured it too against Antinomianism, by Asserting, That Repentance is
necessary in its way, and Faith in its kind, in order to the Justification of a
Sinner.

(2.) That Expression in the first Paper, which excludes a Subordinate
Righteousness, is fully provided for in the Third, in these words: None of
these, nor any Work done by Man, or wrought by the Spirit of God in them, is
(under any Denomination whatsoever) any part of that Righteousness, for the
sake, or on the Account whereof, God does Pardon, Justify, etc. Now this
Expression (under any Denomination whatsoever) is exclusive of whatever can
pretend to come in for a share in Justification with the Righteousness of
Christ; nor can all the Cunning of the most subtle Adversary excogitate any
thing, which this Universal will not shut out of Doors, whether it be
Subordinate, or Coordinate.

(3.) The Condescension of the Third Paper is very Admirable; for whereas all
Quarrels about Mr. Williams's Book had been adjusted in 1692. and it might
reasonably have been inspected, they had been Buried in that Grave, yet when
some had employed their Talents to find a Knot in a Bull-rush, yet the Brethren
were content to admit of a fresh Debate thereon; nor do I hear that Mr. W.
himself insisted on his former Vindication, but freely submitted to a farther
Scrutiny, in order to Peace and Union.

(4.) I must applaud the Excellency of their Temper who drew it up; who would
not forfeit their Ingenuity and Humanity, to expose a Brother to those
Indignities the other Paper had done; letting the World know that however they
had been wheadled into a Subscription to the First, yet they saw their Error,
and were grown more Christian, and considerate in the Third.

(5.) In a word, All things were here managed in that way, which might engage
the Presence of God with them, and the Blessing of God upon them: There was
solemn seeking of God in Prayer for Direction; due time taken, that all might
consider, and then give their Advice: They chose a certain Number out of the
Body, who according to Instructions, might prepare, digest, and draw up Matters
for the Brethren: They made their Report, which was consented to by the whole
Body of the United Ministers; so that according to the acknowledged Laws and
Customs of all such Assemblies, it may be truly and properly said, That every
Individual Brother, gave his Assent and Consent to the Third Paper. That is,
there was not one who declared his Dissent; there was not one, but who did
Assent, that we knew of.

But if any one of the Reverend Nine-Pins, has been Tip't down, and denied his
Agreement to this Third Paper, it is more than he had done before his Brethren:
Nor am I at all concerned; for as I dare not Pin my Faith upon his Sleeve, so
neither will I hang upon his Cloak, lest he should unbutton the Loop, and let
me drop into the Bottomless-Pit, as it is said, he threatened some of his
Auditors; and if he has that slippery Trick with him, I would neither be in his
Clothes, nor hang on his Cloak for a Groat.

Our Author complains somewhere, as if he had drawn the Displeasure of both
Parties upon himself; which is but the Common Fate of those that would Trim it
between two Different Interests; and the Censure they commonly pass on such as
would seem of Two Religions, is, That they Really are of none: An Ingenious
Author in his Poem of the Progress of the Soul, describes us such a Mungrel,
but one that was never trusted.

From Dogs, a Wolf; from Wolves, a Dog he fled;
And like a Spy, to both Sides false, he Perished.
And now, Honored Sir, though we were not so Prudent to sit down and count the
Charges of this Correspondence, before we began it, let us yet be so Wise, to
Compute the Gains now we have done: I confess freely to you, I never Cultivated
so Barren a Soil; never bestowed my Labor upon so Fruitless a Controversy:
Earnings I have made none, it is well if I can come off so, to make a Saving
Bargain on it: If it has turned ^o better Account to your self, you will readily
Ascribe it to him who has Blessed you with an Improving Heart: All I can say I
have got, (if that may be called Gain) is a few Scratches over my Face, with
Briars and Thorns, the Remains of the Primitive Curse: If Religion has not
received deeper Wounds, I shall rejoice, and easily lick my self whole of those
Impotent Strokes he has given me; but how he will repair Religion (so far as it
is concerned in the Cause of the Protestant Dissenters) I do not know: For upon
the Principles on which he proceeds, or presupposes, to his Discourse, he has
rendered their Cause Untenable, Undefencible. And admitting once that the
Scriptures are not a Perfect Rule of Faith and Worship; That Christ is not a
Perfect Prophet, nor has revealed whatever is necessary to be Believed for
Salvation, (upon which Principles, he Cryptically proceeds) the Dissenters and
their Cause, may be blown away with one Breath. So true is the Old Observation,
That Overdoing, is Undoing; and yet we have none, but are too Proud to Observe
it. I will add, That this Sublimating of Religion, in the Speculative Part, is
that which has given occasion to our Deists, and Atheists to Ridicule all
Revealed Religion: You will Dispute 'em up, you must Pray, and Live 'em down!

But, Sir, I will ease you now of Me; nor shall you ever more see me drawing
the Contentious Saw, unless perhaps, which I hope never will, an Irresistible
Provocation, should offer Violence to the Recess which I so much affect: In the
mean time whatever Trouble I have given you, you will be so Just, as to place
it to your own Account, because you drew it upon your self.

Sir, excuse me that I conclude without Ceremony

Your Humble Servant, etc.

FINIS.
MANTISSA.
Reader,
LET it not make thee Proud, that thou art Caressed, Complemented, Courted and
Addressed by the Scribbling Tribe, and made the Judge of Life and Death to every
Paper that shall dare to look abroad into the Public; for it may serve to
Humble thee, that what carries the Appearance of Great Honor, is if well
considered a Real Burden, to be surcharged with the Common Titles of the
Judicious and Learned, the Courteous and Candid, the Impartial and Indifferent,
and whatever other goodly Epithites a wretched Cause may need, or a fruitful
Invention can produce, either to blind thy Judgment, or bribe thy Affections.
It may serve for thy Mortification in some degree, that thou art Postponed,
from the Preface to the Postscript, from the Van to the Rear; and that thou who
have commonly pretended to Ride in State on the Fore-Horse, art degraded to
come behind with the Portmanteu. However, lay aside for a while thy Prejudice
and Passion, thy Interest and Party, and consider seriously a few things before
I give thee a long Farewell.

I. I will give thee the good News that our Author is at last become more
Orthodox, than when he wrote his Report; for then he gave us his Substance of
the Gospel, which had no Justifying Faith in it, no Repentance in order to
Pardon; no Regeneration, no Conversion, no Holiness, no new Heart, and
therefore no new Obedience: Rejoice therefore with us all, that he is now come
home to himself, returned to the Truth, p. 43. Our Sins being the Meritorious
Cause of Christ's Sufferings, and his Sufferings a proper Punishment of our
Sins, for the Satisfaction of Divine Justice; that whoever believes on him, may
be Acquitted and Saved: But it is not intended that the Filth of our Sins,
which is distinct from the Guilt was upon Christ, or that he was any otherways
Criminal in God's Account, than by the Imputation of our Sins to him.

Say not, Reader, this is utterly inconsistent with that Scheme of Religion the
Report has given us; for I am willing to deal much more favorably than he will
with Mr. W. and let his Words pass for his Meaning, however irreconcilable
they are to other places.

But again: Appeal p. 8. We Reject the Opinion of those who hold, That upon
transferring the Guilt of our Sins to Christ, he is to be esteemed the Person
that committed all the Sins of those for whom he Died; or that the Turpitude
and Filth of our Sins was transferred upon him, which is a Notion equally
False, Blasphemous and Imposible -- Besides, nothing can be Renounced by us
with greater Indignation, than such a Change of Persons as implies that we are
actually discharged from Punishment, whilst Unbelievers, or Impenitent. I
rejoice heartily that our Author is once more given to Change, and that for the
better; and that we have at length heard some Tidings of Faith and Repentance,
in order to our Discharge from Punishment, which were wholly lost in the
Report: So much do we owe to the seasonable Deaths of two Antinomians, under
whose Influences he then was; and to the Lives of two Sound Divines, under
whose Awe he now is.

II. Reader thou may observe that the Author, whether Defender or Appellant,
has the oddest way of answering a pinching Objection that ever any Respondent
in the World used; which is not by showing the Weakness of it, but by lending
more strength to it. One notable Instance I have already given in the Matter of
Fact: When the Report had affirmed, the First Paper gave Satisfaction to the
most Learned of both Parties. The Rebuke replied, That it gave no Satisfaction
at all to Mr. Cole and Mr. Mather: And those two surely might be reckoned among
the most Learned of one Party: To which he rejoyns, That for some other Reasons
they declined Subscription; where instead of Answering, he confirms by Reasons
(tho secret Reasons) that they declined Subscription; which is not to Answer,
but Confess the Objection: The Objection was, that they did not Subscribe; and
he very officiously, without my asking, gives an Account, why they did not
Subscribe. But I shall now give an Instance or two more of this way of
answering Objections from his Appeal.

1 Instance. Appeal p. 18. he tells us, That Jesus Christ as our Surety, entered
into the same Bond with us, and that he by virtue of the Sanction of the Law of
Works, was obliged to suffer for our Sins; and for the Proof of this mighty
Assertion, he quotes Heb. 7. 22. Jesus was made the Surety of a better
Testament: To this Mr. W. answers, Christ was called the Surety of the better
Testament, and therefore not of the Law of Works, which in all probability was
not the better Testament, but the worse of the two; that is, it was our less
good. And to speak with impartiality, it sounds harshly to my Ears: That Christ
being called the Surety of a better Testament, that is, of the Covenant of
Grace, should prove him the Surety of a worse Covenant, that is, of the
Covenant of Works. Now how does the Appellant take off the Objection? Why he
brings in Curcellaeus making the same Objection, and that is all his Answer:
But still the Objection is the same, whoever makes it, and stands where it did
in its full strength, till he fairly removes it; when therefore (and not till
then) he shall prove, that the Covenant of Works is the better Testament; he
shall prove that Christ was the Surety of it: But if the Covenant of Grace be
the better Covenant of the two, and Christ be made or constituted the Surety of
that Covenant, he must bring other Texts to prove, that Christ is the Surety of
the Covenant of Works, which will be the more difficult for him to do, because
the Title of Surety applied to Christ, is not used in any other Text in the
whole New Testament. 2. Instance. The Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity (says the Appeal, p. 37.) To the end he might more plausibly
expose those parts of the Christian Faith, which relate to Justification;
insinuated as if they had been such abstruse Matters, that tho the Dissenters
contended so fiercely about 'em, as to divide the Communion, and separate upon
them; yet their Teachers confess, that they understand not what it is that our
Differences are about: This is, I confess, a most sharp Weapon, and thrown with
a strong Arm: It would rejoice me to see a good Answer to it; and that I
conceive is, that our Judgment about these Points of Satisfaction and
Justification, are most clearly laid down in the Confessions of the Church of
England, those of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and at the Savoy, and
we know well what our Differences are about them: But the Appellant has written
several Pieces, and this last among or above the rest, that has justified the
Objection, which is his peculiar way of answering, and rendered these Doctrines
unintelligible; and his poor Clients may now answer him, as they did their
Advocates, Fecistis probe, incertior sum, multo quam dudum; He has misled his
Followers first into the Wilderness, and then out of their Wits; so many
Postulata, so many things begged, others borrowed, some supposed, others
presupposed; and from these so many Deductions, Inferences, Consequences, or
rather Pursuances, that few or none know where the Truth lies, where the Error:
Causes, Impulsive Causes, Meritoaious Causes, near Meritorious Causes, tho how
near they must be, he does not instruct us, and we must not dare to conjecture;
whereas a Cause may be said to be near, in respect of another that lies further
off; and yet Remote in respect of that which lies nearer -- Pudet, haec
opprobria Nobis
Et Dici potuisse, and non Potuisse Refelli!

III. Reader, thou have here a new Book, Conceived and brought forth in a few
Moments; an evident proof he needed not a Man-Midwife to give him a quick
Delivery: He Is pleased to call it an Appeal, it is design is to instruct a
couple of Learned Persons what they are to believe, and not to make them judge
the Author graciously teaches them what they are to believe of themselves, and
how they may believe in him: He informs them in the Meaning of their own words,
which they never understood before; and in the Meaning of his Principles, which
they understand not to this Hour. It Is a piece wherein he sticks close to them
by Adulation, and to his old Friend by Persecution: It Is a piece that will damn
all the World, for none can believe it, and yet it damns us all for Unbelief.

But the best of it is, the very Persons represented in greatest danger are
left safe enough at an impartial Bar; because its Charge against them is
notoriously false, after all the Authors tricks to force them to deny the
Sufferings of Christ to be proper Punishments. For Mr. Baxter says, Method.
Theol. Part III. p. 4. Gods hatred of Sin, and also his Justice, are no less
demonstrated in the Satisfaction of Christ, at least in a manner no less meet
for obtaining the ends of Government, than if the Sinners themselves had been
damned: And p. 53. God does no less effectually show his Punitive Justice in
the Punishments of Christ, than if he had destroyed the World. Hence its
manifest, All the objected Phrases do only come to that he accounted Christ no
Sinner when he suffered. Mr. Williams in Manmade Righteous, says, p. 41.
Though Death was due to us as Sinners, yet Death was not due to Christ, but as
it was to be satisfactory and meritorious. He was to bear it as a Punishment
for the Satisfaction of governing Justice, and to Merit the Pardon of Sinners.
He was willing to bear the Punishment of our Crimes, that thereby he might
Merit our forgiveness in a way consistent with the Perfections of God, and
conducive to the Glory of Divine Government. Hence, Isa. 53. 5. The
chastisement of our Peace was upon him. It was on him a Chastisement of Peace
as its designed end: True, it was for Sin or it had not been necessary, nor yet
a Punishment, etc. Christ's Death must be satisfactory to God, or he would not
have accounted it meritorious of Peace for us; provoked Justice and the injury
to Divine Government for Sin, stood in the Sinners way, yea stood in the way of
all Merit for good to us; there must therefore be a Propitiation for Sin to
God, and this must be made to God; its accepted as a Ransom and Price by him;
and so it operates on the Sinner in a way of Merit consequential of that
Satisfaction. Christ's Blood was offered as an Atonement, etc. Reader, could one
Page more expressly assert what Mr. L's tells thee is denied? I might Cite
hundreds of Places expressing the same. And all Mr. L. objected Passages deny
no more than that Christ was joint Party with us in the Covenant of Works, and
that Sinners suffered and satisfied in Christ.

Nor yet is this piece like to obtain with such whom he designed to ensnare,
for after all, Mr. L. boasts of Dr. Edwards Letter to him, you have his
Thoughts expressed in the ensuing Lines.

To the Respected Mr. D. Williams, etc.
SIR,
I Received yours by the last Post, and in Answer to it, I am to acquaint you,
that I lately received a Letter indeed from Mr. S. Lobb, but no Sheets of any
Book designed by him for the Press: In his Letter he desired to know my
Opinion, in Relation to two Questions therein proposed; to which I did return
him an Answer, in (which (if he thinks fit to Communicate the Contents to you)
you will meet with nothing that will be any disadvantage to the Cause you are
engaged in with your Antinomian Adversaries, or your way of managing it, as I
find it stated in your Writings. The same sense that I formerly declared to
you, I had of your Opinion, and Explication of the Doctrine of our Savior's
Satisfaction, I continue in still, and have told Mr. L. so much, without which
I could not be either Just to you, or Consistent with my self: If Mr. Lobb
shall publish any thing as from me, (which I am far from thinking he will)
which may seem to be contrary to what I have formerly declared to you, in my
Letters, which since, with my permission, you have made public, I do undertake
to give you full satisfaction, and do assure you as to what shall concern my
self, you shall have no just ground of Suspicion or Complaint. In the mean
time, while the Matter depends only on Surmises and Conjectures, or uncertain
Reports, I can say nothing in it, and have no more to add, but that I am,

Jesus Coll. Oxon. Febr. 11. School. SIR, Your very humble Servant, Jonath.
Edwards.


IV. And now, Reader, I think I can discover Land; and shall most gladly leap a
Shore, and quit my self of this angry raging Element, the Controversial Ocean,
on which I have been so long tossed.

Thou remembrest I hope, how the Defense, p. 82. Objected to the Rebuke: That
he charged the Congregational in the Bulk, without a Salvo to the Reputation of
any one of them. And I hope too, thou will be so just to thy Self, and Me, as
to refresh thy Memory with the Answer I have returned in this my Vindication,
p. 23 This unworthy Calumny had been sufficiently obviated in the Rebuke it
self; it has been more fully removed among other heaps of Dung, I was obliged
to remove e're I could come at him; I shall only add this one Thing, That I
never thought, spoke, wrote, that the Congregational Brethren were either in
the Bulk, or in any considerable number, tainted with, or inclined to the
Antinomian Errors, no more than I thought that the other side was tainted with
or inclined to the Socinian or Arminian: It is very true, that the Report had
given some ground for such a Suspicion, who that his Story might look big, had
talked much of the Dissenting Brethren, and still had formed his style in the
Plural Number, we, we, we! Yet I durst never entertain any jealousy of them,
because I well knew they were clear in this Matter: And I looked upon it as a
mere Bravado, a pure Artifice to vapor and terrify us with false Musters,
whereas indeed 'twas Himself, and a few, a very few more, under whose immediate
and powerful Influence he then was, that had espoused those dreadful Notions.

But I can now, Reader, give thee more Recent, and explicit Assurance, from
Authentic warrant, that whatever he pretended or made show of, very many of
the Congregational Brethren have disowned him in his late Luxuriancy of
Scribbling: Some of those Orthodox Brethren were not Privy in the least to his
design, others were not so much as Accessory, either before the Fact, or after
the Fact, others are ready to disavow those Principles he advances in his
Substance of the Gospel: They own Faith necessary to Justification; and amongst
other Reasons, I hope this is one that has Reclaimed him from his wild Notions,
and Reduced him to Reason and Moderation; and I have their Warrant in Terminis,
to declare The Congregational Brethren in and about the City, do all judge
themselves unjustly charged as a Party with Mr. Lobb, in publishing his Report,
they being wholly unconsulted and unconcerned in his publishing thereof.

I will dismis the Reader from farther Attendance, when I have observed, That
our Modern Authors that would be accounted Schoolmen, do write, just as Men in
Populous Cities build, where because they want Ground, to lay a wide
Foundation, raise their Buiding 6 or 7 Stories high: Thus do our Towering
School-Divines; they have narrow slender Ground for their Discourses, and
therefore are obliged to soar up into the Clouds, where we lose 'em, and they
are lost themselves: We are too prone to be gazing up into Heaven to view the
Asterisms of Speculative Theology, whilst we stumble at a Stone, and tumble
into the Ditch of Profaneness: 'Twas a Judicious and Moderate Saying of the
Learned Dr. I. Owen, Diatrib. de Just. Divin. p. 165. Et sane quoniam de facto
ita luculenter constat, etc. Seeing therefore that the Matter is so very clear
in Fact; That Christ has born our Sins, God having laid them upon him; and by
that satisfaction has procured Eternal Salvation; although it had pleased God
to have kept secret in the Cabinet of his own Goodness and Wisdom, all the
Causes and Reasons of that his most Wise Counsel and Design for ever, it had
been our Duty to have acquiesced in his most Righteous, most Gracious, most
Holy, most Wise Will and Pleasure; but yet so that no helps of our Faith are to
be despised, nor any Discoveries of his Divine Nature and Will, are to be
neglected, whereby our most Merciful Father shall lead us into the more inward
and saving Knowledge of the Mystery of Godliness.

To shut up all therefore in one word; Let us all pray that our Gracious God
would bless this present Age with Ministers and Teachers of that Subact
Judgment, and of those Holy Condescentions, that know how to bring down
Divinity from Heaven to Earth, and Accommodate the Sublime Mysteries of
Religion to a Holy and Exemplary Conversation; assuring our selves, that that
Doctrine is none of Christ's, which is not according to Godliness.

FINIS.
By the same Author:
A Faithful Rebuke to a False Report, lately Dispersed in a Letter to a Friend
in the Country: Concerning Differences in Doctrinals, between some Dissenting
Ministers in London, in Octavo.

Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry.


