THE Ambitious Practices OF FRANCE.

THE Ambitious Practices OF FRANCE: OR, A Relation of the Ways and Methods used
by them to attain to that Supreme Grandeur.

As also, The Secret Intrigues of the FRENCH King's Ministers at the Courts of
most of the Princes and States of EUROPE.

With Remarks thereupon, and some Reflections on the Interest of those Princes.

LICENSED,

June 12. 1689. J. Fraser.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall.
1689.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THE following Tract seems to have been written by a Hollander, and is a kind
of Compendium of many of the Artifices and Measures used by the French Court
for several years last past, in order to the attaining to that formidable Power
and Greatness it now stands possessed of. If the Author had been as much a
Master of Logic, as he appears to be Curious in prying into the Secrets of
Cabinets, the French Parliaments refusing to ratify the Peace of the Pyrenees,
opened him a large Field wherein to have shown his Talent, and perhaps might
easily have brought to the Bay all the Pleas that have hitherto appeared of the
Most Christian King's Ministers. But since he thought not fit to urge what a
Maiming it was of the Royal Prerogative in that Ministry to own the invalidity
of a Treaty, though Signed and Ratified by the Prince, only for want of the
Peoples Consent, which is, as I take it, a kind of Lopping, or rather Blasting
one of the fatrest Flowers of the Crown, I shall not trouble my self to push on
that Argument for him. Yet though he affords us but a scantling of Reason, we
must own him a Man of Intelligence, and that there are many particulars very
well worth our knowledge in these gleanings of his after so many Writers upon
the same Subject; though for my part I should be loath to stand surety for the
verity of them all. However there is a sort of merit in making them English,
since it serves to show the happy and prudent Conduct of our Government, which
shelters us from those Miseries our Neighbors groan under; this and the
prospect of so many private Cabals, is what I hope will give the Reader
satisfaction, which he is not in any wise to expect from the Style, which has
the usual ruggedness of the North, and which being in a hurry, I had not time
to smoothen and slick, though here and there I made a shift to purge it of the
filth and ordures of a Republican Pen.

THE Ambitious Practices OF FRANCE.
It Is no difficult matter to discover the Origin of the Mischiefs which we
labor under at this day: Those who would but take the pains to make reflection
upon what has occurred within these twenty Years in Europe, would, with me,
grant, that if sad Experience had but taught us to be wise, we should not now
see our selves reduced to the miserable Estate we are in. For it is not of late
only, that France began to infringe Treaties, which seemed the most Sacred. Her
Ambition could not Curb it self so long from appearing. But we have been either
so weak, or so blind, as not to think of opposing Her Designs, until it was too
late. Wherefore we can only impute our misfortunes to our selves, and sincerely
own, that if we now undergo the punishment of our Imprudence, it is a
punishment we have richly deserved.

And indeed to whom ought we more to attribute the weakness of the Spaniards,
than to our selves, who have so often contributed to reduce them to the
Circumstances they are in at this day? Was it not easy for us to see, that
they only supported themselves by the means of the Cabals on foot in France, in
the time of Cardinal Mazarine, and that if the Prince of Conde had abondoned
them, it had been Adieu to their Fortune, and Repute? Yet notwithstanding we
had seen they had lost the Assistance of that Prince, who by the Peace of the
Pyrenees, was returned into his Duty, and that France, to the prejudice of so
Holy, and so Authentic a Treaty, continued not only to foment the Troubles of
Portugal, but to send thither succors at several times, though we had seen, I
say, that the Peace was only a Masque to Her Ambition, we still suffered our
Neighbors to be oppressed, without saying a word, as if Policy ought not to
have taught us, that 'twas time to oppose the Designs of a Nation, which will
never be contented, until it has glutted its Ambition with the Conquest of the
whole Earth.

Yet with how much Audaciousness, not to say Impudence, does it maintain that
all its paces are conformable to the Peace? Would it not still insinuate that
all that passed in the business of Portugal, passed without its Order; and
while it sent Men and Money thither, did it not outwardly forbid its Subjects
to bear Arms in that service, to whom, on the other side it insinuated
underhand the going to the Assistance of that Crown, as the only place capable
of acquiring them Esteem and Reputation. This notwithstanding, what did it not
say to the Ambassador of Spain, who highly Complained of these Infractions, and
who saw before his Eyes in the Metropolis of the Kingdom, the Marquis de
Beauvieu raised publicly a Regiment of Horse for the service of that Crown,
after having treated in Appearance with the Ambassador of Portugal, but in
effect with the Court of France? It would needs have, that all this Ambassador
urged, was but effects of his Imagination, just as at this day it endeavors to
insinuate into us, that it has not any design of making War, though for some
months past, it has laid waste, and eat up a Country which does not belong to
it, and to which it would not have any lawful Pretensions, if Reason and
Justice were the Rule of its Actions.

And as then we gazed upon all its Attempts, and Motions, without budging in
the least, we do little more now, though we see our selves upon the point of
being the unhappy Victims of its Ambition? How many in the State have found
fault with sending Succors to the Spaniards, and if they receive any from us,
are not both they and we indebted for the so doing, to the Prudence, and
Sagacity of the Prince of Orange, who seeing farther than others, could not
endure that all possible means are used for our Oppression, without doing what
became, and lay in him for prevention.

For this reason it is, we see this Great Prince so much the mark of the
Persecutions of France, that cannot esteem Virtue, but when it suits with its
Interests, and has used all the little Politic Tricks imaginable, to revenge
itself on his Generous Oppositions.

But to return to my Subject, I say, France endeavored to cast a Mist before
the Eyes of the Spanish Ambassador, who was far from being slurr'd upon, when
an unsuspected Encounter caused him to do things with more height, and no
longer to disguize his sentiments. France had Treated with Mont-George, who was
killed in these last Wars, and was then a Captain in Candale, being a brave
Man, and loving War above all things, about Conducting Officers, and Soldiers
into Portugal. Now Mont-George being Embarked with them, in order to his
getting as soon as possible into that Country, having been taken by the
Spaniards, who had notice of his departure for that time, it was forced to pull
off the Mask, because the Spaniards already spoke of taking off his Head.
Whereupon a Courrier was dispatched in all haste to Madrid: and the Court of
Spain, seeing he was re-demanded by France, durst not proceed farther in that
matter, for fear of drawing upon itself the War, which it was very willing to
avoid.

So great a piece of Infidelity was followed with a world of others of the like
nature, without any Potentates interposing his Authority, to bring these things
to be regulated according to Justice. Not but that there were Guarrands of the
Peace of the Pyrenees, but not the least aid would they give unto the
Spaniards, whom it was endeavored to oppress by so many indirect ways. The
Spaniards too, whether that they were become insensible, or as is more
probable, they knew their weakness, suffered themselves to be thus Fooled and
good morrow'd if I may use that word, without showing any Resentment but by
Complaints so little suitable to Sovereigns, unless they be followed with some
effects; so as others seeing they swallowed all these affronts without saying
ought, did not think themselves more obliged than they themselves to take their
part.

Mean while, if their weakness appeared in any thing, it was undoubtedly in
what happened at London between Mon. D' Estrades, and the Baron de Vatteville,
Ambassadors of the two Crowns. For after the Baron de Vateville had got the
precedence of Mon. D' Estrades, at an entrance made by another Ambassador, he
was not only disowned by Spain, but Spain has for ever varnished its
Reputation, by a shameful Declaration, which I dare not repeat, nay, which I
dare not so much as call to mind, for fear of blushing upon its account. Yet if
it be well remembered, the fault thereof ought to be attributed to other Powers,
who showed themselves so passionate for Peace, that they took not any share in
the Affront that was meant upon Spain, which seeing itself abondoned by all the
World, was obliged to relax of its usual haughtiness.

The best Head pieces then considering with what Arrogance France demeaned it
self upon that occasion, were of advice, that before it was suffered to gather
greater Forces, endeavors should be used to oppose its Ambition; but the voice
of these wise Politicians, was only listened to by way of Conversation, and the
blindness began to become so Epidemical, that they considered those who held
such like Discourses, as People, who had more mind to create stirs, than foster
Peace, which they thought so necessary to all Europe.

Nor did they begin to see clear, until that France, being no longer able to
bear the yoke of Ease, resolved to make War in Flanders, under the pretext of
some Pretensions as Chymerical as those now on Foot: But to which, an Advocate
of Paris, whom they had been careful to cull out from among the most expert in
puzling of Causes, undertook to give a Varnish, and some Color. Nevertheless
an honest Man would have been very much puzzled, but this Advocate had served
his Apprentiship at the Bar, where for two Crowns they will undertake the worst
Cause that is, thought, that being much better paid for this, he should not
neglect a thing that might make his Fortune. Thus Interest having prevailed
over Truth, there quickly appeared a Manifest, by which they endeavored to
make out, that though the King had renounced, by the Treaty of the Pyrencas, to
what he might one day pretend in the Low Countries, and elsewhere, upon the
account of the Queen his Wife, this Renunciation was null, because that the
Parliament would never be brought to ratify the Treaty.

This Manifest did moreover establish, that the Queen had a Right from that
time over several Provinces, and to give this Manifest a Title, that might suit
with what it endeavored to insinuate, it was entitled, The Rights of the
Queen. Now you must know 'twas the King himself who hindered the Treaty of the
Pyrenees from being Registered, that so it might be a pretext upon occasion to
thwart against what had been signed by the greatest Lords of France, and what
he himself had signed.

Mean while, this new litigious pretension giving occasion to all the World to
make Reflection upon the little Faith of this Prince, could not sufficiently
admire, that a great Monarch, who affected wearing the Quality of most
Christian King, did things, which would have made the very Infidels to blush,
whose actions some took pleasure in relating, that by the Comparison of those
of both Parties, they might the more debase those of the King. And indeed they
Query'd whether one was not obliged to keep ones word, and principally a word
given so solemnly, sworn upon the Holy Evangelists, confirmed by a great
Alliance, and in short, wherein had been used all that was thought most
considerable, to render it the more inviolable. They Query'd, I say, whether
any thing could fall -- from so solemn an Oath, to which every one answered,
that 'twas an Action that created a Terror in Men, and merited a just
punishment from God.

And indeed a Man needs not be a great Divine, to know that Christianity, and
the Church, which is but one and the same thing, teaches, that we are to keep
our Faith, not only with a Christian Father-in-Law, but even with a Turk. There
is a fine Example of this in a French Gentleman, of the House of Anglure, and
which his Descendants do still Pride themselves in at this day. The particular
History of that Family does make mention, that one of their Ancestors having
been taken in a Battle, by Saladin Sultan of Egypt, after a long Imprisonment,
was set at Liberty, upon Condition he himself should return, and bring his
Ransom, which Saladin had fixed at a very considerable sum; this Gentleman
after being arrived at his own home, and had sold a good part of his Estate to
satisfy his Word, went back to Saladin, and told him, That he was come with
the Ransom he had agreed upon with him, and that if he pleased to name any
Person to receive it, he would pay it him immediately down upon the nail.
Saladin not dreaming of him, and when he had set him at liberty, never
expecting to see him more, was so surpised at his Generosity, that after
having embraced him, and caressed him to a high degree, told him he should
thenceforward have more Esteem for Christians, than he had had before; that he
not only remitted to him his Ransom, but also ordered his Treasurer to give him
ten thousand Francs, which was a considerable sum at that time; that he
requested his Friendship, and desired him that the eldest of his Family might
be ever called Saladin, that Posterity curious of knowing why they bore so
extraordinary a name among Christians, might know at the same time the generous
Action he had performed. Those of that Family have been careful to remember the
request of Saladin to their Ancestor. All the Eldest of that Family have
successively after one another, taken the name of Saladin, so that the Count D.
Estages, who is the Eldest of that Family, is still at this day called by that
Name.

If I might be allowed to make any reflections upon this matter, it would be no
hard task for me to prove that the present Age is very different from the
former. Heretofore a Christian kept his word with a Turk, and now a most
Christian King does not keep his with his Father in-Law. At this day the
Descendants of a Christian are called Saladin, because their Father promised it
to a Turk, and now a most Christian King neither minds the Word, which his
Predecessors gave their Subjects of the Reformed Religion, nor that he himself
has given them. At this day the House of Anglure, which is only the Family of a
Gentleman derives all its Glory from that their Forefather executed the promise
he had given a Turk, and now the House of France, which is the most August
House of Europe, derives all its glory from infringing an infinite number of
Edicts, which it has granted to Christians.

But to return unto my Subject, the French King grounding himself, as I have
said, upon his imaginary Pretensions, and upon the Parliaments not having
ratified the Treaty of the Pyrences, resolved to break the Peace, and carry his
Arms into Flanders. Mean while, as I cannot proceed on farther, without first
giving an account of the Authority of this Parliament, for fear some should
judge its Power extended as far as that of another Country; it is convenient
that it be known that the least Order of Council, Cashiers all Acts of
Parliament, and that its Power is now so limited, that though the matters in
hand be only the interests of private Persons, the Council does often attribute
to it self the taking Cognizance of 'em, and thus makes a mock of all the
Parliament could Decree. Nevertheless its Authority was formerly very great,
nay, and it is not long since, that it was to so high a Point, that it was
looked upon by all with Admiration, I mean the time of the Kings Minority, but
that time is now so much changed, that a man may say, there is now no knowing
the Parliament again.

And even in that time, I mean the time this Manifest appeared in, the King had
stripped it of all its Privileges, had banished all those Members out of it, who
were suspected by him, because they stood well affectioned to the public good,
and to say all in a word, contemned it to that Degree, as to go to it no
otherwise than in great Boots, and with a Cane in his hand. Nay, he plumed it
of its very name, as well as the name of all the other Tribunals: For to show
that none but he was Master, he caused an Edict to be issued forth, by which
neither the Parliament, nor the great Council, nor the Chamber of Accounts, nor
the Court of Aids ought thenceforward to be called more than the Superior
Courts, whereas before they were called the Sovereign Courts: Nay, and he had
published another Edict too, which seemed to me still more injurious, for
whereas when there was a design of any new Subsidies, or of some other
Innovation in the State, he was used to go thither in Person, to have his
Edicts verifyed, he had ordered the Parliament to verify them upon a mere Note
under the Privy Signet, which he most commonly sent by a Footman: so as that
this August Tribunal, which had been instituted formerly, as a Man may say, to
be the Mediator between the People and the King, and to save the one from the
Tyranny of the other, was it self obliged to buckle under his will and
pleasure; for there was no more talking of making Remonstrances, which those of
the same Company formerly made, to stir up Kings to have compassion of their
People: And if any were allowed to be made, they were only such as were stufft
with Flatteries, and Dissimulation; and just as certain Fathers make their
Children sometimes kiss the Rods wherewith they come to Chastise them, in like
manner were the People, who are the Kings Children, or at least, who ought to
be so, to thank the King by the mouth of their Magistrates, for all the Imposts
he lays upon them, to satisfy his Profusions.

Nevertheless it was upon the Authority which the Parliament had in the
Kingdom, that the King laid the Foundations of an approaching War, as I have
already said: In effect, the King of Spain being dead, there straight appeared
a small Tract, under the Name of the Rights of the Queen, in which it was
endeavored to be proved, that the Renunciation which the King had made to his
Rights by the Treaty of the Pyrenees, was Null; seeing the Parliament could
never be brought to verify the Treaty. That though this Renunciation were good,
which, however they were far from granting, it could not always subsist, by
reason of the Dauphin, who had not yet Ratifyed it, and yet who had the
greatest Interest therein, as being one day to be his Mothers Heir: In fine,
this Treatise was only filled with trim words, and few reasons. For to begin
with the first, true it is, the Parliament was used to verify what passed most
remarkable in the Kingdom, but that this was absolutely essential, is what I
deny, and which I shall endeavor to disprove. For Example, if a Marriage of a
King be concluded with a Princess, the Parliament has nothing to do in the
Contract, and we do not find it was suffered to take Cognizance of that of
Henry the Fourth, with Mary of Medices; and to start a matter still of latter
Date, of that of the Dauphin with the Dauphiness. And yet in this occasion the
thing perhaps was of as much moment as the Renunciation which the King made by
the Treaty of the Pyrenees. Yes, but may be one or other may tell me that the
species is very different, for a Treaty of Peace is concerned in establishing
the repose of the People, whereas a Treaty of Marriage only regards the
establishing the Society of two Persons. I Will own with them that their reason
is specious, but easy to refute. For if it be upon the account of the Interest
of the People, that the Treaties of Peace ought to be Ratified by the
Parliament, why does it not also verify Treaties of War, as well as Treaties of
Peace. They will needs have that a Treaty which banishes War, and brings back
repose into a State, instead of Troubles and Confusion, which reign therein,
are subject to verification, and will not allow that a Treaty of War, which
must banish Peace, and bring along Disorder, instead of the repose which all
enjoy, should be verifyed by Parliament, which nevertheless was only instituted
to be watchful for the Preservation of the People. Let us rather say, that this
Custom of thus verifying Treaties of Peace, was only introduced, since it was
Enacted that Royal Gifts should be verified in Parliaments, and that those
which were not so, should be of no consideration, and this to hinder Kings, who
are commonly inclined to liberality, from giving away all their Patrimony, and
so compelled for want of means, to vex and oppress the People. Let us, I say,
conclude that the Parliament seeing that by some Treaties of Peace,
considerable Alienations had been made, and principally under John the first,
to retrieve them out of the hands of the English, and since, under Francis the
first, to retrieve them out of the hands of the Spaniards, had attributed to it
self the Authority of verifying Treaties, to hinder thence forward the
Dissipation of the Crown Lands. But there is more, which is, that though it were a
Law received in France, that the Parliament may find fault with those Treaties
it has not verified, this ought to be understood, if the Treaties were not made
in the forms, or that they were prejudicial to the Crown.

In what remains, there is no saying that France receives any prejudice by the
Treaty of the Pyrenees, not but that this Treaty was concluded with all the
usual Formalities. In regard of the Formalities, they had been so far observed,
that this had kept the matter much longer depending, than was necessary for the
repose of the People, who after so long a War, only breathed after Peace. For
they thought it not sufficient that Lienne, and Pimentel had set their hands to
the Treaty, but for the rendering it the more August to future Ages, Cardinal
Mazarine, and Don Lewis de Haro, Prime Ministers of the two Crowns, would needs
sign it themselves too; so as that one may say it was the most solemn, and
authentic Treaty that has been of a long while. Besides they had observed
therein all the Circumstances imaginable, namely, as holding the Conferences in
a place, which belonged neither to France, nor Spain, which however is
Note-worthy. For this shows they were willing then Spain should go Peer-with
France, but since it will not be allowed, as I said just before, one may say it
had been Ratified, but what rendered this Treaty free from all manner of
scruple, not only by the King, but also by all France; In effect, the Principal
among the Clergy, and Nobility, had signed the Contract of Marriage between the
King, and the Infanta, wherein was contained the abovementioned Renunciation,
so as that it was a mistake to say, that the Parliament, which can at most but
represent the Orders of the Kingdom, would not approve a Treaty, which was
already approved on by the King, by the Clergy, and by the Nobility.

In regard of what I said before, that this Treaty brought no prejudice to
France, that will be also easy for me to prove. For though France had then much
the advantage over Spain, yet it is nevertheless to be considered, that this
advantage might one day turn against it self, being obliged to share his
Conquests with England, which was then in its alliance. Now without specifying
by retail what are the dangerous Consequences which I might draw from this
sharing, it is sufficient for me to say that the interest of France was not to
give one foot to the Englishman in Flanders, who was a much more dangerous
Enemy than the Spaniard. Besides, by this Treaty, France made sure of the
greatest part of its Conquest, and changed into a certain Right, the Right of
Nations, which was a Right subject to all the diverse events of Fortune. In
regard of what was objected, that the Dauphin had not ratified the Renunciation
of the Queen, this is a feeble objection, and such as merits no answer. For
tell me, I beseech you, a Father, and a Mother, do not they engage their
Children, when they sign a Contract? And why had the Dauphin more right to
disclaim what the King and Queen had signed, than those had, who live under the
same Laws, and same Monarch?

All these considerations do sufficiently show, that all that was in the
Treatise of the Queens Rights, was only to impose upon the common people, and
particularly those of Flanders, who being once persuaded that the Queen had
some right to their Provinces, were capable of fomenting a Rebellion, to which
they had other provocations, through the ill treatment, they received from the
Spanish Soldiery, who for want of pay, broke out into several violences. Thus
as it was a point of prudence, to prevent all ill consequences of this kind, by
undeceiving them with the soonest, the Baron d'Isola, one of the Ministers of
the house of Austria, set pen to paper, and made a small treatise, to show the
nullity of the consequences, which the Author of the tract of the Queens
Rights, pretended to draw. And a great number of Copies, were distributed both
in Flanders, Germany and other places of the neighborhood. Nay some were
transmitted into France, but the Court thinking fit, that their Nation should
make its ambition, an Article of their Faith, made an exact search after the
Stationers who had distributed them, two or three of whom were sent to the
Bastile, and were in great danger of their Life, for as it was not allowed in
that Kingdom, to write truth in matter of Religion, so too in matter of Policy,
it was not allowed to speak it, or hear it from any one soever. For which
reason, as well those who bought this Book, as those who vended them, were
obliged to skulk, as if they had done some great crime. But the more they
endeavored to constrain Peoples wills, the more they strove to render
themselves free, so as all worthy People, not minding the prohibition that had
been made, sought to satisfy their Curiosity.

By virtue of these imaginary pretentions, the King failed not to send to
summon the Governor of the Low Countries to remit into his hands the places he
pretended to belong unto the Queen. And as he did a little doubt this Governor
would not comply with his demands, with a powerful Army he followed the Person,
he had sent to him, in order to the seizing them. His Envoy bringing him back
word, that the Governor of the Low Countries had order from the King his
Master, not to yield up the least, he entered Flanders, took Charle Roy, Ath,
Courtray, Oudenarde, and Lisle, while that the Marshal d' Aumons with another
Army, attacked such Cities as Bordered next upon the Sea. These Conquests which
were made with great rapidity, amazed all the Neighboring Potentates. They
thought it their interest, to stop the Course of these progresses, especially
the United Provinces, who had no mind to so formidable, and so ambitious a
Neighbor. Whereupon they engaged with the King of England, to sign a League,
wherein the King of Sweden entered, by which these three Powers obliged
themselves to cause the two Crowns to lay down Arms, if not to declare against
that which would not lay them down.

This League was called the Triple Alliance, and was in the Issue so fatal to
the Hollanders, as I shall show in due place, that for ought I know, they
quickly repented their having had any hand in it. A Man of Rochel is said to
have been the Person who laid the first Foundations of it; after having made
all those Powers sensible, how distrustful it became them to be of the ambition
of France. Be it as it will, France which never easily pardons those who have
once offended it, knowing this Man was in Swisserland, where he endeavored to
insinuate the same thing into the Cantons, sent thither the two Muzels, the
eldest of whom was a Captain of Cavalry, and the other Gentleman of the Horse
to Mon. Turenne, to endeavor the seizing him. The Affair was ticklish, and of
a strange consequence for the Muzels, if what they came to do had been
discovered in Swisserland; but having had the cunning to conceal their design,
and to trapan their Man, as he was passing from one City to another, they
brought him into France, where he was broke alive upon the wheel, after he had
endeavored to baulk the execution, by an action more resolute than Christian.
For having found in the Dungeon, where he lay, a piece of glass, he made a
shift with it, to cut off his privy members, and hid them under his straw bed,
for fear the Jailer, should chance to take notice of what he had done. But not
having been able to stanch the blood so well, but that there still trickled
down some drops, the Jailer would needs see from whence this proceeded; add to
this, that his Color did sufficiently speak him not to be in good health, at
length the Jailer having perceived what he had hidden under the straw bed, with
a great quantity of blood beneath, he gave the Judges notice of it, and as he
was designed for a public spectacle, they hastened his sentence. Whereupon he
was condemned to be broken, and they fearing he would not have strength
sufficient to go as far as the place where they put other Criminals to Death,
and perhaps too, he would not be alive, if they deferred his Execution until
the Afternoon, as is the common practice, they raised up a Scaffold before the
Prison Door, and he was Executed the same instant.

The Triple Alliance, which France had not foreseen, did so startle that Crown,
that though it had promised it self the Conquest of the better part of
Flanders, it was nevertheless obliged to lay down Arms; not but that it had
above a hundred thousand men on foot, but as England and Holland, armed
powerfully by Sea, and that France had not a Fleet capable of resisting such
great Forces, that Crown was afraid, that while its Arms were busied in
Flanders, the English, joined with the Hollanders, would make a descent either
into Britany, or in Normandy, and cast a terror into the very heart of the
Kingdom.

France being thus brought, as it were by force, to make a Peace, began to
contrive how to resent this outrage, and principally upon those who had most
contributed thereunto. And as people did generally attribute to the United
Provinces, the Repose then enjoyed through all Europe, all the French
resentment fell upon it. But it was very cautious of letting it appear yet a
while. For as Holland was as yet in good Terms with England, and Sweden, a way
was first to be found out to separate it from those two Powers, which were
still capable of being reunited together, for the interrupting its Designs, as
it only watched for an occasion, it quickly met with a very fair one, by a
Controversy which happened between England, and Holland, about Commerce; far
was it then from offering its Mediation, as at other times it had done, to
accommodate the difference; on the contrary it endeavored still more and more
to irritate the King of England, and mean while caused a Treaty underhand to be
proposed with the Hollanders, that so they might not entertain any thoughts of
making their Peace with England. The Hollanders, who had often found the
assistance of France, when they had any variance with England, still expected
the same kindness, and the more, for that the French King still amuz'd them
with a Treaty. But when they thought to have come to a Conclusion with him, to
oppose the King of England, they were strangely surprised to hear that the
French King had joined himself to him and that while the English attacked them
by Sea, the French were to attack them by Land, with such numerous, and such
amazing Forces, that it had not of a long while been known that France had had
the like. The United Provinces were then very much perplexed, for though they
were extreme Potent in Ships, and Money, they had no Soldiers just ready to
Oppose the French King, whose Troops were already on their March though the
Land of Cologne, which was the way he took to attack them.

Now to have gone about raising any in their own Country, besides a long Peace,
which the Provinces had enjoyed for several years, had rendered their Subjects
more capable of Commerce, than of War, there was no great feats to be hoped for
from them; the new Soldiers not being over-fit to resist Disciplined Troops.
Whereupon the Hollanders sent into Germany, to make Levies there, and to treat
with some Princes, from whom they were in hopes of Succors. But all Europe was
so startled at the prodigious Preparations of France, that each was willing to
keep his own Troops at home, not knowing yet, but that under the Pretext of
attacking Holland, the French King might invade Germany.

The Hollanders had hardly more than five and twenty thousand Men, for though
they had distributed Commissions to all those who proffered themselves to
serve, them, yet as those new Troops were not on Foot, there was no reckoning
upon them, until they were come to the Rendevouze. But what still more and more
weakened the State, is, that de Wit, Pensioner of Holland, who had much Credit
in the Republic, had ever excluded the Prince of Orange from Affairs, and as
he was a better Politician than a Soldier, and yet would be meddling in all
Affairs, went on very disorderly, and in great Confusion. There was still
another thing which did not a little contribute to the ruin of the State, but
which was then unknown, namely, that the French King knew all that passed in
the Country, by the means of one Mombas, who was in the Service of the
Commonwealth, that had confided in him a considerable trust in the Soldiery. A
Frenchman he was by Nation, so that the King found it an easy matter to gain
him to his Interests, by the means of Desroches, Captain in the Prince of
Conde' Guards, and being his Relation, had prevailed with him to take a Journey
into France the Winter before, where he had discourst the Prince.

All these Reasons were capable of entirely ruining the State, as is easy to
judge, if God had not resolved on the contrary. Mean while, the French King
being just ready to enter the Provinces, the States Assembled, in order to
resolve upon what course they should take to provide for their Defense. The
Prince of Orange, who notwithstanding all the Cabals of de Wit, had been
Elected Captain General of the State, was of advice to abandon the places above
the ^hine, to put ten thousand Men into Mastricht, and go and Encamp with the
rest at Bodegrave, whose Situation was advantageous to cover Holland. Mon. d'
Obdam, and Celidrek, who spoke for the Nobility, were of the same advice; but
the others having been of the contrary Opinion, it was resolved to preserve all
those Places, which nevertheless were strangely weakened by a part of the
Garrisons which were drawn out of them, to be sent to Mastricht.

Mean while the King, after having Encamped for some time before Charle-Roy,
marched toward Mastricht, and staid twelve or fifteen days at Wise, a small
City in the Land of Liege, in which he put a Garrison. There he waited for
intelligence from Mombas, who having given him to understand, there were few or
no men in the Cities above the Rhine, he passed the Meuse at Wise, and after
having put to slight some Troops, which were posted in an Advantageous place,
he came before Orsoy, which was invested at the same time. The Governor did
not want Courage, but as the Town was none of the strongest, and that besides,
it had but a very small Garrison, it yielded up the next day. The French
plundered the Town, and hanged all those of their own Nation, who were within
it, and who had taken Arms against them, and among others, a man of Seventy
years old, who was the Cannomer of Orsoy. The Army marched to Rhineberg and
Dossery; the Commander of the Place delivered (...) up without firing one
piece, for which reason the Prince of Orange caused his Head to be taken off in
a short while after. The Governor of Wesel made little more resistance, though
his Town was capable of maintaining a long Siege, and having delivered it up to
the Prince of Conde, after the Trenches had been open for a day or two, he
merited a punishment akin to that of Dossery: Namely, that the Executioner
passed a Sword over his Head, leaving him indeed his Life, but overwhelming him
with Infamy. Baric was attacked and taken at the same time by Mon de Turenne,
after which the Prince of Conde advanced into the Country, where he took
Deudekom, Rees and Emmerick, with the same facility he had seized on the other
Places.

These Victories, though they cost not much Blood, made the King of France pass
for a Caesar in his Army. For they saw that he like him could say, I came, I
saw, I overcame. Wherefore to maintain the Reputation he began to acquire, he
would pass the Rhine, as that Emperor had formerly done; but resolved to pass
it after a much more Noble and more Heroic manner. For that Emperor had only
passed it over a Bridge, and for his part he would pass it swimming.

Two Gentlemen of the Country Neighbors of the Tol-hays, whose Names I don't
remember, went to the Prince of Conde at Emmerick, and offered to show him a
passage where there were but a hundred Paces swimming. He received their offers
with satisfaction, and so much the more, in that the French saw a stop to their
Conquests, because the Issel defended the entrance of the Country, not only by
reason of its depth, but also upon the account of the Retrenchments that had
been made on the other side, and which were hard to force. The Prince of Conde
after having caressed those two Gentlemen, and promised them great Rewards,
commanded the Count de Guiche to go along with them, to see whother he might
trust to what they told him: They brought the Count de Guiche just opposite to
the Tol-hays, where plunging first into the Water, the Count de Guiche followed
them with his Gentlemen of the Horse, while that his Troop staid upon the shore
of the Rhine. The Count de Guiche having seen that they had said no more than
what was true, returned to give an account to the Prince of Conde, and that
Prince sent the King word of what passed, and that if he would be of the party,
he might fall upon the Rear of the Enemies, who not suspecting the least, were
only careful to Guard the Issel. The King being excited the same time both with
Glory and Ambition, went to the Prince of Conde's Camp, who commanded an Army
apart from his, and after having Supped with him, he marched all the night
toward the Rhine, whither he came about half an hour or thereabouts, before
day.

Mean while the Prince of Orange, who had found more fidelity among the common
people than in the Nobility, having had notice given him by the Peasants, that
the King had some design on that side, he sent Mombas thither with Horse and
Foot: Mombas had played Bankrupt to his Honor, by treating as he had done with
the Enemies; but though this occasion was still favorable to him for the
continuing his wicked designs, yet fearing he could not carry on his Treason so
s^immingly in the rencounter, but that it would run some danger of being
suspected, he bethought himself of writing to some Deputies of the State, who
were about the Prince of Orange, that there was no likelihood the French should
think of passing the Rhine, and if they pleased he would put himself into
Nimmeghen, whither he had great reason to believe they were bent upon their
March. He took his time to send this Letter, when that the Prince of Orange was
gone out of the Camp with a Detachment; and as these Deputies thought him
faithful, and that besides, he represented to them the Affairs as pressing,
they sent him word to do according to what he had written. The Prince of Orange
being returned to the Camp, was much surpised to hear what Mombas had done,
and as he already suspected him of Treason, and that this last action so very
far from so undeceiving him, that it confirmed him still in his Opinion, he
caused him to be taken into Custody.

Mean while he gave his Command to Wurtz, who was a German by Nation, and whom
the Commonwealth had taken into its Service, and ordered him to march in all
haste to the Tol-huys, with some Troops, which were detached from the Army.
Wurtz did what he could to retrench himself in haste, but seeing the French
already appeared on the other side, he lodged his Infantry in his
Retrenchments, and caused his Cavalry to advance along the River. The King
being come on the brink of the Rhine, caused Cannon to be brought at the same
time, and pointed it upon Wurtz his Cavalry, who seeing Trees all along the
Rhine, put himself with his Troops among them, thinking himself thereby the
better sheltered from the Cannon. Mean while in went the French into the Rhine,
one after one, and many of them were drowned, being swallowed up in a
Whirl-pool. Others seeing this, took the advantage on the left, and passed for
all the World like Cows, which follow in the tail of one another.

Wurtz his Cavalry saw them pass, without flinching, until they perceived some
Troopers, who now began to come out of the Water, and form a Squadron. Then
they came from under the Trees, where they stood, but instead of pushing the
Enemies that were returned into the Water, they made a halt upon the brink of
the River, from whence they made their discharge, which being at too great a
distance, was without any effect. The little Resolution which the Cavalry
showed, gave Courage to the French, who would never have dared to have stood
their shock, if they had but followed them into the Water, and not stood
gazing, and suffer them to strengthen their Squadron with their Companions.
Wurtz his Cavalry having thus quited their ground, the French rallied, and
waited for their Companions, who still passed the River, for the most part
swimming, and some by Boat.

The Prince of Conde being thus in a Boat, with the Duke of Anguien, and some
great Lords of the Court, he caused his Boat to turn back toward the
Waterside, when he perceived the Duke of Longueville had thrown himself into
the River, and ran the risque of being drowned, he took him into his Boat, and
endeavoring to pass as soon as possible, he was no sooner arrived on the other
side, than that he drew up his Troops in Battle Array, in order to attack the
Enemies Retrenchments. The Hollands Infantry finding themselves weak in sorry
Retrenchments, and had besides placed all their hopes in the Cavalry, by whom
they saw themselves abandoned, thought less of making Resistance, than of
demanding the Quarter, which the Prince of Conde had offered them, calling out
to them aloud, that they should lay down their Arms. Mean while the French
still advanced, without one man so much as making a shot, either of their, or
on the Hollanders side, which made the King believe, who saw all that passed,
that he should have the Victory, without its costing him one drop of blood: But
the Duke of Longueville, having made a Debauch, just before he parted from
Emmerick, advanced up to the very brink of the Retrenchment, and fired his
Pistol, whereupon the Hollanders vexed they had not fired sconer, and fancying
they had no more hopes of quarter left, made their Discharge, which being made,
as it were in the very mouths of the French, killed a great many of the most
considerable Persons among the Enemies. The Duke of Longueville, who had begun
the noise, was killed stone dead, the Prince of Conde wounded, and many others,
whom it would be too long to name.

The French, who had been startled at this Discharge, being recovered from
their fright, Rallyed, and Attacked the Retrenchments, where they found some
Resistance, especially at one Barriere, where was an Officer, whose head was
hoary with years, but whose old Age had as much Vigor as the most Resolute
Youth. But being at length overwhelmed with numbers, the rest sought their
safety from their heels, not thinking of asking Quarter, which then they
thought was to no purpose.

The French having no more Enemies to fight, plundered the Castle of Tolhuys,
and put all the Isle of Betue under Contribution.

This was not the only advantage they reaped from the passage of the Rhine; the
Hollanders, who were then afraid the French should come and fall upon them
behind, abandoned the Issel, and retreated to Vtrecht, where the Populace would
have Sacrificed Mombas to its Resentment, whom they accused of what had newly
happened. The Prince of Orange, who knew he deserved Death, yet was desirous he
should be first questioned, and perhaps put on the Rack, for a full Discovery
of his Treason, gave order he should be saved by a back Gate, and hid him in
Hay, to save him from the Peoples Resentment. Mean while, the King in Person
took the City of Doesburg, and Mon. Turenne those of Nimmeghen, Swoll,
Deventer, Grave, Arnheim, Skinckenskens, the Fort of Crevecceur, with a number
of other Fortresses.

Thus did Vtrecht fall into the hands of the French, but without their being
obliged to lay siege to it. For while the King was still before Doesbourg, the
Burgher-masters brought him the Keys, as if they had been afraid of not having
a Master soon enough. The Marquis of Rochefort, who was in favor at Court, was
sent to be Governor of that Town. But as he had not yet much experience in
War, he failed of seizing Muidem, which was abandoned, by the taking in of
which nevertheless they had made sure of Amsterdam. In effect, it was easy,
being Master of Muidem, to hinder Ships from going in or out of Amsterdam, for
they must of necessity pass by Muidem, which they would not have dared to have
done, if the French had been Master of it. Thus Amsterdam had been brought to
the necessity of coming to render it self up, as Vtrecht had already done. Not
but that if the King had still come and presented himself before the Gates of
the City, they would have brought him the Keys; for every Individual was in
that Consternation, that they only thought of saving their own Families,
without otherwise troubling themselves about the interest of their Country.
Nay, and without staying for the Kings sending to summon up the delivery of the
Town, a Council was held in the City, whether they should not go to meet him,
to desire he would be pleased to take it into his Protection, as well as all
the Inhabitants, and there was a great danger of their coming to this
Resolution, if two Burger masters, whose names ought to be Consecrated to
Posterity, the one of whom was called Offe, and the other Hassenaer, had not
encouraged the rest to hold firm, and rather call the Sea to their succors,
which had been a safer Remedy for them, tho they were brought to the utmost
necessity, than to receive the French.

After the King had taken the City of Doesburg, he went to Encamp at Zeist, two
Leagues from Vtrecht, where Ambassadors from the States came to demand Peace of
him. But as he was too haughty upon the success of his Arms, he proposed such
disadvantageous Conditions, that the Ambassadors were obliged to return home,
without coming to any Conclusion. Mean while, when they were arrived at the
Hague, it was resolved they should go again, because that Affairs on the other
side were in so lamentable an estate, that they thought themselves over happy,
in that they might receive any manner of Conditions.

Mean while there was still another difficulty, which was, that the French King
would not come to any Conclusion, without calling thereunto the King of
England, whose Demands vere still higher, and greater.

The Ambassadors of Holland being returned to Zeist, and having met with the
Ambassadors of England, a new Treaty of Peace was proposed, but still very
difficult to conclude. For beside, that England did not bate the least of its
first Pretentions, those of France were so exorbitant, that it had been much
better for the State to have perished, than to have granted them. France
demanded a Medal every year, in form of Tribute, with all the Charges of the
War, which it made to mount to immense Sums. England demanded to have several
things in the Indies, which belonged to the Republic, yielded to it; so as I
have said, the State had almost as good have abandoned all, as to have
concluded so disadvantageous a Treaty. The Republic having notice of all those
things by their Ambassadors who came home again from Zeist, without having
effected ought, resolved to break the Dikes of the Sea, which was, as I hinted
before, their last recourse in the utmost necessities. But what made them the
more willingly proceed to this resolution, was, that the People, rejecting the
Disasters of the State upon those who had the Conduct of it, had Massacred the
Pensioner of Holland, with his Brother; so as that they were in hopes, that as
the State had Changed its Master, so also its Fortune would be Changed.

The States proceeding to that extremity, as to break their Dikes, gave them
time to think of their Affairs. They sent to the Princes of Germany the
Propositions of Peace made them by the two Kings, for the better possessing
their minds in what they imagined of the Ambition of France. They represented
to them the piteous estate they were reduced to, and that if they deferred
longer affording them assistance, it would be perhaps too late, when they
should be willing to do it. That the Waters indeed saved them for the present,
but that they would not save them always. That the Winter being come, the
French would pass over the Ice to attack them, and that since they had not been
able to resist them, while the Provinces had been so flourishing, there was
little likely hood they could do it now, being fallen so low from their ancient
Reputation.

These Remonstrances, the truth whereof was undoubted, seeing the sad Estate
the Republic was reduced to, affected the Emperor, the Marquess of
Brandenburg, and several other Princes of the Empire. The Marquess of
Brandenburg, as being one of the most Potent, first took the Field, to succor
it; and as the King knew he had to do with a brave, determinate Prince, and
besides a great Captain, he decamped from Zeist, and returned to France. But
first, he thought fit to try if he could render himself Master of Boisle-duc,
which was shut up on one side by the Garrison of Crevecceur, and on the other
by that of Endeven. Boisle-duc is a place situated just in the midst of a
Marsh, yet it is as weak in its outworks, as it is strong in its situation.
Nevertheless there is a Citadel on the side, which looks toward Holland, with
two Forts on the side of the Mastricht Gate; but all this would not be reckoned
for any great matter, if, as I have said, its situation did not render it
almost inaccessible. The lying established his Quarters at Boustel, but while he
was preparing all things for the Siege, God, who had begun to take Holland into
his Protection, sent Rains, which continued for four or five days, without
ceasing, so as the Country is low and level, it was immediately filled with
water, that a body would have said they had opened the Sluices. The King
thinking the fair Weather might return, staid eight or ten days longer at
(...), but seeing it did not leave off raining, he decamped, and returned home.

The Prince of Orange, who after the Death of the Pensionary, had all the
Authority consided in him, seeing the People in some manner of repose by the
French Kings Departure, thought of contenting them farther, by the punishment
of Mombas, whose death they had long demanded. He had been Conducted from
Vtrecht to Woerden, and from Woerden to Nicurbruk, whither the Army of Holland
was retreated. There the Prince of Orange called a Council of War, and began to
examine his Affair, which appeared daily worse and worse for him. In short, as
his Conscience, did not leave him any repose, and that he thought himself
absolutely ruined, he was contriving how to make his escape, which nevertheless
was very difficult, for he was carefully Guarded, having People always with
him, Sentinels at the Door, and at the Windows of his House. As he was musing
after what manner he should go to Work to get away, one of his Friends got a
Letter conveyed to him, by which he gave him notice that he had but three days
more to live, if he found not the means to escape. That the Council of War was
resolved to make him serve for an example to others, and that it was his part
to take his measures thereupon (...) seeing himself menaced at this rate, spoke
the same day to one of his Keepers, who promised him in con^^deration of some
Money he gave him, to let him escape out at the Window, when he should be set
Senrinel at that Post, which happened on the morrow. This Affair being done,
Mombas caused a Spanish Officer to be founded, who was to be upon the Guard the
same day, at an mundation, to know whether he would let him escape that way,
and get him a Guide ready. The Officer loving Money, as well as the Guard
beforementioned, agreed for a hundred Pistols with him, who made him this
Proposition, in consideration of which, he promised to get him a Guide ready,
and to let him pass when he pleased* This Bargain being thus struck, Mombas
have one called Villate, a hundred Pistols, this Villate having been his
Gentleman o^ the Horse, and the Manager of this Affair, to carry 'em to the
Spaniard; but Villate instead of giving them him, went away with them, whether
that naturally he was inclined to pilfering, or perhaps there remained
something due to him from his Master, and that he was content to pay himself
with his own hands; be it as it will, as Mombas was still reckoning upon this
Bargain, all his Care now was to deceive those that kept him in sight, to do
which, he went this way to work.

First, He began to complain of a great pain in his Leg, sent for a Surgeon,
showed him his Leg, which by a wound he had formerly had, remained lagger than
the other, and asked him what was to be done with it. He caused also a Request
to be made to the Prince of Orange, that he would send him one of his
Surgeons; and these two Surgeons, the one as ignorant as the other,
concluded a Plaster should be laid on it, and accordingly sent him one to be
applied for that purpose. By this means he kept his Bed, without giving any
suspicion, and the day being come he had resolved to make his escape on, he
sent for Tobacco, and told his Keepers he would come and smoke with them, after
Supper. But on a sudden, pretending he had no mind to it, he went again to Bed
before their Eyes, and desired them they would go smoke in the Antichamber, for
that the Tobacco incommoded him. They having seen him in Bed, were far from
believing he had any thought of making his escape, complied with his desires,
but Mombas getting immediately out of Bed, took the Plaster he had upon his
Leg, put it upon his Face, and leapt out of the Window, below which the Guard I
mentioned stood Sentinel.

Thus did he traverse the Camp, without being known by any Body, whether by
reason it was duskish and toward night, or of the Plaster which disguised him.
But being come to the Spaniard, he was strangely furprized to see that he
refused to let him pass, unless he first gave him the hundred Pistols he had
promised him. This Dispute gave him to understand the Roguery of Villate; but
it being now no time to make reflection on it, his thoughts were wholly set, how
he should come off from this Affair, which nevertheless he saw but little
probabilty of effecting. For the Spaniard stood flat and plain upon his having
his hundred Pistols, before he let him pass, and Mombas would not give him
them, not having about him near a hundred; In short, being at this pinch, he
was forced to make a virtue of necessity; and having turned his Pockets before
the Spaniard, he offered all he had by him: But seeing that would not content
him, he told him he might do as he pleased, but that if he was the Cause of his
being retaken, as it was not to be doubted, he would not fail to accuse him.
That it became him to consider what he had now to do, and that he had nothing
more to say to him. These Menaces startled the Spaniard, and making him
recollect himself, he took what Mombas was willing to give him, and let him
troop on with his Guide. Mombas entered into the Inundation, and went thus three
Leagues, having the Water up to his middle, nay, and often in danger of his
life. But it was very just that a Traitor, who was the Cause of the Ruin of a
whole State, should suffer in his turn; and though what he underwent, was
pretty severe, yet was it not so much as he deserved.

Mombas being thus arrived at Woerden, with such Difficulties as are more easy
to imagine, than describe, would have gone into the Boat which goes from
Woerden to Vtrecht; but when he was in, he perceived that a Woman, by whom he
sat, knew him, and had named him to another Woman that sat by her. And as a
Person that has done an ill thing, is ever under a Dread and Apprehension, he
went immediately out of the Boat, being resolved to take another way. And yet
there was no other than that of the Causey, because the whole Country was
overslowed, from Woerden unto Vtrecht. But being afraid that some or other
might come to know him again upon the Highway, he put himself again into the
Inundation, without any other Guide than his Despair; for the Man who had
Conducted him to Woerden, was trooped off, thinking he had no more need of him;
and besides, there was no safety in seeking out another, nor having a farthing
too to pay him, he thought he had no other Course than that of returning into
the Inundation.

Being come within a quarter of a League, or thereabouts of Utrecht, out went
he of the Water, but so wet, that he could not for shame go to the City in that
condition. Wherefore he had his Clothes dried at the first House he came to,
and then entering the Town, he went to lodge at the Palace Royal, where he
chanced to meet with one of his Nephews, who served in the Troops of France,
where he was a Captain of Horse. But this Nephew seeing him enter, far from
believing it to be him, he took him for a Ghost, for the Night before, a Man
came to the same Inn from Nicurbruk, who had told, as a certain piece of News,
and whereof he himself had been an Eyewitness, that he had seen him beheaded:
And this Rumor was so spread about the Town, that no body would believe that
Mombas was arrived.

Mean while the Duke of Luxembourg, who succeeded in the room of the Marquess
of Rochfort at Vtrecht, was very much puzzled whether or no he should see
Mombas. For on one side he would have been very glad to have got such useful
hints and instructions as he was capable of giving, as being perfectly
acquainted with the Country, yet he judged it not altogether Policy to give him
a good Reception, for that this would manifest too openly the secret
Correspondence that had been kept with him. In short, being determined not to
see him, he feigned in the presence of those who told him, as a great piece of
News, that Mombas was in the City, not to give it any Credit, adding, that sure
he would not be so impudent, after having born Arms against the King, to come
again and put himself into his hands. They all knowing what the meaning of this
was, their tongues were hushed from that time forwards, and there was no more
talk of Mombas, than if no body had known him.

For his part, when he knew the Duke of Luxembourg would not see him, away went
he to the Prince of Conde at Arnheim, and as that Prince was full as Politic
as the Duke of Luxembourg, neither would he speak to him, but in secret, and at
an hour when all the world was still asleep. Whereupon he sent his Captains of
the Guards to fetch him from his Inn at three a Clock in the Morning, and
Mombas wrapped up in a great Cloak, came to him in his Cabinet. There did he sell
Holland the second time, declared the secrets of the State, at least those he
had been able to know, before he had been taken into Custody; and after he had
informed the Prince of Conde of all he was desirous to know, he retired to
Cologn, there to stay until he had leave to return into France, which was
another Grimace to deceive the World, thinking thereby to take away the
suspicions that had been conceived of him. Whereupon some time after they let
him know he might come to the Duke of Luxembourg, and he served for a Guide to
that General, when he came to take Woerden, which the French had abandoned
after they had had it once in possession. He it was who conducted him before
that Place, when the Prince of Orange besieged it, so as one may say, that as
much care as before he had taken to conceal his Treason, as industrious was he
then to blaze it abroad.

Now, though all I have now said may seem to be rather the History of the War,
than a Continuation of my Subject, which is to show the faithlessness of
France, yet I should think it, perhaps, not so foreign as some may imagine,
since I therefore call again to mind the Ideas of so many Treasons and
Perfidies: And indeed though there is no saying that the French Nation wants
Courage, yet one may say, that it is very willing to join Cunning to Strength,
without which we should not see it so successful in all its Enterprises. But
let us add at the same time, that what makes it still succeed the better, is
that money costs it nothing to attain to its Designs. For passing at one leap
from War to Peace, let us examine, I beseech you, what Course it has taken to
separate all the Allies, and whether this Metal has not been of more use to it
for that purpose, than all the Rhetoric of its Ministers.

One of the greatest Obstacles to the Peace, was the difficulty of reconciling
the Interests of the Crown of Sweden with the Interests of the Princes who had
some things to clear and determine with it. As to the Crown of Sweden, all its
Interest was; that as it had been engaged in the War upon no other account than
for the service of France, France should cause all the Places to be Restored
it, which had been taken from it, either by the King of Denmark, or the Elector
of Brandenbourg, or the Princes of the House of Brunswick. And the Interests of
these three Powers was on the contrary, not to hear any talk of the Peace,
until all their Conquests were abandoned to them, or at least the greater part.
Thus the difficulty was to reconcile such opposite Interests; but see now how
this Affair was brought about, and which made it no longer appear so
impossible, as an Entertainment that was given one day at the House of one of
the three Ministers of France, being the same who had the secret of the Court.
Among other things, there was a Dish of Olives, and one of the Ministers of
Sweden having found them extraordinary good, the Minister of France promised to
send him a Barrel of them, and accordingly sent him a Barrel by his Secretary.
The Minister of Sweden very much surprised to see that the Secretary of an
Embasie should be the Bearer of such a business, but making no other reflection
on it at first, he took the Barrel into his own hands, and finding it extreme
heavy, he asked him the reason. The Secretary told him, that he would find when he
opened it, but that the Ambassador of France desired that he would open it
himself. The Minister of Sweden began to smell out then the meaning; and having
dismissed the Secretary, he broke open the Barrel, and found it to be full of
Lewis's of Gold, among which he found a Letter, wherein were these words, If
you expect we should often give you Olives, you must grant us the Peace.

Perhaps now may I be asked how it comes that I should get the knowledge of a
thing, which ought to have been kept very secret both by the Minister of
France, and the Minister of Sweden. But to that I Will answer, How do so many
things which pass in the Cabinet become common? How come we to know of so many
Enterprises before they are put into execution? Moreover I must say, that
France afterward falling at variance with Sweden, did not much care though a
secret was divulged which was no longer of any moment to it; nay, and on the
contrary it took delight in sowing by that means a difference between the Prime
Men of Sweden, where this business is now so much the subject of common
Discourse, that they attribute to it the rupture of the two Crowns. And indeed
though the Homage which France demanded for the Duchy of Deux Ponts of the King
of Sweden, was very sensible to that Young Prince, yet wise men believe it
would not have been a sufficient Cause for a Breach, if the King of Sweden's
heart had not been ulcerated with the disadvantageous Peace which France had
brought it to make. And it will not be improper to say here something of this
matter, so much the more, in that during all the time I staid at Paris, I saw
few French but did maintain that the King of Sweden lay under a great
obligation to France, in that it would not listen to any Treaty of Peace, until
all had been first restored it, that had been Conquered from it. But they know
not that Sweden had been forced to yield up the Lands in Pomerania to the
Elector of Brandenbourg. Lands in the Duchy of Bremen to the King of Denmark,
and lastly, Lands in the Bishopric of Verden to the Princes of the House of
Brunswick. But since I am here upon Sweden, I mean to tell after what manner it
was stripped of the Duchy of Deux-Ponts, and under what pretext. The last Duke
was still full of Life, nay, and in good health, when France, perceiving this
Country lay for its convenience projected, that as it had not yet bethought it
self of its Right of Dependancy, under which Color it seizes on so many Lands
to seize on this. Now you must know that the last Duke having no Children, the
Duchy fell after his Death to the House of Sweden, and not to the King of
Sweden positively, because that Duke Adolphus pretended to exclude him, as
being nearer by one degree to him who possessed it. The King of Sweden on the
contrary pretended that the Duchy would one day belong to him, as being Son of
the Eldest, wherein there was great probability. For though in many places of
Germany they have established that the nearest to the Dead succeeds in his
Estates, yet it is to be observed that the use is contrary in the Electoral
Houses, and principally in the Palatine House, which was the Family now in
Issue. Be it as it will, the French King having an itch to make the Latin
Proverb good, which says, that between two Persons that dispute for a
Succession, there comes a third which ravishes it away from 'em both, sent
Troops to seize on the Duchy of Deux-Ponts, yet under pretext of keeping it
for the King of Sweden, in favor of whom by this means he decided to the
prejudice of Duke Adolphus. The Duke of Deux Ponts who was still alive, as I
have said, was not surprised to hear that the French Troops entered into his
Country, because he was often exposed to their violences: But he was strangely
amazed when he knew they came to gather his Succession, of him I say, who was
still full of Life, nay, and had not yet the least mind to die so soon. Mean
while the Troops being entered into the place of his Residence, he not only saw
all his Country under slavery, but likewise his own Person. For as they very
much doubted that a Prince of so Great and of so Illustrious a Birth, would
hardly be accustomed to see himself under Tutelage, and that it was feared he
would call the Emperor to his Succor, they watched him sonarrowly, that one may
say, he was rather in Prison than at Liberty.

Mean while France being very willing to make sure of the King of Sweden, of
whom it still had need, for all this passed during the War, let him know, that
all it had done was only to oblige him: So that this Prince not being able to
imagine it had any bad Intentions, spoke of sending a Governor into the Duchy
of Deux-Ponts. But while that he offered this Government sometimes to the Count
of Carlson his Natural Brother, in recompense of something he had taken from
him, sometimes to a Prince of the House of Baden the French King sent thither
the Prince Palatine of Berkenfeld, and so set the Prince of Baden and Count
Carlson a shaking of hands, they before beginning to look a little askew upon
one another, as two Persons are used to do, who aspire to one and the same
thing.

The Peace being concluded some time after, France having no mind to part so
soon with so delicate a Bit, would not at first show its intentions, but still
contriving a Color to keep Deux-Ponts, it bethought it self of its Right of
Dependancy, and demanded of the King of Sweden to pay it Fealty and Homage for
it. This pretention, which was wholly new, surpised extremely the King of
Sweden, but as this Country is far distant from his Territories, most of his
Ministers already concluded that he should wink upon the matter, and not fall
at variance with France, when France, which had only started this difficulty,
that it might not restore what it held, caused Duke Adolphus to intervene that
so, until they were agreed together upon the matter, it might still remain in
its possession.

Thus just as it had stripped the old Duke in his Lifetime, who went to die of
vexation far from his own Dominions, so does it now despoil two Princes in the
very flower and vigor of their Lives. For without entering into Discussion to
whom this State belongs, either to the King of Sweden, or to Duke Adolphus, it
is probable to say, that if it cannot keep it for it self, it will rather give
it to Prince Palatine of Birkenfeld than restore it to either of the two. For
it would be afraid, if it fell into the hands of the King of Sweden, of
increasing the power of a Prince who would not easily be won to be its Friend,
and it might believe the same thing of Duke Adolphus, whose true Interests are
ever to continue well united with the Head of his Family.

Now it must needs be no small mortification to the Palatine House, to see so
great a number of its Princes become Subjects in so short a time. For in fine,
besides that he who shall have the Duchy of Deux-'Ponts, that if in case
France does give it to any Body, will be obliged to pay it Fealty and Homage,
how many others are there, who groan at this day in their Bonds. The Prince of
Petites Pierre can say something to this matter, if the unhappy example of one
of his Relations did not perhaps oblige him to hold his Peace. I mean the
Prince of Weldens, who by having had the Soul of a Prince, and resolving to
keep himself in the Rank which God had conferred upon him by his Birth, would
now be reduced to die of hunger, if his People had not Pity of him, I say
reduced to die of hunger; you must not imagine I exaggerate, for many people
know as well as I, that upon refusing to render Fealty and Homage to France, he
was dispossessed of his Dominions, where he now lives in a borrowed House, and
upon the Alms he receives from his Subjects. They also know, to what the Prince
his Son is reduced; they know, I say, that his Father not having the means to
give him a Manchet, away he trooped upon a little Nag, without Servants or
Train, as might do the least and most inconsiderable Gentleman of France. They
know farther that he has been too happy in putting himself into the Service of
the States of Holland, who have given him a Company of Foot, which is all he
has now to subsist on.

Some or other will now perhaps ask me why the Prince of Weldens, should all
alone, stickle against an absolute Power? Why does he not yield to the time as
well as others; and in fine what great difference is there between a Vassal of
the Emperor, and a Vassal of the French King? For in short, I know that these
Discourses are commonly in the mouths, not only of those who are in the
interests of the Crown of France, but also of several Persons, who cannot
behold the misfortunes of this Prince without Compassion, and without seeking a
Remedy thereunto: to this I will answer, that the Prince of Weldens seeing
himself reduced to the ultimate necessity, he has tried all sort of means of
accommodation; but could not resolve upon slavery. In effect, seeing a number
of Princes of his Family had showed him the way, he sent his Son into France,
who offered the King on his behalf to pay him Fealty and Homage, provided he
might be treated as a Prince, that is to say, possess the same Rights and
Privileges, as he enjoyed before things changed face. But the King made a mock
at these Propositions, so as that his Son was forced to come back without any
effect.

Mean while if a Body may here be allowed to make some Reflection upon the
present state of the Princes of Germany, and upon what they were in a while
ago, it is no difficult matter to make appear how much those are mistaken, who
think there is no difference between being a Vassal of the Emperor, and the
being a Vassal of the French King. But I am to blame to say Vassal of the
Emperor. For all the Princes of the Empire, I mean Sovereign Princes, as
Electors and those of certain Houses, are indeed members of the Empire, but not
Vassals of the Emperor. True, they are obliged to assist the Empire under pain
of forfeiting their Privileges, nay their States, but they are not obliged to
assist the Emperor, unless the Empire is attacked. Wherefore let us conclude,
that the word Vassal does not relate to Princes of Germany, who are Sovereigns
over their Tributaries, as the Emperor may be over his. Who have Rights of Life
and Death over their Subjects, imposing on 'em burdens and Taxes according to
their own Fancies; and in fine, are accountable for their actions only to God
alone Let Us, I say, Conclude, that Princes, who have thus all the Badges of a
Sovereign, are very different from the Princes of France, who bating that they
are covered when the King gives Audience to Ambassadors, have nothing above
other Subjects. Nay, and a man may say they are below some certain Subjects
that there are; for you know the Dukes and Peers take place of them, and that
the Princes are obliged not to be at any Ceremony, that they may not come after
'em. Mean while, if we would look back but to the beginning of the last Age, we
should find, that among those Dukes there are those whose Fathers were Notaries
at Paris, and other Merchants. It Is well known what the Descendants of one of
those two Houses have done not long since, to suppress the knowledge of so low
and so shameful an Extraction. It Is well known, I say, that they have caused an
Epitaph in the Church of St. Innocent to be taken away, and that instead of it
you see one now in the Celestins, wherein there are as many Lies, as there are
Truths in the other.

Nevertheless it is to men of this Extraction, that Princes who only reckon
Sovereigns among their Ancestors, are obliged to give place at this day. But
what say I? it is to men of much more lower and of a much more vile Extraction,
whom the Princes of the Blood are compelled to make their Court to. It Is well
known that what makes a man's fortune now in France, is not to budge out of the
Antichamber of a Minister; and a Colonel of Horse, whom I could name, and
every one knows as well as I, does not disdain to be the Buffoon of one of the
Secretaries of State. For which reason, he has parted with his Regiment, for
fear that when he was in War, another should rob him of so noble an Employment.
It Is also well known that while Mr. Colbert's at Dinner, the greatest Lords
study some quaint saying or other to make him laugh, and he that has had the
luckiest hit that way, knocks off, as well satisfied with his person, as if he
had been the man who defended Vienna against the Turks. In fine it is well
known, which nevertheless People can hardly comprehend, that Monsieur, the
Kings only Brother, is obliged to have recourse to them, for the obtaining any
Boon or Favor, nay, and after he has had recourse too, he has not always what
he demands. I could prove it if I would, by a thousand examples what I dare
here allege, but I shall content my self with saying, that what happened a
year or two ago, upon the account of a man who was very desirous to come into
the Farming the Kings Customs, is a sufficient testimony. Not being able to
obtain it, after having told Mr. Colbert again and again, he was obliged to
speak to the King thereof.

If there was any need to enhance upon all this, to show in what consideration
are the Ministers of France, and the fawnings and stoopings which the Princes
are forced to cajole them with, I need only relate what happened a while ago to
the Dauphin. He had asked of Mr. de Seignelay, the Son of one of the late Mr.
Colbert a Clarks place in a Ship, for the Son of the Officers of his Household,
and Mr. de Seignelay having granted it him with some difficulty; a while after
a fancy took this Minister of a new Impression, to revoke the Clark, under the
pretext he was incapable of his Office. The Dauphin being informed of this told
Mr. de Seignelay that he should be very glad he were re-established, and that
if he had failed in any thing it was only out of Youth, that he would stand his
surety that he should do better for the future, and that he should have no more
occasion for reproach. Mr. de Seignelay after having listened to this Prince
with that gravity he of late so impertinently affects, told him that he was not
Master of the thing, but that he would speak of it to the King. Upon this the
Dauphin not being able to endure that a man of his stamp should receive so
unworthily the honor he did him, rebuked him with such nipping words, as
humbled his Pride.

Let Us from hence Conclude that it is a great misfortune for a Prince to be born
the Subject of the Crown of France, and a great imprudence in him who is not
so, to entertain any thoughts of yoking himself in such a Servitude. Let Us but
ask the Prince Palatine, who is only a Neighbor, how he likes the
Neighborhood, and I am sure he will tell us, there is little difference
between his Subjects and his Neighbor. If he pretends to speak as a Prince,
they speak to him at the same time as Master, and if he would have France leave
her at Quiet, he must too submit himself to all its wills. Let Us also ask him,
whether he has now any faithful Subjects left him among so many Subjects who
obey him, and whether France, has not debauched them all. Finally, let us ask
him if he dare so much as complain, tho he daily sees his Territories so
Harassed, and whether he be not on the contrary told, That he is still too
happy in being under the Protection of so great a King. Let Us proceed on, I
beseech you, into the Courts of other Princes of Germany, and let us see what
passes there, before we make any Reflection on the Princes of France. What
shall we say of the Ecclesiastical Electors, the one of whom sells his Country
for glittering ready Cash, through the suggestions of French Emissaries; the
other suffers himself to be daunted by its Emissaries Menaces, and the other
follows so its passions, that one would say, the same Interest Spirited them
both? But let us also say at the same time, that all this is not sufficient
without violence. For who doubts of all the Tricks it has played, and the
Cabals it has set on foot, and are now daily working to detach them from their
true Interests. Some are told that most of their States are Dependencies on the
Crown, and that if they do not make it their business to Court its favor, they
will not long enjoy a thing which does not appertain to them. Thus while they
are fleeced of the true Character of a Sovereign, which is of being Independent
of any body, they endeavor to insinuate to them on the contrary, that their
Dependency on France, is the only thing which can make them Reign. Others are
bid to consider the power it has, to judge whether thus have any thing to hope
but by its means, and while they are they fed with fair hopes, their People are
encouraged in Disobedience that Sovereigns may still have need of its succors
to repress them; nay, and would not say, that all Wheels are thus set awork, to
appropriate the more easily a State wherein each Plays the Master, while he,
who has nothing to do with it, has already there got one Foot, and will set the
other too, when he pleases, by reason of the Fortresses that are suffered to be
demolished. Any man may easily guess, I now mean Liege, where France already
holds Dinant, contrary to the Faith of Treaties, and where the Discord of the
People with their Sovereign, renders it as much the Mistress, as if this State
belonged to it. For who is so blind, as not to perceive the Policy in this
Occasion. As it was ever afraid that Mr. de Cologn would clear up his Eyes, it
thought fit to have a remedy against what may happen; and just as it maintained
the Messanezes in their disobedience, so it fosters the people of Liege in
their enterprises. If Mr. de Cologn would but once make reflection that he
ought to be their Sovereign. For in fine, if this was not its intention, what
should now hinder Mr. de Cologn from reducing a Town which is open on all
sides, without Succors and without Garrisons. Wherefore if he would be pleased
a little to consider with himself, and mind that the alliance of that Crown,
has only served to procure him the hate of his People, and the entire ruin of
his Country, without speaking of the Armies of the Empire, which after this
have been obliged not to spare him, let us see how he himself has been treated,
by those in whom he places all his hopes. Who but knows the horrible
Contributions which France has raised upon his Subjects, the Desolation of the
Country, the Plunder of Towns, and to say all in a word, the Destruction of
Cities and other Edifices? Who knows not what passed at Huy, where not
satisfied with having Tyrannized over the Inhabitants, it has moreover pulled
down the Castles, and destroyed one of the finest Bridges there was upon the
Meuse, so that now that City is frustrated of its greatest convenience, by
having received him within its Walls* But let us pass on to the other Princes of
Germany, and see whether they have any more reason to be contented with its
Proceedings.

I might abridge with one dash, what I have to say upon this Subject, if I
would but only relate what has lately befain the King of Denmark. For as it
would be easy to judge by the Treatment its Ally receives from it, the
Treatment which all others may expect, methinks that this should be sufficient
to insinuate its violence, and how it pretends to Lord it over all the World.
But as there are many who are willing to have specified what way it is the
French Court takes to bring about its Designs, I mean here to give a taste of
its maxims and its enterprises.

The whole World knows how the Dauphins match with the Dauphiness was made. The
consideration the Duke of Bavaria was in, in the Empire, not only upon the
account of the largeness of his Dominions, but also from their Situation, was
the reason he was courted by all Parties during the last War, as being able to
give a great weight to that, in favor of whom he should declare. This the
French King was sensible of, and therefore made him daily offers of a thousand
advantageous conditions if he would engage in his Interests. The Emperor on his
side forgetting nothing that might win him, so as that the Duke of Bavaria
judging of his Credit by the Caresses he received, resolved to hearken to both
Parties, but to engage only with that with whom he should find his so doing
would turn to best account.

In regard of the Emperor, he only offered him an Offensive and Defensive
League against France, whose Ambition he laid open to him, thinking it would be
sufficient to render his Interests Common; but as the Duke of Bavaria expected
something more advantageous, he listened the more willingly to the propositions
of France, which they endeavored to render to him the most agreeable that was
possible. In effect they joined to a World of Politic Reasons, which might
formerly be good, but which were nothing worth now, magnificent presents, which
care was taken to renew from time to time. And as Princes as well as others do
pretty often suffer themselves to be tempted with those lures, he was every day
more and more disposed to make an Alliance with France. The Duchess of
Bavaria, for whom the French King had formerly some thoughts of Marriage, and
who had been vexed that it had not been brought about; thinking she might place
her Daughter on the Throne, which she her self had missed of possessing, pushed
the Elector of Bavaria on to this Alliance; but advised him at the same time,
to secure the Establishment of their Daughter, who could not hope for any more
advantageous Match in all Europe.

The Ministers of France quickly discovered what passed in the Cabinet of M. de
Bavaria; and thinking they should the better insinuate themselves into his
Favor, if without waiting, that he should prevent them upon this point of
Marriage, they should first make to him the Proposal of it. They declared to
him, they had Order from the King their Master, to break the Matter to him; and
said the same thing to the Duchess of Bavaria, which filled her full of joy.
After this the Ministers of the Emperor, were no longer listened to in any
manner; and there was no other talk than of the future Alliance, which was upon
the Foundation fo the Treaty, which then was making between France and Bavaria;
by which the Duke of Bavaria promised to remain Neuter, which was all that
France demanded. For as the Duke of Bavaria was powerfully Armed, and that he
had resolved to observe the Neutrality as long as the War should last, France
conjectured, as it was also true, that it would create an Umbrage in the
Emperor; and that this Arming would almost produce the same effect, as if M. de
Bavaria acted openly; and indeed the issue showed that these Conjectures were
not ill grounded. But without amusing my self with relating what were the
consequences of this matter, which all the World knows as well as I, I shall
say, that this Alliance having subsisted until the Treaty of Nimmeghen, the
Marriage of the Dauphin with Mademoiselle of Bavaria was Consummated presently
after; seeing principally there was no other Princess to be Married in Europe;
nor any better Family, nor who had Nobler Quality.

Besides, France thought by this means it had made sure of the House of
Bavaria; but the Duke and Duchess of Bavaria being dead a little before, and
their Dominions falling into the hands of a Young, though a more Sagacious
Prince, if the saying so may be allowable, than were his Father and his Mother,
as France perceived; that he was not so wedded to its interests, as they had
been sought, to tie him by some new Alliance. Now as there is nothing more
taking with a Young Prince, than Beauty, especially when it is built upon, and
seconded with extraordinary Merit; the Ministers of France so ordered the
matter, that those Pentioners they had about his Person, should often Discourse
him about Mademoiselle de Blois, the King's Natural Daughter, who appearing
accomplished at a very tender Age, promised to become, in time, one of the most
charming Persons in the World.

The Elector of Bavaria, finding himself alittle touched, with what was told him
every day, or perhaps spurred on with the curiosity of knowing whether
Reputation did not make any addition to the Beauty of this Young Princess; made
known that he should not be sorry to see her Picture. But the thing having been
told to those who were still faithful to him, and who were jealous of his
Glory, they represented to him too strongly, the Gin that was laid for his
Youth; that this Prince recollecting with himself, was ashamed of what,
perhaps, he had only done out of Curiosity.

Mean while there came from France several Pourtraicts of Mademoiselle de
Blois; but the Ministers of that Crown, perceiving the scandal of her Birth,
destroyed all the impressions which her Beauty might make, abandoned the Design
of this Match, of which they had before conceived some hopes.

Upon this they proposed another Marriage to the Duke of Bavaria, and which was
indeed more suitable, being of Mademoiselle, Sister of the Queen of Spain, and
Daughter to the Duke of Orleans. But those same Ministers of his, who had been
able to make him disrelish the former, found the means to dissuade him too from
this; representing to him, that all this was but a Snare to divert him from the
Alliance of the Emperor, whose Daughter he might be in hopes of Marrying; which
was not only a much more advantageous thing for him, but also necessary to his
interest: Wherefore that it became him to open his Eyes once for all, upon the
Designs of France, which only tended to the Ruin of the Emperor, and of all the
Empire. That true it was, that it fed him from time to time with fine
imaginations; as, the having him chosen King of the Romans; but that at the
bottom his Design was only to disunite the Princes from one another, that when
the Election came to be, she might take for her self what she then so willingly
offered to others. That it was not for his interest to desire a Neighborhood
so fatal to all those who had the misfortune to be his Neighbors; that this
was no slander, and that there needed no more than to consider their condition,
to make others dread falling into the like circumstances.

These wise Councils produced all the impression that could be expected in the
mind of a Prince, who loves Glory, and flies Oppression. But as this was in no
wise palatable to the Ministers of France; they wore so outrag'd at the refusal
which the Duke made of a Match with Mademoiselle, that they had the insolence
to say, That though the Elector had Married Mademoiselle de Blois, he would not
have been dishonored. That there were as great Princes as He, who world,
perhaps, demand her in Marringe, and yet not obtain her. And that the King was
sufficiently puissant to revenge himself one day for the Contempt that was made
of his Alliance. These heights gave the Duke of Bavaria to understand, how at
first that Crown introduced it self by gentleness, and would afterward
establish it self by force.

But this Procedure serving only to divert him the more from this Alliance, he
treated immediately with the Emperor; with whom one might say, he would find
both more safety and more Glory.

Nor has the Duke of Saxony had more reason to commend the Conduct of France,
who seeing that he stood wedded, as well as the Duke of Bavaria, to his true
interest, without suffering himself to be cajoled with all their Promises, has
raised him Enemies, both at Home and among his Neighbors; it being well known
how many Tricks and Arrifices it has used to set him at Variance with the
Princes of his own Family; and which not being able to bring about, it has had
recourse to Neighboring Princes, who have given it some jealousy, which the
Emperor however, has very wisely dissipated.

As concerning the Marquess of Brandenburgh and the King of Denmark, I know
nothing which can afford more aversion for that Crown, than its Conduct to
those Princes. For if we consider after what manner, it introduced it self into
their Considence, we shall find it set all manner of Engines a going to bring
it about; but after having attained to what it desired, there is no manner of
hardship but what it has made 'em suffer.

Every Man knows the Proposals the Court de Roy made at his arrival in the
North. They know, I say, that he demanded of the King of Denmark, on the behalf
of the King his Master, that he should share in the Disposal of the Subsidies,
which he received from him; adding they were unprofitably dissipated. The same
thing almost, was said to the Elector of Brandenburgh.

But to hinder such like Complements, from exciting the resentment of those
Princes, who ought to be jealous of their Honor; they keep buzzing about them,
either Pentioners, or French themselves, who mollify things, insomuch that
those Princes being kept, as I may say, between fear and hope, know not what to
determine. But let us here admire the Policy of that Crown, which knows how to
draw its advantages from all things, even from those which would seem to be
contrary to it.

The Persecution which it made Mr. Brickman suffer, is sufficiently blazed in
the World; for he after having been a long while in the Bastile, for having
shown his steddiness, was moreover obliged to leave his Country; saying there
was nothing more to hope for him in the Service of France, where he had,
nevertheless, consumed his Youth. But as soon as France knew he was gone into
Brandenburgh, and that he had been kindly received by the Elector; on a sudden
its Hatred was not only appeased, but it would needs too Recommend him to that
Prince; not by it self indeed, because that would have been suspicious, but by
its Generals; insomuch, that this Recommendation, joined to the Merits of his
Person, obtained him in a short time a Regiment of Horse, with the Government
of Wesel. And he it is it now makes use of, but slily, to work out its
Intentions: For though he does not seem trusted with its Secrets; and that on
the contrary, he is always speaking some Resentments of what he has suffered
from France, he knows how to give the Blow upon occasion; but a Blow too much
the more dangerous, in that it is not thought to depart from an affectionate
hand.

Bois David, who was obliged to fly France, where he was a Brigadeer, and
Colonel of Foot, for having fought a Duel with Mr. d' Aubijoux, has also
regained its Favor by acting for its Interests at the Court of Zell, where he
is settled to advantage; there occurring nothing there, but whereof Mr. d'
Louvois is informed; and what appears the more extraordinary, is that, though
there be no more remission for those who are accused of the same Crime as his
is; yet he goes sometimes to Paris, whether it be to settle his own Affairs, or
as is more probable, to Confer with Mr. de St. Bovange, upon what he would not
dare to trust in Letters.

All the Courts of other Princes, are thus crammed with Banished, or
Discontented Frenchmen. But at the same time that these Princes receive them,
if a Man may not say they receive Serpents into their Bosom, one may say, at
least, they ought to be very careful, not so easily to confide in them their
Secrets. For as the Genius of the French Nation is, to slip lightly into all
things, a Man may also say, that the French very rarely, forget the Fidelity
they owe their Prince; so as that it is great Imprudence to put too much
confidence in them.

But after having spoke, as I have already done of the misfortune those Princes
lie under, who are in the Neighborhood of France; or that have any Engagements
with that Crown;

Let Us now behold to what those are reduced, that it has lately drawn in into
its Rights of Dependency.

I will say nothing, either of the Prince of Petite, Pierte, or of that of
Weldens, since I have already spoken of them sufficiently; but I will say
something of him of Baden, who was no sooner of the numbers of its Subjects,
than that he saw himself compelled to give a great Pension to his Wife; who has
left him long ago without ever any persuasions being prevalent enough to get
her to return to him.

To no purpose was it for him to remonstrate that he was ready to take her
again; no regard was had to his Reasons: And the first thing they began with,
was to make sure of a Fund, which he was barred all meddling with.

I pass over in silence the Tyranny that is exercised toward other Princes of
less consideration: For since the Princes of Sovereign Houses are no longer
spared, as I have made out already, there is little likelihood that others
should meet with more favor. It is not to be said what they daily suffer from
these petty Tyrants, who of Ministers Lacqueys being become Commissaries, and
of Commissaries, Intendants, attribute to themselves a Sovereign Authority.

But the French are not contented with stripping them of their Honor; they
likewise fleece them of their Estates: How many Processes do they exhibit
against them; either upon the account of the Militia, or the Dues of Vassalage?
and how many Princes, who had a while ago a power of Life and Death over their
Subjects, are now compelled to go plead against them; nay, and often lose their
Processes too; for this is another piece of the French policy, to uphold the
Vassals against their Lords; as knowing, that as long as it has the People on
its side, it has nothing to fear either from the Princes or the Gentlemen, who
can effect nothing without the People.

Thus its Interest sways over all manner of Justice; but it little cares, though
it seems unjust, provided it establishes its Dominion every where, or to say
rather its Tyranny.

If we proceed to the Usage the Gentry have met with from France; how many do
we see ruined by Garrisons, and others still worse treated? for let it not be
thought, that it sticks at the common Forms to establish its new Power, though
the Law was, to seize the Lands of those who would not pay Fealty and Homage:
How many has it Imprisoned, that by detaining at the same time, both their
Estates and their Persons, Necessity should oblige them to comply with all its
desires?

But the Treatment the Baron d' Evenop had met with, speaks the top of its
Tyranny and Injustice.

This Baron is a Gentleman of Quality, and whose Family has heretofore afforded
a Queen of Sweden. For after having received his Fealty and Homage, it
dispossessed him, without ever any Bodies being able to give any reason for it,
or that France it self can give any, unless, that which is well known, that it
is very willing to put it self into possession of others Estates.

There is hardly any Prince in Europe but knows its Violences; and has moreover
a notable Interest to repress them. But their Blindness is so terrible, that
instead of uniting all together to put a stop to those unjust Courses, they
seem to have conspired by their Disunion to give it the Empire of all the
World. They all know it has united it self with the Turk, to overrun and lay
Germany waste; the one on the one side; the other on the other: And yet they
will not unite to destroy an Enemy which endeavors to plunge them into Slavery.

But since I have mentioned, that it was as it were through Inadvertency that
Alliance with the Turk; it is convenient that I convince those who have
hitherto doubted of the reality of it, by a circumstance which has lately
happened; and to which there is no reply.

Every man knows the vigorous resistance made by the Count de Staremberg,
Governor of Vienna; insomuch, that the Grand Vizier often having lost an
infinite number of men before that Place, was resolved to raise the Siege if he
could have retreated with Honor. For that purpose he sent back Count Albert
Caprara, who was the Emperor's Ambassador at the Port, whom till then he would
not suffer to return home to make him some Propositions for a Peace, and which
were much more reasonable than those he before had offered. But the Marquess de
Lepeville, who was with the Emperor, on the behalf of the French King, having
notice of it, dispatched away at the same time a Courier to his Master, to give
him notice thereof; and upon this News, France sent back another immediately to
the Grand Vizier, to remonstrate to him the injury he would do his Reputation,
after having lost so many Men before Vienna, to raise the Siege so shamefully;
that besides he was going to enter Flanders, to oblige the Princes of the Rhine
to recall the Succors they lent the Emperor; and that this Diversion would
quickly procure him a happy success of his Enterprise.

The Courier of Mr. de Lepeville arrived on Sunday, August 22. at
Fontain-Bleau, that which was dispatched to the Grand Vizier, or to Mr. de
Lepeville, which was the same thing, departed the same day at one a Clock in
the Afternoon; and that very Afternoon they not only proclaimed that they were
going to enter Flanders, but also the Orders were issued forth for that
purpose; insomuch that the Grand Vizier not doubting but that this once, at
least, they would keep tack with him, and make good their word more than they
haddone before; he since continued on the Siege, and according to all
appearance, would never have quitted it, had he not been compelled by Arms. But
since I let fall, that France had failed in its word to the Grand Vizier, it is
not improper to say what was the occasion of it. Certain it is, that by a
secret Treaty made between it and the Port; whereof Count Teckely was the
Guardian or Feoffee, and one called Bohan the Instrument: France was bound to
attack the Empire on the side of the Rhine, at the same time that the Port
attacked it on the side of Hungary.

For this purpose the French King was already on his way to his Army, which was
upon the Frontiers; but having learnt that the Turks, whose Beginnings had been
so advantageous, that it was not to be doubted but that they would take Vienna,
whereunto they had laid Siege; had given such a terror unto all Germany, that
all the Princes thought themselves already lost; he would not March on, not out
of any effect of Moderation, nor much less out of an effect of Christianity,
but that he might not lose himself in the Opinion of all the Princes of
Germany; for he imagined, that lying under those woeful Circumstances, they
would suddenly be obliged to have recourse to him; and already reckoning upon
the Empire, he would not pour upon it Desolation and Terror; and this was the
cause that he now rather attacks Spain than the Empire: For he still hopes that
if the Turks once seize on Vienna, that none but he will be able to oppose such
mighty Forces; as if the Princes of the Empire would not rather choose if it was
a forced Putt, to render themselves Tributaries of the Turk than to submit to
his Slavery. And indeed, without speaking further of his Tyranny, which is
incomparably harder to support than that of the Pagans; is it not probable to
say, Consciences will not be always Tyrannized over; and that each Man will be
allowed to serve his God? There you will hear no talk of Edicts, which decree
the Destruction of Churches; nor of Troops which serve for Executioners to
those who assemble upon their Ruins to sing there the Praises of the Almighty.
But if it is easy, at least, as I imagine, to create an abhorrence of the
French Government; it is not so easy to teach the means to avoid it; seeing
principally, as I have said, all Princes seem to conspire with it to bring
Europe into Slavery. For in fine, is it not a thing worthy both of pity and
anger, to see that in a time wherein there ought to be a general Union against
so formidable a Power, they still strive to give it new Forces? for what do
those think of, who have lately Elected the Elector of Cologn, or rather say
Bishop of Strasburgh for the Bishop of Munster? do they not know that both
those Princes are entirely devoted to France? and though the Elector of Cologn
should come to rub and open his Eyes, yet the Bishop of Strasburg has so great
an ascendant over him, as that he would still oblige him to continue in his
error. Do they not know that though the Elector of Cologn only loves Peace, the
Bishop of Strasburgh only loves War? do they not know that it was only by the
means of the late Archbishop of Cologn, and by the persuasion of the Bishop of
Strasburgh, that France carried its formidable Arms into the United Provinces;
and who then now augment the power of their Heirs, who already show but too
much passion to shackle Europe. They have the same Name, the same Inclination,
the same Design with the Deceased. It is their same Blood, and their same
Spirit. We have seen into what a hideous Precipice the Deceased had thought to
have tumbled all Germany; and yet as if people had quite forgot what has but
newly happened; they give the Nephews the means to execute the things which the
Uncle had only the will to do. The one has already delivered the Capital City
of his Bishopric into the hands of the French; and the other will have them
still deliver the rest of Germany, which is already put into great Captivity by
this Treason. They are willing, in a word, to find the hands of Holland by the
Neighborhood of a new Enemy; and so fetter, by this means, the rest of Europe,
which has no other hopes than in that State.

But let us put a period to a Discourse, which, besides, can operate no good
effects; since all People do not love to be so plainly told their Truths. And
indeed, as much as France may be vexed that I have here discovered its Maxims
and its Policy, so will the others bear me an illwill for having rebuked 'em of
blindness and weakness; mean while I still cannot forbear saying, to the
venture of all, that these may think that it is rendering themselves the
Accomplices of all the Enterprises, which France shall undertake, if they do
not put an end to the Differences, which for this long while have so divided
them. For what else can a body say? we see the one is preparing to invade
Lubeck, another Pomerania; others are contriving how to oppose these Designs,
when on another side a much more formidable Power, meditates the reducing them
all under its Obedience. They will not suffer that one Neighbor should become
more powerful than the other, but make no reflection that an Enemy reproaches;
who not contented with having, enlarged his Dominions, with great Conquests,
will not content himself with remaining their Neighbor.

It is for all the world, in this, just as what is pleasantly said by the
Author of a certain Lampoon, which stole abroad about five or six months ago,
upon the state of Europe at this day: for when he comes to speak of the United
Provinces, he makes them say, they will not suffer the Prince of Orange to
Reign over them; and he answers them, that they are blind and fools, since they
are afraid of being bitten by the Dog, and do not see the Wolf which is just
ready to devour them. In effect, all those Princes of the North, perceive that
the King of Denmark would willingly join Hamburgh and Lubeck to his Crown; but
they do not perceive that France will quickly join to its Dominions, both those
two Cities, and their Dominions too, unless they unite together to prevent it.
They see that the Marquess of Brandenburg has a design of invading Pomerania,
from which he thinks he was, without reason, excluded; but they do not see,
that while they oppose his augmenting his Power, another augments his to that
degree, that they all run a risque of being suddenly oppressed. Wherefore, what
remedy is there to all these Mischiefs, unless that of forgetting the old
Quarrels, to entertain a new one? But first, those fordid Spirits ought to be
banished from Councils? who after having insinuated themselves into the favor
of Princes, in reward, play 'em daily a thousand and a thousand Treasons. None
but the Ancient Servants ought to be heard; I mean those, whose fidelity has
been so often tried, we should be blame worthy to suspect them; for in the Age
we live all People ought to be distrusted; principally, since we daily see but
too much Corruption. For in fine, Would not Strasburgh still subsist, if it had
had only in its bosom, Persons stocked with Fidelity. But let us admire, I
beseech you, the difference there is between the Service which France reaps
from its Subjects, which are in the Service of other States, and the Service
which other States reap from their Subjects, which are in the Service of
France. I have already showed, how one Bois David, and one Brugmaie, both
banished, and both proscribed, as they are, yet serve for Spies to their
Country, in the Courts of the Marquess of Brandenburg, and the Duke of Zell. I
have showed, I say, what reason these Princes have to suspect their Fidelity.
But let us now see, how much on the contrary, the Fidelity of Hasfield, who is
born the Subject of the King of Sweden, ought to be suspected to the King his
Master.

His Birth is so well known in the World, that it would be superfluous to speak
of it here, unless that I had a mind to say, that being born of a French Father
and Mother, it is not to be wondered that he inherits and fosters their
inclinations. Yet this may be objected to him, that after his Family had been
raised from nothing, if I may say so, by the benefits of the Crown of Sweden;
and that he was born in that Kingdom, all the other Obligations ought to be
effaced; insomuch, that what was a Virtue in his Father, is a Crime in him. And
indeed who can think without having a contempt of his Person; that while France
carries it so sparkishly toward the King his Master, he still conspires with
it, to bring all Germany into Slavery. Was it not him who took so many Voyages
to Strasburgh, when it was more easy for him than others to negotiate, by
reason of the Language of the Country, which is familiar to him; as also, for
that he was there the less suspected? Is it not he who is daily hatching Cabals
in Sweden, where he knows the Great Men are discontented, by reason of the vast
Estates which the King has taken from them, because they were rather Profusions
than Liberalities made by the Kings Predecessors? I only take to Witness the
great Men of that Kingdom: and whether it be not true, that in a Debauch where
seven or eight were present one of the Company told the other, that if
Hasfields Counsel was followed they should set up a Teckely among them, that is
to say, a Head of the Malcontents.

But I pass many other things over in silence; be it as it will, there is no
saying but that France does well reward the services that one does it. Besides
his receiving good Pensions from thence, and great Presents, it advances all
his Family, while it never thinks of the best Families of the Kingdom which
ne'retheless do not a little want it. He has two Brothers, one of whom is
suddenly to be a Bishop, the other an Abbot, the King having promised it him,
and never failing in his word, unless we except what he and his Ministers call
Word of State. There are still two others, one of whom is at Hambourg upon the
account of the French King, a worthy Brother of Mr. Hasfield, that is to say,
just as ready as he, to sell Germany, if the thing was in his power, and the
other remains in Sueden, and he it is that gives notice of all occurences in
that Kingdom. Now all these noble Blades, Sons of Mr. Bidal, that famous
Bankrupt, whom Boileau has not failed to glance upon in his Satyrs, but now he
is obliged by an express order from Court to raze it out, when he puts his
Works again to the Press. For Mr. Hasfield doing such mighty feats to render
his name worthy of immortality, it is but justice there should not remain so
many Monuments of his Infamy.

Wherefore the means to prevent all these abuses, is to follow the Example
which France does now it self set the world. For it not only Confiscates all
the Estates of its Subjects who go into the Service of other States, but it
also forbids 'em to serve under pain of Corporal punishment. Mean while if we
see it has indulgence for some, we can only infer from thence, what I have
noted, namely, that those Persons serve for its Spies about the Princes, by
whom they are employed, which is but too true.

Let us hence Conclude that so long as there is no Care taken to remedy these
abuses, it is impossible we should be successful in our measures, but that on
the contrary France will have all the advantages it can desire. For can it be
expected, we should happily accomplish an Enterprise, whereof France had long
had notice before we went about to put it in execution? Moreover let us add to
this, that it is not yet sufficient that a Prince should distrust his Ministers
or change them, he must be his own Minister, and know that though there be one
person in his Council proof against temptation, there will be a thousand that
will stoop to the lure. In effect, let him but make reflection, that hiring out
himself very commonly, as at this day, is but too frequently practiced, to him
that gives most, his Ministers may well do the same thing, and the rather, for
that they want more than he does the money which is offered them.

There remains something to be said touching the remedy that ought to be
applied to so many mischiefs, wherewith we find our selves overwhelmed at this
day. But as I can only offer what several persons have said before me, I rather
choose to be silent, than to repeat so many useless matters, and besides, for
the most part more speculative than real. For when I make reflection upon what
I have read in so many passages, and heard spoken in so many places, that all
Protestants ought to unite together in Default of Catholics, to oppose their
Common ruin, ought not we to Conclude that it is much more easy to reason
after this manner, than to see the effect of that Argumentation? For how can
they expect that the Protestants all alone should undertake a war against
France, while the Catholics are daily upon the Catch to surprise 'em. We see
at this day a fair Example of their Intention, by which it is easy for us to
judge of the Confidence we may put therein. I mean the usage the Protestants
meet with in Silesia and the other Neighboring Provinces, at a time when they
themselves are under Desolation, and stand in full need of our Assistance. But
they had rather all the Empire should Perish, than slacken their Cruelties in
the least. The House of Austria does not see that the Authors of all these
Councels, I mean the Jesuits, only give it them out of Interest; It is still
willing to Sacrifice to them the rest of the Empire, whereof it has already
Sacrificed to them a good part. Mean while let it not be imagined, that all I
here say proceeds from any natural aversion against them upon the account of my
Religion; I protest before God that I hate no body, and that I would not impute
to them any of our mischiefs, if I did not see that all worthy People, even of
their own Religion love 'em no more than I do. The World is sufficiently
acquainted with their strange avidity to have the Estates of those four
Hungarian Lords, whom the Emperor caused to be beheaded, to Comply rather with
their pressing Instances, than for any Crime which was in them, at least,
unless you will say, it is a Crime to be zealous for ones Religion. But as all
I can here say would be to as little purpose, as what so many other Persons
have said before me, the best I can do is to make an end, and own that our
mischiefs are at such a period as well as those of all Germany, that none but
God can save us.

FINIS.

