THE HISTORY OF THE Government OF VENICE.

WHEREIN The Policies, Councils, Magistrates, and Laws of that STATE are fully
related; and the use of the Balloting Box exactly described.

Written in the year 1675, by the Sieur Amelott de la Houssaie, Secretary to
the French Ambassador at VENICE.

LONDON, Printed by H. C. for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet, near
Temple Bar, 1677.

TO Monseigneur le Marquis de LOUVOIS ET DE COURTENVAUX. Commander and
Chancellor of the KING'S ORDERS, Secretary and Minister of State.
Monseigneur,
THough the State of Venice is at this day in its declension, yet in the
condition it is, it retains something of Majesty; It is venerable for an
Antiquity of above Twelve hundred years; Illustrious for Christianity which it
has professed from its Cradle; Famous for the Kingdoms it possessed in the
Levant, and for the Wars it has maintained against the Turks; Famous for the
form of its Government, which is a Masterpiece of Policy; and Famous for its
ancient Alliance with the Crown of France, which has had it sometimes for its
Companion both in Arms and Victories. I have thought, Sir, these Reasons a
sufficient recommendation to your Lordship, of this History which I now
present. I am sensible notwithstanding, I ought not to expose so poor a Work to
the Eyes of so great a Minister, and that a person respected by all France,
consecrated to the Public, ought not to be interrupted by particular Affairs;
and indeed I could not but balance betwixt my desire of doing something that
might testify my Zeal to your Lordships service, and my fear of committing that
which might be interpreted boldness. But when I considered your Goodness, as
great as your Power, I could not but hope your Lordship would extend the
effects of it to me, who along time have been a silent Admirer of your Virtues:
Virtues that your Lordship has inherited from your Father by way of advance;
Virtues, that have rendered you like him, a complete Minister.

I could not but admire in your Lordship, that pregnancy and force of Spirit
that makes you sufficient alone for so many different affairs, whilst neither
their difficulty disturbs you, nor their multitude confounds you. That faithful
and uninterested Devotion you carry for your Prince, (whom you honor more for
his Person than his Crown) That respectful liberty wherewith you address to
himself, not to his fortune; preserving by a great and unusual secret, the
Dignity of your Office, and the Reputation of his Favor; That Heroic
Constancy that places you above the reach of Envy or Hatred, things wherewith
you fear not to incumber your self, when the service of your Prince and
Country requires it; And last of all, That incomparable Vigilance that keeps
you always in action, which carries you to all places where your presence is
necessary, and which inables you to see, to understand, and to penetrate into
all things. For, if we may trust what is said and known of your Lordship upon
the Frontiers, and in our Armies, There it is Sir, that you are observed to
pass whole nights on Horseback, to expose your Person to danger, perform all
the most laborious offices of a Soldier, to give example to others, and
necessitate them to the execution of their Duty. So that Sir, it is not without
good reason his Majesty loves you, and heaps upon you his favors and benefits.
He does honor to his own Justice in advancing of you, and you are the
Workman-ship rather of his Wisdom, than Kindness. He wanted a sagacious, exact,
active, indefatigable Minister, and such a one as was fit to succeed in the
place of your inimitable Father: He has found all those qualifications in such
perfection in you, that he has put your industry upon trial in several
difficult Employments. His choice discovers your worth, and your actions, that
you are worthy of his Choice: He is happy in a Minister, your Lordship in a
Master; and betwixt His Majesty and your Lordship, we may see the excellent
Concert that was formerly betwixt Augustus and Mecenas, that is, a perpetual
Conflict betwixt Generosity in the Prince, and Gratitude in the Subject. I
perceive I am flown out insensibly in your praises, which flow in upon my Pen
without any labor or study; but though they proceed from a true Sentiment, and
Flattery has no share in them, nevertheless because I would not offend your
Lordship's modesty too much, I ferbear to pursue them.

It remains them that I only beseech your Lordship to vouchsafe your protection
to this Work in which you will see as in a Glass, the finest and most delicate
Maxims of the Venetians. I could wish it had been more perfect, but I hope you
will excuse its defects, and perhaps commend the design, which was the more
difficult, because Venice is a place where Secrets are impenetrable to
Strangers, especially to Ambassadors and other Ministers, to whom they never
speak but by gestures and signs. Besides, scarce any thing is to be seen in
their Government, but clouded with variety of appearances and pretenses far
enough from the Truth. For my part, I have endeavored to tell truth quite
through my Book, and your Lordship will easily discern it; Your Lordship who
your self use it so much, and can so readily distinguish it from Falsehood. In
the mean time, I shall esteem my self transcendently happy, if this Work (which
is the first product of my thought and my solitude) may assist to persuade Your
Lordship that I am with all possible Reverence and Devotion.

My LORD, Your most humble and most obedient Servant AMELOT de la HOVSSAIE.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
I Suppose by the very Title of my Book, my design will be so clear, that I
need not say it was not to write a complete History of Venice, which would have
been superfluous after so many as we have already, and from such eminent
Authors; My intention is only to give a short and faithful Relation of their
Policy, Counsels, Magistrates, and Laws, a thing that few have hitherto
attempted, and those that have, have done it but superficially. So that if the
Subject be not, I may say without Arrogance, the manner of my Description is
new; And yet that is not the only thing I pretend shall recommend it, the
goodness of my Materials and Authority may do as well, which were the Letters,
Memoires, and Relation of Ambassadors communicated to me; The ancient Annals of
this Republic out of which I have extracted all the Examples and Actions that
I report, especially the instructions which I had opportunity to take from the
Fountain it self, having had the honor to be employed in the French Embassy to
Venice, which is the true reason why I undertook this Work, that otherwise
would not have fallen into my thoughts. I do not doubt but Critics will find
many faults, some in my Design, some in my Language, some in my Judgment, and
some in my Arguments. Let them judge of it as they please, I should have enough
to do to answer them, and be sure to lose my Cause, should I contend with a
people who profess to despise and decry every thing that they write not
themselves. I shall only say to calvum in tellexisse quid melius esset, nec
voluntatem quin: sublimeus and Cultius deceret, sed ingenium ac vires defuisse.
them as Quintilian did of Calvus, That my mind was to have done better, but my
parts and faculties would not answer to the greatness of my Desire; My comfort
is, That being the first Frenchman who has writ of this Government, I may hope
that reasonable persons will excuse my Work the more readily, because the first
of every thing is imperfect, and it holds in the operations of the mind, as
well as the productions of Nature. Besides, who knows but the roughness and
unevenness of this Book, may provoke some more able and dextrous Pen, to
exhibit what shall be more regular and exact.

However, the chief object of my Pains, and the only recompense I expect, being
your Approbation, I hope you will allow me some little time to recount the
order and connection of this History which I present to your perusal.

I have begun my Description with the Grand Council, which in my own opinion is
the unpleasantest part of the Book. This Method will make some people say (and
methinks I hear them already) that I am ill skilled in the Art of Writing, to
bring the Reader at first dash among Briars and Thorns, whereas I should rather
have displayed my Roses and Flowers, to have invited him farther, and inveigled
him into an esteem of it. To this I answer, The Grand Council being the source
of all the other Councils and Magistrates, I could not proceed otherwise
without being preposterous, and perverting the natural order of my Subject.

Besides, if the matter be thorny in it self, it ought not to be imputed to me,
who had not the liberty of my choice. And if it be objected, that I might have
omitted the perplexities of their Elections and Ballotings in the Grand
Council: I reply, what I have done was no more than necessary to make my Work
complete, and to satisfy the curiosity of the Reader. For as Frenchmen have in
their passage through Venice, many times desired to be admitted into the Grand
Council, to see their way of Balloting, so I doubt not but there are some of
them will be glad to read, what they have seen but confusedly, and perhaps will
commend the pains I have taken to clear them. In which I have imitated several
great Authors, who have vouchsafed us whole volumes for explication of the
Comitia in the Commonwealth of Rome; whereas I have comprehended all Venetian
Courts in three or four pages, that to read them might not be troublesome. But
in short, if that place displeases any one, he may without much trouble skip it
over, and pass to that which is more delightful.

I have treated at large of the Senate, because being the Noblest, and most
excellent part of the State, I thought it but reasonable to proportion it to
its Subject, and make it the chief part of my Book: On the contrary, I have not
detained my self long upon the College, because I looked upon it as it were an
Antichamber to the Senate.

Having spoken of their Councils in General, I proceed to the Magistrates of
which it is Composed, beginning with the Duke as chief, and continuing with the
rest according to the dignity and importance of their employments. I have given
some little particular touches of the Doge, the Procurators of Saint Mark, and
the Decemviri, called by them the Council of Ten. Not so much because they are
the Chief Magistrates of the Town, as because the Matter, however curious and
delightful, has not hitherto been well handled.

All that have given us Relations of Venice, tell us, that the Duke has no more
Authority than another Senator, and that he is subject to the Laws. That the
Council of Ten is a great Tribunal, where all the Nobility, and Malefactors
against the State, are judged in an extraordinary way: This every body knows
before, and there needs no more Books to convince us. But to show how the
Venetians comport with their Duke; in what his Grandeur, his Office, his
Obligations consist; of what Age, of what Humor, of what Genius he ought to
be, are things which in my judgment deserve to be writ, as completing our
knowledge of their Government. For the same reason I have endeavored to draw
the Council of Ten to the life, supposing my draft may be the more grateful,
because in it you may see all the fine strokes, all the subtle Maxims, all the
close and concealed Mysteries of their Government. And I do not fear that any
will accuse me of animosity or bitterness against Dominationis Arcana. Tac. Ar.
the Venetians (whom I have no reason to hate) seeing I have said nothing on
them but from every good Memoires, their own proper History, several
Ambassadors, and the Public reputation, which certainty will be enough to
justify mine. Moreover the Commonwealth of Venice, like other Nations, being
made up of good and bad, I have not suppressed or lessened the honor of their
Actions where they accur'd in my Discourse.

If I have compared sometimes the Magistrates of Venice to the Magistrates of
Sparta, and Rome, it was not by the way of Ornament to my History (which
perhaps may be wanting) but to show what the Republic of Venice has taken from
two other eminent Commonwealths, and with what good success they have usued it;
an Argument of their profound Wisdom and Prudence: Besides, these sort of
comparisons instruct, and entertain the mind of the Reader, especially if he be
French, whose humor it is to learn many things at a time. Moreover in that I
have imitated an excellent Historian, Polybius.
who in the same manner has made Parallels betwixt the Carthaginians and the
Romans, and betwixt these and other Nations, but with this difference, that his
Description contains whole Pages, and mine (except my comparison of the Doge
with the King of Sparta, and the Ephori with the Council of Ten) is comprised
in three words.

My language is neither affected, nor careless, but betwixt both, neither great
constraint on the one side, nor great liberty on the other. And if I have not
picked my words in some places, it has been to preserve the efficacy of the
Sense, which elegant and modish Phrases would not have rendered so entire; for
I have more respect to a good thought, than a good word, to the elegancy of
things than the elegance of phrases, which is the proper work of a Grammarian.
Again, A subject like mine, requires more gravity and solidity, than pollish
and smartness; And therefore the Venetians deride those who affect to speak in
their Senate, either in the Roman or Tuscan Dialect. Moreover I should be very
glad, and think I came off very well, if nothing be laid to my charge but ill
Choice, or ill placing of my words.

This is all, kind Reader, I have to say for my self, and my hope is, your
Moderation will make it more effectual, than it would otherwise be.

The Table of CHAPTERS.
THe Design of the Author, Page 1

The first Part.
OF the Grand Council, Pa. 7 Principle Laws of the Government of Venice, 18 Of
the College, 32 Of the Senate, 35 Of the Correspondency of the State of Venice
with several Princes and States, and first with the Pope, 73 With Spain, 75
With the Emperor, 77 How the Venetians stand with the Electors of the Empire,
78 Their Condition with France, 80 Their Condition with the Duke of Savoy, 82
Their Posture with the great Duke of Florence, 84 With the Duke of Mantua, 85
With the Duke of Modena, 88 With the Duke of Parma, 90 With the Republic of
Genoa, 90 With the Republic of Lucca, 93 With the Grisons, 93 With the
Swisses, 94 With Holland, 95 With England, 95 With Denmark, 97 With the Swede
and the Pole, 97 With the great Duke of Muscovy, 98 With the Ottoman-Court, 100
The second Part.
OF the Magistrates of Venice, Page 108 Of the Doge, 109 The Counselors of the
Seignory, 134 The three heads of the Quaranty Criminal, 138 Of the Sages
Grands, 139 Of the Sages de Terra firma, 142 The Sages des Orders, 143 The
Procurators of St. Mark, 146 Of the Council of Ten, 154 Of the Quaranties, 171
Of the three Avogadors, 174 The two Censors, 179 The three Syndies, 180 The six
Seigniors Criminal de Nuit, 181 The six Lords Civil of the Night, 182 The three
Providitors du Commun, 182 The three Providitorjalle ragione Vecchie, 183 The
four Providitorj alla guistitia Vecchia, 184 The three SopraProviditorj all
Biave, 185 The four SopraProviditorj del Sal, 186 The three Sopra Providitorj
alla Sanita, 186 The three Sopra Providitorj all pomp, 188 The three
Genernadorj dell' Entrate, 192 The ten Sages, 192 The four Judges della
Mesettaria, 193 The three Judges al forestier, 193 The three Cattaverj 194 The
three Seigniorj allj Banchj, 194 Of the Chancellor and Secretaries, 195 Of the
Patriareh of Venice, 200 Of the Podestats, 205 Of the Captains at Arm, 208 Of
the other Officers and Provincial Magistrates, and first of Friul. 210 In
Istria and Dalmatia, 211 In the Isles upon the Mediterranean Sea, 212 The
Generalissimo or Captain General at Sea, 214 The Providitor at Sea, 218 The
General or Governor of the Golf. 219 The General of the Galeasses, 220 Of the
Sovereignty of the Venetians upon the Adriatic Sea, 222
The third Part.
The Holy office of the Inquisition of Venice, 227 A discourse concerning the
chief causes of the Decay of the Venetian Commonwealth, 233 The manners and
general Maxims of the Venetians, 267 An Elogy on the Venetians, 285 Remarks on
several passages in this History, 288
The END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Printed that Excellent History of the Republic of VENICE;
wherein is related the most considerable Affairs of Europe from the year 1612
to 1644. Written in Italian by the Eminent Battista Nani, Procurator of St.
Mark, and Faithfully Englished by Sir Robert Honywood. In Folio, Price bound 14
s. Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet, near Temple Bar.

THE HISTORY OF The Government OF VENICE.
I Write the History of the Government of Venice, without contradiction, in its
kind, the best in all Europe; as being a true Copy of the ancient Republics in
Greece, and as it were an Amass, or Collection of all their most excellent
Laws. Some Authors have handled this Subject before me, among which Cardinal
Contarin, Sansovin, and Jannotti were the chief. But all three of them have
given us no more than a bare description of the Magistrates and Tribunals in
Venice; and so far have they been from sounding the mystery of that Government,
that they would not so much as touch it by the by, in respect of some private
interests of their own. Wherefore I undertake this Relation, out of an opinion
it may satisfy sober men by the importance and variety of its matter, in which
something possibly may be found, that being new will have at least its novelty
to recommend it.

To begin with Order, It seems to me convenient to premise something about the
several States and Conditions through which this Republic has past since its
Foundation; which will be, as it were, an Epitome of the whole History, and
serve as a Scheme or Ground-plot to my Work.

Venice has often changed the form of her Government. Her first Government was
by Consuls, but that lasted not long: Her next was by Tribunes, annually chosen
by the people of each Isle, which in those days made a separate Commonwealth,
not much unlike the Cantons in Switzerland, or the United Provinces in the
Low Countries; and to those Tribunes it is that Cassiodorus addresses his
Letters with this Superscription, Tribunis Maritimorum. But because their
Magistrates many times disagreed, and the Lombards Cum Tribuni insularum sibi
ad invicem defer nolent, Longobardi absque resistentia eorum fines pluries
invaserunt. Dandol. Ann.
took advantage of their dissentions, whilst they lost their time in contesting
among themselves: The people wearied with their delays, took a fancy to make
experiment of a single person; and to that end, creating a Duke, they
transferred upon him their Sovereign Authority, which they had enjoyed for 270
years. Nevertheless, being quickly weary of their Dukes, they abolished the
very name and dignity in the person of the third Duke, who abused his Power;
and in their place substituted a Military Tribune, called in their ancient
Annals Magister Militum, by corruption Mastromiles, whose Office was annual.
This form was laid aside in the fifth year after its institution, Fabricio
Ziani, the last of that quality, having made himself odious to the People, who
at that time were very hard to be pleased; insomuch that these Islanders
regrating the deposal of their first Dukes, by comparing them with their
present Tribunes; by common consent revived the Ducal Authority, and advanced
Theodate, Son of their last Prince, to the Throne.

From this Election in the year 742, to the year 1173, there were 34 Dukes
successively; who governed the Isles with an Authority so absolute, that it is
not to be admired if there were so many Revolts and Conspiracies against them;
some of them having been expuls'd, some having had their eyes put out, and
others most cruelly massacred.

After the death of Vital Michieli the second of that name, slain upon
Easter Day, 1173, the People being weary of the long Dominion of their Dukes,
reassumed the Government; Ab unius dominatione ad omnes. Bodin.
yet for more reputation to their affairs, they continued to elect a Prince,
but with such manacles and restrictions, that they left him scarce any thing
but the Title and Precedence. All was managed by the Grand Principi orbum
potentiae nomen relinquitur. J. B. Contarin Hist. Venet. l. 7.
Council, which was composed of 470 Citizens named by 12 Electors, selected out
of the six Quarters of the Town, called by them Sestieri: These 470 were
changed annually every Michaelmas-day, that all persons might have their share
in their turns. This method continued to the time of Duke Peter Grandenique the
Second, who reformed the Grand Council in the year 1298, by imposing upon the
Quarenty See Quarenty in the Remarks.
Criminal a new Law to this purpose: That all those who were of the Grand
Council that year, or had been of it in the four precedent years, should
continue so, and their children after them in perpetuum, if they were able to
obtain twelve voices in the Quarenty; and that all the rest of what quality
soever, whether of the Populace or Nobles, (for they call those Nobles which
were descended from the ancient Tribunes) should be for ever excluded from the
Civil administration. Insomuch that the said Decree having been proposed in the
Grand Council by Leonard Bembe, and Mark Badoer, in the name of the Quarenty,
and received by plurality of voices, the Sovereignty was transferred from the
People to the Nobles. This change (as is common in all revolutions of State,)
produced the famous Conspiracy of the Quirins, the Tiepoles, and other ancient
and considerable Families, who were excluded either totally or in part; for
several of them were divided betwixt servitude and liberty: witness the Nani,
the Navagiers, the Trevisans, and the Pasqualiques, who in consequence of this
Decree found their Families mingled with the People and the Nobles, with
Masters and Servants; upon which the Quirins did eagerly complain, That this
Reformation cut the knot of Amity and Concord betwixt all the great Families in
Venice, and would endanger the kindling a Civil War. But their murmurs were in
vain; and the enterprise of Marin Bocconi to break open the doors of the Grand
Council, and there to assasinate the Duke, had no other success but his own
Execution, and the ruin of his party.

In the mean time the new Government, that was as yet but an Oligarchy, grew up
by degrees to an absolute See Aristocracy in the Remarks.
Aristocracy, by addition of several Illustrious Families that had been
excluded by lot, and by establishing the Council of Ten to imprint respect and
obedience in the hearts of the People; who, when they are in no awe themselves,
are ever to be feared. So that it may justly be said, the Commonwealth of
Venice began by Prince Peter Grandenique, because it was he who in spite of
all difficulties, by his own courage and address, wrested it out of the hands
of the common People, to give it that excellent form which it retains to this
day.

Tant ae molis er at Venetorum condere gentem. So then Venice was governed by
Consuls and Tribunes in its Infancy, which lasted 270 years, during which time
she kept her self within her Islands, as within her Cradle. She past her
Childhood under 37 Sovereign Dukes, that is to say, from Lucius Anafestus, to
Sebastian Ziani. This comprehended 470 years, part of which time she employed
in Wars against her neighbors, and part in extending her Conquests to greater
distance, as she found her Power increase. The Populace having rescued
themselves from the Tutelage of their Dukes, undertook the Conduct of her
Youth, from 1173 to 1298; which was effectually robust and vigorous, but
disturbed and agitated (as happens frequently in that age) with many dangerous
paroxisms both of Wars and Revolts. Her Virility began under the Nobles 1298,
and lasted from the reformation of the Government, which they called, Il serrar
di Consiglio, where the Democracy ended, till the war of the League of Cambray
1509, which, to speak properly, was the beginning of her Old Age. Be it how it
will, Venice has this advantage, she has maintained her self longer than all
the famous Republics of the Ancients. The Commonwealth of Sparta lasted but
700 years: Athens, Thebes, and Rhodes lost their liberty several times: Corinth
continued not long in that form: and Rome, the most illustrious of them all,
had much ado to preserve it self free 500 years together; a strong presumption
of the excellence of the Venetian Commonwealth, whose present State and
Condition is the only thing I design to represent in this Book.

There are three principal Councils in Venice; that is to say, the Grand
Council, which comprehends the whole body of the Nobles: the Pregadi, which is
the Senate; and the College where Ambassadors have their audience. I do not
reckon among them the Council of Ten, because it is only a Tribunal instituted
for the trial of matters against the State. In all these Councils the Seigniory
(which is a kind of Septemvirate, consisting of the Duke and six Counselors,
and called il Consiglietto, being an abridgment of the rest) presides: so that
the Seigniory is as it were the Head of that Republic of which the Duke is the
Mouth, because it is his office to give answer to the Ambassadors. The
Counselors are the Eyes and the Ears, it being their business to peruse all
Letters directed to the Senate; all Memorials, or Requests, presented to the
College; and to hear all foreign Ministers, all Deputies of Towns, or whatever
other persons are employed in any negotiations with the public. The College is
as it were the neck of this body Politic; by which, as by a Pipe, all affairs
pass to the Pregadi, which may be called the Stomach, or Belly, as containing
all the parts of that Government, and deriving all its nourishment to it. The
private Magistrates are as it were the Nerves and Bones that move and sustain
it; and the Council of Ten are the ligaments, hindering the parts from
unknitting, and preventing any violent motion from putting them out of their
natural place.

But the Grand Council being the basis and foundation of this Republic; it
seems to me most proper to begin my description with a particular of that, its
Jurisdiction, and all its Essential parts: which I shall endeavor to do with
as much method, clearness and brevity, as is possible.

THE FIRST PART.
Of the Grand Council
THe Grand Council is a General Assembly of the Nobles, which meets on Sundays
and Holydays for the Election of Magistrates. It is called the Grand Council,
because it comprehends all the rest; and therefore when that is held, the rest
do cease on course, as formerly all the Courts in Rome did during their
Comitia: and the reason why Sundays and Holy Days are chosen for the meeting of
the Grand Council, is, that other days might be left free for other Courts,
without interruption to the course of affairs.

In Summertime the Grand Council meets in the morning, and sits from eight of
the clock till noon. In Winter they meet after dinner, and sit till Sunset.
Their Session in the morning begins in April, and ends at All Saints; at which
time begins their meeting in the afternoon.

Their Election of Magistrates is in this manner. The Chancellor having read in
the Assembly a Memorial The form of their Election of Magistrates.
of what Offices are vacant; and the Avogadors, See the Remarks.
the chief of the Council of Ten, and the Censors, having sworn to observe the
Orders of the Council; the Nobles draw lots to become Electors. The Electors
(who are always 36, and make four Mains as they call them, or separate Bands)
do each of them name a Competitor, which is baloted afterward by one Main of
the Electors.

To understand it the better, you must know there are three Vrns raised above
the ordinary height of a man, to the end that no body might look into them. One
of these Vrns is placed before the Duke, the other two at the ends of the
Table; and three Counselors are appointed to look to each of them.

Into the Vrns on the right and left hand are put as many little white Bouls as
there are Nobles in the Council; that is to say, sixty all gilt, thirty for
each Vrn. Into the Vrn in the middle are put sixty, 36 gilt, and 24 white. The
Nobles come up two by two, one on each side, and draw by turns: If the Boul be
white, they throw it into a little box under the Vrn, and return to their place
as nothing had been done. If the Bowl be gilt, it is presented to the
Counselors belonging to the Vrn out of which it was taken. From thence they
proceed to the Vrn in the middle, out of which, if they draw a white Bowl, they
are ipso facto excluded; but if it be their fortune to light upon a gilt Bowl,
they are received for Electors of the first Main: after which they remove to a
Bench placed before the Duke's Throne, where they sit down with their faces
toward the Duke, that no man may have opportunity by making signs to recommend
himself to them; and having done this, they are proclaimed aloud by one of the
Secretaries of the Council. If in the first Main the lot falls to two Nobles of
the same Family, the second is reserved for the second Main; and all the
Gentlemen of that House retire out of the Council, the Law excluding them that
day, because there cannot be in the thirty six above two Electors of one
Family; So that every Main consists of nine Gentlemen of indifferent Families.

The first Main being fixed, a Secretary delivers to the youngest of them a
Note of what Offices are to be supplied, and conducts them out of the Council
into a Chamber on purpose; where he causes them to draw by turns out of a
Vessel which contains nine Bowls, marked each of them with a figure from 1 to
9, which answers to the Magistrates to be named: so that the Nobleman who draws
the figure 1, names a Competitor for the first Office, and so of the rest.
Every Competitor is baloted, or chosen by lots afterward by this Main; and if
he has two thirds of the Suffrages, he carries the place: whereas if he has not
two thirds, he who named him must propose another, till he pitches upon one who
passes; and then the Secretary writes the name and quality of the person so
named, under the note of the vacant Office for which he is Competitor. And the
same is observed in the other Mains: but here it is to be observed, that all
four of the Mains do name persons for every Office, and so to each Office there
are four several pretenders.

After the Competitors are concluded, the Electors withdraw, unless they be
Counselors, Sagegrands, Members of the Council of Ten, Avogadors, or Censors,
who have privilege to return again into the Council to justify their Election.
The four Secretaries of the respective Mains deliver the Note of Competitors to
the Chancellor, who reads them aloud to the Table; to the end it may appear, if
among them there be any in divieto, that is, excluded by the Law. After this he
exhorts them in a short speech to postpone their private animosities to the
good of their Country, and not prefer their passions to their duty. In the
mean time the Competitors for the first Office depart the Council, with all
their kindred, who are not allowed their suffrages by reason of their relation.
This done, certain children called Balotins are appointed to receive the Balls
in two Bossols or boxes; one white to signify exclusion, the other red to
signify admission, by pronouncing the name of the Competitor.

The balls made of white stuff very small, are put into the white or the green
box through a common mouth; so that no man need fear the eyes of another,
because no man can see where they are put; and those who have given exclusion
may swear truly according to their usual oath, Caro Signor l'ho servisa, si da
servitor vero. The balls being taken out, are carried to the Counselors to be
counted; and the Competitor who has most of them carries the Office.

After this the Chancellor mentions the next Vacancy; and the persons proposed,
who immediately retire out of the Council with all their relations, the first
being admitted into the Council to elect these; and this is called Render il
partito, because they render what was borrowed: and it is the same with the rest.

If it happens that none of the Competitors for any of the Offices has more
than half the balls, the place is to remain void till another Session: but the
Competitors shall not be the same again, because the lots will hardly give them
the same Electors. Again, if any of the Competitors should be left to be drawn
after Sunset, he loses absolutely his right; for as it is not permitted to
draw, nor indeed any thing else in the Grand Council at Venice (no more than it
was formerly at Rome to deliberate Ante exortum solemn, aut post ejus occasum,
Senatusconsultum irritum est. Varro.
in the Senate) after Sunset; so whatever is then done being thereby actually
void, the nomination of that person becomes utterly useless. And if of the four
Competitors three be in divieto, the fourth who remains cannot be chosen for
want of a Competitor. But on the contrary, if all the Mains concur in the
Election of one person, (as it falls out sometimes,) he must be chosen, because
he was Competitor to himself. And the same rule holds for those who are named
by two Mains, which is intimated by the Chancellor in his proclaiming the
Competitors.

In the Election of the Doge, their form is quite different; and I shall give
it in as few words as are possible.

All the Nobles past 30 years of age being met in the Palace of St. Mark, as
many little bowls The form of Electing their Doge.
are put into an Vrn as there are Gentlemen present; 30 of which bowls are
gilt. Those to whose lot they fall, present nine of the gilt bowls before the
Seigniory, among 24 of the white; and the nine Gentlemen to whom the gilt bowls
come, are Electors for 40 others, all of different Families, among whom they
have liberty to comprehend themselves. By lot they are reduced to twelve, which
twelve choose 25 others; the first chooses three, the other eleven two a-piece.
These 25 drawing by lot as the 12, are reduced to 9, who have the nomination of
45; that is to say, each of them names five. The 45 are by lot reduced to
eleven, and they again choose 41, which are the last and principal Electors of
the Duke, after they have been confirmed by the Grand Council. Nor is it
without reason the Venetians have established this unusual form of Election;
for by these variations, and diversity of Electors, it is, that all private
ambitions are defeated: because all depending upon the choice of those who are
favored by lot, (which no man can force) all their plots and stratagems are
ineffectual. Besides, it is a way of contenting most of the chief Families by
the share they have in the Election.

Anciently the Dukes of Venice were chosen by the acclamation of the Duces
primum populi acclamationibus deligebantur. Bern. Justin.
People; but that way of Election being confused and tumultuous, they
established another after the death of Vital Michieli the second; whose
successor was named by eleven Primus Sebast. Zianus ab xi Electoribus est
creatus. Idem.
Electors, whose number was advanced to 40 in the following interregnum, and 60
years after fixed in 41, to avoid the difficulty which sometimes happened of
having their voices equal. Which custom has been observed since the time of
Duke Marine Morosin to this day; only with this difference, that in his days it
was sufficient to have 21 voices to be elected Duke; and at present there are
25 required at the least.

In the Election of Magistrates there are no doubtful voices, because they have
too much choice among the Competitors, to be in doubt what is to be done: but
yet in their Balotings certain rules are observed, as also in their Criminal
Judgments, where the doubtful voices are allowed to the weaker party. For
example, If one of the Nobles, against whom process is formed, has fewer voices
in the Baloting than his accusers; the Nonsincere (for so it is they call the
doubtful voices) are reckoned to him, with which adddition, if yet his number
be found inferior to his adversary, the Noble is condemned: On the contrary, he
is discharged, if the adverse party, with the addition of the Non-sincere
voices, has fewer than he. But if he be not cleared without the addition of the
Nonsincere voices, the Baloting begins again, and continues till either the one
or the other has more than a moiety of the Yea's or the No's: for the
Non-sincere voices serve only to suspend Judgment, as the Code of Venice tells
us; Non faciunt Judicium, sed illud impediunt

Furthermore, there are great abuses in the Elections and Judgments of this
Council, in which all things are carried according to the caprice or ignorance
of the young Gentlemen, of which it is full. Hence it was, that the Senator
John Sagrede said well in his Oration for General Morosini; that it was not to
be admired if the plurality of voices went at first for the Avogador Correr the
accuser, among such a number of young men, who receive blindly the first
impressions, and suffer themselves to be carried away like the Tide: it is the
very word he used after he had compared the Grand Council to a tempestuous Sea.
From whence we may judge, whether the Government has done wisely to allow the
Nobles deliberative voices from the first day of their entrance into the
Council; whereas formerly they were novices for two years before they were
admitted to the lots.

Selling of voices is another great mischief, the rich buying the suffrages of
the poor, whereby they make themselves slaves to their equals. It Is true, it
may be objected that kind of trade keeps up the correspondence and concord
betwixt the one and the other; but whether that be so or not, it is an abuse
that draws many inconveniences along with it. Anciently this bartering and
ambition of Office was forbidden; now there is nothing more frequent among
them, and the Sea the Remarks.
Broglio is a public Fair licensed by the corruption of the times, where all
Offices are to be sold.

The Law permits not any of the Nobles to sit in the Graud Council before they
be 25 years of age; but the Seigniory admits every year a certain number which
they call the Barberins: and this they do by lots, to avoid the envy and
discontent of the pretenders, who thereby have no reason to complain, or be
dissatisfied, when fortune is not so favorable to them as to the rest. Their
method is thus.

On the third of December the pretenders present themselves to the Avogadors to
certify their age, which must be full twenty years; as also that they are
legitimately descended from Noble Venetians. Having satisfied them in that, the
Clerk of the Avogadory gives them Attestations signed by that Office, which
Attestation they carry to the Secretary of the Quarenty Criminal, who all put
their names to so many several Notes.

The next morning the said Secretary presents the Notes to the College, where
there are two Vrns placed before the Duke; in one of which so many Copper-bowls
are put, as there are pretenders: but let their number be what it will, there
are never more of the bowls gilt than 31. In the other Vrn are put the Notes,
which the Duke draws out one by one; and delivering them to the Secretary,
causes him to read the name publicly; and then the Balotin, who is a child,
takes a bowl out of the other Vrn for the Gentleman whose name is proclaimed;
and if he lights upon a gilt-bowl he is admitted of the Grand Council; but if
his bowl be white he is excluded: and so with the rest.

Sometimes the Seigniory dispences with the age of their Nobles, in recompense
of the service of their Fathers, Brothers, or other Relations. Sometimes they
sell those Dispensations, (as they did during the war in Candy,) and the money
they receive for them is called il deposito del Consiglio, the depositum of the
Council.

And here it is to be observed, The Nobles are not of the body of the Republic
but from the day of their admission into the Grand Council which for them is a
kind of second Nativity, seeing it gives them possession of a Civil life, and
makes them members of the State; whereas before they were members only of their
own Families. Ante hoc domus pars videntur, mox Reipublicae. Tac. Ger.


Those who are pretenders to the dignity of the Nobles, present a Petition, in
which they set forth their reasons; and then go seven or eight times to the
gate of Palais St. Mark, as Clients do to the Gates of their Judges, to
recommend themselves to the Gentlemen in their passage to the Council. If these
pretenders have more than a molety of suffrages in their Baloting, they are
received as Nobles, otherwise they are excluded. But if the voices be divided,
(which is called at Venice, Impattar,) the business is put off to another
Session: or if there happens a Patta, or any other difficulty in respect of the
Non-sincere, (which are used likewise in these Balotings,) all is referred to a
third and last Council; for one and the same business cannot be protracted
above three Sessions.

The Procurators of St. Mark are excluded the Grand Council by reason of their
dignity, which being the most eminent in that State next to the Ducal, is the
cause they have no passive voice in the Council; that is to say, there is no
Office to which they can pretend, till the Interregnum, in which they are in
election to be Dukes. It is the Law in Venice, that the Nobles which have no
passive voice in the Councils, can have no active voice there. But when the
Procurators are Sage-Grands, which is a dignity in the nomination of the Senate,
they are admitted to the Grand Council as Sage-Grands, not as Procurators.

Some are of opinion the reason of this exclusion Jannot. de Rep. Ven. and
Sansor in deser. di Ven.
is, because these Lords are obliged to watch as Guards of the Palace, and of
the place St. Mark, during the Session of the Grand Council; that if in the
mean time any popular Commotion should arise, there might be persons of
Authority ready to suppress it.

But though the Grand Council comprehends the whole body of the Nobles, it has
not the whole authority of the State; for the rights of Majesty are divided
betwixt the Council and the Senate. The first has Authority to make Laws, or
abolish them, to elect Magistrates, and other inferior Councils; as formerly
that in Rome was inferior to the People, according to that ancient saying,
Auctoritas in Senatu, potestas in Populo. The second has power of making War
and Peace, Leagues and Truces; to lay Imposts and Taxes upon the People: to put
the value upon money, with the absolute disposition of the Treasury. It
disposes of all military Commands both at Land and Sea; and all temporary
Offices, called by them Cariche a tempo, created only upon emergency. It sends
Succors to their Allies, names Ambassadors, Residents, Secretaries of their
Embassies, who depend wholly upon it, and are recalled, continued, corrected,
or rewarded as it pleases. So that the rights of Majesty being equally divided
betwixt the Grand Council, which consists of all the Nobles, and the Senate,
which is a select party; the Republic of Venice may be said to be almost an
Aristo-Democracy, like that in Sparta after the institution of the Ephori; and
that in Rome, when the Authority was divided betwixt the People and the Senate,
who made distinct and separate Laws; the first the Plebiscita, the second the
Senatus-consulta; though to take it in strictness, it is a pure Aristocracy,
seeing the Duke has no absolute power, and the People no part in the public
administration. Sometimes there have been contests about Jurisdiction betwixt
the Grand Council and the Senate; as it happened in the affair of General
Morosini, where the Senate named an Inquisitor to inform against the said
Gentleman, though the Grand Council pretended to name him. But besides that
these differences are rare, they end always without noise or confusion.

It is the Grand Council the Nobles play all their pranks, and exercise all
their private animosities, to exclude their adversaries from Office, without
the least regard to their merit. There it is they pretend to do all by Lots;
but it is not with little balls of white stuff, but with large presents quite
contrary to their promises.

In a Monarchy it is sufficient if we please our See the Remarks.
Prince; in a Republic we must please every body, which is the more difficult,
if not impossible; because Birth, Fortune, Honor, and even Virtue it self is
enough to create a man enemies, unless he manage with more than ordinary
prudence. Nobilitas, opes, omissi, gestique honores pro crimine, and ob
virtutes certissimum exitium. Tacit. Hist. 1. So that Nobleman was not
ill-vers'd in their Policies, who said, that he made no difference betwixt the
Noble Venetians; that to him all the Families seemed equal, and that there was
not one of which he would not be a member. For by pretending to know no such
odious distinction of Case See the Remarks.
Vecchie, and Case Naoie, they assured themselves of the affection and favor
of two thirds of the Nobility, and were certain of their suffrages upon any
occasion.

Furthermore, because it is the Grand Council which makes the Laws; in my
judgment it is not unnecessary to take notice of such of the principal of them
as do more particularly concern the Nobles, as the predominant part of that
State.

Principal Laws of the Government of Venice.
I. THE Ecclesiastics as well of the Nobles as Populace, are excluded from all
Office, and incapable of being of any public Council, though the Bishop and
Curats of that City were admitted into the Councils before the Reformation
1298. But this Regulation shuts the door upon all Enterprises from the Court of
Rome in temporal matters. For the Pope having the nomination of the Bishops,
and the disposing of almost all the Benefices in that State, it would be no
hard thing for him to get a party in the Senate that might carry most of their
deliberations, by the assistance of such of the Nobles, as, like the
Ecclesiastics, depend upon, and expect recompense from him. The Law excludes
also such of the Nobles as have Cardinals to their Brother, Uncle or Nephew,
from all deliberations touching Ecclesiastic affairs. It excludes likewise out
of that sacred Office those who are pretenders to the Cardinalship, or any
other dignity at Rome, lest their private interest should dispose them to
compliance with that Court to promote their designs.

II. No Nobleman is permitted to trade, lest his private affairs should
obstruct or delay the proceedings of the Public. Besides, Traffic and
Merchandise agree not with the majesty of Government: Upon which consideration
it was that Commerce was forbidden to the Senators of Quaestus omnis patribus
indecorus visus est. Livius.
Rome.

III. All the Noblemen are subject to rules in respect of their age; not one of
them but must attend the just number of years, and begin by inferior Offices,
rising by degrees, Sin dalle ultime moss, as they say: that is, they must
begin at one end of the course, and from thence advance gradually to the other;
so that before one can arrive at the great Offices, he must be of a
considerable age: as it was anciently in Lacedemon, where they were to be old
men before they could be capable of great honors, In sola Sparta expedit
seniscere. And the same thing is implied by the two baskets of Medlars covered
with straw, which is painted at the foot of the great Staircase of St. Mark,
(by which we ascend to the Grand Council, and to the Pregadi,) and shows, that
as the Medlars ripen in straw, so the minds of young men must ripen with
expectation, till they have gained experience and qualification that may
recommend them to the Government. It is moreover no ill policy to conduct their
Nobles by degrees, and as it were from Tribunal to Tribunal, if it were only to
keep them in perpetual practice and emulation, and to encourage them in the
service of their Country, by the hopes of arriving one day at the highest
dignity and preferment. Whereas if the young Noblemen should jump into the
great Offices at Venice, where there is nothing perpetual, they would refuse
the rest, and there would be no body to execute them. This has already happened
too often; and those who have exercised great Offices, thought it beneath them
to accept of inferior. For this reason the Seigniory has done wisely to
prescribe bounds to the acquisition of Honor, to prevent the insolence and
elation of their young men, who are naturally ambitious, by calling them
gravely, and in good time, to those preferments; as Tiberius said to the Senate
of Rome No quis mobiles adoleseentium animos, praematuris honoribus ad
superbiam extolleret. Tacit. An. 4.
.

IV. The Noblemen cannot hold many Offices at a time, how small or
inconsiderable soever they be: by which means the Public is better served, and
more of them are employed. But it is lawful to quit one Office for a better, if
he be chosen to it, though in his first Office his time be not expired.

V. Those Noblemen who refuse any Office to which they are chosen, are obliged
to pay a Fine of 2000 Ducats to the Public; so that even their disobedience in
some measure turns to account; after which they are to absent themselves for
two years from the Graud Council, and the Broglio, which is little better than
an Exile.

VI. It Is forbidden to joy a new Officer upon his Election, to prevent
flattery, which is too frequent in those occasions, and to keep the Noblemen in
such a modesty as is convenient for Citizens of that Commonwealth. But in this
Law there is an exception for the Duke and Procurators of St. Mark, in respect
of the great merit of such as are advanced to those eminent Dignities.

VII. The Magistrates in Venice, and upon the Continent, cannot lay down their
Authority, though their time be expired, till the Grand Council has appointed
their Successors. They cannot be absent from their Charges, without permission
from the Seigniory, which will hardly be granted but upon very good cause; so
that the Public service is seldom interrupted: but in case of the sickness of
an Officer it is otherwise; for if they see it is like to be chronical, others
are immediately substituted in their place. See the Remarks.
And if it happens to any of the Rettori of the Towns, the Captain executes for
the Podesta, or the Podesta for the Captain; and in case both be sick, some
other Noble Venetian in Office upon the place, till upon notice the Seigniory
supplies them: by which means there happens no delay in their Affairs, and no
contradiction of Orders.

VIII. The Noblemen who are Knights of Malta, have no more part of the
Government than if they were no Noblemen, because that Dignity subjects them to
the Laws and Statutes of a Foreign Prince: so that ordinarily there are but
two Gentlemen Venetians of that Order, one of the House of Carnarro, and the
other of the House of the Lippomade; and that to preserve two considerable
Commands, the first, the Government of Trevisa, with the Title of Grand
Commander of Cyprus, and the other of Conillan in the Marches of Trevisan.

IX. It is forbidden to the Nobles to receive Presents or Pensions from
Foreign Princes; as also to purchase Lands under their Dominions, upon penalty
of degradation from their Nobility, confiscation of their Estates, and
Banishment; which is the true way of obliging them to the common Defense of
their Country, where all their Estates, and all their Hopes do lie: whereas if
they were suffered to have their solid Establishment elsewhere, they would many
times betray the Public Interest, in Complacency to those Princes in whose
Territories their Estates lay; which in time might be a prejudice, if not
subversion to the whole Government. And it was by this means the Republic of
Genoa subjected it self to the King of Spain; who knew well enough to make his
advantage of the foolish ambition those Nobles had for Authority and
Jurisdiction in the Kingdom of Naples, not suffering them to dispose of them
but to others of their own Country, to the end that they might preserve their
Dominion over them, and oblige them in perpetual Servitude.

X. The Nobles are not permitted to purchase Fiefs or Lordships upon the
Terra-firma, that there might be neither superiority nor dependence to destroy
the Equality among them. Besides, it would occasion jealousy and disorder
betwixt the ancient Nobility that are poor, and the new, who being generally
rich, would in time buy the whole Terra-firma. Formerly they were not allowed
Houses of Pleasure upon the Continent, but of late that has been indulged: so
that in Venice it is quite otherwise than in Genoa, where particular Persons are
rich, but the Government poor; but here private Persons are poor, and the
Public wealthy, having Privatus illis Census erat brevis, Commune magnum. Hor.
the Propriety of all the Lands, as in the Republic of Rome.

XI. The Noblemen are not suffered to marry with Strangers, nor their Daughters
to the Subjects of another Prince, though they be Gentlemen: and the design
thereby is to preserve their Riches among themselves, which otherwise would be
insensibly transported by those Marriages; and to stop the ambitious carreer of
the ancient Nobility, who by Marrying with Foreign Princes, would by degrees
come to despise all Matches at home; and lastly, to deprive those Families of a
retreat to those Princes with whom they are allied; which would render them
more bold in Enterprizing against their Country, as being not easily contented
with the Parity there. Moreover, it would be almost impossible to keep any
thing secret in a Senate Constituted of such Nobles as were under foreign
Alliance, which would beget new factions and divisions at home. But they may
marry their Daughters to such Gentlemen of the Terra-firma, as thereby become
better-affected to the Venetian Nobility, whose protection they are willing to
purchase. The Law suffers the Nobility to marry with Citizens, to fortify their
Party against the Populace, in case they should mutiny against them; thereby
not so much communicating, as corroborating their Power by uniting with the
Citizens, as with a Body capable with the Nobility to resist any Effort of the
multitude. By this means likewise the Nobles that are poor do sometimes marry
advantageously, there being no rich Citizen but is very ready to embrace an
Alliance with a Noble Venetian, it being an honor and protection to his whole
Family: And in this the Seigniory is not without a peculiar interest; for these
sorts of Marriages do put the Nobles into a condition of serving the Public in
Embassies and other expensive employments: Not, but that sometimes the Nobles,
who marry these Citizens Daughters, grow contemptible to the People, who do
frequently call their Children Amphibia. And yet it is every day to be seen in
Venice, Noblemen of the last impression do marry Ladies of the first; the first
purchasing their Wives, the latter their Husbands. But when a Nobleman marries
a Citizen, his Contract must pass the approbation of the Grand Council,
otherwise their Children cannot pass for Noble Venetians.

By Citizens are meant the Secretaries of State, Advocates, Notaries,
Physicians, Mercers, Drapers, Glass-makers, etc. And if a Nobleman marries out
of this Category, his Children are ignoble, and degenerate into Citizens. As
appeared in the Case of the Procurator John Baptisto Cornero Piscopia; who,
during the War in Candia, was glad to purchase Nobility for two of his
Children, because their Mother was Daughter to a Gondolier.

XII. There is no Eldership or Seniority among the Nobles; which Law agrees
very well with the Form of that Government, and prevents disorders that quickly
would happen. If younger Brothers, who have equal share in the Civil
Administration, should find themselves inferior to their Elder Brothers in
respect of their Estates, many of them would turn Enemies to their Country;
and, as occasion offered, stir up and agitate ill humors in the State. Besides
that, particular persons would in time become too considerable and potent. For
this Cause the Seigniory at one time obliged three Brothers of the House of
Cornaro to marry, under penalty of Banishment, and confiscation of their
Estates, which was computed at more than 100000 Crowns per ann. which in those
days was a prodigious Revenue. And last of all, this Equality of division
renders them all capable of serving the Public; whereas if the Eldest went
away with the whole, the State would be deprived of the service of the
Nobility, who being Younger Brothers, would be useless by reason of their
poverty. Nor does this way of partage or division hinder the Greatness of their
Families, seeing for the most part all the Brothers live together, and but one
of them marries, and that is commonly the youngest; for whom the other are
contented to scrape, and to spare, especially if he be a man of Compliance.

XIII. All the Noblemen, without excepting the Duke himself, are liable to
Public Charge during the War, and each of them pays according to his Revenue;
as anciently in Sparta, where the Kings and Senate were taxed as the People, who
thereby were made more obedient to the Nobility, and the Nobility more moderate
and just.

XIV. The Magistrates who judge in Civil Causes, are not allowed to receive
Visits from either of the Parties, nor any Recommendation from their Friends,
under penalty of Degradation, and a Fine. But in Criminal Affairs solicitations
are allowed, unless in matters of State. Their reason is, because in Civil
Affairs it would endanger the justice of a Cause, to allow such application to
the Judges: But in Criminal Causes all ways are left open for the defense of
the Accused, and for the compassion of their Friends, so that at Venice, if a
man's Cause be not bad indeed, he may easily get off.

XV. A Nobleman may Plead at the Bar like an Advocate, without diminution to
his Quality. About 200 years since, all their Advocates were Noblemen,
appointed by the Grand Council to the number of 24; and had all of them
allowance from the Public, being forbidden to take Presents or Money, that the
nobleness of the Profession might not be sullied by so ignoble a Custom, and
that in all Processes it might be their interest to give a dispatch. But this
is now quite laid aside, there being scarce any of the Nobility that will give
themselves that trouble, any more than to read Law publicly at Padua, as
formerly was done by the Patricians; who were so far from thinking it
derogatory, that they made it their principal glory. But since this virtuous
Emulation ceased among them, we have found debauchery and ignorance succeed, to
the great prejudice of that State.

XVI. The Noblemen are obliged in the Councils to make use of the Venetian
Language, to avoid the envy of such of the Nobility, as understanding no other,
cannot endure a better; and therefore there has many times been clapping of
hands, and crying out to hold, in full Council, when any of them has but begun
to speak Latin; so wild are they in Commonwealths, and so odious is Novelty.
It Is true, in Venice it is necessary all Gentlemen speak the same Language,
especially in Council, lest otherwise many of them might be discouraged from
speaking their minds, out of a modest diffidence they should not deliver
themselves as well as others. But if a man be Eloquent, his best way is to
dissemble it, as Costus unus ex Legatis notae facundiae, sed dicendi artem apta
trepidatione occultavit. Tac. Hist.
a Swiss Deputy did when sent to Cecinna; otherwise the aversion of his
Auditors will work more upon them, than the Orator's Arguments.

XVII. All sort of Correspondence with Ambassadors or Foreign Ministers is
forbidden to the Noblemen upon pain of Death; by which means the transactions
of the Senate are concealed, which otherwise would be no hard matter among so
many Gentlemen to pick out by Conversation and Presents: witness the Example of
Cornaro, whose fidelity was corrupted by the Marquess de la Fuente's Bills of
Exchange. For this reason the Emperor Claudius forbid such of the Patricians to
enter the Senate, as had not wherewithal to maintain their Dignity.

But the form of an Aristocracy suffers not such an Exclusion, which would
destroy the Equality of the Nobles; and by the poorer sort (who are always in
greater number) be looked upon as Contempt, a thing absolutely insupportable
among Republicans, and which would certainly Cum enim multitudo inopum est in
Civitate, eademqueab honoribus exclusa, necesse est eam Civitatem esse plenam
hostium Reip. Arist. 3. Pol. 7.
make the Government odious. For this reason the Seigniory has been forced to
take other Measures, and prohibit in the Nobility all manner of Commerce either
by Letters, or Converse with foreign Ministers, or any of their Retinue. And
this is so rigorously observed, that if a Nobleman should be discovered in
discourse with any Person in relation to any foreign Agent or Ambassador, and
it should come to the knowledge of the Inquisitors of State before he discovered
it himself, he would not be suffered to live two hours. One day a Senator of
the House of Tron finding me at the House of the Curate de Santa Maria Matter
Domini, started and ran away as if the Plague had been there. Twice I was met
by one of the Procurators, who with an hardiness that would have been fatal to
many others, staid some time with me in a Stationer'sshop; and though I offered
it, would not let me depart.

This Prohibition beginning to be neglected, was revived in the year 1618, upon
the discovery of the Conspiracy by the Spanish The Duke of Ossuna, Viceroy of
Naples, Don Pedro de Toledo Governor of Milan, and Don Alf. de la Queva the
Spanish Ambassador at Venice.
Triumvirate against their Commonwealth; from which time they have looked upon
foreign Ambassadors as so many concealed Enemies; and to make them the more
dreadful to the Nobility, the Senate very cunningly gave it out, that the
Marquess de la Fuentes himself had betrayed Cornaro, that the Sum he had
consigned for him might be stopped.

But though all sort of Communication with foreign Ambassadors be forbidden to
the Noblemen, nevertheless there are Priviledg'd places where they may meet in
disguise, as at their ordinary Gaming-houses, which they call Ridotti, in
Balls, in particular Houses during the Carneval, at Weddings, and several other
Feasts and Solemnities: But here they are not suffered to converse, especially
at the Ordinaries, where silence is kept as strict as at a Sermon; and men are
seen sometimes to lose their whole stock, without loosening their teeth: upon
which score the Venetians are counted very good Gamesters.

As to the Rules the State of Venice has prescribed for its own Ambassadors in
the Foreign Courts, they are well worth our knowledge, and I will give you some
of them here.

XVIII. The Venetian Ambassadors cannot depart from the place of their
Residence till their Successor be arrived, and by them presented to the Prince;
if they do, they are looked upon as Desertors of their Embassy: Redire
praepropere, est legationem deserere.
which is to be delivered over by his own hand, and the new Comer put into
possession of his Charge, and instructed viva voce in whatever is requisite for
him to know toward the discharging himself worthily of his Employment. And
this they do with great formality one to the other, not only in obedience to
the express Orders of the Senate, but in honor to themselves, by causing their
Successors to take the same Measures, and follow the same Methods as they had
done before.

They are obliged to Present the Senate with a Relation, in writing, of their
Embassies at their return: for though it is to be supposed they gave Account in
retail before, in their weekly Dispatches; yet it is esteemed for the interest
of the Public to have a Breviate of them, that may save them the labor of
rummaging among their Letters and Memorials, to find out a thing that this way
may be found in a moment. Besides, all those several pieces, which asunder are
like so many shreds, being stitched together, and compacted by the Author
himself, give a better Prospect of the Affairs, and of the Minister who manages
them. And by these Relations it is, the Senate understands the whole Strength of
their Neighbors, the Condition of their Territories, their Armies, their
Revenues, and their Expense: and this Manuscript is Quae cuncta sua manu
perscripser at Augustus. Tac. Ann. 1.
a kind of a Journal, like that Augustus made of the Affairs of his Empire; and
it is according to that Model the Seigniory regulates, and the Noblemen that go
Ambassadors do draw their best Lessons, and their most refined Policies.

They are obliged likewise to produce the common Presents that are made them,
at the end of their Embassaries, to be disposed of as the Senate thinks fit;
testifying thereby, that they are content with the Honor of having served
their Country faithfully, Ne quicquam ex publico Ministerio praeter laudem been
administrati officii ad ipsos accederet. Zonar.
and that if they have merited any thing, they will not receive it from any but
the Senate. But yet they are never defeated of those marks of Honor, unless
they have done something dishonorable, and contrary to their duty.

If a Nobleman carries his Wife along with him, he is answerable for her
faults, according to the practice in Rome P. Cavendum Senatus-consulto ut
quanquam insontes Magistratus Provincialibus uxorum criminibus perinde quam
suis plecterentur. Tac. Ann. 4.
with the Governors, or other Magistrates in their Provinces.

The Sons of the Duke cannot be Ambassadors whilst their Fathers are living,
not so much to spare their purses, but for fear the Duke should employ them
with private Instructions for the particular interest of their Family.

XIX. No man can be made a Nobleman of Venice, but he must be a Catholic; not
so much to prevent that the body of the Nobility be divided in Religion, but
that their Honor might be continued Eminent and Illustrious to that
Commonwealth, which has the advantage of all States and Princes of Europe, to
have been born and continued constantly in that Church. Upon which score she
has been honored, like France, with the glorious Title of Most Christian See
the Remarks.
by several Popes, and several Councils.

XX. Foreign Gentlemen that are Noble Venetians either by merit or favor, as
the Pope's Nephews and others, being personally in Venice, have liberty of
coming into the Grand Council, and Baloting as the rest: But they cannot
execute any Office in the State, unless their constant Residence be there; and
to enter into the Council they must put on the Robe, the Stole, and the Woollen
Bonnet. Nevertheless, in my time Prince Borgia was admitted by particular
favor with his Sword, yet not without great difficulty.

I shall not mention the other Laws which relate to the particular Magistrates,
because I shall have occasion to touch upon some of them in my Second Part.

Furthermore, in Venice new Laws are created every day; but being too frequent,
they are seldom observed: From whence proceeds that saying among them; Part
Venetiana dura una settimana. But the Seigniory swallows this abuse to cajole
the People with a false appearance of liberty, and to render their Government
more gentle.

In short, the Grand Council has made all Offices annual, or for sixteen
months, to keep their Nobles in expectation, and to enure them to Moderation by
the continual vicissitude of Obedience and Command. For if they grow proud and
insolent in annual employments, what would they do were they to enjoy them for
life? Superbiro homines etiam annum designatione, quid si honorem per
quinquenni unum tenerent? Tac. en. 2.
And if those excluded in the Balotation be discontent, (though they have hopes
of succeeding in the next,) how would they be displeased at a refusal that
should make them desperate during the whole life of the Possessor? By this
changing it is, the industry of their Nobles is exercised. Plato would have his
Officers perpetual, that long use and conversation in their places might make
them more dextrous, and beget more esteem and respect from the Quo major
prudentia ipsis, major Reverentia popularibus sit.
People. But the Venetians find this change to be a better way of continuing
them in their duty, by keeping them in constant decorum, in order to their
Election to greater Offices afterward. Besides, thereby their Dependence is
greater, and their Authority less, especially among the Provincial Officers;
who are but transient, (as I may say) being scarce suffered to settle before
they are called back to Venice to give an account of their Administration; and
therefore the Towns endure their Governors the more patiently, because the
advantages of the one does many times recompense the defects of the other; and
if any of them be ill, they are not troubled with them long. So much for the
Grand Council. We will come next to the College.

Of the College.
THE College is composed of 26 Nobles, that is to say, of the Duke and six
Counselors, (called the Most Serene Seigniory, because when together, they
represent the Public Majesty of the State,) of three Deputies from the
Quarantie Criminelle, who are changed every two months; of six Sages-Grans, who
represent the Senate; of five Sages from the Terra-firma, whose Affairs pass
through their hands: and last of all, of five Sages des Orders, who formerly
had absolute direction in all things relating to the Sea.

For these reasons this Chamber is called the College, that is to say, an
Assembly of all the Principal Members of State, whose Hand it may be called;
because by it all Affairs are handed and distributed to the rest of the
Councils, especially to the Senate, to which all disorders are addressed.

In the College it is that all Ambassadors of Princes, all Deputies of Towns,
Generals of Armies, and all other Officers have Audience; there it is all
Requests, all Memorials are presented that are brought first to the Pregadi;
after which the College returns them the Answer of the Senate in Writing, which
Answer is called by them See the Remarks.
Part.

At their Audiences Ambassadors do use this Apostrophe, Serenissime Prince;
Tres Illustres and tres Excellens Seigneurs. Whereas in former times their
Addresses was only to the Duke, as they had been speaking to him alone; which
Custom, in jealousy, the Senate has reformed, to show that their Republic
depends not upon the Duke, who is but a single Member as the rest: and
therefore in his absence Foreign Ministers use the same Title of Serenissime
Prince; and, May it please your Serenity; because the Prince is supposed to be
wherever the Seigniory is.

The College rises, and uncovers, for the Pope's The Ceremonies of the College.
Nuntio, and the Ambassadors of Crown'd-Heads, as soon as they appear at the
door of the Chamber, and make their first Reverence; but the Duke pulls not off
his Hat, a thing he never does but to Sovereign Princes, Princes of the Blood
in France, or Cardinals. The Ambassadors introduced are placed on the Duke's
right hand, if they be sent from Kings; and if from a Duke, they have the same
place: but the College rises not till their second Reverence in the middle of
the Chamber; neither do they rise at their going out, till their second
Salutation. Foreign Generals are placed as the Ambassadors, whereas the
Generals that are Noble Venetians are set below the Counselors, but the
Seigniory rises not either when they come in, or go forth. The Receiver of
Malta (who is always one of the Commanders of the Orders) sits next under the
Deputy from the Quarantie Criminelle, by which he is distinguished from all
Residents, without exception to the Emperors; who for that cause negotiates
with them by an Agent, with the Character of Secretary, for he is seldom known
to have any Ambassador there.

The Nuntio, and the Royal Ambassadors are received at their Public Entrances
by sixty of the Senators, and Complemented by a Knight of the Golden Stool,
which is the mark of a Nobleman that has been an Ambassador. But for the
Ambassador of a Duke, the College orders them to be received by forty Nobles of
the Sous-Pregadi, who are no better than bare assistants to the Senate; and no
person is sent to receive a Resident, but he is of the number of the Publici
Representanti.

For the Deputies of Towns and Corporations under the obedience of the
Seigniory, they are never admitted to Audience from the College but upon three
Conditions; that they have Credentials from the Governor or Podesta of the
place from whence they are sent; that they have a Memorial of their Demands
under the hand of their Governor; and another sealed Letter from him, in which
he gives his judgment of their Affair to the Senate, that the Prince may not be
surpised. But if these Deputies come with complaints against their Superiors,
(which is but rare) it suffices for their admission, if their Letters be only
from the Commonalty, or Corporation.

In a word, it belongs to the College to call the Senate, but by mutual
dependence it obeys it when met, and receives and executes its Resolutions and
Orders: One proposes, the other disposes, and these two Councils act always by
agreement. When the Senate has taken any thing ill from a Prince, and is willing
to show a Resentment, it causes the College to refuse Audience to his
Ambassador or Minister. In the time of Urban the VIII, Audience was refused to
his Nuntio upon the affront offered to the Seigniory in exunging the Elogy of
the Venetians Set up by Pius IV in the Royal Hall of the Vatican.
, relating to the Restoration 1535.
of Pope Alexander III, the Memory of which his Holiness had a mind to abolish.

In the interregnum no Foreign Minister enters the College, unless with the
usual Complements of Condolence upon the Duke's Death: For nothing of business
is transacted till another be chosen.

I shall not speak here of the Function of such Magistrates as make up the
College, as belonging more properly to my Second Part: I shall passs therefore
to the Senate immediately, as to the chiefest and most important Councils of
this State.

Of the Senate.
THE Senate is the Soul of the Commonwealth, as the Grand Council is the Body.
It is the Fountain of Peace and War, the Balance that keeps an Harmony and
Exactness in all the parts of the State. It is called Pregadi, because that
formerly there being no set-days for the meeting of the said Council, the
principal Members of the City were invited upon extraordinary Emergency, and it
therefore retains the Name of Pregadi, or Invited Assembly; though the Custom
of calling them together in that manner is laid aside.

At first the Senate consisted only of sixty Senators, but upon any great
occasion they added 25 or 30 more by Commission; but their Commission ceased as
soon as the Debate was resolved. They proceeded in this manner in the time of
Johannes Delfinus, in the Treaty of Peace with Lodovic King of Hungary, about
the year 1360. Under the Duke Laurence Celsus during the Revolt of Candia 1363,
and under Prince Michael Sten, upon occasion of the War in Ferrara against the
Marquess Albert of Este in the year 1410. But the War in Lombardy following
some years after, the Venetians established in the year 1435 a perpetual Giunta
or supply of sixty more Senators, to answer the multitude of Affairs that were
then before them; and these are they which at this day are called the Pregadi
Extraordinare. So that the Body of the Senate consists of 120 Gentlemen, who
have deliberative voices, without difference of Senators in Ordinary and
Senators of the Giunta, unless in their Name and Quality.

There are in the Pregadi several Magistrates, some with voices by virtue of
their Offices, as the Procurators, the Ten, and all the Judges of the Quarenty
Criminelle; others are there only to hear, and learn, as the Sous-Pregadi: so
that the Venetian Senate consists of three Orders, as that of Rome, Senators in
Ordinary, like the hundred Patres created by Romulus; Senators additional, like
the Patres conscripti of the Sabins, associated by Romulus with the former; and
simple Assistants, like those in Rome, who were called Pedarii, who had no
right of opinion: the whole amounting to 300 Nobles, among whom it is
mavelous to consider how secret their Affairs were kept, as if none of them
were privy, or as if they had power to forget whatever they heard. Non dicam
unum sed neminem audisse crederes, quod tam multorum auribus suerat commissum,
Valor. l. 2. c. 2.

Titus Livius tells us, that King Eumenes having accused King Persius in a full
Senate at Rome, and proposed ways of making War upon him, nothing was known of
it more than his introduction to Audience.

Venice affords us Examples not at all inferior. In the year 1495, the Pope,
the King of the Romans, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Milan Treated, and
concluded a League with this Republic against Charles VIII so privately, that
Philip de Comines his Ambassador, who saw every day the Ministers of the
Confederate Princes enter into the College, and conferred frequently with them,
discovered nothing of that important Negotiation, which had been transacting
several months, till he received the first advice from Duke Augustine Bemb.
Hist. Ven.
Barbarigue. Lewis Sforca Duke of Milan knew nothing of the League Offensive
entered into against him by Lewis XII and the Senate, till several months after
it was concluded, though he was the most subtle and sagacious Prince of his
time. Not long before their General Carmignole Guiccardin lib. 4.
returned to Venice, without the least foresight or suspicion of what the Senate
had resolved eight months before, that is, of taking away his Commission as
soon as he came back, though it was not unknown to all the friends he had among
the Nobility. So that at Venice Silence is in no less veneration than among the
Persians, where it was esteemed a Deity.

In the mean time the Venetians might reduce their Senate to a smaller number;
and the more easily, because the Pregadi changing every year, all the Nobility
might have hopes of being admitted in their turns. But they alledg, that the
body of the Nobles being very great, the principal parts ought to bear a
proportion, and the number of the Nobles amounting to full 2500, it is not too
much to admit 300 into the Senate, as well to prevent the falling into an
Oligarchy, (which is the first corruption of an Aristocracy) as to content more
of them at a time, and to render the Deliberations of the Senate more plausible,
and more inviolable to the People, which has always a greater Reverence for
what is decreed in a greater Assembly. Besides, the public wisdom has provided
sufficiently for their secrets, by the severity of their Laws against their
Nobility, from whom it has taken all ways of Communication and Converse with
the Ministers of Foreign Princes Adempto per inquisitiones and loquendi
audiendique commercio, Tac. Ag.
.

However, it is certain their Affairs are never the better managed, for having
so many privy; at least their Deliberations would not be so tedious as they
are, if there were not so much Counsel to be taken, and so many Speeches to be
made.

Some may find fault, that the Senate of Venice changes every year, the rather
because the affairs of State, which require long experience, are always
transacted by new Senators, who sometimes mistake the Means and the Consequence
for want of due instruction in the beginning. For which cause Lycurgus ordained
the Senators of Sparta should hold their places for life, which was to be a
recompense for the longest of their services Hic Magistratus praemium virtutis.
Arist. Pol. 2.
. Solon of annual, made them perpetual at Athens; conceiving that the Senate of
a Commonwealth ought to be fixed, being the Basis, or Pole, upon which their
whole Government turned. But this defect, if it be one, is neither without
cause, nor remedy in Venice. For as the Senators may be continued by new
Election, there always remains a good part of the old. Besides, there be so
many Magistrates admitted into the Pregadi, that there are constantly some, who
having assisted, are well informed of the precedent negotiations. And for this
reason it is, that so many of the Nobles are received into the Senate, that by
hearing what passes, they bring themselves by degrees to a notion of those
things which they are to manage in their turns. And if the Emperor Soliman
said, that a Prince to be well advised ought never to make use of one Minister
above once, because the desire of gaining the esteem and favor of the Prince,
is a strong motive to make him act as he should; as Sejanus incipiente adhuc
potentia bonis consiliis notescere volebat. Tac. An. 4.
Sejanus did in the beginning of his rise: It is more manifest and visible in
Venice, where the dignity of a Senator being only annual, every man endeavors
to signalize his zeal and his industry, to render himself pleasing to the
Public, and facilitate his continuance in the next Election. In a word, by
this yearly change a Gate is always open to desert; those who are found
improper, may be rejected at the years end without offense, and more able
persons substituted in their stead: Whereas, the Senate being perpetual, the
unfit must be continued as well as the fit, which Aristotle observed as a great
defect in the Senate of Sparta, because some there are whose minds are as soon
superannuated as Est enim sua sicut corpori, sic and menti senectus. Pol. 2.
their bodies, and who by consequence grow incapable of governing.

Let us see now how the Senate proceeds in its Deliberations and Elections:
After which I shall treat of their Politics at home, and their Intelligences
abroad; the two main points in which their Civil Government consists.

As to the Order observed by the Pregadi, or Senate, in the discussion of their
Affairs, I have said before, that nothing is transacted there but what has
first passed the College, whose office in respect of this Council, is almost
the same as the Senate of Rome's was in regard of the People; that is to say, to
propose to them such things as were to be debated by them. And because many
times the College is divided, one of the Secretaries sets down every man's
opinion with his Name by it, and brings his Note to the Pregadi, where being
read publicly, every man speaks pro or con as he thinks fit; and afterward
they proceed to Balotation, as follows.

For every recommendation there is a Secretary that gathers the voices, and
goes from hand to hand naming the Author; as of old the Rogatores Suffragiorum
did in Rome. These Secretaries have each of them a white Box in their hand, and
the Nobles give their Balls to which of them they please. There are two other
Secretaries following the first, one of them with a green Box for the Balls of
the Dissenters, and the other with a red Box for the Nonsinceri, which answers
to the Non liquet among the Romans. And he who has most Voices (provided they
exceed a moiety of the whole Court) is received by an Arrest of the Senate, in
the nature of the Senatus-Consultum in Rome. But if none of them amount to the
just Number, they begin their Balotation again, rejecting those who have the
fewest voices, that the others may pass with more ease. Otherwise new men are
to be proposed, as when in the first Balotation the Nonsinceri have more than
half the Voices, which is a sign they do not agree to any that are recommended.

But though the Nobles of the Senate have power to speak for or against any one
proposed, as he thinks fit; yet none of them, unless it be the Duke, the
highest Councillors, or the Sage-Grands can propose any to be Baloted in their
own name. But if any of the said Counselors, or Sage-Grands recommends him as
one likely to be serviceable to the Commonwealth, he may be admitted to the
Balot: Which is very wisely contrived by the Senate, to avoid confusion and
delay in their Affairs, if it were permitted to each of the 300 Nobles to
propose his own man.

As to the Magistrates chosen by the Pregadi, they are not beholding to lot,
they are elected upon due knowledge and consideration of their deserts, which is
a thing not to be found out by lot Sort and urna mores non discerni. Tac.
Hist. 4.
. Besides the Senate being the Model and Image of a complete Aristocracy, ought
not to commit any thing to Fortune, that favors for the most part those who
are most unfit, and is used nowhere so properly as in a Popular State.
Sortitio Reip. Democraticae propria est. For which Sors deerrat ad parum
idoneos, Ann. 13.
reason Lots are used in the Grand Council, which is as it were the people of
the Nobility, and the form of the ancient Democratical Government in Venice.

It remains now that I discourse of the Maxims, the Ends, and the Interests of
the Government at this day, as also of the good or ill dispositions of its
Subjects; this matter belonging of right to the Senate, as having the full
direction of Affairs, and giving what motion it pleases to the whole Machine of
the State.

The Senate cajoles the People by suffering them The Policy of the Senate.
to live idly and debauched, having no better way to debase them, and to render
them obedient, than to indulge them their pleasures, and licentiousness of
life, which they call Liberty, though in effect it is the greatest occasion of
their slavery. So the Persians called Cyrus their Father, because he allowed
them in their softness and delicacy, when his design was really to enslave
them. The Romans do still make use of this artifice, subjecting the People more
by the Spectacles, Plays and Divertisements, than by their Arms. Voluptatibus
quibus Romani plus adversus subjectos quam armis valent. Tac. Hist. 4.
The common People in Venice are astonished at the bounty and good nature of
their Masters, when they behold the Doge come every year with the Senate upon
the first of February to Santa Maria Formosa, to discharge a Promise made by
their Predecessors; and not disdain a poor Straw-hat, and two Bottels of Wine
presented him by the Artificers of that Parish, in consideration of his pains.
As also when they see the Senate assistant at the killing of a Bull on
Holy-Thursday, and several other Festival-days; for nothing takes more with the
multitude than to see their Prince accommodate to their Customs, and bear a
part in their Recreations; by which method the Emperor Augustus affected to
make himself Popular. Civil rebatur misceri voluptatibus vulgi. Ann. 1.


Moreover, the People of Venice are the more pleased with their Government,
because the Nobility of the Terra-firma having no share in it, they have the
satisfaction of seeing Men of Parts and Qualification excluded as well as
themselves. From whence we may judge the kindness those Gentlemen must needs
have for the Noblemen in Venice; whereas were they under any other Government,
their Birth would make them considerable, and their Industry prefer them to the
highest Honors; which at Venice is utterly impossible, because there their
Merit serves only to expose them to the jealousy of their Superiors, and their
Patience produces nothing but ill usage, with greater impunity.

But the common People of the Terra-firma believe the Seigniory the gentlest
and most just Government in the World, when they observe the Humanity and
Popular Carriage of the Podesta's, whose Houses are as open to them as the
Church; and set-days appointed to receive Informations against their Country
Nobles, (which the common People do mortally hate;) whilst the Inquisitors of
State hear their Complaints with such kindness and candor, that they believe
all done out of inclination to do them right; whereas in truth it is for
nothing, but with some form and appearance of Justice, to exterminate all the
rich Families upon the Continent: so that these poor Gentlemen are betwixt the
Venetian Nobility, and their own Populace, like Fish betwixt the boiling Oil
and the Fire. And to help forward with their misfortunes, their own private
Animosities contribute much, and makes them oftentimes accuse one another. In
the mean time their Governors cry up the felicity of the People, magnifying
their Justice, their Plenty, and their Repose, Pane in Piazza, Justitia in
Palazzo. After which it is not to be admired, if the People who judge always by
appearance, have no mind to change their Masters, especially when Kings are
described to them as so many Tyrants, and Woolfs, devouring their Subjects. The
King of Spain is never mentioned to the Bressians and Bergamesses, but with
horrible exaggeration of the Cruelty and Injustice of his Ministers. And the
Bressians being naturally mutinous and bold, the Senate treats them gently,
avoiding to provoke them, and sending them Governors of such temper and
prudence as will invite them by fair remonstrances to their duty; and when they
transgress, reduce them by their Caresses, as People capable Domiti ut pareant
nondum ut serviant. In Agricola.
of obedience, not of servitude. And this is an artifice used by the Seigniory
to render their Dominion easy, by comparing it with the Spanish deportment
toward the Milanois their Neighbors, and formerly their Companions. In a
word, did the Senate take the same measures with the rest of their Subjects,
there would not be a better Government in the World: but if they have so much
respect for the Bressians, it is because they fear them, and dare not command
them absolutely. For, on the contrary, the Paduans, the Trevisans and the
Vincentins are used with greater severity, because they are in no apprehension
of them. The Bressians besiege their Podestates sometimes in their own Palaces,
to obtain their demands. They break up their Prisons at Noonday, laugh at
their Noble Venetians, affront their Courts when summoned to them, oppose the
Exeecution of their Decrees, and hold their Bandis or Meetings publicly; and
yet the Senate connives, and pardons all, lest rigor should put their courage
into a flame Ne sublata spe veniae, pertinacia accenderentur. Hist. 4.
. But if the Paduans or Vincentins commit the least fault, or speak the least
word that displeases, they are banished immediately, and their Estates seized:
And this is so frequent in those Towns, it is obvious to every body the Senate
regards not so much Justice as Interest in the condemnation of those unhappy
creatures Ne dubium haberetur magnitudinem pecuniae malo vertisse. Ann. 5.
, who, for the most part, are guilty of nothing but being too rich. It Is true,
the Nobility upon the Terrafirma ought to be purged now and then to evacuate
the peccant humors wherewith many of them do abound: But the Remedy the Senate
applies is worse than the Disease, as may appear by this following Example,
which evinces clearly the designs of the Senate, in relation to the Nobility
upon the Continent.

Francis Erizza Lieutenant General to Vdina, afterward Duke; seeing the Nobles
of Friul live in Peace and good Correspondence, resolved to put division
amongst them, thereby to force them upon imprudencies, that might turn to the
advantage of the Senate. To that end he caused Commission to be sent to him, to
confer the Titles of Earl and Marquess to such as he thought fit. This begot
jealousy and animosity in several Families which pretended to those Honors,
against such as had received them; the new Counts and Marquesses taking place
of those to whom formerly they had given it: so that these who were rejected,
to maintain their ancient Precedence, came frequently to blows with those newly
Ennobled, cutting one another throats when they met in the Streets, where they
marched with a guard of twenty or thirty Bravo's well-arm'd, who for their own
interest fomented the Quarrel betwixt them. This fury spread it self among the
nearest Relations; many Younger Brothers violating the rights of Nature, and
invading their Elder Brothers, who were no Counts like them. In the mean time
the Exchequer grew rich by the confiscations of these Gentlemen Murderers, and
the Senate extinguished by the continual effusion of Blood, that Fire which they
so lately had kindled.

But of all the Subjects of this Commonwealth, none were so ill-treated as the
Paduans; for the Senate considering them as the ancient Masters of Venice,
supposed their subjection but forced; and that looking upon the felicity of the
Venetians as their misery, they held them for Tyrants Pari dolor commoda
alieena ac suas injurias metiuntur. Hist. 1.
. And indeed in their private Conferences they spoke of it with inexpressible
resentment: for they had dispeopled the Town by substracting the best of their
Families, some of which they had constrained to settle in Venice to secure
their fidelity: and to increase their misery, so much liberty was given to the
Students of that University, that the Townsmen were grown to be their Slaves;
which made them incessantly regrate their Lords de l'Escalle, and the Carrares,
under whose Authority the said City had flourished.

As to the People in Venice, the Senate apprehending their Unity and Power, by
design have kept the City divided into two contrary Parties, one called The
Castellans and Nicolates in Venice.
the Castellans, the other the Nicolates; among whom the Emulation was so
great, that they applied themselves mutually to cross one another; and the
Animosity was so high, the very Children of the respective Factions never met
in the Streets (if they knew one another) without blows, nor could they be
parted till one had drawn blood, that the conquered might be provoked to
revenge himself another time upon the Conqueror. The Youth in Sparta fought in
the same sort, if you will believe that Excellent Historian. But the design
Pugilata inter se exaemulatione contendunt. Xenoph.
of the Lacedaemonians was to enure their Youth to the dangers of War, whereas
the design of the Venetians was to divide and weaken the People, who would be
very formidable, were they sensible of their Number and Power, as Manlius
remonstrated to the Senate of Rome; Quousque ignorabitis vires vestras? Numerate
saltem quot ipsi sitis, quot adversarios habeatis: Quot enim Clientes circa
singulos fuistis Patronos, tot nunc adversus unum hosts eritis. For this cause
it is the Venetians suffer their Citizens to wear the same Vestment with their
Nobility, for fear lest the distinction of habit might discover to the People
the small number of their Governors; Si separentur libertini, manifestam fore
penuriam ingenuorum; for which, new Families are frequently aggregated to the
Body of the Nobles, in place of the Ancient, which are daily extinguished.

So it is not to be imagined the public and familiar Conflicts betwixt the
Castellans and the Nicolates are made for entertainment of the People, or
Strangers, but to prevent the cooling of the Heat and Animosity in both
Parties, which insensibly fortifies the Authority of the Senate, whom it would
be no hard matter to ruin by their Union. And the Nicolates having a Duke of
their own, An Artificer of the Quarter of St. Nicolas.
ridiculous to the Castellans, it is a perpetual occasion of Quarrel betwixt
them.

But with the Citizens or Burgoise, the Senate proceeds in such a manner, as
without that, they are, or at least seem very well contented: It distinguishes
them from the Plebs by privileges, exemptions, and considerable employments,
making use of them for Residents, and Secretaries of all their Councils and
Embassies, by which they seem to be equal in some measure to the Nobles, and
superior to the Gentlemen of the Terra firma, who are utterly excluded.
Besides they have their share of the Bishoprics belonging to this State,
unless it be of seven or eight reserved only for the Nobility; with whom they
have this likewise in common, That they are never condemned to the Galleys
whatever crime they commit.

The Merchant of Venice (who is also of the Body of Citizens) thinks his
condition very happy, in respect the Nobility is contented to associate with
him in order to Trade: For though all kind of Traffic be prohibited to the
Nobles, yet underhand they are many times engaged in partnership without being
known, and the Senate swallows it discreetly, because of the benefit it receives
thereby, by sending the said Noblemen on Embassies, where they spend good part
of what they gained; whereas there would otherwise be want of rich men to
sustain those chargeable Employments, if their Nobility were restrained from
that way of enriching themselves; and by those ways of entertaining their
minds, they are hindered from contriving against the State.

And now one would think the Ecclesiastics had great subject to complain of
this Government, in which at this day they have not the least part; which
caused Cardinal Zapata to say, that at Venice their condition was much worse
than the condition of the Israelites under Pharaoh. But the Senate makes them
ample amends for their exclusion, by the liberty it gives them to live as they
please without any notice of their irregularities: Insomuch, that they are so
far from repining, that they believe themselves in Paradise.

As to the Nobility, the Senate takes particular care to maintain them in unity,
knowing well that Animosity is dangerous in a free State; Periculosiores sunt
inimicitiae juxta libertatem. Tacit. Germ.
and that division among the Governors has been the ruin of many a
Commonwealth; witness the Revolutions at Florence and Verona, which happened
only upon the quarrels and factions betwixt their principal Citizens. To
prevent these ill consequences, the Senate takes notice of the least difference
betwixt the Nobility, and without expecting till the fire be kindled, it choaks
it in its embers, and stops its progress by their vigilance and authority; for
the Nobles are obliged to an immediate acquiescence, otherwise they run
themselves into the displeasure of the Senate, let their provocation be never so
great. Some years since, the Vidmans being in suit with the Family of Naue, in
which the Vidmans Grandfather had served as a Packer, and being reproached by
the means of their Extraction in a full Assembly, the Senate interposed,
commanded them silence, and ordered the Judges to take up the business, as
reflecting upon the whole body of their Nobility. A Gentleman of the Family Da
Ponte threatening another called Canale, that he would prove the Pontes were
above the Canals; the other replying, but the Canals were before the Pontes,
and the Pontes had never been but for the Canals. The Senate sent them word,
That they could choke up the Canals, and pull down the Bridges when they
pleased; and these sort of reflections are the more odious, because they grate
upon their Equality, which is the very Soul of their Commonwealth. And if in
some things the new Nobility seem inferior to the ancient, as not being so
soon admitted into the great Offices, it is done only to improve them, to
experiment their industry in smaller Employments, and, as Sylla says, to enure
them to the Oar, before they be trusted with the Helm; without which gradation
Preferment would but expose them to the contempt of the People, who commonly
despise those who have been formerly their equals Insita mortalibus Natura,
recentem aliorum felicitatem agris Oculis introspicer quos in aequo videre.
Hist. 2.
.

Moreover the Senate had never permitted the Venetian Ladies to follow the
French Modes, but by a new luxury to prevent an old distinction which they
affected in their habit; the Ladies of ancient Families dressing their heads a
la Guelfe, and the other a la Gibeline, from whence grew a certain emulation
that brake out some time into quarrels, and proceeded often to their Husbands,
not only to the danger of the Nobility, but to the disturbance of the State.
For in all sorts of Governments, nothing is more pernicious than jealousy and
misunderstanding betwixt the Governors; the offended party desiring always
innovation and change. So it was, that Heracleodorus in Eubea taking a pique
against his Colleagues, set up a new form of Government, by which the Authority
that was formerly in the hands of the Nobility, was transferred to the People;
as on the contrary, Duke Peter Gradenique of Venice, transferred it from the
People to the Nobles, to revenge himself of the People, who had refused to make
him their Duke.

The Senate governing upon Maxims of Peace, will not endure dissension either
among the Nobility or People; for fear if once they came to Arms, they should
take a fancy to alter the Government. The Senate is sensible, Ambition and
military Gallantry are inseparable, and that great Courage cannot endure the
obscurity of a private life; of which we have a fair example in the Roman
Commonwealth, who with all her power was not able to master her Generals. And
this Maxim is so much the better, because the Venetians not designing to
aggrandize themselves by new Acquisition, but only contriving how they may
defend what they have got, have no need of Generals among them, whose Ambition
would keep them always in alarm; there being but too many of those haughty
spirits, who believe all things are lawful that conduce to Dominion, and that
it is mere madness to refuse it in a punctilio of Religion Si violandum est
jus, regnandi causa violandum est. Eurip.
.

Besides, the General for a Commonwealth, finding himself adored by his
Soldiers, favored by fortune, and happy in an opportunity, without more than
ordinary moderation, can hardly bring himself to depose an Authority that he
can so easily keep, and reduce himself to an Equality, when it is in his power
to Command. Upon which consideration, the Senate has laid it down for a Maxim of
State, Never to put the Command of their Land-Armies into the hands of any of
their Nobles; seeing that to arrive at any perfection in that Trade, they must
pass the best part of their time upon the Terra-firma, and seek their
employment among foreign Princes, which would quickly make a breach among
their Nobility, it being most certain, those who had been long absent from
their Country, and taken up a way of living quite contrary to their old, would
not accommodate very easily with their Companions brought up in Idleness and
Peace; by which means it would not be long before their Republic would be
perplexed and embroiled by its own Citizens.

Therefore when they have War at Land, they invite to their Service some Prince
or Foreign Lord, to whom they allow a large Pension, with the Title of
Generalissimo at Land: I say the Title, because he has neither Authority nor
Power, the Senate appointing constantly as his Council, or rather as Spies, two
Senators, which they call Proveditors General of the Army; who never suffer him
to be out of their sight, nor take any Resolution, or undertake any Enterprise
without them. On the contrary, he is obliged to do as they direct; and let his
Experience in Military Affairs be what it will, they seldom comply with his
Sentiment, the Noblemen of Venice being naturally enemies to any Advice that is
not their own, as if they designed their Perverseness should show their
Dominion. And therefore they will not entertain Generals more brave, or of
better Conduct than themselves; because commonly their Complaisance is but
small, and that is a Quality with them equivalent to the greatest.

In the absence of the Generalissimo, the General of the Infantry (a Stranger
too) has the Command, by a Custom quite different from other Princes; which is
a great trouble to the General of the Horse, as appeared by the Prince of
Modena, who quitted the Venetian Service upon that Score, during the War of
Mantua.

The Senate not only entertains Foreign Generals, but all the Foreign
Soldiers they can get, always retaining a special care of putting Arms into
the hands of their Subjects. Not that the Senate is ignorant how inconvenient
the service of Foreigners is, having had such fatal experience many times, and
particularly in the famous Battle of Ghiarra d'Adda See the Remarks.
, where most part of their Troops deserted them; but because they had rather be
illserv'd, than have their Liberty endangered.

The pain they find to get Soldiers, by reason of the slavery in which they
keep them, (which is such, that many of them have chose rather to revolt
desperately to the Turk,) constrains them to have recourse to their Allies for
succor; but they never do it but in great extremity, being as fearful of the
Troops which they employ in their defense, as of those that invade them; and
therefore it is they so frequently change the Posts and Quarters of their
Auxiliaries, separating them with great care, and incorporating them with their
other Troops, to prevent or defeat any design their Commanders may have.
Sometimes they force their Officers to retire, tiring out their patience by a
thousand affronts; and if they happen to be obstinate, and persons that will
not easily desert their Party, they make no great scruple to remove them other
ways; witness Don Camillo de Gonzague, who died not many years since at Capo d'
Istria, of which they discharged themselves by a solemn Service, and a Funeral
Oration delivered in the Senate. Many times they choose rather to make a
dishonorable Peace, than to continue or entertain Auxiliaries in their
Defense; so much do they abhor that kind of Cattle, which they look upon as
little better than Professed Enemies. For it is the Custom of those States who
have over-reached their Neighbors and Allies, to apprehend being circumvented
themselves some time or other, judging of their enemies by what they themselves
would do in their places. Wherefore the Senate never engages in a War but upon
necessity, and after they have tried all ways to prevent it, there being no act
of Submission that they will refuse to deliver themselves from that Plague; and
the rather, because their Affairs are supported more by their Reputation than
Arms. Their bare aversion to War, if you will believe Magis fama quam vi stare
res suas. Tac. Ann. 5.
Andr. Moccenicus belli Camer, (who was one of their Senators) made them change
their old Patron St. Theodore, because he was a Soldier, and resembled St.
George too much, who is the Patron of Genoua. The Statue of St. Theodore to be
seen upon one of the Pillars in the Place of St. Mark, Armed at all Points, but
with his Lance in his Lefthand, and his Shield in his Right, does denote that
it is not the Venetians Profession to bear Arms; though it is said, by that
Symbol the Senate intended to intimate, that they never made War willingly, and
that when they did make it, it was for no other end but to maintain a good and
safe Peace.

And if in thirteen or fourteen Centuries they have grown so Potent in Italy,
it is easily imaginable, it was not so much by their Arms, as by their Money
and Address, like Philip of Macedon in his Conquests in Greece. For Example,
when any difference happened betwixt their Neighbors, the Senate found some way
or other of interposing, under color of accommodating their Quarrel; but in
effect it was to embroil them more, by privately fomenting their Animosity,
exciting the most Potent to Revenge, and underhand giving Supplies to the
weaker to continue the War, and insensibly to ruin them both: so that having
tired and exhausted both the one and the other, there was no great difficulty
in dispossessing them all, by the necessity that was upon them of putting the
Contested Places into their hands in Deposito, or at least of receiving a
Venetian Garrison. In the year 1404 they got possession of Vicenza by means of
Supplies, which they sent to the said Town to defend them against the Paduans
their mortal enemies. They plundered most of the Great Persons of Romagna, some
they cajoled by fair promises, others they surpised, and others they betrayed
under the sacred name of Friendship, and pretended Protection. The same
Practice they used with the Nobility of Ravenna, especially of the Family of
Polenta, with the Manfredi of Faienza, the Malatestes of Rimini, and several
others: for they always esteemed it more Honorable to vanquish their Enemy by
Cunning, than Force of Arms. And what was said of the Romans, Sedendo Romanus
vincit, may be said of them; for many Victories have they obtained sitting in
their Councils, and in their Closets: Yet when Princes have made War upon them,
without troubling themselves to Treat, (in which notwithstanding their greatest
Talent and Felicity lies,) they never fail to bring them to reason. And if Pope
Paul V, had done as Sixtus IV, and Julius II did, that is, joined his Spiritual
Arms with the Temporal, he had certainly found the Venetians more obedient,
though perhaps their Cause was the better. Of late years they no sooner saw the
French Army in their Territories, but they betook themselves to such gross and
mean submission, that their Confederate Princes were amazed to find so little
Courage in those persons, who before flattered themselves with hopes of chasing
Lewis XII out of Milan, and seizing the whole Duchy for themselves, to make
their Dominion as absolute all over Italy, as they had made it in Romagna: but
the loss of one Battle at Vaila made the Senate cry See the Remarks.
peccavi, though before they had defied the Kings, and called them in derision,
Sons of St. Mark, as if they had been already overcome.

And here I shall observe by the way, that upon several occasions the Venetians
have done themselves injury, by discovering their weakness and pusillanimity to
their Enemies. Their Prayers and Submissions to Francis Carrare Lord of Padua,
during the War with Genoa, giving him in their Letters the Title of Highness,
The Letter from the Senate was written in Italian, in these terms: Magnifico e
Potente Signore Francisco da Carrara, discreto Imperial Vicario General Andrea
Contarini per Dio Gratia Dose di Venegia.
which at that time was given only to Kings; and supplicating him to afford
Audience to six Ambassadors they had sent to him (an Honor they had never
before done to either Pope or King) these Condescentions, or rather
Debasements, I say, served only to make him the more haughty, and desirous of
Revenge; insomuch that all the answer they could get, was, That he would not
hear their Ambassadors, till he had first caused the four Brass Horses in the
Portico of St. Mark to be brought away; which are four curious Horses that
Marinzen, the first Podestate from that Commonwealth at Constantinople, had
sent to Venice in the year 1205.

Noi pregamo l' Altezzo vostra qualmente vi paccia mandar vostre Lettere de
salvo Condotto de venir alla presenza dell' Altezza vostra, audiendo
liberamente li nostri Ambassadori Piero Zustignan, Nicolo Morosini P. Giacomo
Priuli P. e tree alteri del nostro Consiglio de Pregadi, etc. Annals M. S. de
Venise. To the Magnisicent and Potent Lord Francisco da Carrara, the most Wise
and Discreet Imperial Vicar, General Andreas Contarini, by the Grace of God
Duke of Venice, Greeting. We beseech Your Highness, in what manner you please,
to send your Letter of Safe Conduct, for the admitting into the Presence of
Your Highness, and free Audience for our Ambassadors, Peter Zustignan
Procurator, Nicolo Morosini P. Giacomo Priuli P. and three more of our
Senators, etc.

Their Neutrality, which is another of their Fundamental Maxims to keep
themselves in Peace, has been very prejudicial to them, and sometimes pulled
War upon their Heads; as it happened when they endeavored to have kept
themselves Neuter betwixt Lewis XII, and Maximilian the Emperor, at that time
engaged in War about the Duchy of Milan. For these two great Princes being
equally incensed against this Commonwealth, (whose Friendship added nothing to
their Affairs) united in spite, and formed the Project of the League of
Cambray, in which all the Princes of Italy were concerned. In a word, the
Juncture was such, that there was a necessity of declaring either for the one
or the other: But the Senate having chosen the midway Quod inter ancipitia
teterrimum est. Tac. Hist. 3.
, which in great dangers, and doubtful, is always the worst; in stead of
preserving their Friendship, they disobliged both, and made them their Enemies.
So that it may be said of the Republic of Venice, what was said by Florus of
Marseilles, That desiring Peace, she precipitated her self into the War she
apprehended: Or what Alsonso King of Aragon said of the Sienois, comparing them
to those who are lodged in the second Story of an House, and incommoded with
smoke from below, and water from above. And truly, if Neutrality be not very
well managed, it not only conciliates no Friendship, nor prevents any Enemies
Neutralatis neque amicos pari^, reque immicos tol it. Poly. 6.
; but it exposes such States as have made it their Principle (as the Venetians
have done) to the contempt and hatred of the Conquerors, who according to the
prudent Remonstrance of the Roman Ambassador to those of Achaia, are accustomed
to treat those ill, and, if possible, to ruin them that will not publicly
espouse their Interests, and run their Fortune: witness the Republic of
Florence, which desired to remain Neuter betwixt Pope Julius II, the King of
France, and the King of Aragon; and thereby not only disobliged the Pope,
offended the King of France, who expected Supplies from it as a friend, but
deprived it self of those advantages which it might have expected before from
the King of Aragon upon Honorable Conditions,

But as much aversion as the Senate has to Landforces, no less is its
inclination to the Forces by Sea, upon which depends absolutely the
Conservation of the Government, from whence it has had its rise and increase.
In their Galleys are always disposed a certain number of young Noblemen to
instruct themselves in Maritime Affairs, and good Pensions are allowed to such
as embrace that Profession.

The Senate likewise obliges the rich Merchants who have Ships at Sea, to
entertain at their own Charges two or three decayed Gentlemen permitted to
carry a certain quantity of Goods without paying any Duty for Exportation; or
if they have not Money to furnish themselves for Traffic during their Voyage,
the said Gentlemen have liberty to sell their Privilege to other People, and
supply themselves that way, which is a great relief to their misery, and makes
them in love with a Profession that is so much to their advantage: besides the
hopes they have of arriving one day at the Chief Command of their Fleet, Venice
conferring those Commands like the Senate of Sparta, only to the Nobles, that
they might not be wholly deprived of the Reputation of Military Conduct, the
situation of their Town inviting them moreover to that kind of Warfare. And in
this it must be acknowledged the Venetians have succeeded so well, that they
deserve to hold among all the Italians the Pre-eminence for Power and
Experience at Sea, as the Athenians had formerly among the Greeks. But it must
be confessed likewise, it would have been more flourishing at this day, had
their Predecessors contented themselves to be Masters of so many rich Islands
in the Archipelago, without setting foot upon the Terra-firma, which has
corrupted their ancient Manners, and put them upon ways of living quite
contrary to what they had, and what was necessary to maintain them in their
Grandeur: In which they were the more blameable, because to regulate them they
had the Example of the Lacedaemonians, who being the most fortunate of all the
Greeks in their Wars at Land, subverted the Government of their Town, and
ruined their State by making War by Sea against the Athenians; who by continual
Conversation in that Element, were become the ablest and most experienced
Nation of Greece. But it seems the Venetians had as much mind to imitate the
Faults, as the Maxims and Laws of that famous Commonwealth.

I shall not enlarge farther upon their Sea-Affairs, because I shall hereafter
have occasion to speak of them, when I treat upon their Generals at Sea. I
shall only mention in this place the ordinary Forces, wherewith the
Commonwealth of Venice keeps her Towns and Territories in obedience.

The Senate has always a body of Infantry called Cernida, which is to say, a
People selected out of all their Territories, though in truth it be nothing but
a Mass of miserable Pesants, and all The Venetian Militia.
the Rascality of the Terra-firma: But they cost them nothing in time of Peace,
there being none but the Captains and Sergeants paid; the first at the rate of
twenty-five Ducats, the other at ten Ducats a-month; all the rest contenting
themselves with certain Exemptions, and some slender gratifications at their
Musters. Nevertheless this Militia serves to keep the People in their duty, and
the neighboring Princes in awe. This outward appearance of War (the true way
to preserve Peace both at home and a-broad) being only to show their Forces are
always ready to receive and repulse their Enemies. And because the Bourgevisie
or Citizens have rarely good intelligence with their Militia, (their humors
and their interests being as opposite as their professions) the Governors of
their Towns do always quarter their Soldiers separately by themselves; not so
much to ease and secure the People against the insolence of the Soldiers, as
to remove their Militia from the fury of the Populace (who would make their
advantage if they were separated) and to secure themselves from all surprises,
by keeping their Land-Armies on foot, Vt simul imperia acciperent, numeroque
and robore, fiducia ipsis, in caeteros metus crederetur -- si quid
subitumingruat, majore auxilio subvenire. Tac. An. 4
and ready to obey the first Orders. Besides, this Militia is not much unlike
that which the Romans called Milites Subitarii; which being sufficient to stop
the first Career of a Sedition or Revolt, gives time to expect succors from
the neighboring Towns, which never fail them, and keeps the people of the said
Towns in perpetual fear.

Their Cernida is divided into -- Companies, amounting in the whole to about 14
or 15000 men, not much worth; so that in their Wars the Venetians use them only
as the Lacedaemonians did the Helotes their slaves, to keep their baggage Ne
hostibus viderentur ad paucos redacti in quodlibet stratum demortuorum Helotas
restituerunt. Athenaeus.
, and fill up the places of the dead, rather than to fight, which is not at all
their business.

Their Infantry, called Capelete, is of another Nature. The Senate trusts them
with the Guard of their best Towns upon the Continent, having always found them
faithful to their Service, and inveterate against the Turk. Nevertheless it is
thought convenient to separate them into several Garrisons, because together
they might be be dangerous. There are constantly two Companies of them in
Venice, one to keep the Palace, the other the Place of St. Mark.

As to their Cavalry, they have always fifteen Companies in pay upon the
Terra-firma: some of them (called gross Companies) consist of 60 Curiassiers,
which are bestowed partly upon the Italians, and partly upon the Tramontani, or
Foreigners, in recompense of their long or extraordinary Service; for their
Pay is considerable. The rest are called Capeletes, or Light Horse, made up of
Sclavonians, Albanians, (which they call Stradiots) Dalmatians, and Morlaiks,
all of them subjects to that Commonwealth. The Curiassiers serve principally to
sustain and cover the Infantry in time of Battle, the weight of their Arms
making them unfit for Excursions, which is the proper business of the
Capeletes. The Morlaiks are a handful of men, who having quitted the Turks
Service, submitted freely to the dominion of this State, and have since
signalized themselves by their faith and their activity. They infest the Turks
with their continual inroads, whatever is portable they carry away, what is not
they spoil; and then save themselves in the Mountains, where it is harder to
find than overcome them Quos difficilius invenire quam decellare.
; so well are they acquainted with all the passages and turnings. Besides their
immortal resentment of the barbarous usage they received of late years from the
Bashaw of Bosina; the consideration of a Sequin which the Senate allows them for
every Turks head they bring in, has so blooded them against those Infidels, and
carried them so far, that they have no hopes left of ever reconciling Quo
minore spe veniae, cresceret vinculum sceleris. Tac. Hist. 4.
with the Turks *; which was all the Senate desired to fix them in their
Service; they looking upon them as fickle, and like birds of passage, held by
the feathers, not the foot, their humor being as uncertain as their residence.
They have no fixed place of abode; they encamp in the Plains, and there set up
their Cabanes, to avoid the licentiousness of Towns, and the resort of such
Citizens as teaching them delicacy, may * corrupt their Inter Paganos
corruptior miles. Hist. 1. Severius acturos si vallum statuatur procul urbis
illecebris.
Military Discipline.

In short, The Senate entertains a certain number of Vltramontane Officers, with
Pensions called Conduites. The number of these Officers is commonly 50, but
they are augmented as occasion requires. These Gentlemen have sometimes
Governments in Dalmatia; sometimes the command of Gross Companies, as their
Service recommends them; besides other Privileges, as not to be arrested for
debt, to have a seat in the College when Affairs are in debate, and to take
place in the Towns where their Commands lie, immediately next the Podesta and
the Captain at Arms.

But the Venetians chief Strength consists in their Naval Force; and their
thoughts are most employed upon that, in respect of the Situation of their
Town, which is wholly in the Sea, and for defense of their Golf, and
preservation of those Islands which they hold in the Mediterranean. In my time
there were only 25 Galleys, and four Galleasses, with a few Barks and
Brigantins Armed, to secure their Coasts; but they were able to set out twice
the number, were their Arsenal supplied with Slaves, Seamen and Soldiers, as
well as other necessaries. Their Arsenal is one of the finest things in Europe,
and the best kept. It is a place of about three miles in compass, in the form A
Description of the Arsenal.
of an Island. at one end of the Town, and on that side next the Main-Sea. It
is walled about, and enclosed with Canals that serve for so many Ditches.
Within it there are three great Fountains or Reservatories which receive the
water from the Sea, and communicate one with another upon occasion. About them
all three are an infinite number of little Houses full of materials for
Galleys, some made, some half made, others to be refitted, and all in their
particular Magazins. For Example, one is full of Nails, another of all manner
of Ironwork necessary for a Galley. Two are full of Small-shot, and
Cannon-bullet; one of Planks, one with Rudders, one with Oars ready made, and
two where they make them. There are two places for Cordage of 400 paces long,
one for Hemp, another for Sails, with a large Room full of Women to sow them:
one for Masts, one for Pitch, one for Saltpeter, and several for Powder. There
are in it twelve Forges, or Smiths-shops, in which 100 men are continually
working. Three Fonderies, or Rooms for running of their Lead. A great Hall for
weighing their Cannon: a large Court full of Timber, Anchors, and Artillery,
with about 800 Pieces of Cannon of all sizes ranged in several Rooms. In a
word, there are always Arms ready for 50000 men. The number of their constant
Workmen is 1200; and all these Artificers have a Superior Officer called
Amiraglio, who commands the Sea the Remarks.
Bucentaure on Ascension-day, when the Duke goes in State to marry the Sea: And
here we cannot but take notice, that by a ridiculous Custom this Admiral makes
himself Responsible to the Senate for the inconstancy of the Sea, and engages
his Life there shall be no Tempest that day. It Is this Admiral who has the
Guard of the Palais, St. Mark with his Arsenalotti, during the interregnum. He
carries the Red-Standard before the Prince when he makes his Entry; by virtue
of which Office he has his Cloak, and the two Basins (out of which the Duke
throws the Money to the People) for his fee.

This Arsenal contains all that is necessary for defense of their State, and
had the Spaniard succeeded in his design to burn it, they had been lost beyond
all hopes of recovery. For as to the two Armories in the Palais of St. Mark,
they are not considerable, being only to Arm part of the Nobility, if any
Tumult should happen during the Session of the Grand Council. It Is said the
Turk would not be troubled with Venice, if it were not for the Arsenal; that he
esteems the Arsenal more than the Town, which, if it were in his Power, he
would willingly restore upon payment of a Tribute: and this is reported by an
English Author, who affirms he heard it from one of the Ricault. Hist.
Principal Ministers in the Grand Signior's Court.

The Charge of this Arsenal amounts to 500000 Ducats. The Workmen are paid
every saturday without fail. No man is received to work there under 20 years of
age; and no man can be a Master till he has served eight years. It Is Governed
by three Noblemen called Padroni all Arsenale, who are changed every three
years; and by three Proveditors, whose Office it is to choose the Workmen, and
to see them paid.

But because Money is the Nerves of all States, and gives motion to all its
Members, it will not be amiss to say something in general of the ordinary
Revenue of this Commonwealth, from whence we may better judge of their real
Strength.

The Duchy of Venice, that comprehends the City, and all the Islands and Ports
about it, pays yearly three Millions of Ducats, besides the Duty upon Salt,
which amounts to more than another Million: all amounting by Computation to
little less than a Million Sterling, if you reckon every Ducat at 50 Sols
French; but I will not pretend to be too punctual in my Arithmetic.

The Marquisate of Trevisan being a good Country, pays 28000 Ducats.

Padua and the Territory about it pays 40000 Ducats.

Vicenza and the Country about it, 200000 Ducats.

Verona and the Veranois 360000 Ducats.

Bergamo and its District, 300000 Ducats at least.

Crema 160000 Ducats, perhaps more.

Bressia, and the Country belonging to it, 1200000 half of which is assigned to
the payment of the Arsenal at Venice.

The Polesin, called il Contado di Rovigo, a miserable Country, pays 140000
Ducats.

Friul, a large Province, pays 400000 Ducats.

The Countries upon the Sea, as Istria, Dalmatia, and part of Albania, with the
Isles of Corfu, Zante, Zephalonica, Cerigo, and others, pay by report 800000
Ducats, if not more.

All which amounts to more than two Millions Sterling, besides new Impositions
that multiply every day; the Tithes of the Clergy, the Sale of Offices,
Confiscations, and several other Incomes very considerable. So that in time of
Peace the Senate lays up vast Sums, their Form of Government exempting them from
the Expenses of Monarchies, where all things are more Noble and Magnificent.
It Is true, the State of Venice has more reason to lay up in time of Peace than
any other Prince; there being none of them to whom their Wars are so Chargeable
as to it, who for the most part is served altogether for Money, with little or
no affection from those they employ. Besides, their ordinary Revenue is not
sufficient to maintain their Wars; but when once they are Engaged, they find
out ways to supply themselves by new Taxes, extraordinary Impositions upon the
Nobility, Citizens, Ecclesiastics, and Mechanics, by selling Nobility to the
Populace, the Vest of Procurator, the Golden-Stole, and all the great Offices
to such Lords as are ambitious; which ways, during the Wars of Cambray, brought
into the Exchequer 500000 Ducats in eight months time. The Senate sells likewise
la Cittadinanza, or the Freedom of their City to Strangers, the Titles of
Marquess and Count to the Nobles of the Terrafirma: Liberty to Prisoners, Mercy
to Criminals, Permission to return to Banished Persons. Moreover it takes Money
at the rate of two or three per Cent. out of the Banks for Pious Uses, as in
that at Trevisan in the year 1669. It constrains the Rich to lend them, but
especially the Jews, whom they squeeze like spunges when they please,
threatening to send them packing upon the least hesitation. During the War of
Candia, the Jews in Venice only, furnished the Senate with five or six Millions,
and yet some few weeks before Candia was Surrendered, they made bold to draw
Bills upon them for a considerable Sum more.

At the end of that War, if we may believe what was commonly reported in
Venice, that Commonwealth was indebted above sixty millions of Livres; and it
was true: Yet a few years Peace will easily recover them, and put their affairs
again into good condition; there being no Prince that spends less superfluously
than they, which Parcimony is to them as good as a revevenue Parcimonia magnum
est Vectigal.
. Besides, their Officers who manage the public Treasure, having so many eyes
upon them, and being to give account of their administration to as many Judges
as there are Nobles, it is impossible for them safely to imbezzle it; for the
Multitude, as they cannot dissemble, so they never forgive; for the intacco di
Cassa, or purloining the Public Money, is unpardonable at Venice.

Furthermore, no payment is made, but it is first baloted, or authorized in the
Pregadi; so that nothing passes out of the Coffers of their Exchequer, but upon
good terms. When the sum they owe is considerable, they pay it not all at one
time, but by parcels and degrees, thereby to keep their Creditors in Venice,
that before their second receipt, their first may be spent among them; and this
practice is so frequently observed, that many times their Creditors are forced
to renounce all and be gone, lest their attendance should consume them. Besides
this, all their payments are made in Ducats, a Coin that cannot be transported,
it being of so base an allay, it would scarce give half the value out of that
State; For this reason they are glad to change them at great loss for Gold, or
lay out their money in Commodities; so that it returns generally from whence it
came, or at least a great part of it.

Again, the discovery of the East Indies by the Portugals in the year 1498, has
been a great diminution to the Revenue of this Republic; for whereas all the
Spices and Drugs from those parts were brought by Aleppo and Alexandria, to
which places they were conveyed upon Cammels backs, and from thence to Venice
by Sea; as being at that time the Magazine for all Europe; Vasquez de Gama
found a way to bring them at much less charge by the Cape of good Hope; which
has prejudiced the Venetians in their revenue to the value of 9 or 10 millions
per ann. For then they set what price upon their goods they pleased; and they
could do it, being the only people who supplied all Europe. And Christopher
Columbus did them as much mischief 1490.
alone, by his discovery of the West Indies, as all the Genois together in
their several Wars; for by his Navigations he opened a way to the Spaniards and
Portugais, who since then have supplied themselves plentifully by Sea with such
Merchandise as before they were forced to buy of the Venetians at their own
rate.

Let us now see what is objected by some people against the Conduct and
Economy of this State. Some blame their selling of Nobility as a dishonorable
thing: Others condemn the extravagant indulgence of the Senate toward their
Priests, Monks, and Religious persons: And others declaim as much at their
Stews, and the public protection of Courtisans.

As to the sale of Nobility, it is absolutely necessary, the ancient Families
extinguishing every day; and if new ones should not be substituted in their
places, the Government would fall into an Oligarchy; by which it would be easy
for the People to possess themselves of the power, and exclude the remainder of
the Nobles. Besides, the profit of this Sale is employed to the ease of the
People, who would otherwise be over-laden with Impositions to supply the
necessities of their Wars, did not the Senate rather choose this as a more mild
and plausible way to supply themselves out of the Purses of Rich men by a
voluntary Contribution. Again, hereby the People have the satisfaction to see
their Friends and Relations sharers in the Civil Administration, and are
thereby rendered better contented with what passes, and better inclined to the
interest of their Country. Hence it follows that those few Noblemen who are
averse to this new way of Creation, are not to be esteemed so good Citizens as
they ought to be, in that they prefer their Passions and private Punctilios
before the real Interest and Advantage of their State.

This was the Case of one of the Priuli, who professed he had never, nor never
would give his voice to any of those Pretenders, it being, in his judgment,
undecent to sell their Nobility, which The Book in which the names of all the
Venetian Noblemen are writ.
was to be conferred only upon Merit, and to put into * the Golden-Book the
names of Artificers and Mechanics. And it was wittily said upon that occasion
by John Sagrede, That mixing their Silver with such mean Allay, was no less
Criminal than Coining.

As to the Senat's Indulgence to the Churchmen, it is true it is too great,
especially to their Monks, who (as was well said by Cardinal Elci during his
Nunciature at Venice) had great need to have their Hoods taken shorter.) But by
their kindness to them they secure themselves against the effects of the
Censures and Excommunications of Rome; for the Monks being sensible that no
other Prince would allow them that liberty as they find in Venice, where they
live happily and contented, they make no great scruple to disobey either his
Holiness, or their General; against whose threats they oppose the favor and
protection of that State, as the Shield of Achilles. Of this we have seen a
fair Example in the Interdiction of Paul V, which was observed by no body but
the Jesuits, the Theatins, and a part of the Capuchins: for in spite of all
the endeavors of the Pope's Party, who at Ferrara, Bologna, and Mantua, cried
out against this Commonwealth as being Lutheran, spreading all over their State
Seditious Libels, pronouncing all their Marriages void, their Children
illegitimate, and thousand other things of that Nature; yet the People went on,
continued Obedient, and enjoyed their Repose. Whereas had not the Monks been
obliged to the State by their own proper Interest, at a time when the Pope was
supported by so many Boutefeux, especially by the Spaniard, the said Monks
might have disposed the People to a Revolt, by declaiming against the
Government, and seducing timorous Consciences; which was a way whereby they
have many times put Italy into a flame. So that the affection of their
Ecclesiastics stands the Senate in good stead, together with their Right, which
would otherwise be preserved by the common Interest of all the Princes in
Europe. And it was easily presaged at the beginning of that Affair, that the
Issue would not be happy for the Pope; it being a common See the Remarks.
saying, (alluding to the Coats of Arms belonging to his Holiness, and the
State of Venice) That the Borgian Dragon would not be able to overpower the
Venetian Lion; and that though the Dragon fought desperately with its Wings,
yet the Lion would find wherewithal to defend it self. To which they applied
that Verse of Scripture, Sub umbra alarm tuarum, which the Venetians used then
as their device, Pax tibi Marce, being their device only in time of Peace: and
for this reason in time of War, or upon any vigorous preparation thereunto, the
Book in their Escutcheon is shut.

The Senate draws another Advantage from the licentiousness of their Clergy, and
that is to discredit them with the People, who as blind, and as corrupt as they
are, can yet see their ignorance, and abhor their Debauches. So that their
ill-humors are not much to be feared, it being certain the People would never
hearken to them, or willingly follow the persuasion of those for whom they have
so little respect, or opinion of their Conduct in any Considerable Enterprises:
besides, the Senate knows so well how to Coax them in time of War, that they
Wheedle them out of vast Sums without violence or discontent; for they do not
oblige them to Contribution by any Edict or Positive Decree, as they do the
rest of their Subjects, but by such Prayers and intimations of their
Necessities, as they are not able to resist Preces erant, sed quibus
contradicere non posset. Tac. Hist. 4.
, as they did in the War in Candia. To which may be added, that upon
extraordinary Exigence the Senate touches them with the specious pretext of
their ill-lives, and the scandal they give, thereby to obtain of the Pope
suppression of their Monasteries, and Confiscation of their Goods.

And as to the irregularity of the Nuns, it is an Inconvenience must necessarily
be dissembled, lest they should make desperate so many young Gentlewomen as the
Nobility do daily force into their Covents, where they never would Profess, did
they not find themselves better accommodated than at home with their Parents.
It Is true, none of them ought to be forced to that kind of Vocation; but if we
consider the inclination most young Women have to Liberty, their dishonorable
intrigues with their Servants, and their other impurities that would stain the
Paper to describe; we must excuse the severity of their Friends, who have not
their hundreds of eyes to observe them; and those poor Gentlewomen who never
stir abroad, and who are deprived, by the Custom of the Country, of all the
Pleasures and Divertisement of their lives, ought in Equity to have some
Entertainment in their Cloisters, and at least to be allowed the privilege of
seeing their Lovers at a Grate, when besides what they see there, they see
nothing but the walls of their Chamber.

In short, their Protection of Courtesans is an evil from whence the Senate
receives great Advantage, delivering themselves thereby from the Care they must
otherwise take of keeping their young Noblemen employed, who having nothing to
do, would probably entertain themselves in Designs against the State.

The Courtesans are a kind of Leeches applied to such Members as have too much
blood. They are Spunges that suck up Foreign Moisture, and are squeezed by the
Magistrate when he sees occasion: for if they dress themselves like Persons of
Quality, or if they commit any other fault against the Law, the Officer des
Pompes fines them so severely, that they are many times forced to sell all, and
lie themselves upon the ground. One time when the Signores (for so they call
the Courtesans) were retired from Venice, they quickly found the inconvenience,
young Gentlewomen being every day stolen, and ravished from their Parents; and
sometimes the Gates of the most Eminent Monasteries broke open, so as the
Seigniory was forced to invite the Ladies of Pleasure from all Parts, and to
assign them certain Houses, which they called Case-Rampane, from whence comes
that word of Obloquy, Carampana, at Venice. From whence we may gather, that
there are some Ills that cannot be conveniently remedied; that the Maladies of
State are incurable when they are old; and that a Cacochimical and ill-affected
Body is better let alone in Repose, than to have the Humors stirred by Physic
that cannot carry them off. Besides, it is Prudence in a Prince to connive at
what he cannot suppress, otherwise his Authority would be Exposed, and grow
Contemptible, when his Commands were not capable of being put in Execution. It
would be more easy to Introduce a new Government, than to Reform Abuses that
have past into a Custom Non minus negotii est Remp. emendare, quam ab initio
constatrere. Arist. 4. Pol. c. 1.
. And indeed no Government can be perfect Vitia erunt donec homines. Tac. Hist.
4.
, because there will be Exorbitances whilst there are men.

Therefore it was that Cato was reckoned no wiseman, because he knew not how
to accommodate to the propensity of the age. And Tacitus observes, that Cn.
Pompeius corrige. dis moribus delectus, and gravior remedus quam delicta erant,
suarum legum author idem, ac subversor. Ann. 3.
Pompey, who was chosen Censor for the reformation of Manners, was glad to
abolish those Laws that he himself had established, because he found them less
supportable than the Evils against which they were made. This it was made the
Great Cosmo de Medicis say, that the City of Florence had better be Corrupted
than Ruined; implying that a Prince has more Honor by preserving his Country
in what condition soever, than in losing it quite.

Having spoken at large of the Policy of the Venetians at home, it remains now
that I touch upon their Correspondencies abroad; and I shall do it according to
the Information I received when I was resident at Venice. And first

With the Pope.
THE Senate endeavors to entertain good Correspondence with the Popes; the Senate
respects, and reverences, and complies with them in every thing, provided they
be just, and keep themselves within the bounds of their Jurisdiction, without
intrenching upon the Venetian. For if once they encroach, they are sure to meet
with nothing but contradiction and resistance. Witness the passages in the
times of Paul V, and Urban VIII. When I was in Venice, there were great
Disputes betwixt the Court of Rome and that State, about the Privileges of the
Religious, who were obliged to assist at Processions; and about a Canal the
Senate made upon the Po, on the Confines of Polesin and Ferrara, for the
convenient transportation of their Merchants Goods, without carrying them
thorough the Lands of the Church; which Cardinal Altieri endeavored very
earnestly to have obstructed, but was not able to prevail.

There is an ancient Emulation betwixt these two States, continued by the
pretentions of the one, and the oppositions of the other: there being no Prince
in all Italy that stands more upon their Dignity than the Seigniory of Venice.
Nor is there any State but that in all Europe, which has excluded their Clergy
from participation of the Civil Government, or neglected to have Pensioners in
Rome, they having made it a Maxim to themselves not to meddle in the Election
of the Popes. To which may be added their detention of the Polesin, an ancient
Member of the Duchy of Ferrara, that is like to be a perpetual occasion of
Difference and Contestation betwixt them. In the mean time the Venetian courts
and caresses the Pope by the Magnificence of their Embassies, and by conferring
their Nobility upon the Nephews, (a Custom introduced since the time of
Alexander VI Son of Caesar Borgia). In recompense the Pope has granted them
Tenths upon the Clergy, and suppression of Abbeys in case of War with the Turk;
permits them sometimes to supply themselves with Corn out of the Ecclesiastical
Lands, and always comprehends them in the Promotions made for the Crowns.

In short, the vicinity of their Countries, (which are conterminous both by
Land and by Sea,) and their mutual jealousy of the King of Spain in Italy,
unites them by the common ligament of Interest: and therefore the Spaniard, who
well understood the importance of that Union, employed all his Cunning with
Paul V, to engage him in a War against the State of Venice when he interdicted
it, as knowing that they alone should go away with the profit.

With Spain.
AND therefore the Venetian has no reason, and indeed do not heartily bear
good will to the Spaniard, whose ill Offices and Violence they have so often
resented. And though they seem to improve their Amity, and render it sincere by
continual Embassies one from the other, yet it is but a Copy of their
Countenance; and nothing is more clear than that the Animosity is immortal, and
that the Spaniards can never forgive them the dismembring of Bressia, Bergamo,
and Crema, from the Duchy of Milan, and the Venetians are in continual fear
they should attempt to recover them. So that they hate not the Spaniards only
by Habit and Custom, (as the Marquess de Castle-Roderiguo told the Venetian
Ambassador Peter Bazadonne,) but from certain and experimental knowledge of
their ill inclinations toward them. Furthermore, the Senate keeps constantly a
Resident in Milan, which is the Shop where all the Spanish designs against
Italy are forged; and from whence they understand all their Negotiations with
the Princes, the Posture of their Affairs, and several other particularities,
which being faithfully transmitted, are very Essential to the benefit and
safety of their Commonwealth: and to succeed the more effectually, they do
court and caress the Governor of that Province with all possible Industry, in
respect that their Amity and good Intelligence with the King of Spain depends
much upon the favorable impressions he receives of them from that Minister, as
appeared by the transactions in the time of Don Pedro de Toledo, and the Duke
de Feria, both Governors of Milan, and both holding the State of Venice in
continual Agitation, as being their particular Enemies. And there wanted but
little of falling into a dangerous War, for a small Pass called Strada dello
sticcato, that joins the Territories of Crema and Bergamo together, by which
Pass the Duke de Feria pretended to march his Troops without permission from
the Senate. Again, the Nani Hist. Ven. l. 4.
Venetian hates the Spaniard, as having found them more dangerous Enemies in
time of Peace, than in War; as was manifest in the Excommunication of Paul V,
and not many years after, in the Conspiracy of Don Alonso la Queva their
Ambassador: which occasioned that saying of Trajano Bocalini, 1618
that in time of War it was sufficient only to lock their door; but in time of
Peace, he who would be safe against them, must bolt, and double-lock, and
barricado, and all little enough to keep them out. And the Venetians had good
reason to be alarmed when the Princess, Mary of Mantua See the Remarks.
, had thoughts of Marrying the Cardinal Infant of Spain, according to a secret
Engagement she had given the Emperor to that purpose; for if that Match had
gone forward, the Commonwealth of Venice had been hedged in on all sides by the
House of Austria.

With the Emperor.
THE Senate of Venice is the better inclined to the Emperor, because it fears
nothing from him in Italy, where he has neither Reputation nor Estate. Their
greatest pique to him, is only for being descended from a Family whose Eldest
Branch is their greatest Enemy. Yet the Emperor has his pretenses to Friuli,
that his Predecessors engaged formerly to the State of Venice for 400000
Crowns: But there is Prescription now in the case, and the Senate has fortified
their Title of Forfeiture, by the Right of Conquest, having recovered that
Province by their Arms, after they had been explus'd by the Emperor Maximilian
I. Vdina the capital City having neither ground nor situation proper to be
fortified, they have fortified Palma Nova according to the new way of
Fortification, with nine Bulwarks in a Circle, which has made it equally strong
on all sides, and capable of resisting any enterprise, either from the House of
Austria or the Turk; which last has many times ravaged and overrun the whole
Country, the poor Inhabitants being glad to leave all, and retire with their
Families into this place, as their only Sanctuary and Asylum.

Upon his pretension to Friuli it is, that the Emperor pretends to the
Nomination of the Patriarch of Aquilea; which in truth remained in his
Predecessors after the said Province was engaged: But to prevent all manner of
Controversy, the Senate has found out a way never to let it be vacant, by
giving him who has the Title, power of choosing a Coadjutor, which he never
fails to do out of his own Family, and by that means keeping it constantly in
being, the Emperor is defeated, and becomes utterly excluded from that
Nomination.

But the Emperor, as he is King of Hungary, retains a right in Dalmatia, which
King Lad slaus engaged to the Venetians for 100000 Ducats, though the Venetians
pretend he sold it outright: However, that seems nor probable, for King
Wincelaus demanded restitution of it during the Wars of Cambray, threatening
Peter Pasqualigne their Ambassador, to do himself justice with his Sword, if
they would not do it without. But he wanted Money, and lost a favorable
opportunity of entering that Province, whilst the Venetian hands were full in
defending themselves against the Emperor and the King of France.

How the Venetians stand with the Electors of the Empire.
THis Commonwealth holds no Correspondence with the Electors of the Empire,
either because they have no business with them, or by reason of an old
Controversy betwixt them about Precedence; which the Electoral College has
always disputed, upon an Arrest of the Golden Bull in these words, Sacri Romans
Imperii Electores digniores habentur caeteris Principibus praeter Reges; and
the Example of one of the Ambassadors of the Palatinat, who as they pretend had
the precedence of Vincent Grandenigue the Venetian Ambassador, in the
Ceremonies at the Wedding of the Emperor with the Princess Maria Anna de
Bavaria, celebrated at Gratz in the year 1600. As to the Bull, the Venetian
replies, that he is comprehended under the exception praeter Reges, being
treated like Kings in all the Courts of Europe. And if the Count d' Ognate, the
Spanish Ambassador, refused it to Peter Gritti the Venetian Ambassador at
Vienna *, as was done since at Madrid by the Emperors Ambassador 1622.
the Count de Chesniller, to Leonardo Moro Ambassador from that Senate; yet this
Novelty which they would introduce, to revenge their quarrel about the
Valtoline, could not prejudice the known Right of this Republic, nor
strengthen the Right of the Electors. In a word, a Cardinal refusing Letters
from the Senate, because they were writ with the Title of Illustrissimo, and not
Eminentissimo, Urban VIII declared in the Sacred College, that he comprehended
the State of Venice in the clause Exceptis Regibus, and required all the
Cardinals to treat them as formerly. It is clear likewise, if the Duke of
Venice should go to Rome, he would be received as a King, as Christopherus
Morus was received at Ancona by the Sacred College, during the vacancy of See
the Remarks.
the Sea. For though he has but the Title of a Duke, that Title being personal
would cease by representation of the Body of the Commonwealth, which is a kind
of Royalty or King. And this is so true, that in the Pontificat of Clem. VIII.
certain Cardinals advising with the Master of the Ceremonies, how they should
treat Duke Marin Grimani if he came to Ferrara, as his Holiness had invited
him, it was told them by the said Master of the Ceremonies, that they must
treat him like a King, that Commonwealth having for a long time been possessed
of the Sovereignty.

Their Condition with France.
IF the Senate has an aversion to the Spaniard, it has no great kindness for the
French, whose Power they look upon with an evil eye, as fearing their
Neighborhood, and retaining the the memory of their Wars with Lewis XII. The
French acquisition of Pignerol, increases their fear, though it be as a Port
opened to the Supplies sent to the Italian Princes, against the oppression of
the Spaniard, who were grown insupportable to them, since the Exchange for the
Marquisat of Saluzzes.

The Venetian makes it it his business to stand Neuter betwixt the Spaniard and
the French, either to preserve the Friendship of both, or so to balance their
Power, as to keep both in an Equilibrium. And how great soever their jealousy
be against the Spaniard, they would never help to drive them out of Italy to
bring the French in their places: For which cause the Count de la Roque,
Ambassador from Spain at Venice, found no great difficulty in gaining his cause
against Messieurs de Bellieure and de la Tuillerie, the French Ambassadors, who
solicited the Senate to a League with their King against the King of Spain, that
by a conjunction of their Forces they might wrest the Duchy of Milan out of
his hand. And the Marquis of Fuentes prevailed as easily with that State, not
to suffer the French to pass the River Adda, demanding that liberty for the
King his Master; by that artifice to oblige the Senate to a refusal of France
that they should not be able to excuse; and by so doing, they saved Milan,
which otherwise had been certainly lost, as the Marquis of Caracene confessed,
if the French had gained passage there.

Besides, the Spanish humor is more agreeable to the Venetians than the
French; and doubtless they would love the Spaniards much the better of the two,
had they no Dominions in Italy; or if those they have were in our possession.
But to say truth, the Venetian loves neither the one nor the other; and how
great soever their outward appearance and correspondence may be, they will
never trust either of them more than of necessity they are obliged. And it is a
common saying, That the Venetians know how to hate the Spaniard without
favoring the French.

However it must be confessed, they are more inclinable to the French than the
Spaniard, especially in what relates to their Ambassadors, who are more desired
there, and are more considered than the Spanish. Besides, the Senate upon
particular occasions, sides always with the French; as in the vacancy of the
Holy See, at which time they give Orders to such Cardinals as depend upon them,
to join with the French Faction in the Conclave; and to their Ambassador at
Rome, to act in that affair by consent of the French Ambassador: Which is a
great advantage to the French when the Venetian Ambassadors proceeds franckly
according to Orders from his Masters, who are no less concerned in point of
interest to oppose the Spaniards than the French. Yet sometimes they steer
quite contrary, as Sorance betrayed the French party in the Conclave, in the
year 1621, in hopes he should have got a Cap. Moreover the Venetian Cardinals
depend not absolutely upon the Senate, which contributes nothing to their
promotion, but their single recommendation to the Pope; but they serve in their
own way, without considering any thing but their own interest.

Their Condition with the Duke of Savoy.
THE Venetians and Duke of Savoy do not live in the same good intelligence as
formerly. Charles Emanuel I. began the breach, by sending home their Ambassador
Vincent Gussoni upon occasion of succors they sent to the Cardinal Duke of
Mantoua, for the defense of Montferrat. Victor Amideus offended them likewise,
by taking upon him the Title of King of Cyprus: And Duke Charles Emanuel II.
has been all his time at a distance, or rather in dispute with them upon the
same subject, and the superscription of the Letters from the Senate. The Count
de Bigliore the Duke of Savoys Ambassador, having caused the Arms of Savoy
quartered with the Arms of Cyprus to be set up over his Gate, the Senate sent
him word, if he caused them not immediately to be taken down, he should see
them taken down for him, and torn before his face. And the Ambassador was glad
to submit. One day Count Philip d'Aglie, a Knight of the Annonciade, raking too
far into that ungrateful Matter, drew upon himself an unhappy Answer from
Catarin Belegne the Venetian Ambassador; who told him, that his Masters, the
State of Venice, would be very glad if the Kingdom of Cyprus were in the Hands
of his Highness the Duke of Savoy, and not in the Hands of the Turk; because,
if in his Highness's Hands, he was sure his Masters would be able by Force of
Arms to recover it in two Months. These alterations, and several others of a
later date, by degrees broke all their Correspondence; so that in the year
1670, the Senate called home their Ambassador Francis Michieli, with which the
Duke was offended, and more particularly with the said Ambassadors refusal to
send him one of his Pages, who had drawn his Sword against one of the Duke's
Pages in his Antichamber; and the said Duke recalling in like manner his
Ambassador the Count de Bigliore from Venice, he departed the next morning
after his Audience of Congy, that he might not receive the usual Presents of
that Republic, and thereby signify his Resentment.

Besides all these Considerations, the Duke of Savoy's intimacy and adherence
to the French, disgusts the Venetians exceedingly, who without that could not
conceal their displeasure at the delivery of Pignirol. So jealous are they of
the King of France's farther Progress in Italy Hist. Ven: l. 8.
, Temendo ugualimente (says Nani) il giogo, e il soccoroso See the Remarks in
Victor. Amedeus.
. Fearing equally their Yoke, and their Assistance.

Their Posture with the Great Duke of Florence.
THis Republic on the other side maintains all possible Correspondence with
the Great Duke of Tuscany, whom she looks upon as a Prince of much Reputation
in Italy, and one whose Predecessors have always showed themselves
well-Affected to the interest of the Venetians. And their partiality appeared
in the business betwixt the Count de Bigliore, and the Marquess Ricardi, both
Ambassadors of Obedience, one from the Duke of Savoy, the other from the Duke
of Florence, spreading abroad Reports among the People to the advantage of the
Florentines, and contrived on purpose to debase and tarnish the glory of the
Savoyards.

And it troubles the Venetians much to see the said Prince as it were
Beleaguered on all sides by Spaniards, who are in possession of Piombino,
Portolongone, Orbitille, and Porto-Hercole, with Garrisons in several places in
his Territory.

However it is with an ill-eye they behold Ligorn enriching the whole Country,
to the prejudice of the Venetian Trade; yet that does not hinder them from
sending Workmen from their Arsenal to build Galleys for the Great Duke: and the
said Duke, in Honor to the said State, has given to the new Town of Ligorn the
name of Venetia-Nuova.

The Resident of the Duke of Florence is admitted to his first Audience by the
College, with open doors as an Ambassador, whereas the Residents of all other
Princes of Italy are received with the doors shut, and without any Ceremony.

With the Duke of Mantua.
THE Dukes of Mantua have always held a strict Correspondence with the
Commonwealth of Venice, whose Councels and Assistance have never been wanting
to them upon occasion. Ferdinand, Cardinal and Duke of Mantua, found the
effects of their protection against Duke Charles Emanael of Savoy, who would
have seized upon Montiferrat, and against the Marquess of Innoiosa Governor of
Milan, who favored his designs. Vincent II, having succeeded his Brother
Ferdinand, the Senate seeing the said Prince without Children, or hopes of
having any, or living long, by reason of his indisposition, employed all their
interest with him, to cause him to declare in favor of Charles Duke of Nevers
set up by the French, but opposed as vigorously by the Spaniard, who prompted
the interest of Ferdinand de Gonrague Prince of Guastalle, who, as descended
from Ferdinand third Son of Francis the last Marquess of Mantua, was farther
off in his Alliance from the Reigning Branch than Charles of Nevers, who was
descended from Lewis third Son of Frederick, first Duke of Mantua. So that the
Branch of Nevers is in a manner indebted for its advancement to the Venetian,
who not only procured them the Duchy of Milan by their industry, and the
Cooperation of the French, but have preserved to him the Possession by force of
their Arms, in despite of the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the Duke of
Savoy. Charles II had so great an inclination to the Venetians, that he came in
person almost every year to keep his Carnival, and Ascension at Venice. And
this he did as well for his Interest as Recreation, thereby negotiating his own
Affairs with the Principal Senators, who were as his Council of State. Yet this
good Intelligence had like to have been interrupted under Ferdinand, Charles
his Son, upon a Difference that arose betwixt them touching the Propriety of
the River Tartare in the Territory of Verona; the Venetians pretending the said
River belonged to them, as being in 1669.
their Dominions, and that the Duke of Mantua had usurped his Fishing and Toll,
which the said Prince as peremptorily denied, affirming that he The Title of
the Duke of Mantua sent to the French Ambassador at Venice.
had been in peaceable possession of it since the year 1404. That his Right had
been often acknowledged by the Venetians, particularly in the year 1405, by an
Act passed betwixt the Doge Michel Sten, and the Marquess Francis de Gonzague:
in the year 1517 by Daniel Renier Governor of Verona for the Venetians: and in
the year 1598 the Magistracy of Mantua having caused a Verbal Process to be
formed upon that occasion, the State of Venice remained content with their
Reasons, and the Veronois continued to pay their usual Duties at the Fort of
Ponte Molino, built for that purpose by the Predecessors of the Marquess of
1447.
Mantua. But the Senate not enduring this Expostulation from the Duke, threatened
him with War instead of a Reply. The Prince unable to contend, submitted to
their Force, and sent the Marquess Horace Canossa incognito to Venice, who in
three days time composed the difference privately, to the satisfaction of the
Venetian, whose Subject he was born.

There are two Fortresses on the Confines of the Territory of Verona, which are
as a Bridge to the said Duke. One is called Pischicra upon the Menzo, built by
the Lords della Scala, and usurped by the Venetians from the Marquess of
Mautua. It was taken by the French after the Battle of Aignadel, contrary to
the opinion of the Senate, who believed that single place would have been able
to have stopped the Career of the Conqueror. The other is called Legnago, upon
the Banks of the River Adige, a place of very great importance. Two places
famous by the Exile of several Senatots, sent thither for their Mortification.

The Intelligence betwixt the Dukes of Mantua and the Emperor, is very
unpleasing to the Venetians, who had much rather it had been with the French:
But that which troubles them more, is to see him environed so close by the
Spaniard, without all hopes of extrication, whilst they are Masters of
Sabioneda, and have a Garrison in Casal.

When the Duke of Mantua married, the Senate expected an Ambassador, at least an
Envoy Extraordinary, according to the Custom of Princes, but none coming, they
interpreted it as a disgust.

With the Duke of Modena.
THE Duke of Modena is very solicitous of Friendship with the Venetian, and
keeps commonly a Resident in Venice. The Senate being reciprocally well-disposed
to the said Prince, would willingly contribute to the restoring him to the
Duchy of Ferrara (so long in the possession of his Ancestors) if occasion
offered: For the Senate had much rather have the Duke of Modena their Neighbor
than the Pope, who some time or other may have a fancy to reunite the Polesin
with the Demeasns of Ferrara, from which it was dismembered under the Dukes of
that Name. And Clement VIII had a great desire to have done it. When the House
of Este was in possession of this Duchy, the Venetians had in Ferrara a
Magistrate called Bisdomino, or Visdomino, who alone administered Justice to all
Subjects of that Republic, with the interposition of any of the Duke's
Officers, according to agreement betwixt the said State and Duke.

By the said agreement, the Duke was obliged to make no Fortifications upon the
River Po, by reason of the Polesin, which being an open Country betwixt the
Adige and the Po, would be Nani Hist. Ven. l. 12.
exposed to inroads and devastation. The Pope has many times opposed it, and
particularly in War of Parma, when he built Forts upon the Confines of this
Province. For these reasons the Venetian desires seriously the Duchy of
Ferrara were again in the hands of the Duke of Modena; and if during the said
War, they would not grant him permission to make use of the Troops they had
sent him, to stop the Barbarini in their passage into that Country, and to make
an irruption into the Country of Ferrara, to reprize himself for the losses of
his Family; it was, because they foresaw it would beget a cruel and dangerous
War in Italy, the blame of which would result upon them. And therefore the said
Duke could not prevail with the Senate, to procure that his pretensions upon
Ferrara and Commachio might be comprehended in the Treaty of Peace, because
that proposition being insisted upon, must necessarily have interrupted the
whole Negotiation about the business of Parma, upon the accommodation of which
depended the quiet and tranquillity of all Italy.

Furthermore, though the Venetian is not much troubled to see this Prince in
the interests, and under the protection of the King of France, they would have
been better content he had stood Neuter; as fearing his Ambition to be great,
may some time or other involve all Italy, as it happened in the time of Duke
Francis, who joined his Forces with the King of France for the Conquest of the
Duchy of Milan, hoping that Crown would afterward have given him all
necessary assistance for the recovery of Ferrara: And this gives great Umbrage
to the Venetians, for fear the French should come to be their Neighbors.

With the Duke of Parma.
THough the Duke of Parma has no particular Alliance with the Venetians, yet he
is well esteemed by the Senate, to whom he professes great obligation for their
assistance to his Family in the Barberine War, which ended at length by the
restitution of the Duchy of Castro *. And it is thought the Venetians were not
1644.
at all pleased to see that Country fall into the Pope's hands, after they had
endeavored so much to wrest it out of the Clutches of Urban VIII.

With the Republic of Genoa.
IF the Republics of Rome and Carthage, of Athens and Sparta, made themselves
famous by their Emulations and Wars: The Commonwealths of Venice and Genoa
contending for dominion 300 years Certatum utrinque de dominationi est. Salust.
, have made themselves as famous by their long animosities and conflicts: And
though at present they be at Peace, yet they retain still the old
heart-burning, which will last as long as the memory of the mischiefs that
either of them has brought upon the other. The Genoeses cannot with patience
behold the Venetians Masters of the Adriatic Sea, having disputed it with them
so long, and worsted them so often; and the Venetian looks upon Genoa as
jealous of his glory and power.

Nine times have they been at Wars together, but the last so cruel, and lasted
so long, that the memory of it is still fresh in Venice, and there are a sort
of Noblemen called Nobili della guerra di 1379.
Genova, as being taken into the Nobility at that time. Never was Venice so
near ruin as then, when Peter Doria the Genoa General looked upon it so sure,
that when the Venetian Envoy presented him certain Genoeses Prisoners from the
Senate, he told him, that in a short time he would be in Venice Annal. M. S. of
Venice.
himself, and deliver the rest. Upon which Answer the Senate dispatched with all
diligence See the Remarks.
Friar Benoist, General of the Cordeliers, to the King of Hungary to beg Peace
of him out of pure Commiseration, and to beseech him that he would employ his
Interest with the Genoeses in their favor, and with the Lord of Padua. But
though the importunity of this Minister was very great, and the humility of his
Address had melted the King, delivering himself still upon the knee; yet the
Ambassador from Genoa, Gaspar de l'Orbe, and Baltazar Spinola being present at
all his Audience, diverted the good inclinations of his Majesty, by persuading
him the time was now come when he might have all he desired, and that within a
Month he would infallibly be Master of Venice. Such was the miserable condition
of the Venetian, when being deserted by all People, there was nothing left to
them but a generous resolution to vanquish or die; and this they resolved with
so good success, that advancing against the Genoa Navy, with the shattered
remainders of their own Fleet, under the Conduct of Andreas Contarini their
Duke, in a few days time they retook Chiozza, and returned to Venice laden with
good Prize; and several of the Genoa Nobility, who being Prisoners, paid the
best part of the Charge of the War for their liberty: since which famous
Victory the Genoese has been quiet, and given over Rivalling the Venetian. So
that the Genoese are as much too blame for not having made an advantageous
Peace when it was begged with such submission, as Asilius Regulus was of old,
for not having done the same with the Carthaginians after he had defeated them,
which omission brought a long chain of inconveniences upon the Romans. But the
Venetians were brought so low, the Genoeses would have been rather reproached
for not knowing how to have conquered them, had they made Peace with them at a
time when their destruction, in the opinion of the whole World, was inevitable.

At the beginning of their War in Candia, the Genosses offered the Venetians a
considerable supply of Men and Money, upon condition they might be treated as
Equals, but their Offer was rejected with contempt: which netled the Genoese
exceedingly, who cannot easily brook being thought their Inferiors, after they
had so long contended for Precedence. Besides, the Venetian frustrated the
design the Genoese had upon Sala Regia, which Donna Olimpia had almost
persuaded Pope Innocent Asperis facetiis, ubi multum ex vero traxere, acrem sui
memoriam relinquunt Tac. Ann. 15.
to grant them. From whence it may be presumed the Animosity betwixt these two
Rival States is not yet extinguished: on the contrary, both one side and the
other do many times revive and exasperate them by their Railleries and
Sarcasmes, which being many times true, leave a greater sting upon their
spirits.

With the Republic of Lucca.
VEnice has but little Correspondence with the Republic of Lucea, but the
Conformity of their Government (being Aristocratical) makes them reciprocally
favorable one to the other; so that should the Great Duke of Tuscany design
any thing against the liberty of that State, it is probable the Venetians would
not refuse their assistance.

With the Grisons.
THE Senate of Venice bear an Affection to the Grisons as a People whose
Interest it is equally to hinder the Spaniards from entering the Valtolin, and
increasing their Power in Italy, where already they have several Princes under
their dependence. And therefore the Grisons no sooner understood the designs of
the Duke of Feria, Governor of Milan upon the Valtolin, but they repaired
immediately to the Venetian for relief against the Valtolins, who were Revolted
at the instigation of the Spaniard; and indeed that Affair alarmed the
Republic of Venice more than any other Prince of Italy, by reason of the
situation of that Valley, which bordering on one side upon Tirol, and on the
other upon Milan, served as a kind of Gallery to the Spaniards, to join their
Dominions with the Emperors, and to stop up the passage for foreign supplies
against all Italy, and particularly against their own Country, which the
Emperor and his Catholic Majesty kept blocked up as in a Circle. This was the
design of the Count de Fuentes not long since, when he advised his Master to
seize upon Monaco and Final, and the Valtolin; which was the ready way to
reduce the Princes of Italy into servitude. But because the execution of his
design required time, he laid the first Stone by building the Fort of his Name,
at the mouth of the River Adda, which since has produced that long and
mischievous War to the Grisons. But were it not for their interest the Venetian
regards them but little, as looking upon them as poor people, and savage.

With the Swisses.
THE Senate on the other side, courts the Swiss very much, as knowing their
fidelity and valor. It raises Soldiers among them in time of War, and takes of
their Officers into their Armies, paying them Pensions for their lives. They
have moreover a Resident constantly either at Zurick or Berne; which are two of
the best Towns in Switzerland, where all the chiefest of their Affairs are
transacted,

With Holland.
THE Commonwealth of Venice and Holland are under a strict obligation of Amity
and Interest. They are both at the same defiance with the King of Spain. The
Hollander withdrew himself from his obedience to that Crown; and the other
favored the Revolt by Councels, Money, and Solicitations with Queen Elizabeth;
to engage her in the defense of their new Companion. And though they be
separated by a long tract of Land, yet upon occasion they can easily unite by
their communication at Sea, where both of them are very powerful.

With England.
THE Senate maintains a perfect Correspondence with the King of Great Britain,
considering him as a Prince whose Amity may much import that State in their
necessities, by his great interest and reputation with other Kings. King James
had a great respect for the Commonwealth of Venice; and in their difference
with Paul V. he no sooner understood the King of Spain had declared in favor
of the Pope, but he declared for the Venetian, promising their Ambassador
George Justiniani, that he would not only assist him with all the force of his
Kingdom, but oblige all his Allies in their defense: And if the quarrel had
broke out into a War, it is believed he would have been as good as his word, as
well as the Hollander, who upon his recommendation offered them a considerable
number of Ships and of Men. King Charles I. continued the esteem and affection
of his Father; and by a just return, they preserved for him in his misfortunes,
and even after his death, all the Kindness and Veneration they showed to him
during his life. For they were the last that sent Ambassadors to the Protector,
and their forbearance was looked upon by him as a silent reproach of his
Government, and a contempt of his Authority; so many great Princes having as it
were contended who by their Ambassadors should honor him first. And Cromwell
having complained of their backwardness; the Senate (fearing his displeasure at
a time when they were at War with the Turk) was obliged to cause John Sagrede
their Ambassador in France, to pass over to London to appease him. At length
Charles II. being restored, they renewed their ancient Alliance with him, which
was answered by his Majesty in the solemn Embassy of the Lord Falconbridge; who
after he had staid two months himself in Venice, left Mr. Dorington as Resident
for his Majesty of Great Britain. But how great soever the Intelligence is
betwixt England and this State, there is no probability that that King will
ever send any Ships into the Venetian service against the Turk, lest the Grand
Seignior should seize upon the Goods and Effects of the Turky-Company of
London; which amounts to more than five millions of money: Which would ruin
the best branch of the English Trade, and be a great diminution to his Revenue.

With Denmark.
THE Senate has no Correspondence at all with the King of Denmark, their
Countries lying so remote, that they can neither expect relief from one another
upon occasion, nor apprehend any detriment.

With the Swede and the Pole.
IF Resemblance of Government, or Interest be one of the principal causes of
Amity, there are no two States in all Europe obliged to stricter Alliance than
Venice and Poland, they being the only two Crowned Commonwealths; both of them
governed by a Senate, and an Elective Prince; both Neighbors to the Turk, and
both famous for their Wars against that cruel and formidable Enemy. For though
Poland carries the name of a Kingdom, it is nothing but an Aristocracy mixed
with a Monarchy, according to the old Model of Sparta. Upon these
considerations the State of Venice is much concerned for all accidents in
Poland, whether they be good or bad: And if the Progress made by Gustavus
Adolphus in the Empire, pleased them very well, the Success of Charles Gustavus
in Poland afflicted them as much; because the impoverishment of that Kingdom
would be an advantage to the Turk, as it proved afterward. It Is not to be
doubted then, but the interest of the Pole is dearer to the Venetian than the
interest of the Swede; whose prodigious increase both at Land and at Sea, it
began to apprehend. That King having taken the Northern Liconia from the Pole,
and all one side of the Baltic from the King of Denmark.

With the Great Duke of Muscovy.
THough the Senate has no particular affair with the Czar of Moscovy, yet it
puts a great value upon his friendship; that King being very potent, and of
great reputation with the King of Persia, whose Alliance is necessary for the
Venetian, thereby to give diversion to the Turk: For whenever the Sophy of
Persia invades him on that side, the Venetian finds it no hard matter to repel
him on the other; and these Negotiations with the Persian, are managed by the
Mediation of the Czar. So that if upon any interregnum in Poland, the Senate
should appear for the Election of any person, their interest would put them
upon the Election of the Czar, upon condition he would turn Catholic, because
that Prince would be in a posture, not only to oppose the Turk, but to carry
the War home into his own Country, and force him to disgorge all that he has
swallowed from Poland: and if this should once happen, the Senate might then
confederate with the Pole against the Turk, either to attack them openly at the
same time, and give them diversion; or to defend one another reciprocally by an
Auxiliary War, whenever either of them should be invaded: After which, if the
Sophy should enter into the League, (which he would do, if he saw the Czar his
ancient Ally made King of Poland) it is not to be doubted, but that Triple
Alliance would bring the Turk to reason, or at least keep him closer in the
bounds of his Empire: But because the Election of the Moscovite to the Crown of
Poland is like to meet with great difficulty, in respect that the Nobility
would fear the subversion of their Liberty by so powerful a Prince, the Senate
of Venice desires at least to continue in good intelligence with him, by reason
of the great advantages it may receive from him upon any extraordinary Exigence.

With the Ottoman Court.
IT IS no fault in the Republic of Venice, that they are not always at Peace
with the Turk, for there is scarce any thing they omit to procure it. They
endeavor, or rather purchase his friendship by continual Presents. They
dissemble the Injuries and Affronts that they receive, lest they should be
obliged to revenge them. They suffer his Pyracies in the Adriatick-Sea, and yet
pay him more Submission and Ceremony than to the Pope, and all the Princes of
Europe; which, if we may believe the testimony of a Venetian Ambassador at
Constantinople, serves but to enhance the insolence of the Turk, whose nature
it is to make advantage of every thing, where he finds himself dreadful. And
though at Land he be incomparably stronger than the Venetian, yet at Sea the
Venetian is too hard for him, in respect that the Grand Signior has neither
good Pilots, good Rowers, nor good Mariners: nor is it so easy for him to
recruit at Sea as at Land, not for want of Ships or Galleys, but for want of
good Seamen, and good Officers to Command them; for generally the Ottoman
Fleet consists principally of slaves who never were at Sea before, and by
consequence are unable to endure its Fatigue: by which disadvantage the Turks
have been often beaten at Sea by the Venetian, who understands that Trade very
well, and makes it their continual Exercise. So that the Turks have a saying,
God has given the Sea to the Christians, and the Land to the Turk.

Nevertheless, the Venetian is in such awe of the Turk, that they will renounce
their Alliance with all the Princes of Europe to preserve his; and their
Complacency is so great, they care not to break with the best of their Friends,
when the benefit they are to expect from them may give the least jealousy to
the Port. Upon this Consideration they would not permit the Pope to hold the
last Council in Vicenza; and therefore the Italians call the Venetians
Semiturchi, and the Spaniards, Venice l'Amancebada del Turco, that is to say,
the the Concubine, or Prostitute of the Great Turk, who suffers him to do any
thing. And, to speak truth, it is but just they should fear him, having suffered
his Power to increase to such a pitch, that they are not able to deal with him
with their single Force, which at first they could do, at least with as much
ease as the four last Paleologi kept Constantinople a whole Age in the middle
betwixt two Capital Turkish Cities, Adrianople and Burse, that kept it as it
were blocked up: as Huniades raised the Siege of Belgrade in 1442 in spite of
Amurath II, and in 1456 in spite of Mahomet II. Or as a poor Scanderbeg, 1451,
and 1457.
Prince of Albania defended his chief City called Coja against the Efforts of
both those Emperors, Amurath dying of pure indignation that he could not carry
the Town, and the other drawing off with shame, as he did from the Siege of
Rhodes, where he lost his time, and a great part of his Army. So that it may be
concluded 1480.
the Venetians lost in that time the Isle of Negropont, Corinth, and the best
part of Morea, Albania, (which they had seized after the death of Scanderbeg)
only for want of Courage; seeing they alone had more Money and Force than the
Kings of Hungary, Albania, and the Knights of Rhodes all together.

The Greatness and ancient Extent of this Commonwealth may be estimated by
their losses since the Turks established in Europe. Amurath II took from them
Salonica, the richest Town in Macedonia, and demolished that famous Wall called
A Wall 6000 paces long in the Streights of Corinth.
Hexamile, that stopped the progress of his Conquests, and secured that Country
from his Invasions. In the year 1470 Mahomet invaded Negropont, and seized upon
part of Moria and Albania, after he had a second time ruined that Corinthian
Wall which the Venetians had repaired.

Bajazet II took from them Lepanto, Modon, Coron, and Duras, in the year 1500.
Selimus II possessed himself of the Kingdom of Cyprus 1570. Canea and Retimo in
Candia were taken by Ibrahim, and at length in the year 1669 Candia it self was
taken by Ibrahim's Son, Mahomet IV, the present Grand Seignior.

Fifteen months after the loss of Candia, they were in danger of a new War
about the limits of Dalmatia, but by good fortune they escaped that; the Bashaw
of Bosnia, with whom the Procurator Nani was to treat, being favorable toward
them, it being concluded betwixt them, that Salona, Navigrade, St. Daniel, and
all betwixt Zebenigo and Spalatro should remain to the Venetian, with Clissa,
and the Country five miles about. That Scardona should return to the Turks, not
having been conquered by force; and as to Pizzano, and other places in dispute,
they should be kept in their ancient bounds. But this Treaty was not ratified
gratis; for the Senate sent his Highness a Present of 12000 Sequins, with a
large quantity of Cloth of Gold for the Sultanesses.

So that the Port needs no more than to complain or threaten, to draw Money and
Presents from the Venetian Amicitiam dum magnitudine munerum, non constantia
morum continere put at, meruit magis quam habuit. Tac. Hist. 3.
, who by his Gifts renders himself rather worthy than secure of the Amity of
the Turks; and the reason is, because he knows not how to Comport with a firm
generous Resolution.

They have constantly an Ambassador at Constantinople, whom they call Bailo:
this Embassy recompenses all their other; for (as they say in Venice) in three
years time they get above 100000 Crowns, all Charges born, the Ambassador
having considerable Duties upon all Merchants Ships that carry the Standard of
St. Mark. They have two other Bailos or Consuls in the Dominion of the Great
Turk, one at Al ppo, the Center of all the Asian Trade; the other at
Alexandria, the Magazin of all the richest Goods not only of Egypt, but
Africa; thereby to preserve their Rights and their Privileges granted to them
by the Emperors of the East, the Kings of Jerusalem, and the Sultans of Egypt.
These two Consulships are commonly conferred upon two of the most indigent of
the Nobility, because they are Places of great Profit, and little Expense; and
sometimes the Senate permits them all their life long, that they may have more
time to enrich themselves. But the Consulships of Cyprus, Chio, Rosetta,
Ancona, and Genoa, are executed always by Citizens of Venice.

The Profit the Venetian draws from their Commerce with the Turk is very great;
for the Turks alone, as I have heard from several Merchants, do receive more
Silks and Cloth of Gold from Venice than from all Europe besides. And though
the English and Hollander have made it their business to settle a Trade at
Constantinople for Cloth, they could never effect it: the Turks finding them
too fine, and of but little service, compare them to painted Ladies, which look
very well, but cannot endure the water.

These are all the Correspondencies the State of Venice holds with the Princes
of Europe; I have not mentioned Portugal, because there is nothing of Commerce
betwixt them. But the Senate desires their friendship, as being a Balance to the
Power of the Spaniard, whose diminution will always be good News to the
Venetian, unless it be with advantage to the French.

As for Malta, their Religion and Government has so great resemblance, by the
quality of their Nobility With Malta.
that administer in both; by their Forces at Sea; by the Conformity of their
Interests; by their opposition to the Power of the Turk, that they cannot but
love like Sisters, and assist one the other against their common Enemy.

There is always at Venice one of the Commanders of Malta, called Recevitori,
because he receives whatever accrews to the Knights in the Territories of the
Venetians. The Nobility pretend to Exemption, but the Order would never allow
it, because of the new Nobility; and in my time the Son of the Procurator,
Cornaro, surnamed della Casa grande, did his duty in the usual forms.

Venice is one of the seven Priories of Italy, and comprehends 23 Commanderies,
viz. Trevisa, and Conillan, (Patronates of the Houses of Cornaro and
Lippomane,) Rovigue, Barbarana, Verona, Longara, St. Medard, Bologna, Faienza,
Regia, Montecchio, San Giovanni in Bosco, St. Simon, St. Jude, Imola, Rimini
and Cesene, that are united, Forli, Modena, Parma, Borgo-San-Domina, Cerro di
Parma, Capo di Ponte, Ravenna, Pila, and Gradisque, united.

The Venetian Correspondencies being maintained by their Embassies, it is not
amiss in this place to say something of their Custom therein.

The Senate maintains constantly an Ambassador in the Pope's Court, and that
place is commonly supplied by one of the Senators, cunning, eloquent, and
well-vers'd in the Civil-Law, that in his Negotiations he may be able to defend
himself, and elude all the Artifices of the Court of Rome, especially when any
thing is in Controversy betwixt them. Upon extraordinary occasion they send
four Ambassadors Extraordinary, either Procurators of St. Mark, or of the
Principal Senators. The Senate did the same Honor to Francis I, after the
Battle of Marignan, and the four Ambassadors were, Anthony Grimani, afterward
Duke, Dominick Trevisan, George Cornaro, and Andrew Gritti, all of them
Procurators of St. Mark, and Venerable for their years.

They have their Ambassadors likewise in the Courts of France, Vienna, and
Spain, which places are never vacant, lest they should prejudice their Affairs;
and when any of the said Kings come first to the Crown, they send two
Ambassadors Extraordinary to Congratulate. But sometimes they are too careless
in these sort of Formalities. In the year 1670 it was resolved to send the
Chevalier, Catarin Belegne, and another, to the young King of Spain, who was
already in the fifth year of his Reign, with Complements of Condolence for the
death of his Father, and Complements of Congratulation for his Access to the
Crown; so that the said Prince would have had occasion to have laughed at so
preposterous an Embassy, as Tiberius did at the Embassy of the Trojans, to
condole the Death of his Son Drusus. Respondit irridens, quasi jam obliterata
dolor is memoria, se quoque vicem eorum dolere, quod Egregium Virum Hectorem
amisissent. Suet. in Tib. At the Election of Michael Wisnioweski to the Crown
of Poland, Ange Morosini was named to have gone with their Congratulation, but
the King died before the Ambassador stirred.

To the Duke of Savoy the Seigniory sends no Ambassadors but when they have
need of him, as in time of War; where it is remarkable by the by, that the
Ambassador at his Audience gives him the Title of Royal Highness, by which that
Republic seems to acknowledge his lawful Right to the Kingdom of Cyprus; which
I objecting one day to the Secretary Augustine Bianchi, he told me, the
Ambassador gave him that Title out of his own civility, without any order from
the Senate, who connived at it for the benefit of their Affairs during the War;
E per questo, cessante la Guerra, cessa l' Ambasciaria, anzi la Corrispondenza;
And therefore, said he, when the War ceases, their Embassies and Correspondence
cease with it. And indeed not long after the War at Candia was at an end, there
was an end of their Correspondence.

The neighboring Kings do reciprocally honor this Republic with Ambassadors
from them, not for any need they have of the Venetians in their Affairs, their
Alliance being useless to them, in respect of the Neutrality which they
publicly profess, but to gratify them in a thing they so ardently desire,
because the presence of these Ambassadors keeps up their Reputation in Italy,
and holds those Princes in respect; besides, their own Subjects bear greater
Veneration to their Government, seeing the deference paid them from the Kings.

These Embassies to Venice are commonly of no great importance to the Affairs
of those Princes that send them, the Senate applying wholly to Peace; and yet of
all their Embassies they are the most difficult, and require the most cunning
and sagacity, because they treat as it were with dumb People, and are to
understand every thing by signs. Therefore it is that Venice is called the
School and Touchstone of Ambassadors: for thither do Princes send them to
discover their Parts; and in this Embassy it was that Monsiegnior d' Aligre,
the second of that name, and present Chancellor of France, discovered to the
late King his prudence and dexterity, having executed that Office at a time
when things were very intricate and perplexed, in respect of the differences
about the Valtoline, which was then possessed by the French, the Spaniard, the
Italians, but particularly by the Venetian, who had the greatest interest
therein.

THE SECOND PART
Of the Magistrates of Venice.
THE Magistrates of Venice are of three sorts, the Domestics, whose
Jurisdiction lies wholly in the Town, as those in Rome, who were called
Magistratus Vrbani; the Provincial Magistrates, whose administration is abroad;
and the Military Officers, as the Generalissimo, the Proveditor General of the
Sea, the General of the Gulf, and others.

The first are of two sorts, one manages the Affairs of Government, as the
Duke, the six Counselors, the Sage-Grands, and the Senators, like those in
Rome, called the Magistratus Majores. The others meddle only in matters of
Judicature, and are so numerous, a third part of them are sufficient. But the
Seigniory has thought fit it should be so, that all their Nobility may be
employed, especially the young Gentlemen, who are much delighted with the very
name of a Magistrate.

I do not pretend to set down the precise number of their Magistrates, which
would be troublesome and useless; I shall only speak of those who have the
chiefest share in the administration. And because the Doge or Duke is the most
considerable both for Dignity and Office, I shall begin with him, and his
Predecessors, to make their condition the more perspicuous, by comparing it
with what they were formerly.

Of the Doge.
THE Isles under the Venetian Jurisdiction were governed at first by Consuls,
and then by Tribunes annually chosen, as I have hinted before. But the People
growing weary of their delays, and particular quarrels, resolution was taken,
to create a Head, to whom the Tribunes should be obliged to be accountable.

To this end all the Isles sent their Deputies to Heraclea, to proceed in the
Election of a Prince; and it was Lucius Anafestus that was chosen, to whom the
People transferred their Sovereign power: but the Venetians refused to agree,
alleging, that since the Foundation of their Republic they had always
preserved their Liberty, and never submitted to any Authority, but the
Authority of their Laws. Bodni, Jannoti, John Botetus, and some other eminent
Writers, have spoken of the old Sovereignty of the Dukes of Venice, as of an
unquestionable thing. The Reader may judge of it by the following Arguments,
which I have extracted out of their own proper Annals.

1. The Investiture that Ducis jussione Electiones Praelaturarum a Clero and
Populo debeant inclavare, and Electi ab eo investitionem accipere and ejus
mandato inthronizari. Just. Duc.
all the Prelates and Officers chosen by the People, were obliged to demand of
the Duke before they could have possession, seems to me an Argument of the
Sovereign Authority the Dukes exercised at that time. Besides, it belonged to
him to call the Clergy and the People together, to proceed to their Elections;
and if at any time they assembled without his Convocation, all the Elections
were actually void.

2. The Princes who sent Ambassadors to Venice, addressed their Letters of
Credence to the Duke only, as the King and Patriarch of Jerusalem; and Ad ducem
Venetiae Antiochenus, and Hierosolymitanus Patriarcha, and Balduinus 11 Rex
Jerusalem Legatos miserunt -- Calixtus etiam per suos Nuntios Ducem ad hoc
inducit. Ann. Ven: M. S.
Pope Calixtus did to Duke Dominique Michieli. So that it was the opinion of
all the Princes of that time, that the Dukes of Venice were absolute.

The said Dominick Michieli refused the Crown of Sicily that was offered him,
only because being Sovereign of Venice, and of several Provinces in the Levant,
he feared to lose the possession of a State at that time more considerable
(almost as to Title) than Sicily: Whereas had his power been only precarious,
and dependant upon the People, it is not probable he would have pretermitted so
fair an occasion of making himself a King. Besides, what he did in Syria is a
strong Argument of his Sovereignty; for Money being short, and his Soldiers
mutining against him, he caused boiled Leather to be coined, called it by his
own Name Michielette, commanded by a promulged Edict all the Sutlers and
Victuallers of his Army to receive it upon pain of death, and promised to pay
the value in Silver at his return, and they obeyed. From whence it may be well
presumed they owned him for their Sovereign, because they trusted to his
promise, which they never would have done, had they not thought him able to
have kept it; and how could he have been able, had he not been their King?

3. It Is a mark of Sovereignty to apply confiscated Goods to his own use; but
this the Dukes of Venice did, as appears by an Edict of Duke Peter Candian in
the year 972, by which he prohibits all the Subjects of that State, to carry or
convey unto the Turks any sort of Arms offensive or defensive, under penalty of
100 Livres of Gold, to be applied to the use of him and his Successors.

4. The Dukes of Venice have associated in their Dukeship with their Children
and Brothers, and by that means keeping it to their Families, have in a manner
made it hereditary. Witness the three great Families of the Badoers, Candiens,
and Orseoles, who kept the Government successively among them for more than 200
years, as it happens to several Royal Families in Elective Kingdoms. This it
was that made Dominick Flabanicus (who in probability had neither Children nor
Brothers) to publish an Edict, ordaining that the succeeding Dukes should not
have any Colleagues in their Dukeship for the future; and thereby declaring the
House of Orseole degraded and lapsed from all the Honors, Rights, Privileges
and Preheminences that formerly they enjoyed, and banished out of that State
for ever: and this Flabanicus did, not upon any impulse or necessity from the
People, but from an old Pique he bore to the Orseoles, with whom his Family had
had great Quarrels.

5. The Doges marry with Foreign Princesses, as Peter Candien, the fourth of
that Name, did with the Daughter of Albert, Lord of Ravenna: Otho Orseole with
a Daughter of Stephen King of Hungary; Dominick Silvius with a Sister of
Nicephorus, Emperor of Constantinople: Ordelase Falier with the Princess
Matilda, descended from the first Kings of Jerusalem; and Peter Ziani with a
Daughter of Tancrede King of Sicily. And in like manner they married their
Daughters to Sovereign Princes, as Peter Orseole married one of his Daughters
to Stephen, Eldest Son to the King of Croatia: all which infer that the Doges
in those days passed for Sovereign Princes.

Though in the Archives of their Acts the Clergy and People are mentioned with
the Doge, as in these, Nos Petrus Candianus, etc. cum Vitale Patriarcha, Clero,
and Populo Venetiae; Nos Tribunus Memus, etc. hortantibus and consentientibus
nobis D. Vitale Patriarcha simul cum Episcopis nostris, and cum Primatibus
Venetiae; Nos Vitalis Michael, etc. cum Judicibus and sapientibus, atque Populi
Veneti collaudatione and confirmatione concedimus, etc. Nothing can be
concluded from thence, but that the Doge of Venice might have a particular
Council composed of persons selected according to his fancy, to deliberate with
him, as the Kings of Rome did anciently with their Senate: and this is so clear,
that those Assemblies in the Annals of Venice are called the Duke's Council
expressly, Dux cum suo Consilio armare decrevit; Ipse cum suo Consilio and suis
Judicibus constituit. From whence it follows, that these Counselors, which
Vitale Michaeli calls Consiliorum suorum participes, that is properly, his
Confidents, depended upon the Doge, and were accomptable only to him. But now
since the Doges are no more but Masters, the Style of their Chancery runs
another way, and there is not a Secretary of State dares use this ancient form,
Dux cum suo Consilio, and suis judicib. For the Magistrates are not now the
Doges, but the Commonwealths Officers; nor will any Doge be so bold either in
speaking or writing, to say, My Council of State, My Magistrates, because it is
the language of a Sovereign Prince, that now he cannot pretend. Besides, I do
not see that these words, Cum Clero and Populo; cum Judicibus and Sapientibus;
cum Populi Collaudatione and Confirmatione, do at all prove the participation
of the three Estates in the Civil Government. For by the same reason it may be
argued the Kings of France are not Absolute there, because all Ordonnances
concluded with this form, By the King and his Council, which only shows that
that King takes the advice of his Council before he resolves in any matter of
State. As to the words Collaudatione and Confirmatione, they signify nothing
but the manner in which the Edicts of their Doges were received by the People,
that is to say, with universal Applause: for if the word Confirmation be taken
literally, and in the same sense it is said, the King has Confirmed the
Privileges granted by his Predecessors to some Abbey or Family: or that the
Parliament has Confirmed the Sentence of a Presidial; it would be no less than
to say the Authority of the People was greater than the Authority of either
Doge, Clergy, or Nobility, because it belonged to them to confirm all
Deliberations, which the Venetians, who pretend their Government was never
Popular, will never allow.

From whence I conclude the Collaudation and Confirmation of the People was
nothing but an outward approbation, and obediential Concurrence to the Edicts
of their Dukes. without being required, or any necessity of them to the Duke,
before he could execute any thing that was resolved: and this is proved by the
aforementioned words, hortantibus and Consentientibus nobis, etc. For to
exhort, is a kind of Prayer or Remonstrance that Subjects use toward their
Sovereigns: and if the Clergy and Noblemen of Venice gave their consent
sometimes, it is not to be said the Doge could not act without them, but rather
that the Doge doing them the Honor to communicate with them in some things,
their gratitude prompted them to a ready obedience.

If the Doges at any time caused their Orders or Decrees to be subscribed by
the Prelates of the Province, and the Judges of the City of Venice, it was one
of their Artifices to pass with more ease such Edicts as they thought would be
offensive to the People, whom by that means they desired to persuade, that
those who signed the Edicts, were Authors of them; and by this means the Doges
did now and then shift off the Odium upon others.

At this day the Authority of the Duke is so limited, that he can do nothing
without the Senate. For this cause, in public Ceremonies where the Senate
marches, there is always following the Doge a Nobleman, who carries a Sword in
the Scabbard before the Senate, to signify that the whole Power and Authority of
the State is in the hands of the Senate. For as the Connestable, or Grand
Escuier carries the Sword before the French King whenever he makes his Entry
into any considerable Town, to show the absoluteness of his Power over his
Subjects; so, on the contrary, it is an evident mark that the Doge is subject
both to the Laws and the Senate, that the Sword is carried after him, and hangs
as it were over his head, to admonish him that if he transgress his duty in the
least, he is not to expect better treatment than was used toward Marin Falier
See the Remarks.
. And for the same reason, at the Ceremonies of his Coronation, this Sword is
never put on, nor indeed at any time but his Funeral, with the Golden Spurs the
Emperor Basile sent to Duke Orso Participatio See the Remarks.
when he Cteated him Grand Escuier of Constantinople.

When the Foreign Ambassadors are received to Audience, the Duke replys only
in general terms, that may keep them in hopes, according to the old direction
of the Senate, Dentur bona verba Florentinis; and if he speaks too much, he
shall not only be disowned, but receive a sharp reprimand, and perhaps threats,
as was given one day by the Senator Baradonne, since a Cardinal to Duke
Dominick Contarin, in a full College after the Ambassador was gone out: His
words were these, Vostra serenita parla da Principe Sovrano, ma si recordi che
non chi mancheranno li mezzi di mortificarla quando trascorrera dal dovere.
Your Serenity speaks like a Sovereign Prince, but you may remember that we
shall not want ways of chastizing you, if you transgress your duty too much. So
that it may be said of the Doge Rex Poloniae nihil aliud est quam os quoddam
Regni vobiscum conjunctum libero ac legitimo vestro suffragio, ut is prorsus
nihil agat, ac ne loquatur quidem, nisi id quod ex intimo sensu vestro public
sit profectum. Cromer.
, what a Polander said once of his King, that the King was the Mouth of the
Commonwealth, but that the Mouth could not speak any thing that the public
Judgment had not first prepared and resolved.

If an Ambassador makes any undecent proposition, or speaks dishonourably of
the Commonwealth, the Duke is concerned to reply a little smartly, otherwise he
will run himself into the contempt of the Nobility, and perhaps be deposed, as
pusillanimous, and unfit for the Government: and in that case the Proposition
passes not to the Pregadi, as a thing not fit to be received.

In the year 1671, the Turks having made a descent in the Coasts of Ancona, not
far from Loretto, and carried several Families away with them, the Nunt io
Pompeius Varesus came to the College, complaining in the name of the Pope, that
the Seigniory had suffered those Corsairs to pass into the Gulfi without
fighting them, notwithstanding their obligation to do it. The Duke replied,
That he admired his Holiness should make any complaint of disorders happening
in any place under his obedience: for Reflecting upon the Cardinal Altieri, who
employed the Galleys in conveying Merchants Goods from place to place.
if those Infidels entered so boldly into the Territories of the Church, it was
because they found them illguarded (not to say deserted) whilst the Pope 's
Galleys were employed upon particular service, when they should have been left
in his Harbors for security of his Towns, and defense of his Subjects. An
answer that stopped the Nunt io's mouth.

The same Nunt io received another Answer as unpleasing, upon his interposition
in behalf of the Jesuits, the Somasques, and the barefooted Carmelites, who
refused obedience to an Order of the Senate relating to Processions, against
which they pretended privilege from the Pope: for having represented to the
College, that it was no less than laying violent hands upon the Sanctuary, and
enterprizing against the Authority of the Holy See, for them to encroach, or so
much as dispute the Privileges his Holiness had given, by constraining the
Religious to assist at Processions. The same Duke replied immediately, that So
far were the Senate from Enterprizing any thing against the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, that the Pope invaded theirs, by concerning himself, and
disgusting that the said Senate should Command their own Subjects as they
pleased. That the Senate could not Revoke what they so justly had Ordained; that
he did not think it an encroachment upon the Privileges of the Religious (who
were as much under the Protection of their Government as the rest) to oblige
them to public Offices, as Processions, etc. in which Bishops, Patriarchs, and
Cardinals themselves are every day assistant: and at last he told him the Pope
's Orders for Privilege were good in the Lands of the Church, but not at
Venice, where his Holiness had no more right to Command, than the Senate had at
Rome.

These two Answers were generally liked, because they were as they ought to be,
and the second seemed approved even at Rome, for the Nunt io not being with the
Senate in the first Procession of the Religious upon St. Justin's-day, because
he would not countenance that Novelty with his presence; not long after he
received Orders to be present at all the rest, to the astonishment of all the
World, which rather expected from his Holiness some demonstration of
displeasure and resentment against that State.

As to the Offices performed by Ambassadors to the College, to signify the joy
or affection of their Masters, the Doge in those cases has liberty to say as he
pleases, those sort of Answers being only Complemental, and draw no ill
consequence after them.

The Answer of Duke Andreas Gritti to the Ambassador of the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, upon the taking Francis I. prisoner, is very remarkable. The Ambassador
coming to the College full mouth with the news of his Master's Victory, just as
the Bishop of Baieux, the French Embassor, was gone out; the Duke, who before
had to the said Prelate been condoling the misfortune of the King, replied with
excellent temper, and suitable to a Prince who scorned to equivocate; That the
Republic of Venice being equally in Amity with both Gaudete cum gaudentious,
flete cum flentibus, Romans 12.
the said Crowns, could not have an equal concernment for both their interests;
and according to St. Paul 's counsel, rejoice with those who rejoice; and mourn
with those who mourn.

The Doge being chief in all Councils, it is his right to propose every thing to
all the Principal Magistrates; he proposes all business of importance to the
Grand Council, in which he has a double Voice; to the Pregadi; as the
Sages-Grans; the Council of Ten; as the three Capi-Dieci; in which he is
something more than the President of the Senate among the Romans, who never sat
but in the Senate.

The Credentials of all Ambassadors sent by this State to Foreign Courts, are
writ in his Name Ejus nomen Epistolit Edictisque proponebatur. Tac. Hist. 4.
, the Senate allowing him that appearance of Sovereignty to render him the more
Venerable abroad. Yet those Letters are not signed by his hand, because it is
not he who sends the Ambassadors, but the Senate, which for that reason causes
them to be signed by one of the Secretaries, and sealed with the Arms of the
State. And though these Ambassadors when they are abroad, direct all their
Letters and Dispatches to the Duke, he cannot open them but in presence of the
Council, who quite contrary may open them without him.

All Money is coined in his Name, (which seems another token of his
Sovereignty) and they are called Ducats; as much as to say, Money coined by the
Duke. Yet the Money cannot be properly his Coin, as bearing neither his Image
nor Arms; which are the essential conditions of Coin. And if there be the
picture of the Duke upon his knees before St. Mark, and putting a Standard into
his hand; the humility of that posture cannot be interpreted to signify the
Regency of the Duke; but that is not the Duke, only a man in Ducal Ornaments,
representing only the chief Magistrate of that Commonwealth in general. It Is
true, Duke Nicholas Iron caused pieces of Silver to be stamped with his Image,
and they were upon that score called Irons: But this can be no President, for
the said Duke did it by consent of the Senate, to stop the current of false
Money, which was then too common in Venice; and this appeared by his Epitaph,
Fraudatam pecuniam viva illius Effigy (Resp.) resignavit. And the Dukes
Nicolas Marcel, and Peter Moccenigo, who next succeeded him, had not that
privilege, though there are pieces of Silver still to be seen, inscribed with
their Names. And though Cardinal Contarini, and Jannot, seem to affirm the
contrary in these words, Nummi luduntur cum facie ac nomine Principis; that may
easily be understood a general picture; both the said Authors correcting
themselves afterward, by leaving out the word (facie) in every place else. I
say, those Dukes who otherwise have governed Monarchically, have not stamped
any Money but according to the Coin of that Prince upon whom they depended; as
appears by the Medal of Lewis le Debonnaire, that Monsieur Retan, Councellor in
Parliament, caused to be graven, where on one side is to be seen H. Ludovicus
Imp. and on the reverse, Venecia.

The Name of the Doge is likewise upon all the Medals and Chains of Gold the
Senate gives to their Ambassadors, or chief Officers at War; but under his Name
are always these two Letters, S. C. for Senatus Consulto, importing, that it is
not the Duke, but the Senate that gratifies them. Nor is it the Duke, who
Publishes the Edicts, though they begin always with this form, Il Serenissimo
Principe fa sapere; for that belongs not to him; for if the Publication was by
his Authority, it would be expressly in his Name, as it is in the Name of all
Sovereign Princes.

In short, at his entrance into any of the Courts or Counsels, all the
Magistrates rise and salute him; but he never rises, nor pulls off his Hat to
any man: In which he exceeded the Kings of Sparta, for whom the Ephori never
stirred. Omnes e sedibus suis Regibus assuegunt. Exceptis Ephoris, qui e sellis
se Ephoricis non levant. Xenoph. de Rep. Laced.

When foreign Ambassadors are admitted to Audience, he rises, but does not
uncover; because, say the Venetians, the Sea the Remarks.
Corne-Ducale upon his head, is a Symbol of Sovereignty, and the absolute
Dominion of that State. And the Duke being no Sovereign, cannot pull it off as
he pleases. But when he has nothing on but his Red-Gown, he may do as he thinks
fit.

The Duke has under his Ducal Bonnet a Coyfe of white Linen, in fashion of a
Diadem, like the Headband which the Conservators of their Laws wore at Athens
during their Office. Because it is the Dukes business to look the Laws be put in
execution, by doing that first, which all the Nobles are obliged particularly
to do. In this quality it is he goes every month to visit the Courts of S.
Mark, exhorting the Judges to administer Justice; and receiving the Complaints
of such as have been wronged, in which case he rebukes the Judges severely.
Formerly this Visitation was made every Wednesday; and possibly the custom may
come from thence, of paying the Duke his 100 Sequins every Wednesday, as an
acknowledgment of his care: But now the day is uncertain, the better to
surprise the Judges, and prevent their usual preparation.

All the Ecclesiastical Benefices are in the Dukes Nomination; that is to say,
26 Canons, and a Dean; who is always a Noble Venetian, and called Primocirio di
S. Marco. This Dean depends not upon the Patriarch of Venice, and enjoys
Episcopal Prerogatives by virtue of a Bull from Pope Innocent IV. granted to
Duke Marin Morosini about the year 1250. This Deanery is worth 5000 Ducats per
ann. besides the Abbey of S. Gal, which commonly goes with it, and is valued at
4 or 5000 Livres per ann. more.

The Church of S. Mark acknowledges no Jurisdiction but the Dukes, who takes
possession of it, as the Pope does of that at S. John de Latran. The Primicier,
or his Grand Vicar, taking a solemn Oath to preserve the dignity of that
Church, and the three old Procurators swearing likewise for the good management
of the Treasure.

The Duke is Patron and Protector of the Monastery delle Vergini, built and
founded by Duke Peter Ziani and the Duchess his Wife, for young Gentlemen of
Venice. The Abbess calls him Father, and has no Judge but him, not so much as
the Patriarch of Venice, much less the three Sopra-Proveditori of the
Monasteries; so that if any disorder happens among the Nuns, the Duke alone
rectifies, as if he were their Bishop.

He disposes of the little Offices about the Palace, as the Ushers and others,
who are called Comandadori del Palazo, lodging in the Palace, and being paid by
the Public.

He has jurisdiction over the Gondeliers, a sort of people that ply upon the
sides of the Canals for the convenience of Passengers. He makes Knights at his
promotion, and commonly they are Deputies of Towns sent to him to congratulate;
or Virtuosi and men of Learning.

He has a kind of Introducer of Ambassadors, called, il Cavalier del Doge, who
from him invites them to his Ceremonies, and conducts them to his Apartments in
the Palace. This Officer is always in red. The Duke has another Officer called,
Il Gastaldo del Doge, who is always present in a Purple Robe at the Execution
of Criminals; and gives the signal, by shaking his Handkerchief in the Air,
which is as much as to say, No mercy is to be expected.

In short, his Family is not subject to the Magistrate des Pompes: His Children
are suffered to have their Footmen, and Gondeliers in their own Livery, to
attend them in the Town, and to wear Girdles with gold Buckles. So the Elder
Sons of the Kings of Sparta, as Sons of Lacedemon, were excused from the common
Discipline and Education Hac necessitate soluit lex pueros qui ad regnum
Educabantur. Flut in Agisil.
.

Thus have I shown precisely, in what the Grandeur of the Duke of Venice
consists. Let us now turn the Medal, and see where lies his Inferiority and
Subjection. The Duke cannot stir out of Venice, but by permission of the
Council; otherwise he incurs the displeasure of the Senate, and exposes himself
to a thousand insolences, against which he can look for no reparation; there
being an express Law that gives liberty to any one to throw stones at him in
that case. Out of Venice he is no more than another Senator; he receives no
public honor; it not being with him as it was with Pompey, who said, Vbi
Pompeius, ibi Roma; where he was, there was the Commonwealth of Rome. On the
contrary, the Doge is always where the Seigniory is, but the Seigniory is not
always with the Doge: If any disorder should happen where he was abroad, he
could not take cognizance of it, nor apply any remedy; it would belong to the
Podesta, as being a public Officer invested with Authority to that purpose:
whereas the Duke would be wholly divested, and as a member cut off from the
body, quite incapable of any Function or Office. By this means they take from
the Duke all desire of absenting from Venice, which being as it were the Helm
of that Government, his Presence is always necessary to manage it, and give
Example to the rest of the Nobles.

His Children and Brothers are excluded all the principal Offices of State
during his life: they can neither be of the College; of the Council of Ten;
Chiefs of the Quarenty Criminal, Avogadors, Generals, Proveditors General at
Sea, thereby making a just counterpoise of his Power, by debasing his Family:
they cannot make Addresses for any Bishopric, Abbey, or other Benefice, to the
Court of Rome, nor accept them, though freely offered by the Pope.

In the year 1622 Cardinal Matthew Priuli refused the Bishopric of Bergamo, to
which he was named by Gregory XV, because his Father Duke Anthony was living.
Cardinal Frederick Cornaro did the same when the rich Bishopric of Padua was
given him by Urban VIII, who was highly disobliged thereby, and would have had
him taken it, in spite of the Laws of his Country, and opposition of the
Senate. For the Cardinalship there is particular exception, and the Senate
declared it was not comprehended under the word Benefices, at the promotion of
the said Cornaro. So that the Duke of Venice may say with Antonius Pius,
(though in a different sense,) Postquam ad imperium transivimus, etiam quae
prius habuimus, perdidimus. Capit. in Anton. Hence it is that many of the
Nobility who have had Dukes of their Family, avoid nothing more than that
Honor; and yet they are forced to accept it, unless they have a mind to be
banished, and forfeit their Estates. In this manner they forced the Dukeship
upon Andreas Contarini during their Wars with Genoa, upon Marc-Anthony Trevisan
in the last age, and upon Francis Cornaro since, who died of pure anger eight
days after his Election. That which is more strange is, that this Republic
after the constant good service of their Dukes, make no scruple to depose them
upon any sickness or infirmity, as if their age or indispositions were
sufficient to extinguish the memory of their former deportment, though never so
good. With this ingratitude they recompensed the merits of Francis Foscaro, to
whom they would not allow him to die, though he was 84 years of age, and in his
Dukeship had acquired to his Country the Towns of Bressia, Bergamo, Crema, and
Ravenna, as is to be seen in his Epitaph. Yet this severity has one good effect
upon the Dukes, that in stead of pretending themselves ill, to avoid the
fatigues of their Office, they will assist at all public Ceremonies, though
they be ready to die. And if he fails at certain Feasts, and appears not with
the Senate, it is immediately supposed he is dead, and many times they have no
news of his death till they hear of his Funeral.

Formerly several Dukes have resigned, and laid by their Dignity, to die in
repose, as John and Orso Participatio; Peter Orseole; Sebastian, and Peter
Ziani; one Maliepiere, and James Contarin: but now it is not permitted, the
Venetians declaring, That a man born in a Commonwealth, and having share in the
Affairs, ought never to be wanting to his Country, whilst he is in a condition
to serve it: that it belongs not to a particular man to quit his Country, but
to his Country to quit him, if it finds him unserviceable: that it is laziness
and poltronery to retire from the Government to spend our age in ease, when
either our tongue or our brain is able to assist it. That if it be
dishonorable for a General to repose himself whilst his Army is engaged, it is
no less for the chief Person in a State, to retire to take his ease whilst the
rest of the members are agitated and busy. If the General of an Army Oportet
Imperatorem stantem mori. Suet. in Vest.
, as Vespasian said, was to die standing, a Duke, who Presides in several
Councils, and has so many important Affairs to dispatch, ought as little to
repose, or die in any posture but sitting in the Senate: In a word, That Regia
potestas est gentis unius quasi domestica quaedam gubernatio. Arist. 3. Pol.
11. Nec Rem. tuam esse, sed te Reipub. Sen. de Clem.
the body of a Commonwealth was like a great Family, of which the Duke is the
Father, and cannot with any Honor relinquish his relation. And in this manner
they opposed the resignation of Duke John Cornaro in the year 1628.

The Commonwealth belongs not to the Doge, but the Doge to the Commonwealth.
The Commonwealth may disoblige him with impunity, but he cannot in the least
transgress against the Commonwealth, but he is severely rebuked. The best of
his actions are effaced by the least of his faults. He has nothing before his
eyes but advertisements and memorials of the duty of his Place, and the great
danger he incurs, if he does not behave himself as he promised at his Election;
Exigis ut sententiam suam mutent, si talis esse desieris, qualis electus es.
Pli. de Trajan. Whatever he sees, tell him silently, Memento esse Rempublicam.
His Palace is a gilded Prison, where he is watched only by Spies, and
Inquisitors of State who never are seen by him. The very Walls have mouths, and
those always open to accuse him, The dreadful See the Remarks.
Council of Ten lies next to his Apartments, that he may never be without the
wholesome remembrance of death that environs him on all sides. And perhaps it is
for this reason, that in the Session of the Grand Council, the President of the
Council of Ten is placed just over against the Duke.

The Duke is subject to the Ten, as the Kings of Sparta were to the Ephori, and
the Kings of Aragon of old to the Sovereign Magistrate they called El Justicia,
who sitting upon a Throne, delivered himself to the King in the Name of all the
Subjects of that Kingdom, in these words, Nos que valemos tanto come vos, y
podemos mas que vos, os hazemos nuestro Rey y Sennor, con tal chi guardeis
nuestros fueros y libertades: Sino no, intra vos y nos un que manda mas que
vos. We, who are considerable, and have more power than you, do make you our
King, with condition that you preserve to us our Privileges and Freedom: If
not, we retract what we have done; for betwixt you and us there is a Person who
Commands more than you, viz. El Justicia. If the Venetians use not the same
words, they use the same way with their Duke, as he finds by the effects. The
Ephori being Judges betwixt the Kings of Sparta and the People, El Justicia
betwixt the Kings of Aragon and his People, and the Council of Ten betwixt the
Doge and the Nobles.

The Lacedaemonians allowed their Kings no Guards, not thinking just and
well-resolved men as they supposed them to be, should have need of those kind
of People, when by observing the Laws, they would be sure of the hearts of
their Subjects, who whilst they feared nothing of servitude, would be always
solicitous for them Qui magis pro me metuunt quam me. Alf. Arag. l.
. The Republic of Venice takes the same course with their Dukes, as knowing
well enough their Persons will be sase, whilst their Administration is honest,
and that it is the Interest of the Nobles to look to their preservation, seeing
with them they make but one body Politic, that consists chiefly of Noblemen.
In short, the Dukes having no Sovereignty, and the Laws at Venice having the
same Force as formerly Apud Lacedaemonios plus veteret leges quam Reges.
Herodot.
in Lacedemon, (where they were of more value than the King,) there is no
necessity they should be attended by Guards, for fear they should use them,
upon occasion, to subvert the Government, and change it into a Monarchy, as
Pisistrates did at Athens, and Timophanes at Corinth.

The Kings of Sparta had nothing more than the Spartiates, but Title,
Precedence, and a double Comparison betwixt the Kings of Sparta, and Dukes of
Venice. Herodot. li. 6. Thucyd. lib. 5. Xenoph.
share of their Repasts. The Dukes of Venice have the Title of Serenissimo,
Preside in all Councels; and have a moderate Revenue, but such as exceeds the
allowance of any of the other Magistrates. The Kings of Sparta eat frequently
in public with the Spartiates, who were the Nobles of that City. The Dukes of
Venice retain something of their Customs, making four Feasts a year, to which
all the Nobles are invited, without distinction of poor or rich, ancient or
new: for the Duke is the Father of the Family, and caresses all his Children
alike, to keep them in a constant and brotherly Amity. These Feasts are made
the next day after Christmas Day, on St. Mark's-day, on Ascension-day, and on
the fifteenth of June, upon which day a great Conspiracy was discovered in the
year 1310.

The Wives of the Kings of Sparta were not treated as Queens, nor allowed any
thing for their support from the Public. The Senate of Venice at this day takes
no notice of their Duchess, and if a Duke be married at the time of his
Election, at his own peril, no Revenue is allowed for his Wife, she is only
treated as the first Lady, but not as Princess. It Is true, not long since the
Venetians Crowned some of them, that is to say, Julia Dandole Wife to Laurence
Priuli, in the year 1557; and N. Morosini Wife to Marin Grimani in the year
1595; for whose public Entry they were at vast expense. But in the next
Interregnum, the Inquisitors and Correctors finding the necessity of moderating
the Honors of their Women, especially in a Republic Moderandos faeminarum
honores dictitans. Tac. Ann. 1. de Tiber.
where ambition and luxury are very dangerous, by Decree abolished the Custom
of Crowning them, that they might not so much as fancy they could ever be
Queens.

In the mean time the difference is very great betwixt the Dukes of Venice and
the Kings of Sparta. The Kings of Sparta had two sorts of Command, one at home,
which indeed was very straight; the other abroad in their Wars, which was more
large. The Senate of Venice clipped the wings of their Dukes in the second point
in the year 1645 after the death of Duke Francis Erizza, ordaining that no Duke
should be chosen General at Land nor at Sea, nor any of their Brothers or
Children during their Dukeship. Which served to confirm the report at that
time, that the Senate having found the danger they had pulled upon themselves by
the large Power they had given to Duke Erizza, had poisoned him as he was ready
to depart.

The Kings of Sparta had power Legationes dimittere tum amicas, tum hostiles,
id Regis est. Zenoph. de Rep. Laced.
to dismiss the Ambassadors of their Enemies or Allies with positive Answers.
The Doges cannot resolve any thing upon their own heads, nor answer any of the
Propositions or Demands of Foreign Ministers, as I have said before. The Kings
of Sparta could by their own Authority commence, continue, or determine a War,
reserving to themselves the Sovereign Command whilst it lasted. The Doges can
neither begin, protract, nor conclude it. The Kings of Sparta could abrogate
old Laws, and establish new; but the Doge of Venice cannot alter a syllable of
what is decreed by the Grand Council and the Senate.

In a word, the Republic of Venice not only detains their Dukes Prisoners in
their Palace, encompassed with Spies and Informers, destitute of common
divertisements, and divested of all the Authority of Princes; but it daily
retrenches their Privileges, to vilify them the more. Formerly, the Presents
sent them from the Levant, or other Countries where it was the Custom to send
them by their Ambassadors, belonged to the Dukes. In the 1668, the Muscovite
Ambassadors in their return from France, passing by Venice, where they had
something to negotiate for the interest of their Master, presented the Doge to
the value of Ten or Twelve Thousand Crowns in Sables and other Furrs. The
Procurator Andreas Contarin, a Sage-Grand, nearly related to the Duke of that
Name, but a mortal Enemy to the Procurator his Son, who had made himself odious
to all the Nobles by his abominable avarice; remonstrated to the Grand Council,
That the Presents of the Muscovites ought not to be appropriated to the Doge;
for he being no Sovereign, neither the Ambassadors nor Presents were sent to
him, any more than he sent their Ambassadors: Adding, That when their
Ambassadors carried Presents to Constantinople, it was not at the charge of the
Doge, and therefore it was not reasonable that he should have the profit of
what belonged in Justice to the Public, which defrayed the charge of the
Ambassadors. And the business coming to a debate, it was solemnly decreed, that
for the future the Doge and his Successors should be deprived of that ancient
advantage.

When the Doge appears in any public Procession or Ceremony, he is
magnificently clothed, sometimes in Cloth of Gold, sometimes in Cloth of
Silver, and sometimes in Scarlet, with the Ducal-Corne. upon his head, the
ushers of his household marching before him, and two of them carrying his Train:
The Captain-Grand marches likewise before him with his Officers, the
Secretaries of the Pregadi, and Grand-Chancellor with the Golden-Stole, and
after him follows the Senate. In this Equipage he draws the Eyes, and forces
Veneration from the People, who are always taken with the outward tokens of
Grandeur. But it is to be observed, the Senate follows not in addition to his
Honor, but to participate of what is given him wherever he goes; believing
that if the Duke should receive it alone, he would appear a Sovereign to the
People, and to such strangers as were present.

The Venetians like not that their Duke should have too much parts, they
believe that would make him less tractable, and give him a Confidence in
himself. They had rather have a person of moderate qualifications Par negotiis,
neque supra. Tac. Ann. 5.
, who is capable of their affairs, but governable by them, and easily held to
his duty. Besides, the Senate (where he has but a single voice like another
Nobleman) Quod uni dee^^^, suppl^tur ex aliis, and quod ab uno peccatur, ab
aliis emendatur.
supplies the defects of his understanding. And therefore Duke John Pesaro was
no proper man for them, because he knew too much himself, to be persuaded by
other people, whom for the most part he drew to his opinion by the strength of
his arguments: as in the business for the reestablishment of the Jesuits. Nor
indeed is it necessary a Prince in a Republic, having nothing but the bare
name, and being but the shadow of the Senate, should have too large and
capacious an Intellect, seeing he is to do nothing of himself; and therefore it
was the Thebans pictured their Prince with his Ears open and his Eyes shut, to
signify it was not his Office to see or determine what was to be done, but to
hear, and execute blindly what was concluded by the Senate.

They make him Duke for his life, to render him more Majestic, and like to the
Crowned Heads, among whom they are willing he should be reckoned; as also to
coax him for the little Power he has, by the Duration of his Dignity: but they
choose him always ancient, that other pretenders may have hopes to succeed.
Besides, old age wanting the Vigor of youth, is not so bold and undertaking.

They are very glad when their Dukes are rich, that they may adorn their
dignity, and be an ornament to the Public, which allows them not above 12000
Crowns per annum, half of which is spent in his four annual Feasts: To which
may be added the charge of his entrance, which is never well celebrated but by
large Gifts to the people thrown among them in Silver in the Palace of St.
Mark; a Custom first introduced by Duke Sebastian Ziani. So that if they have
any touch of Generosity and Magnificence, they do often incommode, if not ruin
their Families: And that is it the Senate desires, having perhaps no other
design in exempting their Children from the penalty of their Sumptuary Laws.

The Administration of their Dukes is looked into after their deaths by three
Inquisitors, and five Correctors created on purpose, who always find that
either the Duke has abused his Authority, some more some less; or neglected the
Public affairs for the advancement of his Private; or else that he has not
lived according to his quality. And this canvasing of his Conduct is commonly
followed by the condemnation of his Heir in some Pecuniary Mulct; so that their
Children cannot enjoy their Inheritance, till they have obliged themselves by
Oath to pay what Imposition shall be laid upon them. Thus was the Family of the
Duke Peter Loredan charged with a Fine of 1500 Sequins, because the Father had
lived too narrowly in his Dukeship. In my time they found the like fault with
their Duke, who besides his own parsimony, had a Son who took whatever he
could lay his hands upon, as if to make amends for the old age of his Father;
which appeared the worse, because the Manus avidae and tanquam apud senem
festinantes. Tac. Hist. 1.
people had been accustomed to the Magnificence of his Predecessors, the Dukes
Valier and Pesaro. In a word, the fear of this Inspection into their
Management, makes the Dukes and their Children cautions what they do, and shuts
the door against all their oppression and violence.

And yet this Custom hinders not, but that great Honors are paid to them after
their death. Their Funerals are solemnized with great Pomp at the charge of the
State. Their Funeral Orations pronounced formally in the Church of St. Mark; an
Honor the Law did not formerly allow, and which began but since the death of
Andreas Contarin. They fix upon their Vaults a Scutcheon with their Arms, in
memory of their Dukeship, which was introduced at the Obsequies of Duke Marin
Morosini. And last of all it is permitted to set up noble and rich Tombs for
them. But that which is singular in their Funerals, is, that the Senate attends
the Corpse in their Robes of Principes mortales, Rempubl. aeternam esse. Tac.
Ann. 3.
Scarlet, a color far enough from mourning; but they do it to show, that
though their Duke be Mortal their Commonwealth is not: That the perpetuity of
their Empire consists in the Body of the Senate, upon which only depends the
Safety of the People. Aeternitas rerum, and meacum vestra salus, incolumitate
Senatus firmatur. Tac. Hist. 1. And that it belongs to private, not public
persons to lament, in which they choose rather to satisfy a punctilio of
Honor, than to discharge the common duties of Piety and Compassion for the
Dead.

And here it is remarkable, that the Hall where the Dukes Corpse is exposed, is
the same where he receives his first Complements of Congratulation from the
Foreign Ambassadors the day he was Crowned; that the joy of his Advancement,
might be tempered by considerations of Death; and that he might look upon the
Magnificence and Consulares fasces, Curulemque sellam, nihil aliud quam Pompam
Funeris putent. claris insignibus velut insules votatos ad mortem destinari.
Live. Hist. 2.
Ornaments of his Dukeship, as the beginning of his Funeral Pomp, and as if
like a Victim he was Crowned but for a Sacrifice. To this end the Grand
Chancellor always reflects upon Death, in his Complement when he is put the
first day into possession of the Palace of St. Mark: Admonishing, That his
Government is not over Subjects, but Fellow-Citizens and Vt non dominationem,
and Servos, sed Rectorem, and Cives cogitaret. Ann. 12.
Companions, to be Commanded only by his Example. That the Nobility have made
him Duke, not to do as he pleases, but to labor, and charge himself with all
the Cares and Troubles of the State. That his Dignity is but an Honorable
Servitude Esse Nobilem servitutem. Trog.
, as Antigonus said formerly to his Son. And that his Crown was not a thing of
Parade, and Authority, but of Obligation to his Country, and Obedience to
their Laws.

When the Doge is sick, or absent, he is represented by one of the Council
called the Vice-Doge, that the Council might never be without a Head. But this
Vice-Doge sits not in the Ducal Chair, wears not the Bonnet, nor is treated
with the Title of Serenissimo: yet Ambassadors directing their speech to him in
the College, do give him that Title, but it is interpreted to the Table. This
Representative replies, like the Duke, to Foreign Ministers; but puts not off
his Bonnet, and keeps the middle-place when he walks.

The Grand Council in the year 1553 made a Decree, that in the Audience of
Ambassadors the Vice-Doge should take his place betwixt the Dean of the Council
and the Ambassador, who accordingly was removed from the first place on the
right hand of the Throne, to a third; which was an injury to the Ambassadors,
it being clear that the Representative of a Prince ought in Justice to pay them
more respects than the Prince himself. But this Decree was rectified the next
year, gave the Ambassadors their ancient place, and put the Vice-Doge beneath
them; yet he was not allowed to salute them with his Bonnet.

The Counselors of the Seigniory.
THE present Counselors of State in Venice, are those who formerly were
Tribunes of the Isles: and as every Isle had then its Tribune to administer
Justice, so now the six Quarters of the City Castello San Marco Lana Regio.
San-Paolo. Santa-Croce. Dorso duro.
, called Contrade or Sestieri, have each their Councellor, who, according to an
Ordinance of Duke Orie Malipierre, is to reside personally in his Quarter. So
that a Nobleman whose common Residence is in the Country of St. Mark. cannot be
chosen Councellor of the Castle, St. Paul, etc.

These Lords are called Counselors of the Seigniory, because with the Doge
they represent the Body of the Commonwealth. They are called likewise
Consiglieri di Sopra, to distinguish them from the Consiglieri d' Abasso, who
Preside in the Quaranty Criminel, in stead of the Seigniory which sat formerly
there. And here it is to be understood, that the Office of Councellor that is
annual, is differently exercised during that time, the Counselors sitting only
eight months in the College; the other four, they go down into the Quaranty
Criminel, and Preside there: whereas, if they begin in the Chamber, as
Consiglieri d' Abasso, they are advanced alla Banca di Sopra, or the College.

The Counselors of the Seigniory have two Offices, one public, the other
private. The last is, to Consult with the Duke and three Heads of the Quaranty
Criminel such matters as are to be proposed in the Councils. And this they do
in the presence of a Secretary called all Voci, who marks their Votes. To open
all Letters directed to the Seigniory, whether the Duke be present or not. To
receive all Petitions Cognoscible in the Grand Council; to examine them among
themselves, and to tear them in pieces if they do not like them. To grant
Privileges and Exemptions. To appoint Judges to both Parties, when the
Controversy is about Jurisdiction: and, in short to resolve when the Council is
to be called extraordinarily. The first, that is to say, their Public Office,
is to Preside in all Councils; to dispatch all necessary Orders (during the
Interregnum) to the Podestats, General of their Armies, Proveditors at Land or
at Sea; and, in a word, to all the Officers of State.

When Relations have any Contest among them, and desire extraordinary Judges,
it is in the power of the Duke and the Counselors of the Seigniory to appoint
them; and the said deputed Judges, by virtue of a Commission confirmed by the
Grand Council, determine definitively. This in Venice is called dellegar una
Causa: but this favor that prevents a great deal of Charge, especially li
Caratti, or Fees, is not vouchsafed but to Persons of principal Quality, and
upon Causes of great importance to the Public, such remissions giving just
occasion to the Magistrates to complain. These Delegates are commonly chosen
out of the Senate for the better Authority of their Judgment, and are called
Savii del Corpo del Senato.

The Counselors both di Sapra and d' Abasso are always habited in red, both
sitting in Council, and walking in the Streets, under penalty of 25 Ducats of
Gold for every time they offend. In Winter they wear a Scarlet-Robe with
Ducal-Sleeves; and in Summer a Red Watered-Camlet, with a Cloth-bonnet of the
same color, unless their Fathers or Brothers be lately dead, in which case
they are permitted to mourn for a month, and during the Holy-week they are in
Black also.

It is forbidden to the Counselors, Heads of the Quaranty Criminel, Sages of
the College, and Avogadors, to be present at any Weddings, unless it be of
their Children, Brothers. Nephews, Unckles, Fathers in Law, etc. And this Law
is founded upon two Reasons, one is, lest those Magistrates should seem to
encourage by their presence the luxury of the Table and Habits, which are
expressly forbidden by the Laws. The other is, because these Lords having
direction of the principal Affairs, and the whole care of the Government upon
them, the public Service would be retarded or neglected by such kind of
Festivities, and they hindered in their attendance at the Palace, which might be
of dangerous consequence.

When one of these Counselors time is expiring, he swears his Successor (a
month before he enters into his Charge) to the observation of his Capitulair,
which he reads over to him for his instruction in the duties of his place,
showing him that all Decrees revokable since five years, or that past only for
a certain time, are of no obligation: and if by any impediment the new
Councellor has not taken his Oath from his Predecessor, he takes it before the
Seigniory, in this form.

J. N...... Councellor of Venice, of the Quarter of N.... do swear and engage
in the presence of God, that during the time of my Office, I shall council and
advise sincerely, and without fraud, whatever I think, for the Honor and
Interest of the Commonwealth. That I shall not be guilty of juggling or
collusion, either to revenge my self upon my Enemies, or advantage my Friend.
That whenever it shall please the most Screne Doge to call me to the Palace, I
shall obey him immediately, unless some lawful impediment hinders! and lastly,
that I shall observe punctually and faithfully all the Articles contained in my
Capitulair, which I shall read, or cause to be read to me every month. In the
Election of Counselors (who are chosen but three at a time) there are two sort
of Competitors; one proposed by the Senate, the other by the Mains Electoral of
the Grand Council. The first do commonly carry it against the second, either
out of the esteem the Nobles have for the choice of the Senate, who do always
recommend Persons of worth; or else because of the great number of Senators,
who in the Balotation of the Grand Council do always maintain by their
suffrages, those whom they have Elected in the Scrutiny.

The three Heads of the Quarantie Criminel.
THese three Gentlemen are present in the College to see what is past, as the
three Counselors d'Abasso are in the Quarantie Criminel to observe what is
done in that Chamber. And this Order is kept, to keep the College and Quarantie
within the bounds prescribed them by the Laws.

These Heads are in the Office but two months, during which time they are
called Excellence, and are habited in Purple.

The Authority of the Counselors is much greater than the Authority of these
Heads. For any one Councellor may propose any thing to be debated by the Grand
Council or Senate, which the Heads of the Quarantie cannot do, but all three
together; so that if two of them be disposed to present any business to the
Council, and the third dissents, it cannot be proposed. These Heads are obliged
to accuse and prosecute the Avogadoxs, if they find them negligent in holding
the Counselors of the College to the observation of their Capitulair, and the
Decrees of the Grand Council.

If at the meeting of the Council these three Heads be all of them absent, the
business is to be put off till another day; for all the Deliberations and
Elections of that day would be void, the Law requiring that nothing pass in the
Grand Council, but with the participation and presence of one of those Heads.

When the three Chiefs of the Council of Ten enter into the College, the Heads
of the Quarantie retire, by reason of the Emulation betwixt those two Criminal
Chambers.

In the Grand Council these three Counselors have their place above the
Knights of the Golden-Stole, upon another Bench.

Of the Sage-Grans.
THere are six Sages called Grans, because they manage the grand Affairs of the
State, of which they are properly the Ministers, and as so ought to have more
sagacity Quos vulgus, propterea quod maxim omnium sapere videntur, sapientes
appellant. Contarin. Reip. Ven. 1. 3.
and experience than the common sort of the Nobility. Besides, these Sages
being much above those of the Terra-firma, or Sea, (who together with these do
make up the College) are called Grans by way of Excellence, and not without
reason.

These six Noblemen do meet among themselves to consult and prepare such things
as are to be presented to the Senate, which are delivered to the Senate when the
Sages have framed and digested them. In this they resemble the Counselors
called by Aristotle, Praeconsultores Quia praeconsultant illa de quibus
consulendus est Senatus.
. But though they sit, and consult promiscuously together, there is one of them
appointed every week, and called for that reason Savio di Settimana, who
receives all the Memorials, Addresses and Requests presented to the College, to
be carried to the Senate.

It Is to this Savio di Settimana it belongs to propose to his Colleagues what
is to be debated, and to be determined afterward by the Senate: to answer the
Letters of Princes, and the Offices of all Ambassadors and Foreign Ministers,
but not of his own head, but according as is resolved in the Pregadi.

When an Ambassador desires a favor for himself or any of his friends, he
addresses to these Sages either by his Secretary, or the Consul of his Nation,
without troubling himself to go in Person, which he never does, but about his
Masters Affairs; if these Sages approve his demand, they present it to the
Senate, who commonly incline much to their opinion: but if the Sages think it
unreasonable, they excuse themselves for proposing it to the Senate, in the best
terms they can. Thus they proceeded with the French Ambassador in favor of
Count Pirro Gratiani Resident of Modena, who had a Boat of Wine seized as it
entered into the Town.

Though the opinion of these Sages is of as great weight in the Senate, as the
opinion of the Counselors of the College is in the Grand Council; yet it is
very lawful not only for every Senator, but for every Nobleman present in the
Senate, to speak against their advice; for it is Reason, not Person, that is of
Authority there.

These Sages are in Office but six months, in which time each of them is four
times Savio di Settimana, the Law not suffering them to hold it a month
together, to moderate their Power by continual change, which interrupts all the
measures they might take, if the Office di Settimana was continued for a month.

When their time is expired, they cannot be continued for the next six months;
but after the next six months they may be chosen again, and come in by a new
Election, that is to say, a Nobleman may be a Sage-Grand once every year: yet
that happens but seldom, though Duke Francis Donatus and John Pesaro have been
Sage-Grans 24 times.

No man can be admitted to this Office till he be complete 38 years of age, the
importance of that Charge, upon which the whole Civil Administration depends,
requiring that the Members be men of more than ordinary accomplishment, and
well-vers'd in the Mysteries of Government.

The Procurators of St. Mark desire this Preferment with much earnestness,
thereby adding Authority to their Dignity, which has more of Title than Power.

Formerly the Sage-Grans managed and reported the Affairs of the Terra-firma as
well as the Sages of the Terra-firma, but of late that Order has been changed,
to lessen the Authority of the first, and to advance the latter.

The Ordinary Ambassadors sent by this State to the Emperor, are always styled
Sage-Grans in their Credentials, though perhaps they have not gone thorough
that Office, nor cannot before their return. And this is a distinction the
Senate puts betwixt their Ambassadors to the Emperor, and their Ambassadors to
Kings, which Ambassadors have only the Title of Sage-Grans de Terra-firma.

The Sage-Grans are not chosen like the rest of the Magistrates, by the Grand
Council, but by the Pregadi, who elect three at a time, every three months. To
these it belongs to convoke the Senate, as it does to the Counselors of the
College to assemble the Grand Council. In Winter their Habit is a Purple-Robe
of Cloth: in Summer, a Watered-Camlet of the same color, with Ducal-sleeves.

The Sages de Terra firma.
THere are five Sages called Sages de terra firma, created first about the year
1340, after this Republic had acquired la Marca Trevigiana. One of them is
called Sanio alla Scrittura; whose business it is to List Soldiers, to Muster
them, and to Continue or Cashier them. He is treated with upon all Levies of
Men: He reports to his Colleagues, and with them deliberates what is to be
proposed to the College: He is Judge in Appeal of all Sentences passed, either
within the City of Venice, or without, against any Soldier belonging to that
Commonwealth, and determines definitively both Civil and Criminal Matters
relating to the Soldier.

There is another of these Sages called Savio Cassiere, who orders the payment
of the Soldiers, and all others who have money to receive of the Commonwealth,
and nothing is paid without an Order signed by this Sage.

The three other have neither Title nor Business peculiar, only they consult
jointly with the said two, whose places they supply in case of absence or
sickness, but with the Title of Vice-Sage Cassiere, Vice-Sage Scrittura: Their
Office continues only for six months like the Sages-Grans. In Winter they wear
their Robe of Purple Cloth, and in Summer a Black watered-Camlet, with wide
Sleeves: They are chosen likewise by the Pregadi, but without deliberative
voices, in which they are much inferior to the Sages-Grans, and yet they have
the Title of Excellence given them:

The Sages des Orders.
THere are likewise Five Sages commonly called Sages des Orders, who are young
Noblemen of Principal Quality; admitted into the College, not to deliberate for
they have no voices, but to hear, and adapt themselves to the Government by the
example of the other Sages, whom they respect as their Masters; and therefore
when they speak to the College, they are obliged to be standing and uncovered.
It Is probable upon that account they are called Sages des Orders, because they
are to obey the Orders of the Sages Grans, and Sages de Terra Firma, who have
Power to exclude them from their respective Assemblies, when any affair of
importance is before them that requires their Ministry: Whereas the Sages des
Orders have no privilege to exclude the other Sages from their Consultations,
nor to exclude them from their Maritime transactions which are all under their
Cognizance, and therefore they are called most properly Sages de Mer.

When present at the Consultations of the Sages Grans, and Sages de Terra
firma, they may modestly give their advice; but their advice not being
deliberative, nor proposable to the Senate, the Secretary does not enter it,
unless one of the Sages-Grans or Terra firma approving their motion, ownes it
for his own, and then it is Registered in the Secretaries Roll under the name of
the said Sage, to be Baloted in the Pregadi; according to the Custom of the
Lacedaemonians; where the Lacedemone quidam Demosthenes homo impurus Author fuit
sententiae idoneae: Ad quam repudiandam proindignitate Authoris populus visus
est propensior. Proinde Ephori alterum ex senioribus forte legere, cui negotium
ejusdem sententiae dicendae demandaverunt. Plutar.
Ephori caused to be pronounced by some person of authority and desert, the
Advice that another Citizen of less quality proposed, when they thought the
proposition was for the advantage of their State, thereby preventing the
rejection of good Counsel upon prejudice to the Author. But when Affairs of Sea
are before them, these Sages have deliberative Voices, as the other Sages have.

This Office was formerly one of the highest and most important in the
Commonwealth: But since the Venetians extended in Lombardy, and began to relish
the delights of the Terra firma, they neglected their Sea-Affairs so much that
the Sages de Mer, who before were respected according to the greatness of their
Employment, lost all their Credit in a moment Re Maritima diminuta,
nostrorumque studiis ad Continentis Imperium conversis, coepit hic Magistratus
in parvo precio haveri. Cantar. 3. Reipub. Ven.
: In so much that they put into those Places only young Gentlemen, who having
little experience are received into the College to be indoctrinated; and
therefore they willingly give place to the Sages de Terra firma, whose share in
the Government is so great.

These Sages are chosen likewise for six Months by the Senate, in which they
have their places during their Office. Their Robe is Purple with straight
Sleeves.

Though this Office be of no great Power, it is mightily sought after by the
young Nobility, it being a step to greater Preferment, if they know how to
Conduct: Otherwise it is a Rock upon which many miscarry that have not that
Aptitude, or Propensity to Business, for there they are exposed to the
Observation of wise and penetrating people, who do them good or hurt
afterward, according to the Impressions they received of them: One Alexander
Contarin a Sage des Orders, would needs speak in the College without standing
up, contrary to common practice in that case; desiring to see the Part, or Law
by which standing was required; But he understood afterward to his cost, the
Obedience he ought to his Superiors. And here let me add by the by, That in
Venice, as well as anciently in Lacedemon, there are many Laws unwritten,
unless it be in the Hearts and Memories of the Citizens, upon whom the example
of their Ancestors have more effect and influence than all the Writings in the
World, good Manners being much better than good Laws Plus ibi boni mores, quam
alibi bonae Leges valent. Tac. Ger.
. Besides, it is indecency and too much forwardness in young Men to enquire
into the Institution of their Laws Haec una inter caeter as praestantissima
Lex, ne juvenum cuiquam fas sit in Leges inquirere. Plat. 1. de Leg.
, and demand Reasons for them. And in Sparta this Curiosity was expressly
forbid, lest it should be used as a pretense to their Disobedience, Si quaerere
singulis liceat, pereunte obsequio, etiam imperium intercidit. Tac. Hist. 1.

Thus have I shown all the Magistrates of which the College subsists, and I
have treated of them together, for that reason, without considering their
respective Ranks in the Commonwealth. Let us now pass to the Procurators of St.
Mark, which is the second Dignity in that State.

The Procurators of St. Mark.
THere was anciently but one Procurator of St. Mark, called Procurator Operis
B. Marci, because he had inspection over the building of that Church; and this
seems to support the opinion of those who believe that Office Donat. Jannot.
Fra. Fulgent.
to have been Created by Duke Peter Orseole, the first of that name, by reason
he began to rebuild the Ducal Chapel, which had been burned under Peter
Candien his Predecessor. Be it as it 977.
will, Bartelemi Fiepole Elected 1049, under Prince Dominick Contarin is the
first to be found in the Archives, where it appears that there was but one
Procurator, till the year 1231; at which time Philip Memme being sent
Ambassador to the Emperor Baldwin II. at Constantinople, Peter Dandole was
chosen, that the City might not be Under Duke James Fiepoli.
left without a Procurator: so that at the return of the said Memme was the
first time two Procurators are mentioned to be together: Some will have it,
that Duke Sebastian Ziani having ordered by his Will, that the Revenue of the
Lands he left to the Church of St. Mark should be annually distributed to the
Poor by the Procurator, it was thought unfit the disposition of so much Money
should be entrusted to one man, lest thereby he should insinuate with the
people, and use them in some dangerous Design; and therefore to prevent that
inconvenience, the Venetians had chosen another Procurator to see the Will of
Ziani executed: But it appears by several Manuscripts in the Library of St.
Mark, that under the three Dukes who succeeded after Sebastian Ziani, there was
but one Procurator, and that it was upon occasion of the absence of Philip
Memme, a second was created, as is mentioned before,

The Riches of St. Mark being well increased since that time, the Council chose
in the year 1258, Mark Sorance for a third. Procurator, and divided the
Business and Advantages betwixt them; charging the First with the Care and
Government of the Ducal Church: The Second with the disposal of such Legacies
as were left to it by such as lived on that side the Grand Canal: And the
Third, with whatever was left to it by such as lived on the other side of the
said Canal: which two Persons were called likewise Commissaries di qua, e di
la. And in the year 1261, a Fourth Procurator was made in the Person of James
Molin who was Colleague to the First, and writ thus, Ego N. Procurator Operum
B. Marci, not Operis, for the building was grown too great and Magnificent.

But the Republic finding this Dignity much sought after, and that it would
furnish them with a way of gratifying their Subjects without any Expense; In
the year 1319 they Created Nicholas Tailer, and Marin Foscarin a Fifth, and a
Sixth Procurator, associating them with the Second and Third, who had no
Colleagues, and giving them the keeping of all their Charters and Records.
These Six Procurators were divided into three Chambers, called commonly Ridotti
di Supra, di Citra, and di Vltra.

In the year 1442, Three more were made, viz. Lewis Loredan, Paul Tron, and
Francis Barbarigue, assigning to the First the Chamber di Supra, to the Second
the Chamber di Citra, and to the Third the Chamber di Vltra: so that each
Chamber had three Procurators, all of them reteining the Title of Procurators
of St. Mark, though only those di Sopra were entrusted with the administration
about the Ducal-Chappel.

This last Creation was attended with a Decree by which the Grand Council
ascertained the Number of Procurators, and confined them to Nine, declaring
that no Person whatever should be proposed, nor admitted into that Order, till
after the Death of some one of those Nine who were at that time in possession
of the said Dignity. That is to say, James Trevisan Di Sopra, Mark Mobin Lewis
Loredan Mark Foscare Di Citra. Andrew Contarin Paul Tron Stephen Contarin Di
Vltra, Paul Correr Fran. Barbarigue

In those days the Procurators were made only for their Merits, but the
affairs of the Commonwealth changing their Face afterward by the War of
Cambray which exhausted it, and cost them Five Millions of Gold, the Council of
Ten made two Decrees, one of the ninth of May, the other of the first of June
1516: by virtue of which, Six Noblemen, viz. Lewis Pisani, George Eme, Franc.
Fossare, Laurence Loredan, Lewis Molin, and Jerome Justinian were for a Sum of
Money added to the rest of the Procurators Under Leonard Loredan.
. But with condition that no more should be Created till the said Company
should be reduced to the determinate number of Nine; from which notwithstanding
the said Council thought fit to digress by another Decree of the 26 of March
1522, which Decree was presently followed by the Election of Three other
Procurators for their Money: so that the number of Extraordinaries was equal to
the Ordinaries under Anthony Grimani, and under Andrew Grimani who succeeded
him, they were increased to six or seven more.

This exorbitant number of Procurators was afterward by the death of several
of them reduced to Nine, whom the Council declared Procurators in Ordinary,
though of the Nine Six were Extraordinary. But in the year 1570, the Republic
being at Wars with the Turk, was forced for want of Money to sell that Dignity
again to Six Frederic Contarin, Octavian Grimani, Lew. and Franc. Priuli, Lew.
Tiepoli, and Alexand. Bon.
several Gentlemen, which since they have continued to do in all necessities of
their State, and particularly in their last War in Candia, which continued 25
years, for never was there seen so many Procurators as then. During the Siege
of Candia there were no less than Forty, some of them being of the New Nobility
paid 70000 Ducats for their Places, whereas the Ancient paid not above 30000 at
most: The Commonwealth making it a Maxim to favor the Ancient Nobility, and to
squeeze the New, as having more juice for the generality than the other.

But of all these Procurators there are only Nine in Ordinary, called by the
People Procurators par meriti, whose Places are filled up after their Deaths,
according to the Decree in the year 1572. For when any of these Nine are dead,
the Bell called la Trottiere (designed only to assemble the Grand Council) is
rung, and the Defunct is not Buried till his Successor be chosen; to prevent
Disorders that may be caused by multitude of Competitors.

The new Procurator appoints a day for the Solemnity of his Entry, according to
ancient Custom, and all his Relations and Friends come home to his House to
attend him, first to the Church of St. Mark, where he hears Mass, accompanied
by the ancient Procurator, who in Honor to him, gives him the Right Hand that
day: He is followed by the rest, as also by the Senators, and other Gentlemen
invited, who march two and two in their Scarlet Robes.

Mass being done, he swears upon the Evangelists to observe exactly his
Capitulaire, to promote with all his power the Worship of God, and the
Advancement of the Public interest; after which he enters into the College,
where having saluted the Seigniory three times, he goes up to the Counselors
Seat, and places himself next under the last of the three Chiefs of the
Quarantie Criminel. The rest of the Procurators place themselves above the
Sages-Grans; and the rest of the Nobility without Order, as they please
themselves. There it is he acknowledges the great Honor done him by the State,
in whose name the Doge replies, commending modestly his Parts, or his Services,
wishing him long enjoyment of his new Dignity. After this, he receives the Keys
of the Chamber designed for him, which are presented to him in a Purse of
Crimson-Velvet by one of the Gastaldes, or Farmers of the Company: Then he
takes another Oath upon an old Record the Grand Chancellor, holds in his hand
to that purpose, and so departing from the College, he takes possession of his
Charge.

Formerly these Procurators were in so great esteem quite through Italy, that
from all parts they sent their young Gentlemen to Venice, to be brought up in
pusillage under them: and several Princes and great Persons falling suddenly
ill in their passage that way, committed all that was most precious and
valuable about them, to their custody, as Persons above all covetousness or
deceit. So that this Magistrate was instituted partly to undertake the tuition
of Orphans; to settle the Affairs of those who had no Guardians; to regulate
the Estates of those who died Intestate, or without Issue; to see the Wills of
other Persons performed; and, in short, to keep good Order and Decorum betwixt
Family and Family.

Upon this score it was that all the Procurators were excommunicated by the two
Nuntio's Ardenaro Largo and Falcone Cesaraei.
sent on purpose to Venice by Pope John XXII, in the year 1322, to recover such
Moneys as had been left to the Apostolic Chamber by certain Merchants Trading
into the Levant; to the most part of whose Wills, the said Procurators being
left Executors, they had refused to pay the said Money to the said Prelates,
upon pretense that they would keep it for the Children, whose Fathers had never
left it to the Pope, but in fear of being damned if they restored not as much
as the principal amounted to of all the Goods they had carried of their own
into the Levant. For the Monks and the Friars had put it into their heads when
Trat. dell. Inquisit. di Ven. di Paolo servita.
they were dying, without so doing they were not capable of Absolution. And if
this Restitution should accrue to the profit of the Pope, as by a Bull of Clem.
V. 1307, it would manifestly redound to the destruction of their Families, and
the ruin of the Venetian Trade, had not the Senate interposed for the
prevention of so great an evil.

These Procurators have the care and direction of the public Alms, and can
dispose of them as they please, either to Hospitals, Monasteries unendowed,
poor Criminals, discharge of Debtors, or Redemption of such as are Subjects of
that Commonwealth, and in captivity to the Turk. So as properly these
Procurators are the common Fathers of all People in distress.

The Procurators are never sent Ambassadors in Ordinary; in whick thing the
Republic receives considerable prejudice by the multitude of Procurators
advanced to that Dignity for their Money, who might otherwise be useful to
their Country, and appear with luster in the Courts of Foreign Princes, were
they not adorned with a Robe that exempts them: for the Senate wanting many
times Persons that are rich and powerful (like the Procurators) to supply those
Embassies, are constrained to serve themselves with such Noblemen as being low
in their Fortunes, would ruin themselves absolutely in the very necessary
Expense, and dishonor their Character if they should not.

They have their Palace, as I said before, in the Place of St. Mark; but
because there is room only for six, (their old Houses being inhabited only by
Citizens) the Commonwealth allows the rest a Pension of 60 Sequins, till there
be a place vacant, to which each of them comes in his turn, as well the
Procurator created for his Money, as he that is preferred for his merit,
according to the Order of their reception.

They have likewise their Council Chamger in St. Mark, where they meet every
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. And because the Library is near those Chambers,
they have the direction thereof, and the nomination of the Ducal-Chairs, as
they call them, established for the public teaching of Philosophy, Law, and
Physic. The first is always supplied by a Nobleman, with a Pension of 500
Ducats; and in my time it was John Babtisto Contarini a Senator. The other two
are supplied by Citizens of Venice, with Pensions likewise from the Public.

The University of Padua is under the direction of two Procurators, called
Reformatori dello studio di Padua, and their Office resembles the Office of the
Provost of Sorbon. It belongs to these Reformatori to take notice of all Books
Printed in that State, and to take care they be not exposed to sale, till the
Stationers have given such Copies as are to be put into the public Libraries.

The Dignity of Procurator is for life, yet sometimes the Senate presumes to
degrade them: the last Age furnishes us with two Examples, the one in Anthony
Grimani, who was restored afterward, and created Doge: the other two in James
Sorance, who was deprived of that Honor, and banished into Istria. And of late
years Francis Morosini was in a fair way of being treated in that manner,
though the Grand Council had given him the Robe with excessive testimony of the
satisfaction they received in his Services, creating in particular favor for
him, a tenth place for the Procurators by Merit; which had never been known
before.

The Procurators are habited in Black or Violet, with Ducal-sleeves, and the
Stole black: but if they be Sages-Grans, they wear them of Purple. Upon their
grand Ceremonies, as on the day of their Entry, the Feast of St. Mark, and some
others, they put on a Robe of Crimson-Velvet, and their Stole of Gold, if they
be Knights.

Next to the Procurators are the Decemviri, called commonly the Council of Ten.

Of the Council of Ten.
THis dreadful Council was at first only a Chamber of Justice erected for
finding out the accomplices in the famous Conspiracy of Bajamont Fiepole, but
not many years after it was continued and made perpetual to avoid the clamours
of the People, who murmured, and were ready to Mutiny every time it was renewed.

In the first age of its establishment, its Authority extended not far; for the
Quarantie Criminel which is much ancienter, judged in all Criminal matters, and
in several other things. But by degrees the Ten rendered themselves so
considerable, that by their address they got the cognizance of all Crimes
against the States, as Seditions, ill-Administrations, Coining of false Money,
Assassinations committed by Noblemen, Sodomy, and sometimes of Heresy it self.
Nay, they stretched their Authority so far as to revoke and null the Decrees of
the Grand Council; and to negotiate Leagues Offensive and Defensive with
Foreign Princes unknown to the Senate, which they did upon certain Emergencies,
and in a juncture of time Vbi facto magis quam consulto opus est. Tac. Ann. 1.
properer for Execution than Deliberation. And in this they resembled the Roman
Dictator, who in time of public calamity, had all the Power of the State in
his hand, with Suspension to the Power of the Senate.

Nor do we want Instances of several Negotiations undertaken and perfected by
the Council of Ten, in defiance of the whole Pregadi. Witness Jannot de Rep.
Ven. Guichardin. Hist. l. 4.
the Peace they concluded with Antonio Soderini, and John Baptista Rodolfi,
Florence Ambassadors, who could make no advance with the Senate of Venice. And
this Peace was a Coup d'Et at, Bajazet the Second declared War against them not
long after; which if the Florentines could have foreseen, or if the Conclusion
had been protracted but for some few weeks, it is most certain the Florentines
would never have complied, unless upon better Conditions, as knowing the
Venetians would have been forced to their own terms, lest otherwise they should
have been engaged in two Wars at one time.

But at present the Authority of the Ten is restrained to Criminal Causes, and
as there is no Court in the World where the Judges proceed with more severity
against Persons accused, it will not be amiss to say something of their Methods
in this place.

After the three Capi-Dieci, who are the monthly Presidents, have received the
Depositions of the Witnesses in Writing; and have perfectly instructed
themselves in all the circumstances of the Fact, they cause the accused Person
to be secured privately, and examined by the Chief for that Week; whose Answers
are taken by a Clerk or Register, and by him communicated with his two
Colleagues, and their advice taken thereupon; after which, the Cause is carried
by them to the Council, where they all three do manage the Accusation against
the Malefactor, urging his Confession against him; and this they do, whilst the
poor Criminal is not allowed to plead his own Cause, nor to retain Counsel, nor
to see any of his Friends or Relations, or so much as to receive a Letter from
them. He has only one remedy, and that is, one of his Judges sometimes, touched
with compassion for the Person accused, or perhaps convinced of his Innocence,
will take his Cause into his protection, and defend it against the Accusers,
but though these kind of good Offices happen now and then, they are seldom
effectual. For this Council is so inclinable to severity, the least offense in
matter of State is unpardonable, and very appearance passes for a crime.

It Is said that in Athens, Draco writ all his Laws in Blood; the same may be
said as justly of this Council, in which Clemency and Mercy are Virtues
unknown; where jealousy is incurable, distrust eternal; where great reputation
is dangerous; great services odious, and commonly requited with either
banishment, or death. The Maxims of this Council are these.

That not only Crimes against the State are never to be pardoned, but even
appearances are to be punished, and that they must proceed to punishment before
they examine the offense. That in those things shadow is to be taken for
substance, and possibility for matter of fact; that humane Prudence is not to
be contented that things are not yet happened, but must order things so as they
never may happen; that the Public is to prevent what it fears, at their Cost
who gave the apprehension, without expecting till the mischief occur, there
being no greater crime than to be suspicious to ones Prince, and to disturb his
Tranquillity. That if in other Affairs it be discretion to imagine the
ill-consequences less than they will be, in matters of State, and things
relating to its quiet and repose, it is not only prudent but necessary to
imagine them greater: that injustice to private Persons is not to be considered
where advantage accrews to the Public; because, say they, it is impossible to
Govern without injury to somebody. To which we may add another of their Maxims
no less pernicious, and that is; That it is wisdom to rid themselves of any body
they have disobliged by their wrongful suspicions, lest his resentment puts him
upon revenge, and the fear of a second injury tempts him to secure himself,
though by the subversion of the Government.

By these Principles this Council is become so odious to the Nobles, that they
have tried all ways imaginable to supplant them. In the year 1628 the Family of
the Cornari and their Party pushed it so far in revenge of the Quarrel of
George Cornaro the then Duke's Son, who had been proscribed and degraded by the
Ten, that their Court would have been certainly suppressed, had it not been
prevented by an old Seignior; who in the Grand Council remonstrated, That the
safety of the State depended upon the continuation of that Council, which kept
the Nobility in their duty, by fear of Correction, and the People in obedience
by the goodness of their Example. That to suppress that Tribunal, which was the
svpport of their Laws; the knot of their Concord; the foundation of their
Equality; their defense against Tyranny; and the true balance that kept all
Parties in a poise, would be no less than to introduce Confusion,
Licentiousness, and Impunity. That nothing rendered their Government more
Excellent and Conspicuous, than to see their Nobility obnoxious to the severest
of their Courts, and their Authority checked by their fear, whilst those in
greater Power were in greatest Awe, seeing them exposed to the rigor of the
Laws as well, if not more, than particular Persons. That those who endeavored
to abolish them, were People who designed to be Criminal, if they were not so
already. That they were to be separated frrm the body of the State, if they
could not submit to a civil life, or subject themselves to the Laws, which put
them upon a happy necessity of doing well; and, in short, That it would be
dishonorable to suffer the clamours of a few Citizens to prevail for a Change
so much to the prejudice of the State.

But however the said Council is continued to this day, it is very displeasing
to the Nobility; who cannot hear it mentioned without trembling.

In the year 1670 the Grand Council proceeding to the Election of the Ten, (who
are renewed every year in the Month of August) all those that were proposed,
were rejected two Sundays together, and in the third there was only Seignior
Angelo Emo who passed in the Balotation: nay the ill-humour was carried on so
far, that some of the Electors named either in contempt or despite, some of
the new Nobility, and among the rest a Portugal called Fonseca, of Jewish
Extraction, knowing well those kind of People would never get their just number
of Voices. For that Court, which is as it were the Parliament and la Fournelle
of the Nobles, has been always supplied by the worthiest and best qualified
Gentlemen.

Nevertheless this Council is it, upon which depends the whole Economy of that
Government: this Council is the Cornerstone of the State, not to be stirred
without destruction to the whole Fabric. It is the Copy of the famous Temple
the Ephori of Sparta erected to Fear, as the only Deity, was able to restrain
men, and keep them to their duty: In a word, it is a Virgin full of eyes, and
all of them incessantly watching for preservation of the common Liberty,
insomuch that it is obvious whenever the Council of Ten is dissolved,
confusion and disorder will quickly follow in the State, as happened to the
Commonwealth of Sparta upon suppression of the Ephori, who, as Aristotle tell
us, were the very Nerves of that flourishing Aristocracy.

The Quarantie Criminel labors upon all occasion for suppression of the
Council of Ten, as those who have robbed them of their principal Authority; for
before the Creation of these Decemviri, it is manifest the cognizance of all
Crimes belonged to that Chamber, and after that dissolution it would return
into the former Channel. For this reason Francis Contarini one of the Heads in
the year 1628 spoke with such heat against them, that most of the Nobility
cried out, Via via li Dieci, away with the Dieci, and others spared not to
salute them with Vaga in mal' hora quel Consiglio de Dieci, li venga la rabbia.
May the Council of Ten never prosper: the Devil them, and many other
imprecations, that show well enough what kindness the Nobility had for that
Court. In effect, the Rigor of the Council of Ten has been so great, there is
scarce a Noble Family but produces instances of it, and many of them written in
Blood. And if there be not often seen Noble Persons hanging by the heels
betwixt the Pillars of St. Mark See the Remarks.
, it is not that they are grown more humane or compassionate, but they have
found out new and more private ways, that the Nobility may not lose their
Veneration with the People, nor they think themselves governed by Profligates,
as they would do if they should see those objects too often. These ways are by
drowning them in the night in the Canal Orfano, and others already too well
known in the World.

These secret Executions are too frequent at Venice, and if People vanish in a
moment, it is by the Conjuring of the Council of Ten: this is the silent way
they take to prevent the Murmurs of the Nobles, who always judge amiss of the
Decrees of the said Court, from a constant aversion they bear to their
Jurisdiction. This is the way they take to sweeten and cajole the Parents and
Relations of the Defunct, as if they did it to prevent the infamy that would
adhere to the Family, if the Execution should be public: And yet for all their
tenderness, this Caution is never used but where the business is doubtful, for
if the Evidence be clear, and the Person accused, palpably Guilty, no such
Complement is used; but he runs through all the forms of Justice, and is
attended to the Gibbet with all manner of Solemnity. There is no Appeal from
the Judgment of the Council of Ten, no more than of old from the Roman
Decemviri; nor can their Arrest be modified, or altered, but by themselves, or
their Successors: Only sometimes the Avogadors might suspend the Execution,
provided it was not in matter of State, for in that Case no suspension was
endured.

It Is a dangerous matter in this Council to intercede for any one questioned
for practicing against the State, it is no less than to bring a man into
suspicion, and exposing him to the Malefactors misfortunes. And therefore the
Nobility are many times seen to forsake their nearest Relations upon those
occasions, and to Prosecute them severely, to clear themselves of being
accomplices. Fear overpowers their humanity Interciderat sortis humanae
commercium, vis metus; quantumque sevitia liceret, miseratio arcebatur. Tac.
Ann. 3.
, and the stronger the Accusations are, and the more dangerous the Condition of
the Party, the weaker is their Compassion, and the fainter their Intercession.
Every Man's Tears, and Sighs are observed, and it is little less than being
Criminal, to bewail the Condemnation of another.

All Magistrates employed abroad, as Generals, Proveditors, General at Sea,
Podestates, Governors, and all other Officers are responsible for their
Conduct to this Council, where all Complaints are received readily against
them. There it is their Actions are canvased, and controlled: There their Pride
is humbled, their Extortion punished, and their Misdemeanors inevitably
chastised. There Generals of Armies are handled like Slaves, and Banishment,
Imprisonment, Degradation, and Death, common Rewards. For if they lose but an
handful of Ground, though they resisted never so well, they are sure to be
guilty, Innocence being never to be pleaded, where the State has received a
loss. And I remember I was told by a wise Man of that Country, that the
Bragadin might as well have been Flayed by the Turks, after the Surrender of
Famagosta, as by the Council of Ten, who would be sure to Hang him,

No man's Conduct is so exact and regular, but these severe and scrutinous
Judges will pick a hole in it, though it be but for faults of omission: And
those Persons who escape out of their clutches, and come off with a bare
reprimand, pass in the world for men of exemplary Probity, and incomparable
Wisdom. No man's Innocence is doubted that is acquitted by that bloody Tribunal:
where Parents have been known to condemn their own Children to Death; and among
the rest, the Doge Anthony Venier See the Remarks.
, who with great difficulty was prevailed upon to change the Sentence of Death
that he had given against his Son, into perpetual Imprisonment.

Two of the three Inquisitors of State are taken out of this Council, and the
third out of the Counselors of the College. The Lords of this Council are so
absolute in their Power, they can cause the Duke himself to be drowned, or
strangled without the knowledge of the Senate, that is to say, if all Three of
the Capi-Dieci agree to the Execution; Otherwise all the Ten are to be called.
They have Persons in pay, who are obliged to keep a Register of all the Words
and Actions of the considerable Noblemen and Citizens, as was practiced in the
time of the Emperor Tiberius. And so far are they from discouraging Informers,
that they invite them by Rewards. Many times honest men are treated at that
rate, who are not sensible of their own guilt by any thing but their
Imprisonment or Exile. So Reos fuisse se, tantum poena experti. Ann. 15.
that with them every thing is to be feared, every thing is to be suspected:
Silence, Discourse, Company, Solitude, even the Walls themselves. Congressus,
Coiloquia, notae, ignotaeque aures vitari, etiam tectum and parietes
circumspectantur. Ann. 4.

If any man, speaks ill of the Government, he is packed away in the night, and
drowned in the Canal Orfano. If it be a Foreign Nobleman, or Gentleman, he is
commanded out of the State within 24 hours upon pain of Death. This they
practiced upon a French Officer for charging them publicly with Ingratitude.
Tiberius was of Opinion that People were not to be restrained in their Converse
at the Table, and moved the Senate upon several occasions, that they would not
be severe in matter of Words Deprecabatur tam praecipites verborum poenas. ann.
3.

Ne Convivalium fabularum simplicitas, in Crimen duceretur, postulavit. Ann. 5.


. But in Venice (though a Republic) they are not so favorable to the People;
the Council of Ten having stretched their Law against Treason, to Verbal
Expressions, betwixt which and matter of Fact they make very little difference.

The Inquisitors of State have their Nocturnal accesses to the Palace of St.
Mark, into which they enter as they please by private ways, to which they only
have Keys; and the Duke is more afraid to see them, than to be seen by them:
They can pass if they please to the very Bed of the Duke; They can enter his
Closset, open his Cabinets, read his Letters, and take an Inventory of what
they think fit, whilst neither himself, nor any of his family, dare pretend to
observe them: And his Children, Brothers, and Nephews are excluded the Council
of Ten, only to give more liberty of Complaints and Information against him.

When a Gentleman is suspected, and proof is wanting for his Condemnation in
the usual forms, to charge him with Treason, supplies all defects, and stops
the mouths of his Relations Majestatis Crimina subdebantur uniculum and
necessitas silendi. Ann. 3.
. (For Treason is always the Crime of those that have no other Majestatis
singular and unicum Crimen eorum qui Crimine vacarent. Plin. Pan.
.) They dispatched the Senator Antonio Foscarini See the Remarks.
, in half a days time, and his Death was sooner known than his Imprisonment.

A remarkable instance of the jealousy of Commonwealths, where extraordinary
reputation, is extraordinary danger: For that was all his Offense, though he
was accused of Treason, which after his Death was known to be false. They do
sometimes make use of a man's own Servants to rid themselves of his Master; and
afterward to keep it the more secret, the Instrument comes to be drowned, or
stabbed Malcrumfacinorum Ministri quasi exprobrantis aspiciuntur. Tac. Ann. 14.
, whose presence would seem to reproach them by what they had done. A fit
recompense for a Treacherous Servant. And when an eminent Informer comes to be
discovered to the World, they not only use him no farther, but they Sacrifice
him presently to the public discontent, as Tiberius did Scelerum Ministros
veteres, and praegranes afflixit. Ann. Piaculares publici cdii victimas. Plin.
, to show that he was the cause of all their Injustice; by which means they
pacify the indignation of the irritated Families.

Thus did they proceed against Foscarini's Accusers, though they decreed
extraordinary Honors to his Memory, as willingly consenting he should be
reckoned among the gods, whom they cannot endure among men: Sit Deus modo non
sit vivus. They have likewise another Maxim among them, to connive at many
faults they might easily prevent, to render them more infamous whom they design
to destroy.

All those who are taken with Firearms about them, are punished with Death by
the Council of Ten, without Mercy. In the year 1671, the fourth of January,
John Moccenigue, a Nobleman, having fired two Pocket-Pistols upon Nicolas, and
Sebastian Foscarini, two other Noblemen, at that time in a Lodging in the Opera
of St. Savior, was degraded of his Nobility, proscribed, and condemned to have
his Head chopped off betwixt two Pillars of St. Mark, whenever he should be
taken, the said Council Promising 2000 Ducats to those who should should take
him alive, or kill him within the Territory of that The tenor of the
Proclamation published by the Council of Ten against John Moccenigue-
State, and 4000 if he were taken, or killed out of the State: Granting him
moreover who should either kill, or apprehend him, Pardon for any Nobleman or
Citizen that should be Guilty of Treason (though it was never done before in
Venice, where Crimes of that nature were always unpardonable) all the Goods of
the said Moccenigue, movable and immovable, present and to come, (not excepting
his Fiefs, nor what was committed to him in trust) were Confiscated: All
Contracts passed by him six Months before his Condemnation, were Cancelled and
declared void; with strict charge to the Avogadors to make exact Inquisition
according to their Consciences, that the Goods of the said Criminal might not
be diverted nor imbezled, with prejudice to the Public. Command was given to
the Commonalty of all Villages, Towns, and Cities under the Jurisdiction of
that Commonwealth, to sound the Toxin to take him living or dead, under penalty
of the Galleys or Dungeon to such Officers as should be wanting in their
duties. Forbidding likewise all Noblemen, his Relations, or Friends, to hold
correspondence, or commerce with him by Letters or Discourse, or to give him
any assistance either at home or abroad, upon pain of Confiscation of their
Estates. Moreover, all Offenders against this Decree, who were not Noblemen,
nor Citizens of Venice, should serve ten years together in the Galleys, with
Irons on their Legs; and if they were incapable of working, they should lie as
long in the Dungeon. Nay the Arrest went farther, and declared, That the said
John Moccenigue should never be indemnifyed, not by discovering things of never
so great importance to the State; not by engaging to bear Arms perpetually in
the States service. Not by promising to take or kill any other Offender, equal,
or superior to himself. That he should never obtain any favor, suspention,
alteration, modification, compensation, or other diminution of the Tenor of
this Decree, though Foreign Princes should intercede with never so much
earnestness in his behalf. That no General either at Land or Sea, nor any other
Magistrate whatever, vested with privilege of Indemnifying Banished, or
Proscribed persons, should extend that Privilege to him. That whoever should
but propose any thing in his favor, should pay 2000 Ducats for his Offense,
which should be strictly exacted by the Counselors, and Avogadors, to be put
into the Coffers of the Council of Ten. And finally, the said Malefactor was
Condemned to all other Pains expressed and specified in any other Arrest
whatever. By which the Council of Ten designed to give an eminent example of
their Justice against the Person of a Nobleman, who reckoned in his Family four
Doges, an infinite number of Procurators, Senators, and Generals of Armies, and
allied to all the most considerable Families in Venice. Bearing no respect to
his age (which was not above 22): To the Merit and Services of his Glorious
Ancestors: To the Tears and Sighs of his Wife; To the Innocence of his Son, at
that time hanging at the Breasts of his Mother; Nor even to the Pardon of the
Foscarini themselves; the Elder of which begged it generously of the Senate some
days before his Death: and the Younger, who was wounded letting the Prosecution
fall. And to show the efficacy and force of these sort of Proclamations, it is
to be considered that the said Moccenigue having fled to Rome, where he hoped
to have been Protected in the house of the Venetian Ambassador Michael Morosini
his Father in Law; that prudent Minister understanding the duty of his Charge,
and having been formerly of the Council of Ten, would not receive him into his
Palace, nor violate the public Majesty wherewith his Character Invested him.

And here I shall take notice, that at Venice their Opera's, Comedies, and
Gaming-houses are inviolable places, Consecrated (if I may so say) to public
Pleasure, insomuch as Banished Persons and Criminals resort to them as safely
as to the Sanctuaries of old, the Council of Ten not reserving to themselves
the Cognizance of such Offenses as are committed there, and all to recommend
their frankness to their Subjects, and their hospitality to Strangers,

Coining of False Money is an unpardonable Offense, and the rather because
Italy is full of little Princes, who make use of that way to enrich themselves
to the prejudice of their Subjects, and Neighbors: But as to Sodomy, they seem
either willing to connive at it, as a thing rather contrary to good Manners,
than inconsistant with the Government; or else knowing the nature of the Sin,
and their propensity to it, they think it not convenient to attempt a Remedy,
lest they should discover their own Omittere potius praevalida and adulta
vitia, quam hoc assequi ut palam fieret quibus flagitiis impares essemus. Tac.
Ann. 3.
Shame and Impotency, wherefore, whenever this Sin is punished, it is in the
person of some poor Creature, who has neither Money nor Friends.

This Council is likewise very severe with Stationers who sell Books reflecting
upon the Government; and when any is found offending in that kind, they are at
least condemned to the Galleys, and their Estates Confiscated. Hence it is,
that not one of them dares sell Guichardin's History of the Geneva Impression,
nor the Squitirio della liberta Veneta, which proves the subjection of the
Venetians to the Roman and Greek Emperors.

The Ten do proceed likewise against such Ecclesiastics as procure
Bishoprics, Abbeys or any other Benefices from Rome, by means contrary to the
Laws of their Country; and when they have got Grants of them, the Council of
Ten opposes their Possession: thus they served Charles Quirini who had obtained
from Pope Urban VIII. the Bishopric of Zebenigo in Dalmatia, by the mediation
of Foreign Ambassadors in his Holiness his Court.

The Noblemen composing the Council of Ten, ought to be of Ten several
Families, without any Kindred or Proximity of Relation; that there may be no
prejudice nor partiality in their Votes: For if two or three Gentlemen allied
either by Birth or Marriage, should be admitted into the said Council, it might
be the occasion of a thousand Iujustices, whilst the corrupting of one Member
would endanger the corruption of all his Relations: Besides, three or four
Families might easier unite in any enterprise against the State. In the mean
time the Venetians think it not fit to have more than Ten of that Council, lest
it should render their Authority less dreadful to have it divided among a
greater number of Persons: And yet their Court consists commonly of seventeen,
the Duke presiding these, and the Six Counselors of the College assisting.
Sometimes there is a Giunta, or accession of certain Senators, who have equal
suffrage in the said Council, as the rest, in which case the Procurators, the
Sage-Grans, and the three Avogadors have right to sit among them by virtue of
their Places, not as Judges, but Assistants, without any Votes Jus suffragii
non habent, etsi omnibus negotiis, etc. G. Contr. Ven. Reipub. Is. 3.


Every Month three Capi-Dieci are chosen by Lots; These Capi-Dieci have Power
to open all Letters addressed to the Council, and to report them when they have
done: They receive privately the Depositions of Informers, and give out Orders
for the seizure of the Person accused: They visit the Prisons, examine what
Prisoners they please, and discharge what they think Innocent. They assemble
the Council, not only every eight days according to Custom, but as often as they
think fit, provided two of them concur in it. Each of these three Capi-Dieci
has his Week, during which, he that is chief receives the Letters, Interrogates
parties, and having communicated with his two Colleagues, concerts with them
what is to be done: And he that is in Authority, is in the Grand Council with
the Avogador de Semaine, placed right over against the Doge.

In short, the Dieci of Venice have the same Power as the Ephori had in Sparta.
The Dieci can Depose, Imprison, and Condemn to Death all the Magistrates in the
City, even the Duke himself: But the Ephori could not judge either of the Kings
of Sparta without concurrence of the Senate and the other King (for in that
State there were always Two Contemporary Kings See the Remarks.
) and if the Ephori had Power to put all sorts of People to Death without
formal Process (which gave Ephoris licet indicta causa tot occidere quot
libitum est. Isocr. Ephirorum imperium mirum in modum ibi Tyrannicum. l, 4. de
leg.
Plato occasion to call their Authority Tyranical); The Council of Ten have
often made it appear that they are absolute, in Condemning their
Fellow-Citizens upon bare suspicions, yet in reality they are more moderate
than the Ephori.

The Ephori had Cognizance of all affairs belonging to their Commonwealth, and
a superinspection upon the Conduct of all Persons who manage it, and therefore
they were called Ephori. The Dieci of Venice have the same Power. The Ephori
Ephoros vocarunt quod Reipnegotia inspicerent. Suid.
were instituted as a Balance to their Kings, and to keep them within the
bounds of their Duty; the Dieci were instituted to curb and withstand the
ambition and insolence of the Nobles: and as Theopompus rendered Kingship
agreeable to the Lacedaemonians, by the Creation of this Magistrate to restrain
it from extravagance, so have the Venetians made their Government more
plausible to the People, by setting up the Council of Ten, as a check to the
exorbitance of their Commanders; so that these Ten are the defenders of the
People, as well as the Ephori, though their Government be not Popular. The
Ephori had a care and superintendency over their Sports, and public Combats
invented for the exercise of their Youth; The Ten have the ordering of public
Feasts, and solemn Combats betwixt the Castellans and the Nicolates; and the
direction of their See the Remarks
Regates or Sea Fights. The Ephori had the disposing of the Public Revenue;
the Dieci have their Treasury, where a third of the Public Moneys is entered,
with a superintendency of all the Schools and Fraternities of the City, which
are taxed upon any public necessity, as the Dieci think fit. In a word, the
Dieci are annual like the Ephori, and cannot no more than they, be continued in
their Office; but they may be chosen again two years after: And this is so
exactly observed, that a Nobleman who has been but one day in Office, if the
year be out, deposits his Decemviral Robe, and is excluded the Council for two
years, as much as if he had executed the Office his full time.

The new Nobility cannot pretend to this Charge, but after long and
considerable service, for they must be so many intermediate Offices, and gain
the friendship of the Ancient Nobility, who will otherwise oppose their
Elections: Besides, the ancient Nobility will not equal them so soon by those
Honors, lest having great Estates generally, the addition of such great
Dignity should advance them above them.

The Dieci have place, and deliberative Voice in the Senate, wearing a
Purple-Robe with Ducal-Sleeves.

This Council in their Orders and Proclamations do assume the Title of Eccelso,
to show the Grandeur and Puissance of their Dignity.

Of the Quaranties.
THere are Three Courts in Venice called Quaranties, because each of them
consists of Forty Members. The first is the New Quarentie-Civil, to which an
Appeal lies in all Civil Causes, from the Sentence of all Magistrates abroad.
The Second is the old Quarantie-Civil, that Judges in all Appeals from the
inferior Magistrates in the City. The Third is the Quarantie-Criminel, which
Judges in all Criminal matters except Treason, which belongs properly to the
Council of Ten. These Three Courts are each of them considerable, but the last
is of greater reputation than the other two, because all its Members have
deliberative Voices in the Senate. Because their Capi have place in the College
among the Counselors di Sopra, and because it is called the Serenissimo
Seignoria, like the Assembly of the College, their three Counselors presiding
there in the name of the Seigniory. Besides, this Court is the Parliament of
all the Subjects of that State; as the Council of Ten is of the Nobles.

Eight Months is the time they remain in either of these Quaranties, and the
first step being to the New Quarantie, the next is to the Old, and the third to
the Criminel.

The two Quaranties-Civil consist only of the poorer Nobility, for the richer
sort will not have patience to attend sixteen Months to gain a Ducat by their
Place, and therefore they aspire to enter at first into the Quarantie-Criminel,
at least into the Old Quarantie, one, or perhaps two Months before it
concludes, to the end they may pass presently to the Quarantie-Criminel, and
have Voices in the Pregadi.

To each of these Courts there being two Contradictors or Advocates, who
undertake the Causes of the Defendants, and manage them against the Avogadors,
especially in Criminal matters, where all their Art and Rhetoric is shown in
the behalf of the Person accused.

And here it is to be observed, that inferior Judges cannot be called to the
Old Quarantie-Civil, without the advice and consent of three Auditori Vecchi,
nor to the New Quarantie-Civil but by permission of the Auditori Novi: For if
these Auditors confirm the Sentence of the inferior Magistrate, the business
cannot be carried up into a higher Court, without deposing a certain Sum of
Money, besides paying the Fees.

There have been admitted into the Senate forty of the Judges -Criminel, (who
are commonly Gentlemen of the second and third Form) to balance the ancient
Nobility, against whom they usually unite, by reason of the animosity they bear
them. But many times that is an impediment to their affairs.

The Chiefs of these Quaranties change every two Months: It belongs to them to
appoint the time for hearing a Cause, which they call dar il pendere, or dar il
Consiglio all Cause. But in the two Quaranties-Civil, Priviledg'd Causes are
first to be dispatched, and those next who are brought in by the Auditors in
order, according to the Roll. Those Causes are called Priviledg'd which are
betwixt Father and Son, Mother and Daughter, or Brother and Brother; as also
the Causes of the Avogadori, which are called Cause Avogadoresche: The Causes
of Prisoners, and Pupils under the Tutilage of the Procurators of St. Mark.

It Is not lawful to solicit these Judges either in Person, or by Proxy: All
that can lawfully be done in the Quaranties-Civil, is to Petition those Chiefs
to bring the business to a speedy Hearing. But in the Quarantie-Criminel it is
lawful to employ all the interest, and importunity of ones Friends. Let us now
pass to the inferior Magistrates of the City.

Of the three Avogadors.
THE Avogadors were instituted under Duke Orie Malipierre about the year 1180,
and are in France called Avocats General, but with this difference; in France
they speak finally after the Counsel for the Plaintiff has spoken; and at
Venice the Avogadors speak first, and open the Accusation Consilio coacto
magistratus Advocatorius accusatoris vice fungitur. G. Contarin. Ven. Reip. l.
3.
, after which the Counsel for the Defendant replies.

The principal duty of an Avogador is to see the Laws observed, and to proceed
rigorously against those who transgress them; as also to oppose the
Deliberations of all the other Magistrates. In which they resemble the ancient
Tribunes of the People in Rome, who, as Aulus Gellius reports Tribuni pl.
antiquitus creati videntur, non juri dicundo, nec causis, querelisque de
absentibus noscendis, sed intercessionibus faciendis. C. 12. l. 13.
, had not the power of Judging, but of interposing their Authority in defense
of the Rights and Privileges of the People against the Authority of the
Magistrates, not excepting even the Dictators. Gaspar Contarin tells us they
may be called Tribunes of the Law, because they are the Conservators of that,
as the Roman Tribunes were of the Liberties of the People.

The difference betwixt the Tribunes and the Avogadors is this, that the
Tribunes were Creatures only of the People; the Avogadors of the Commonwealth
in general, and are therefore called Avogadori di Commune Advocatores Communis
dicuntur, quasi omnium advocati, and Intercessores. Contarin. Ven. Reip. l. 3.
. They remove all Process whether they please, those which are of no great
consequence, to the Quarantie Criminel; others to the Senate or Grand Council,
according to the quality of the Cause.

The Quarantie Criminel cannot refuse them when they desire to be heard, by
reason of a peculiar Privilege; and therefore when an Avogador presses, all
other business must be laid aside. Sometimes they carry their Civil Affairs
before the College, as when Controversy is about Fiefs, or Lands depending upon
any Manor, which they would reunite to the Demeasns, as it happened in the year
1670 about Lands which the Avogadors of Brescia alleged belonged in Propriety
to them.

In all Debates and Deliberations either of the Grand Council or Senate, it is
necessary at least one Avogador be present; if not, their Resolutions are void,
and of none effect.

The good or ill Administration of Justice depends upon these Avogadors, it
being their work to frame and prepare all Processes brought into Court, and if
they be ill men, as happens too often, it is in their power to do a great deal of
mischief.

There are always grave and austere men chosen into these Offices, to give the
People greater awe and veneration for the Laws, and to oblige them to greater
severity, the Law gives these Avogadors a considerable share in all
Confiscations. One Theodore Balbi, who had narrowly escaped the Accusations of
his enemies in the Council of Ten, was made an Avogador not long after his
discharge, merely out of an opinion that he would use the same severity toward
other People, that he had experimented himself; and he answered their
expectation.

When the Quarantie-Criminel judges a Person, the Avogador who brings in the
Process has no deliberative Voice, in respect that he is the Accuser; but he
has power to propose the ridgest punishment he pleases, after which, the three
Presidents of the Assembly propose another more moderate, and both opinions
being put to the Balot, plurality of Voices carry it.

When the Grand Council makes any new Order that the Avogadors judge prejudicial
to the Public, or any ways incompatible with the Laws of the State; they can
hinder the Registring and publication of it till it be more deliberately
debated in another Assembly, like the Roman Tribunes, who could stop the
Decrees of all other Magistrates; and this is called in Venice, Intromittero,
answering to Intercederi in Latin, which is as much as to Withstand, or to
Oppose, in English Erat intercedere id quod vulgo dicimus se opponere. N. Gr.
Com. Romans l. 1.
Upon this Consideration it was that Don Innego de Gardenas, Ambassador in
Ordinary at Venice from the Court of Spain, endeavored at the time of the
Jurisdiction to have been made Avogador, though but for two hours, promising
(without farther explaining himself) that in time he would accommodate the
difference betwixt his Holiness and that Commonwealth; which, in my judgment,
he proposed only 1. Touching building of Churches. 2. About Alienation of
Secular Estates to the Clergy.
for the suspension of two Decrees of the Senate, which were then in dispute: a
thing the Pope did passionately desire, that he might have honorable pretense
for the revoking his Censures. But the Seigniory discerning the drift of his
Proposition, and of what consequence it would be to suffer Suspension of the
Laws, they returned no Answer to the Ambassadors motion, that they might not
disgust him by a refusal.

They have Power likewise to hinder their Possession of those places, or the
Execution of them, if in, till they purge themselves of the Accusations against
them. Thus the Avogador Corrare would have suspended the Vest of the
Procuratorship from Francis Morosini, who had been in possession of the said
Dignity 14 months, which doubtless would have had its effect, had not Corrare
abandoned his Accusation.

It Is the Office of the Avogadors to exact and receive all Fines and Mulcts
charged upon any Magistrate for transgressing the Laws: and out of every Fine
they have a certain allowance, which with their other Fees, and ordinary
Assignments upon confiscated Goods, amounts, and makes their Revenue very
considerable.

Being Guardians of the Laws, they are obliged at certain times to read in the
Grand Council the ancient Laws, to rub up the memory of the Noblemen, and keep
them to a stricter observation of them. For good Laws are not sufficient,
without good Men to assert them, and see them put in execution Non satis visum
est bonas leges habere, nisi Custodes earum diligentissimos Cives Creassent
quos Graeci (...) appellant.


And as the Nomophylaces of the Athenians kept the Register of their public
Deliberations, to which they had recourse, when it was in question what was to
be done, or what had been formerly done in that case: in like manner the
Venetian Avogadors keep the Originals of all Orders of the Grand Council, and
all the Decrees of the Senate, as also a Register of all Noble Families, in
which they set down daily the Birth, Estate, Name, and Surname of every
Gentleman and Gentlewoman, that no false Nobility might be foisted in among the
true; which would be easily discerned by comparing their Notes with those who
present themselves for Entrance into the Council, when their age requires.

Their Authority formerly was much greater, for they had the management of all
sorts of Affairs: but since the Power of the Council of Ten has been
established, the Power of the Avogadors has been lessened: and yet they can
suspend the Decrees of the Grand Council, by producing new matter in favor of
the Criminal, unless his Crime be against the Government, for in that Case
there is no suspension. It is always one of these Avogadors who pronounces
Sentence in that Court against the Persons condemned. They are Elected by the
Senate, and Grand Council; the first proposes, and the second almost constantly
accepts, but they may reject if they please: yet that falls out but seldom, by
reason of the respect is born to the Senate, whose Judgment is reckoned as their
Touchstone for Virtue and Esteem.

During the life of the Doge, neither his Children nor Brothers can be
Avogadors, lest they should incline more to him than the Commonwealth, and
relax something of the severity of the Laws, in favor to him.

The Avogadors are habited like the three Capi-Dieci in Purple-Robes with
Ducal-Sleeves, and the Red-Bonnet in Winter: but in Summer their Robe is of
Black Watered-Camlet, with a Bonnet of the same. Every Grand Council-day they
are clothed in Scarlet; and their Office continues for 16 months.

The two Censors.
THE Jurisdiction of the Censors extends principally to the Manners of
particular Persons: to the Designs and Contrivances of the Nobles in the
Broglio to obtain Preferment; to the Condemnation or Fining of those who
violate the Statutes of the Grand Council. To the payment of Wages; the
pilfering of Servants; and lastly, to the correction of the Gondoliers when
they stop up the passage upon the Canal, toward the Palace of St. Mark, for
which offense they have many times given them the Estrapade in some public
place.

When a Malefactor is interrogated by order of the Quarantie Criminel, one of
these Censors, one of the Judges of the Night al Criminal are present, but
always with the Avogador who brings in the Process, and these three Noblemen
assembled, are called Il Colleggietto Criminale.

These Censors are 16 months in Office, during which time they have
deliberative Voices in the Pregadi, and are habited in Purple-Cloth with
Ducal-Sleeves in Winter, and in Summer with black Watered-Camlet, and Chaperons
of the same.

The three Syndics.
THis Magistrate has Authority over all the inferior Justices of St. Mark, and
the Rialte, with power to revise their Acts, and vacate their Decrees: He
punishes the Notaries, Proctors, Sergeants, and Copistes or Clerks, who exact
more than is required by the Tax. But this is not over-strictly observed, for
the Syndics do many times dissemble and connive, in consideration of the profit
accrewing thereby.

But as the Syndics can null or reform the Sentences delle Corti di San-Marco e
Rialto, so the Avogadors can correct or vacate the Decrees of the Syndics, and
when they have done, carry the business before one of the Quaranties, or the
College of XX Sages, according to the quality of the Cause. There are three
Syndics in Extraordinary, to ease the other, and supply their places when any
of them are absent.

The six Seigniors Criminal de Nuit.
THese Gentlemen have the Cognizance of all Thefts and Robberies by night.
Receivers of stolen Goods; Incendiaries, such as have two Wives, Ravishers of
Women, and Jews taken lying with Christian Women, fall under their
Jurisdiction; the Jews are many times condemned to death for that Crime, and if
their Sentence be confirmed by the Magistrate dell' Proprio, (who
notwithstanding is but a Civil Officer) there lies no appeal, otherwise it is
removable to one of the Quaranties-Civil.

These Lords Criminal of the Night were instituted at first but two by Duke
Marin Morosini, one of them with Jurisdiction beyond the Rialto, and another on
the other side: but in the Dogeship of Renier Zen his successor, the Grand
Council added four more to them. Their Office is like the Office of the
Chevalier du Guet among the Romans. They are annual, and their Fee a Ducat
every morning they sit, and half a Ducat every Afternoon.

The six Lords-Civil of the Night.
THey are Judges in certain Nocturnal Affairs that are not altogether Criminal,
as also in cheats and frauds betwixt private persons; they lay the Damages,
appoint the Costs, and execute the Sentences of the Magistrate called al
Foristerio, for regulating and letting of Houses.

They were instituted under Duke Peter Lando with the Auditori Novissimi, and
created for the ease of the said Auditori, who had too much business upon their
hands; their judgment goes no higher than fifty Ducats.

The three Proveditors du Commun.
THE Office of this Magistrate (not unlike the Aedils in Rome) is to keep up
the neatness and uniformity of the City; to see the Pavements and Bridges kept
in repair: to look to the Ships, and see they be not over-laden: to preserve
the Privileges of the Citizens; to set a Plate upon new-Printed Books; to
inspect the several Companies of Artists; and the Gondoliers. They have Vote in
the Pregadi, and continue in Office sixteen months.

The three Proveditori all Ragione Vecchie.
THeir Office is in the name of the Senate to send the accustomed Presents to
Princes, Ambassadors, or other great Lords as come to Venice, and to keep an
account of all those kind of expenses. They are Judges of all damage done to
the Demeasns of the Seigniory without the Town, with Power to inspect the
Accounts of the Proveditors all Biave. This Magistrate resembles the Questors
in Rome, who had the care of lodging such Princes and Ambassadors as came
suddenly to Town, and to furnish them with necessary conveniences in the Name
of the Public: they continue likewise 16 months, and have voice in the Pregadi.

There are also three Proveditori all Ragione nuove, young Gentlemen appointed
to look to the payment of such as are concerned in the Public Forms, and to
seize their Estates upon any defect. It belongs to them likewise to cause to be
coined several little pieces of Silver called Oselle, which pieces the Doge
presents to all the Noblemen of the Grand Council, in lieu of certain
River-fowl which were sent them formerly to their Houses, from whence the
Medals are called Oselle.

The four Proveditori alla Giustitia Vecchia.
THeir Office is to judge in cases of false weights or measures, and they
commonly punish those Offenders severely. They set the prises upon Fruit, and
Seafish, which the Fishermen are obliged to sell standing, with their Hats in
their hands, by that inconvenience to humble them, and take from them the
confidence of bartering too sawcily with the Citizens. All Mechannicks are
under the Jurisdiction of these Proveditors, so that if a Citizen has any
controversy with an Artificer, it belongs to these Proveditors to decide it.

These kind of Tradesmen cannot change their Signs for their Shops, but with
permission from them; nor take an Apprentice or other Person to work, without
acquainting them with the Conditions, which they cause to be entered into a
Register, otherwise their Contracts are void.

There are three other Proveditors called della Giustitia Nuova, whose
Authority is over Inns and Cabaritts; to prevent selling of sophisticated
Wines. They take care likewise that Taxes be well paid, and they continue 16
months in their Office.

The three Sopra Proveditorialle Biave.
THese Seigniors like the Aediles Coreris instituted by Julius Caesar, have
care of providing the City with Corn and all sorts of Grain, that by keeping
the People in plenty, they might keep them obedient and well-affected to the
Government: upon apprehension of Famine, these Officers advise with the Doge
and Sages of the College how they may supply themselves from the Neighboring
Provinces, and to this purpose they contract with certain wealthy Merchants who
engage to bring them in, and deliver them at Venice the quantity agreed for, at
a precise day upon certain Conditions, which are always made good by the
Seigniory, and if the Merchant fails, he is condemned in a considerable penalty.

There are subservient to these Magistrates three other Nobles called
Proveditori all Biave who do the same, and two Seigniori al Formento, who
visit the public Magazins; see them filled up again every year, and when any
thing wastes, or grows unfit to keep them, they see it sold, and other bought in
its place, by which means they are continually full.

The four Sopra Proveditori del Sal.
THese Officers see the Salt brought from the Public Salt-houses, into the
Granaries of the City, where it is disposed and sold by their direction; they
have Power to punish such as imbezle it, or sell it without permission. This
Office is of considerable profit, but it lasts but ten Months. The Senate
Creates sometimes three Revisori al Sal, to look into the abuses committed in
the Gabelle, after which, their Office ceases.

The three Sopra Proveditori alla Sanita.
IT IS their Office to see that nothing contagious be brought into the City, and
that nothing putrified or stinking be sold in the Market. It Is their Office to
send out of the Town all such as are ill of any Pestilential Disease; to hinder
any Persons, or Commodities from Landing till they know from whence they come,
and the Captain of the Ship produces a formal Certificate from the Magistrates
of the place where he Laded. Otherwise they are sent three miles off from
Venice to the Lazant to make their Quarantine. And these Proveditori are
assisisted with three more of the same Name.

There is no Town in the World where they are more careful of their health than
this: and not without reason, for indeed the Plague has raged strangely among
them, and continues commonly a long time because of the streightness of the
Streets, and dryness of a great part of their Canals, in Summer, which sends
forth most unfufferable stinks: and therefore there are two Offices created
expressly for the Water, the one called Savii alla Acque, consisting of Senators
or Procurators; the other, Esecutori all Acque, composed of three young
Noblemen, whose business is to see the Regulations and Orders of the first duly
executed; both of them have Power to punish such as cast any nastiness into the
Canals, which the Laws require to be cleansed every year to prevent their
filling up. But the constant cleansing them according to that Law, having been
neglected during the War in Candia, produce great Inconvenience in many places,
not only for stinks, but by making the passage difficult by the heaps of Mud
and Sand; insomuch that to clear their Canals and their Ponds, the Undertakers
have asked no less than two Millions, whereas had it been taken in time, it
could not have cost above 100000 Crowns.

The three Sopra Proveditorialle Pomp.
THis Officer in Venice, is the same the Gineconomo were in Athens; The
Harmosins in Sparta; and the Censors in Rome. For like theirs, it is the
business of these to reform extravagance both in Clothes and Diet, which in the
judgment of Seneca is the sign of a declining State Conviviorum luxuria, and
vestium, egrae Civitatis indicia sunt. Ep. 115.
. And indeed Feasting is so rare a thing in Venice (where the Nobility live
generally sordidly) that were it not for some Persons who have brought from
their Embassies abroad, a neater way of eating, the Proveditori all Pomp
would not have much trouble to bring them to Obedience: so as they might omit
their frequently reiterated Proclamations against eating of Flesh and Fish at
the same Meal, seeing most of the Nobility content themselves with Pilchards,
and Musles, and such cheap stuff, so that the Scandal of an Ichliophagos would
agree with them more properly than with the Greeks, who eat Fish for Luxury,
whereas the Venetian does it for Nearness.

The outward Robe of the Nobility (which is commonly a Cloath-Vest, with a
Bonnet of the same) has no difference, nor does at all distinguish the the
poverty and richness of the Wearer, unless it be by the neatness of the making
up; for their Robes are to be all of a certain Cloth made at Padua, and if any
of them be so hardy as to make it of Spanish, English, or Dutch Cloth, they
must pay dear for the fashion. But the young Noblemen that are rich,
distinguish themselves usually by their under-Garments, which is for the most
part of some rich flowered Silk, trimmed very thick with broad Lace. Sometimes
their Doublet is of Cloth of Gold or Silver, which they show at the opening of
their Gowns. And when they go upon the Water, they pull off their Gowns on
purpose: an abuse that is suffered by the Magistrate des Pompes, as not knowing
whether his Authority would be able to remedy it Indecorum est attrectare quod
non obtineretur. Tac. Ann. 3.
, any more than several other fashions which Licentiousness and Ambition have
introduced among the Women: which diverted Lycurgus from making Laws against
the extravagance of the Spartan Ladies. So that these Seigniors chose rather to
let those inconveniences rest, than to make new Laws against them, which being
despised as the former, would serve only to give more Head and Authority to
their Luxury, and load the Reformers with the displeasure of the most
Illustrious Families Tot leges contemptu abolitae sccuriorem luxum fecere. ibid.
. For in Venice there are People of that Roman Tribunes opinion, who cried,
Quid opus Liberate, si voluntibus luxu perire, non licet? To what purpose is
Liberty, if those who have a mind to ruin themselves by their Luxury, may not
have leave. Those young Noblemen who have some 40, some 50000 Ducats a year,
would think themselves very unhappy to be obliged to live like their first
Ancestors, whose Dominion was only over one Town, and whose Pastime and
Subsistence was nothing but Fishing, and might argue as a Senator did formerly,
That the Grandeur of a rich Citizen ought to be suitable to the Grandeur of the
State, and that no man's Expense is extravagant that exceeds not his Revenue
Postquam eo magnificentiae venerit, discere singulos, neque in Familia Nimirum
aliquid, aut modicum, nisi ex fortuna possidentis. Ann. 2.
.

All that the Laws can do, is to hinder the growth of that mischief by
chastising those who presume too far: or by chargeable employments, or fines:
and to this end the Venitian Ladies are much restrained in their ordinary
Gallantry of their Sex; they are not allowed to wear Necklaces of Pearl, Roses,
Crosses, Bracelets or Lockets of Diamonds. They have not their Gondoliers in
Livery, but the first year of their Marriage. Nor in all my time at Venice did
I see above one Lady that transgressed these Laws, who being the Daughter of a
Gondolier, and marrying with a Procurator of St. Mark, could not hold, but must
needs be showing her Jewels, as if she thought by their luster to dazzle the
eyes of the People, and keep them from reflecting upon her Birth: or that she
might be as remarkable for the richness of her dress, as for the adventures of
her life.

As to the Courtesans, the Magistrate des Pompes has such authority over them,
that in Fees, and in Fines he goes away with the greatest part of their gains,
they being unable to contain themselves within the rules prescribed by the Law.
They must have rich Clothes at any rate, to invite their Gallants, but it is not
enough they pay for them in the Shops, they must pay for them again a second,
and perhaps a third time to these Proveditori. The Courtesans are not allowed
to wear the White Veil, to divert themselves upon the Grand-Canal; to meet in
any assembly of great Ladies, or to pass in a Gondole with two Oars: but their
humors could not be subjected to these rules; and were they not maintained or
protected by persons of authority, they would rot most of them in Prison, or
dye in an Hospital. The Laws of this nature relating to the regulation of
exorbitancy in young Noblemen, are observed rigorously at first, but they are
neglected by degrees Acribus initiis, in curioso fine. Ann. 5.
. This Court is commonly supplied with Procurators of St. Mark, or at least by
Senators of the Principal Rank.

All these Sopra Proveditori are named by the Senate, as also the Three annual
Superintendants of the Tenths of the Clergy, who receive the Ecclesiastical
Contributions; the Six Proveditors sent upon the Terra firma in Harvest time,
to collect what is due to the Public. The Three Proveditors of the Arsenal,
whose business is to see it furnished with every thing that is necessary. The
Three Sopra Proveditori l'Armamento, who give direction for equipping of the
Galleys and Galleasses; and the Proveditors of the Forts, who have all of them
Voices in the Pregadi.

The three Governadori dell' Entrate
ARE properly the Sur-Intendans de Tinances, for they have the management of
all the Public Revenue: they let all the Farms, and the Farmers are
responsible to them. This Magistracy is always executed by ancient Senators,
eminent for Incorruption and good Oeconomie. They have under them three
Officers called Camerlenghi di Commune or Receivers General, to whom the
particular Receivers pay in what they receive.

The ten Sages
ARE like a little College that taxes the Estates of particular Persons when
the Public is in distress for Moneys, as happens in time of War very often,
the ordinary Revenue of the State being unable to defray the whole Charge. The
Tax is paid exactly by the Nobles, and if any are in Arrear, they are put inter
Aerarios, and as such excluded the Grand Council, and all other Public Office
till they have paid it.

The four Judges della Mesoettaria.
ALL Notaries in the Commonwealth are obliged under penalty of Imprisonment and
a Fine, to give these Judges Copies of all Bargains or Contracts passing
through their hands, and relating to the buying of Houses, Lands, or Ships
(Ships being accounted immovables in Venice by reason of its situation) that
the purchasers may not be put into possession, till they have paid a Duty to
the State of three or four per Cent. otherwise the Bargain is void: Messetto in
the Language of Lombards signifying an interposer, from whence this Magistrate
takes his name, there being no Bargains nor Sales made, but one of these four
interposes.

The three Judges al Forestier.
THE Jurisdiction of these Judges, like that of the Praetor Peregrinus in Rome,
extends to all Controversies betwixt their Subjects and Strangers, betwixt
Stranger and Stranger: as also to the letting of Houses, Ships, or Boats to
hire.

The three Cattaveri.
THey judge of all goods found either at Land or at Sea, determining to whom
they belong. The word Cattaveri, is as much as Searcher of the truth, Cattar in
the Lombard Language signifying to Search. They appropriate to the Public, and
put it in possession of all the Goods of such as dye Intestate, or without
Heirs. They punish such of the Jews as wear the Black Cap without permission
from them; a liberty they sell for Money, but never for above a Month, that
they may have always a way of squeezing those People, who would not be
distinguished by a Red Cap.

The three Seigniori alli Banchi.
THeir Jurisdiction extends only to three places where the Jews are obliged to
lend their Money upon Security; a way the Public has found out to supply the
poor People, who had rather pawn their Goods to them, and redeem them again at
moderate Interest, that to sell them for half the worth, as they would be
constrained by their necessities. These Banks are not unlike those in Italy
called Monti di Pieta.

Not to trouble my Reader with an unnecessary ennumeration of particulars, I
pass by an Hundred other Judges: But must not (as I conceive) leave Venice, and
make a visit to the Provincial Magistrates, till I have said something of their
Chancellor and Secretaries, as bearing part in the Government: as also of the
Patriarch of that City, and the Venetian Cardinals, a matter that carries great
connection with the Subject I intend.

Of the Chancellor and Secretaries.
THE Grand Chancellor is Head of the second Order, that is of Citizens, amongst
whom he is a kind of a Doge: Cancellarius Ducem quasi ex populo refert. He is
present G. Contarin l. 5. Reip. Ven.
at all Councils without exception. He is privy to all Intrigues and Secrets of
the Commonwealth, which writes, nor receives no Letters of which he has not a
sight. He has the keeping of the Seal, and it cannot be taken from him without
deposing him quite. He is as it were a Chevalier born, by virtue of his Place,
which gives him the title of Excellence, and precedence before all the Senators
and Magistrates of the City, except the Counselors of the Seigniory, and the
Procurators of St. Mark. He is chief of all the Secretaries, who with him
represent the Body of the Citizens, as the Doge and Counselors of the College
do the Body of the Nobles; and therefore in Latin Instruments he is called
Magnus-Scriba, and Scribarum Princeps. And it is to be observed the Office of
Grand Chancellor is affected by all the Secretaries, as the end of their hopes
and desires, to which when they arrive, they will have no cause to lament any
pains they have taken, or any Service they have done to the Commonwealth; there
being no Nobleman (with proportion) so well recompensed as they, no not the
Doge himself, nor the Procurators par merit. The Chancellors Office is for
life; he wears Purple like the Duke, and the six Counselors of the College;
enjoys all the privileges of a Nobleman, and has some peculiar to himself.

The State allows him a Pension of 3000 Ducats, besides the common Perquisits
of his place, which amount to 9 or 10000 Ducats more, without obliging him to
any expense. In short, he wants nothing but a deliberative Voice in the
Councils, where he sits only as an Instrument, and in that he is inferior to
the meanest of the Nobility.

When the Seigniory marches upon any public occasion, the Chancellor is
preceded by the Secretaries; the Doge by the Chancellor, and the Senate by the
Doge; where we may take notice of two different Customs, one of the Nobles,
which is preceded by their Chief; the otber of the Cittadinance, or Body of
Citizens, which proceds their Chief: the first to show that the Nobility and
the Citizens are not to take equal measures, the other to intimate that the
Chancellor, is not the Creature of the People, but the Agent and Officer of the
Nobles, by whom he is chosen, and of whom by consequence he holds his Charge
and Authority: and last of all to signify the concord and harmony of all parts
in the Government.

The Chancellor after his election, makes a public entry, and passes to the
College accompanied by several Procurators, the ancientest of whom (assisting
commonly that day) gives him the upper hand, as the Senators and the rest of
the Nobles do to the Citizens, who in that Ceremony march like Noblemen in
their Red Gowns: so that it is not altogether unlike the Saturnals of old,
where the Servants were attended by their Masters. In Public Ceremonies, if it
be Winter the Chancellor appears in a Crimson -Velvet Robe; if Summer, in Red
Damask, with his Stole of Gold: but his common habit is Scarlet or Purple Cloth.

In a word, when the Chancellor dies, he has the same Honors as the Doge when
he dies: his Funerals are kept in the Church of St Mark; and his Elogy
pronounced in presence of the Senate, who upon that occasion are in Mourning,
thereby showing greater regrate for the loss of their Chancellor, than for the
loss of their Duke, whose Obsequies are Celebrated by them in Scarlet Robes, as
I observed before.

Having so many Privileges, it is no wonder that the Chancellor Augustine
Vianole bought Nobility for his Sons, without mentioning himself; the reason is
plain, not being like to be Chancellor and Noble Venetian together, (a thing
that never happened but once, in favor to Mark Ottobon Father to the Cardinal
of that name) he chose rather to keep his place, and continue in the Populatc,
than to quit it, and make himself Noble.

The Chancellor Ballarin was of the same mind, and preferred his Chancellorship
before the Honor of being Noble par Merit, that is to say gratis, which the
Seigniory put to his choice.

The Chancellor is chosen by the Grand Council, as all the Magistrates of the
City are.

As to the Secretaries there are three sorts. The first are called Secretaries
of the Council of Ten, and are most considerable because of the Pre-eminence of
that Court. The second are called Secretaries of the Senate: and the third
Notaries, or Ducal Clerks: from Ducal Clerks they rise to be Secretaries of the
Senate, and from thence they are preferred to the First, according to their
respective Capacities. The Secretaries of the Council of Ten are but four, and
their places are much sought after, and very hard to be got. The Secretaries of
the Senate are twenty four, of which five or six are employed as Residents in
Naples, Milan, Florence, and Zurich in Switzerland, with Pensions of 2000
Ducats: five or six others are employed as Secretaries to their Embassies in
the Courts of Kings, where the Senate continues them for several years, that at
their leisure they may imbibe all that is necessary for the instruction of
those who succeed them; and therefore they are seldom recalled, till they have
served under two or three Ambassadors. And these are the Secretaries who assist
in the College at the Audience of Foreign Ambassadors, that they may briefly
expose to the Seigniory what are the Proposals of the said Ambassadors, which
sometimes are understood by none of the said Lords, nor by the Secretary
himself. But this inconvenience is prevented by a Copy the Ambassador gives in
of his business, which is translated and presented before he be admitted by the
Senate, to whom it belongs to give an Answer.

The Secretaries of these two forms are privy to all affairs, it being their
Office to read in the College, and in the Pregadi, all the Letters writ to that
State; and to prepare all those which are sent from the Senate.

When they carry an Answer to the Ambassadors, they read it before them, and
afterward they impart it to their Secretaries: but if they be from home, the
Secretaries carry back their Copy, for it is death to leave it behind them.

These Secretaries have each of them a Salary of 400 Ducats per annum, besides
other Profits and considerable Privileges.

In Ceremonies they are clad in Violet-coloured Cloth, with Velvet Bonnets of
the same color.

The Secretaries of the third Classis, are not any precise number, and their
Office is like our Registers: For they enter all Judgments given in the Courts
of St. Mark, and the Rialte, to deliver them to the Parties. They draw up the
Contracts of Marriage, and pass all Wills, and other Acts relating to the
Tabellionage. So that properly they are no more than Notaries or Registers,
without any Cognizance in matters of Government,

These three Orders of Secretaries depend wholly upon the Council of Ten, by
whom they are chosen, and when any of them is defective, he is responsible to
that terrible Court.

Of the Patriarch of Venice.
VEnice is Governed in Spiritualibus by a Patriarch always a Noble Venetian,
and elected by the Senate. In his Decrees and Orders he styles himself Patriarch
Divina Miseratione only, not adding as the rest of the Bishops, and sanctae
sedis Apostolicae Gratia. He is Primate of Dalmatia, and Metropolitan over the
Archbishops of Candia and Corfu.

The Ducal Church of St. Mark acknowledges him not, because it has a private
Officer of its own called Primicirio who performs all the Episcopal Functions,
giving Benediction to the People, with Indulgences for forty days: conferring
the Quatre-Mineurs to all who present themselves. And if at any time the
Patriarch officiates in his Pontificalibus in presence of the Seignioria, it is
upon request to the Primicier who consents perhaps to do him that Honor, but
without making it a President.

When the Primicier becomes Patriarch, he ceases to be Primicier, lest the
Deanery of St. Mark should be reunited to the Patriarchal.

The Patriarch has the nomination only of two Benefices in the City, the
Theologate of his own Church, and the Cure of St. Bartholomews, whose Curate is
his Vicar by course: for the Pope has the Collation of the Archdeaconry; the
Chapter disposes of the Prebendaries, and the Parishians Citizens as well as
Nobles have the choice of their Curates.

But that which is strange is the small Authority this Prelat has over the
Priests and Monks, whose lives are very scandalous. An effect of the jealousy
of this Republic, which is to depress the credit of Episcopal Jurisdiction,
opposes it self daily by its Magistrates against the execution of the Sentences
given by the Ecclesiastical Judges, and protects the Priests publicly, though
they be convict of most abominable crimes Principe and Senatu autoribus, qui
non modo licentiam vitiis permiserint, sed vim adhibeant. Tac. Ann. 14.
. They are often to implore the interposition of the secular Magistrate,
(though the business nothing concerns them) in hopes they may escape without
punishment. Which occasioned that common saying of Matthew Zanes, That Venice
was become a second Babylon.

A great Prelat of Venice told me one day in Discourse, That 'twas impossible
for the Venetian Bishops to reform the manners of their Clergy, because the
secular Magistrate held their hands, and made their Censures contemptible; and
to annihilate their whole Ecclesiastical Power, hindered the holding of Synods,
which are the best and most effectual means of correcting the enormities of the
Priests. At the end of which I remember he added an Elogy upon the Church of
France, whither, as he said, the sanctity of the whole Primitive Church was
retired, concluding with these words, Piacesse a Dio che tutta la Chiesa si
Governasse a Guisa del Clero Francese. And would to God our Church was governed
according to the French model.

There is another thing also, a great diminution to his Authority, and that is,
That the Body of the Secular Clergy in Venice, which contains 70 Parishes, is
divided into nine Congregations, each of which has a separate Jurisdiction,
where all Causes of the Priests and Friars in their several Wards, are first
judged; and if there be occasion for an Appeal, it lies before the College
Pleba^^^l, composed of Deputies from all the Congregations; which Deputies do
either Null or Confirm the Sentences the private Judges have given before: and
this College does it so well, that their Affairs are seldom or never brought
before the Patriarch, from whose Jurisdiction it is their whole care to
substract: if at any time any thing of that nature is brought to him, it is
Tanquam ad Judicem Compromissarium, says the Statute, Non vero Ordinarium. By
which it appears that the Secular Clergy in Venice is in a manner separate from
its Prelat, to whom, in other respects, great Ceremony is paid when he visits
their Churches; a Canopy being prepared for him, as for the Doge, or a Cardinal.

Venice anciently was but a small Bishopric, whose Bishops were called only
Sanctae Olivolensis Ecclesiae Episcopi, by reason of the situation of their
Church in the Isle of Olivole; and for their whole Revenue, had only the fees
of Burials, wherefore they were surnamed Vescovi de Morti.

In the year 1091 Henry Contarin, the 23d. Bishop of Olivole, took upon him the
Title of Bishop of Castle, which is the name of one of the six Quarters of the
Town; and that continued till the year 1451, when the Patriarchship lapsed to
B. H. Lawrence, Justinian Bishop of Castil, according to a Bull of Nicolas V,
or Eugenius IV his Predecessor, who to end the Controversy betwixt the Bishops
and the Patriarchs of Grade their Metropolitans, Ordered, that when one of the
Competitors died, both Churches should devolve to the Survivor, with all their
Titles and Rights; and Dominick Michieli the Patriarch dying first, the Bishop
of Castle was in the Patriarchal Dignity, and left it to his Successors.

A Noble Venetian cannot pretend to any Cure in Venice, the State choosing to
leave those Benefices to the Populace to oblige them; as also to prevent the
disorders of Competition, which would probably happen betwixt the Nobles and
them; for in all likelihood the suffrages of the People (which have greatest
share in those Elections) would be more inclinable to the Popular Person than
to the Nobleman. For the same reason they have granted the Offices and
Governments of their Monasteries to the Citizens, who thinking themselves much
honored thereby, are better affected to the Government. In which, the Nobles
imitated the Romans, Apud quos jus imperii valet, inania transmittuntur. Who
having the Dominion in their hands, despise every thing else as superfluous.

The Commonwealth of Venice has under it another The Patriarch of Aquileia.
Patriarch called the Patriarch of Aquileia, which Town was anciently the
Metropolis of the Province of Venice, and of all Istria: but it is now much
fallen from its pristine Grandeur, and much inferior to the Patriarchship of
Venice. However the Patriarch of Aquileia is still Primate of Istria, and it is
said, that in all Councils he pretends to Precedence over all the Archbishops
and Primates of Christendom. He chooses his own Coadjutor, (as is said before)
who being afterward confirmed by the Senate with the Title of Eletto d'
Aquileia, keeps his Residence at Vdina in Friul.

The Commonwealth and the ancient Patriarchs of Aquileia had great Contests
about the Patriarchs of Grade, whom the Popes had invested with the spoils of
the Patriarchs of Aquileia, (for which reason, in History, Grade is called
Aquileia Nova.) Mandy-Thursday was made a Festival originally by one Vlrick
Patriarch of Aquileia, who coming to Grade to surprise his Competitor, was
himself made a Prisoner with 12 Canons, and after set at liberty, upon
condition he should send every year to Venice one Bull, 12 Hogs, and 12 Loaves.

The Senate anciently had, or pretended to have the nomination of all the
Bishops and Abbots in their Dominions; but they wholly renounced it by their
Treaty of Peace in the year 1510 with his Holiness Pope Julius 2, to take him
off from Guiccardin. l. 8.
the League of Cambray.

Under the Papacy of Urban VIII there was great Controversy betwixt the Court
of Rome and the Senate, about the proposition of the Bishoprics belonging to
the State of Venice, in the Confistory; the Senate insisting that that Function
should be performed by the Venetian Cardinals: but it was accommodated at
length, and agreed that the proposition about the said Bishoprics should be
made by a Venetian Cardinal, but the Cardinal Patron was always to be by.

The Senate never names any particular Nobleman for a Cap, lest it should give
offense to the rest: but the Venetian Ambassador at Rome proposes to the Pope
several who are worthy of that Honor, and they are afterward recommended by
the Senate. The Ambassador may propose himself if he thinks fit; however he
employs all his interest with the Pope for his friends.

Urban VI was the first Pope who honored the Noble Venetians with this
Cardinalitial Dignity, and he did it, because that Commonwealth was the only
State almost that stuck to him against Clement VII Pope of Avignion. Those
Cardinals were, Lewis Donat General of the Cordeliers, and John Amedeus
Archbishop of Corfu: the first with the Title of St. Mark, the other of St.
Sabina; since which time there have been always Venetians in the sacred
College, and three of them were Popes. Ange Corraro under the name of Gregory
XII, who notwithstanding was but the Depository of the Papacy: Gabriel
Condolmier, his Nephew called Eugenius IV: and Peter Barbo Nephew to Eugenius,
with the name of Paul II; to whom we might add Alexander V that succeeded
Gregory, who being a Candiot, was born in the Territory of the Venetian.

Paul V was wont to say the Popes ought not to admit any of the Noble Venetians
into the sacred College, because the Venetians excluded their Ecclesiastics
out of all Councils and secular Offices in that State.

But it is now time we proceed to the Magistrates of the Provinces.

The Podestats.
THE Name of Podesta answers to Praetor among the Romans, as appears by Latin
Inscriptions upon the public Buildings, where the Podesta is called Praetor;
and the Venetian Podestats administer Justice in their respective
Jurisdictions, as the Praetors did formerly in Rome, and in the Provinces.

When these Magistrates keep their Court, they are assisted by certain Lawyers
chosen by them, to give their advice: which the Lawyers esteem as a more than
ordinary Honor. An Appeal lies from these Podestats, to the Auditori nuovi, or
to the new Quarantie-Civil.

The Province of Venice, which is called Il Degado di Venetia, contains several
Podestaries or Regencies. The chief is Chiozza, an Episcopal City built like
Venice upon piles, in which great store of Salt is made. The others are
Malamocco, the Port of Venice; Murano, a small Town famous for making of
Glasses; Torcella, Grade, and Caorle.

Their Territory upon the Terra-firma comprehends seven considerable
Governments, viz. Trevigiana, Padua, Vicenza, Verona, Brescia, Bergamo, and
Crema, upon which depends many little Towns, Chastellanies, and Forts, of which
every one has a Gentleman for its Governor; but all these Governments last but
sixteen months, that those who are in possession might not have time by making
an interest, to make themselves Masters. For the State of Venice differs much
from the judgment of Divites satietas in melius mutat. Tac. Ann. 3.
Tiberius, who seldom changed his Governors, pretending that being satiated
with the Blood of the People, they would grow honester men. In short, the
threats of Lentulus Getulicus to the said Emperor, to raise his whole Province,
if he sent another over his head, is a good arguement how dangerous it is to
continue Governors too long, because the People will look upon them as their
only Masters, and 'twill be no little difficulty to resume an Authority that
has been left too long in their hands.

The Cities of Padua and Brescia are always governed by ancient Senators;
Verona and Bergamo by Noble Venetians betwixt 35 and 40 years of age, who
before had passed through many Offices in Venice: the rest are commanded by
young Gentlemen of the best Families of the Nobility.

Every 4th year is sent a poor Noble Venetian to Vicenza, by reason of a
Present of Silver which that City makes every fifth year to their Governor
before his departure.

The City of Vicenza is styled the Senat's Eldest Daughter, because she was the
first upon the Terrafirma that surrendered to the Commonwealth of Venice in the
year 1404.

It Is a long time since the Podestats were permitted to carry their Wives with
them to their Governments, lest the Governors themselves should be governed by
them. But the Senate observing the disorders that happened in several Families by
the absence of the Husbands, the Chastity of their Wives being many times
assaulted, and often overcome by solicitations of their Gallants, (as happened to
the Wife of the Chevalier Lewis Sexum natura invalidum deseri, and exponi suo
luxu, cupidinibus alienis. Ann. 3.
Molin, and others of later date) they released the severity of that Law, in
compassion to those persons who served abroad. But then it imports the Husband
to have an eye over the Conduct of his Wife, that at their return from their
Command, they be not reproached as several Pro-Consuls were at Rome, for having
under their Administration duo Praetoria, duo Tribunalia; for though the fault
may be in the Wife, the scandal lies wholly upon the Husband, and it is he must
answer for it. In these Commands it is that the Nobles are allowed to exceed in
all manner of magnificence, because thereby they signify the extraordinary
Grandeur of the Public Majesty, and imprint love and veneration in the minds
of the People.

The Captains at Arms.
THE Office of a Captain at Arms upon the Terra-firma, answers to the Military
Tribune in Rome; and in all Inscriptions upon public Buildings, he is called
Praefectus Armorum, or Tribunus Militum.

His Office is to Command the Soldiers of the City, and all the Garrisons
under his Jurisdiction: he judges in all differences betwixt Officer and
Soldier, without application to the Podesta. All the Chastellains of the Town,
and quite through his Territory, receive his Orders, and submit to his
Jurisdiction, as well Noble Venetians as others: It is his care to look to the
reparation of the Walls, Gates, Ports, and Fortifications, as he pleases. He
has the disposing of all the Revenue and Imposts in his Government, and in all
places belonging to it, the Camerlingues who receive it, giving an account to
him, and not daring to disburse a farthing without his Authority; to the end
the public Money should be disposed to the public Use, and that those who
keep it may not have power to purloin. The Roman Praetors had the disposing of
their Treasure; but the Venetians will not allow that liberty to the Podesta's,
that by parting equally they might moderate their Authority, and bring them to
some balance and proportion with the Captains at Arms, which are the two
Officers that represent the Majesty of their Masters, and are therefore called
by one common name Rectores, like the Provincial Harmostae of the
Lacedaemonians, in their smaller Towns Harmostae sunt qui ad subjectas Civitates
e Lacedemoniis mittebantur Magistratus.
there is only one Rector, who is Podesta and Captain at Arms both.

The Captains at Arms at Padua and Brescia, are always Illustrious Senators,
who for their Services may challenge the Robe of Procurator par Merit, when
any of those places are vacant.

The Captain of Bergamo has a deliberative Voice in the Pregadi at his return,
as also the Chastelaine of Brescia, by peculiar Privilege above all the rest of
the Governors of Castles or Forts.

When great Officers in a Town differ about Jurisdiction, which happens very
often, they are not allowed to defend their Cause with any thing but the Pen,
that is to say, by humble Remonstrances to the Senate; and if they come to
Blows, both parties are judged Criminal, as well he that receives, as he that
offers the Injury.

In Friul.
THE Proveditor General of Palma Nova is the chief Officer of the whole
Province; and this Office (always in the nomination of the Senate) is biennial,
and supplied by a Senator of the first Rank.

The Governor or Lieutenant of Vdina is the second Officer in the said
Province, and at his return may be proposed for admission into the Council of
Ten. There are under him two Officers, one called the Marschal d'Vdina, who is
a kind of Chastelaine; and the other a Treasurer.

The City of Vdina in the year 1415, came under the Dominion of the Venetians,
with the whole Province of Friul, which before was under the Patriarchs of
Aquileia, to which, the Counts Savorgnanes contributed much, and were made
Noble Venetians for their pains.

In Istria.
CApo d'Istria the chief Town in that Province, and a Bishopric, is Governed
by a Podestat and three Counselors of the poorer sort of the Nobility.

Cita-Nuova, Parenzo, and Pola, all three Episcopal Towns, have each of them
their Podestats, as also Piran, Rovigno, Cherso, Osero, and Raspo, which last
has the Privilege of having a Senator, because it is a place where much is
gained with little expense, and therefore some of the poorer sort of Senators
are sent thither.

In Dalmatia.
THE Proveditor General holds the first Rank, and Commands all the Governors
Proveditors, and Chastelanies of Towns and Fortresses in that Province; and
therefore that Charge is always executed by an Illustrious Senator, or
Procurator; for besides the Authority, it is a place of great Profit.

He has under him a Forreigner who Commands the Forces as General, but can do
nothing but by his consent; not so much as gratify a Soldier with a Penny, nor
order him a loaf of bread more than his Comerade.

The Cities of Zara, and Spalatra, two Archbishopricks in Dalmatia, are
Governed each of them by a Count, and a Chamberlain, who performs likewise the
Office of a Chastelaine. These Officers are two years in Office, as is the
Proveditor of Clessa, a Fortress upon an inaccessible Mountain. The Chastelains
of Traeo and Zebenigo are biennial likewise.

Cattaro, an Episcopal Town, has two Magistrates, one a Proveditor, and the
other a Camertingue, each of them changed every two years.

Budoa, the last place of the Venetians upon the Coast of Dalmatia, has its
Podesta, whose authority continues but two years. It Is not many years since
Dolcingo was under their Dominion, but they lost it to Selymus II.

In the Isles upon the Mediterranean Sea.
THE Commonwealth has always a Proveditor, and two Counselors at Corfeu, which
she has possessed ever since the year 1382, in despite of all the efforts of
the Turks; it being one of the Keys of the Golf. Corfeu is an Archbishopric
worth 4000 Ducats per annum, always supplied by a Noble Venetian, and furnishes
Venice with 200000 Minots of Salt every year; it is guarded by Sant Ange, a Fort
thought to be impregnable.

The Isles of Zephalonia and Zante are Governed each by a Proveditor, and three
Counselors, renewed every two years.

These three Islands have a General to whom the respective Proveditors are
subservient and accountable. He is always a Person of eminent Quality, and
continues in his Command sixteen Months.

And to the end all these Officers may be kept in their Duty by the fear of a
scrutiny, the Senate creats every five years three Syndics to visit all the
Towns and Forts depending upon the State, to hear the Complaints of their
Subjects against the Podestats, Captains and Proveditors, and to inspect their
several Administrations, like the Inquisitors of Sparta, called Thucydides
(...), and the Persons sent by the Romans incognito Privati etiam mittebantur,
qui Provincias viserent, and quid de cujusque obsequio videretur referrent:
trepidabantque gentes de aestimatione singulorum. Tac. Ann. 15.
into the Provinces, to inquire into the Conduct of their Officers: whereby the
poorer sort who are not able to come with their Complaints to Venice, have a
way open to revenge themselves at their ease, if their Governors have done
them any injury.

It remains now that I speak something of their Principal Military Commands at
Sea; all of which are executed by Noble Venetians, whereas those at Land are
given to Strangers for the reasons abovesaid

The Generalissimo, or Captain General at Sea.
THis General is always a Noble Venetian, and Created by the Senate, in time of
War to Command the Fleet of the Commonwealth. His Power is so absolute over all
other Generals, and Captains, that he seems a Dictator, and rather a Sovereign
than a Subject, for the three years of his Command. His Authority extends not
only to the Fleet, but to all the Ports, Isles, and Fortresses, where his
Orders are received without dispute: and if he goes to any of them in person,
the Clergy are obliged to meet him, and the Keys are presented him by the
Governors and Rectors, as if all the Senate came with him Senatus Nobiscum est.
Tac. Hist. 1.
; and indeed all their Power is in him; so that it is no less than Treason to
disobey him, or contest his Orders. Formerly the Senate allowed him not to
enterprise any thing, without advice of them; but the distance many times
retarding their affairs, and the Resolution of the Senate not arriving till the
opportunity was lost Ex distantibus terrarum spatiis Consilia post res
afferebantur. Hist. 3.
, it leaves him now to his own liberty to act as he sees occasion, only
recommending this Caution to him, to manage things so that the Commonwealth may
receive no detriment thereby Videat ne Resp. quid detrimenti capiat.
. And this they do with more Confidence, because he has the possession of no
Town or Port to which he may retire if he be false, and therefore is obliged to
keep always at Sea, exposed to the mercy of the Wind and the Waves.

Moreover there is no Prince whatever who at their return uses their Generals
worse than the Venetians. If any of them have lost a Battle or a Town, they are
plagued by the Inquisitors of State, or rather by as many Judges as there are
Nobles in the City: the Commonwealth having given them the Conduct of their
Armies, and the Government of their Towns, upon the same condition the famous
Lady of Sparta gave the Buckler to her Son, Aut in hoc, aut cum hoc: intending
thereby, that he should either dye, or return with what she had given him. If
they obtain a Victory, they must render an account to those who emulate their
success, and will be sure, if not to procure, to encourage their accusers. In
time of In Pace durius est servitium.
Peace they always debase them, and the meanest Nobleman will not only think
himself his equal, but beard him in the competition of any new Command, which
renders the Yoke of their Obedience very heavy to the Subject. But if a new War
be begun, and the timidity and incapacity of the others be compared with the
Experience, and Courage of these Poscebatur ore vulgi dux Agricola,
comparantibus cunctis vigorem, constantiam, and expertum Bellis animum, cum
inertia, and formidine eorum. In Agricola.
, then it is that Envy gives place to Desert, and their Rivals in time of
Peace, do Homage to their Valor during the War.

When the Genoeses were at Chiozza, and thought of nothing but Plundering of
Venice; the Senate was obliged to discharge honorably their General Victor
Pisani who was then in Prison for the loss of Pola*, a Town in Istria, and to
join him in the Sovereign Command of the Army with Andreas Contarini, to the
dishonor of all his calumniators. Antonio Grimani after he had Conquered the
Towns of Monopoli, Mola, Pulignan, Trani, Brunduscium, and Otranto in Pouelle,
was degraded from his Procuratorship, and Banished into Istria, for unhappily
losing the Battle of Modon to the Turks. But after he had been Banished ten
years, he was called back again upon an exigence, restored to his Dignity, and
at last Created Duke.

In the year 1670, the difference betwixt them and the Port about Confines in
Dalmatia, having caused the Venetians to apprehend a new Rupture, the whole
World immediately cast their eyes upon Francis Morosini, though he was in
disgrace, and at that time actually under a Charge: and not without cause, for
there was none but he capable of the Command which he had in Candia, and had
the War gone on, the Senate would have been constrained to have begged him to
have taken upon him the Generalship again.

The awe the Captains have of the Council of Ten, does not deter them from
applying their utmost industry to raise their own fortunes though to the
prejudice of the Public, not doubting but to find an Asylum, if they have
where withal to purchase it Pecunia, quae bonis malisque temporibus juxta
valet. Hist. 1.
; providing against the worst, out of an opinion they shall certainly be
questioned at their return, how moderately soever they have behaved themselves;
and therefore the fear of an inevitable suspicion, incourages them the more
boldly to pillage, that they may revenge themselves beforehand for such injury
as they are like to meet afterward. And yet they use all imaginable Artifice
to conceal the defects of their Administration, being desirous to appear as
innocent as Gracchus who assured the People of Rome that he went rich to
Sardena, but returned poor Cum Roma profectus sum, Zonas quas plenas argenti
exulti, eas ex Provincia inanes retuli. Aul. Gell. l. 15. c. 12.
.

A General of Candia would have persuaded the Venetians to the same thing by
borrowing 4000 Ducats of a Merchant to defray the Expense of his entry into his
Procuratorship, though he had brought back several Barrels of Silver which
stood him in good stead. For there are but few such persons as the Procurator
Nani, who employed all the Money he had received as a Gratuity from the Senate,
in presents to the Commissioners from the Port, by which means the Contest
about Limits was brought to a happy accommodation. Whereas many others would
have applied it to their own proper use, as their Comerades do at
Constantinople.

The habit of these Generals is always Scarlet, with a Bonnet of the same
Color, like the Mertier of the Presidents of Parliament. They never lay aside
their long Cloak, made in the fashion of that which the ancients called Chlamys
no not even in Fight.

The Proveditor-General at Sea.
THis Officer, called in their Ducals Classis Legatus, as the other is called
Classis Imperator, is perpetual, not as to person (who never holds the Command
above two years) but as to the Office which is constantly supplied, contrary to
the former which expires with the War. His Authority extends to the whole
Fleet, which he manages as he pleases in the absence of the Captain General. He
has Power to Cashier, or punish, even with Death, such Officers as are
defective in their Duties, as well Noble Venetians as others. He disposes of
their Commands. He pays the Soldiers and Seamen, disposes of the Money
belonging to the Fleet, and is accountable to the Senate at his return.

The Generalissimo and the Proveditor having served their time, lay down their
Dictatorship at Capo d'Istria, and return to Venice, and their former condition
of life, retaining nothing of all their Grandeur, but the honor of what is
past and the hopes of what is to come.

They are obliged by a certain Law to deliver themselves up into Custody before
they give an account of their administration, especially if they have been
overcome, which is a great cause of Persecution at Venice, where nothing but
success is considered. General Francis Morosini not complying with the said
Law, incensed the Nobility exceedingly against him, insomuch that after he had
happily withstood one Attack, he was overpowered by a second, and forced to do
that dishonourably, and by necessity, that he might have done before with
reputation, by giving his enemies an example of Modesty and Obedience.

The Captain General and the Proveditor are employed as Spies one upon another,
which producing a reciprocal distrust, keeps both to an exactness in their
duty; and though the Proveditor be inferior, the Power is divided in such sort,
that the second has Authority without Force, and the first Force without
Authority. That is to say, one has Power to propose what is to be done, and the
other to do or not do it, as he pleases, not much unlike the practice in Rome,
where the Senate proposed, Autoritas in Senatu, Potestas in Populo.
and the People resolved. The ordinary Residence of the Proveditor is at Corfeu.

The General or Governor of the Golf.
THE State of Venice keeps constantly in the Golf a Squadron of six Galleys,
and some few Foists to defend the Mouth of it against Pirates, and all Men of
War; as also to exact the duties upon all Goods that pass that way.

This General is the ancientest Officer belonging to this State, and in that
respect has always the Van upon any Engagement at Sea, with this prerogative,
that whenever it happens there is no Generalissimo, he supplies the place
before any other Officer, till the Senate orders another, so that neither the
indisposition nor death of the Generalissimo brings any distraction or delay to
their Naval Affairs.

The Office is perpetual, but the Officer continues but three years, and is
always a Gentleman of principal Quality.

The General of the Galeasses.
THE Galeasses are a sort of Castles and Fortresses in the Sea, in which are
commonly 1000 Men, and 1000 pieces of Canon. The Captains are called Governors,
always Noble Venetians, and Strangers always excluded.

These Governors own no body but their General; but their General receives
orders from the Generalissimo. And because Victory depends much upon the
Conduct and Courage of this Person, his Office is always supplied by a man of
more than ordinary Experience and Valor.

There is also a General of the Galions, who superintends all the Stores and
Ammunition of the Fleet. These two Generals are created only in time of War, as
is a third Stranger General called General da Debarc, who Commands all
Soldiers detached from the Fleet to make a descent upon Land: and after his
Commission is executed, he brings them back again on Board, where nothing
remains to him but the Titles of General and Excellence.

Besides these Generals, the Senate entertains two Captains, each of them with
the Command of four Galleys, one Squadron free, and called di Buone-Voglie; the
other of Slaves, and called Condemnati.

All the Galleys are Commanded by young Noblemen of Venice, called Sopra
Comiti, who have full Power over their Soldiers and Seamen, but only of death,
disposing of all inferior Places as they please: and this is allowed them to
recompense their Levies of Men, which they do commonly at their own charge; the
Commonwealth providing nothing but the Hulk of the Galleys, and the Provisions
of War, and paying the Soldiers no longer than from their coming on Board.

These are the principal Sea-Officers the Venetians have in pay, and they are
always chosen out of the Body of their Noblemen: but because the chief Care and
Charge of these Generals is to defend their Dominion in the Adriatick-Sea,
known by the name of the Gulf of Venice, the Venetian being Master there, it
will not be amiss if in this place I speak something of that Sea.

Of the Sovereignty of the Venetians upon the Adriatick-Sea.
THE State of Venice has been so long Masters of this Sea, it would be
ridiculous to question their Title. They have had possession of it from the
very birth of Si enim Vrbs in Mari sumpsit exordia, and Vrbis fuerunt Veneti
domini, Veneti quoque fuerunt domini ejus inquo erat Vrbs, igitur domini Maris.
Anon.
their State, whose very Cradle was in the Lakes of this Sea, whilst Fishing
was their nourishment, and the Isles about them their Demesnes. Not that the
whole Gulf belonged to them from their infancy, for they possessed only a small
part of the Sea betwixt Ravenna and Aquileia; but as they increased in age, and
the Emperors quitted their propriety in the Gulf, the Venetians began by little
and little to extend their Dominion, and having droven out the Corsairs who
infested it much, and disturbed their Navigation, the possession became
entirely theirs, and has belonged to them ever since.

First, by the Law of Nations, which gives the propriety of Derelicts (that is
to say, Lands or Goods forsaken, and belonging to no body) to the first that
can occupy them.

Secondly, by the Right of War, which the State of Venice maintained 170 years
together against the Narantins, who disputed their Title, and at last submitted
in the year 996. Against the Normans, with whom they had several Battles in the
Pouille; against the Genoeses and Pisans, who were their Competitors for more
than 300 years; to which may be added the consent of the Greek Emperors, who
were so far from complaining at the Venetians pretense, that they were very
well pleased to see the Narantins (their ancient enemies, who infested that
Sea, and had put it often under Contribution) so happily subdued by their
ancient friends. For by that means the Emperors continued in their obedience
Istria, Dalmatia, Albania, Pouille, Abrazzo, with part of Romania, which places
being before exposed to the pyracies and depredations of the Narantins, as
lying upon the Adriatick-Sea, mutinied, and complained of the weakness or
negligence of their Emperors, remonstrating that without better protection,
they would find out other Masters, who should be more careful of them: and
doubtless they had done it, had not the Venetians undertaken the Guard of the
Gulf, and chased away the Corsairs, who threatened Italy, Hungary, and several
other Provinces in Germany with universal ruin: so that the justice of their
possession has for several ages been allowed by all the Princes of Europe,
whose Ambassadors are every year accompanying the States at the Ceremony upon
Ascension-day, when the Doge marries the Sea, by throwing into it a Gold-Ring
with these words, Desponsamus te Mare, in signum very and perpetui Dominii.
Which is never, contradicted by any of the Ambassadors.

Some Historians will have it that Pope Alexan-III gave them their first
Jurisdiction, in recompense of their services done him during the persecutions
of Frederick Barbaroussa, and in memory of the Victory obtained at Sea against
Otho his Son: but it is a vulgar mistake confounding the Ceremony of their
marrying the Sea (first instituted by the Pope) with the donation of their
Dominion: the People taking a solemn declaration of the Venetian Right, and a
formal recognition of their Title In re jam de facto possessa, for an act of
Concession, by which the said Pope put them into possession of the Gulf. Which
could not be, for the Pope neither having nor pretending to any Nemo plus juris
in alium transfer potest, quam ipse habeat. Ex. Cod.
Right in the Adriatick-Sea, could not transfer to another a thing in which he
had no interest himself. And this truth is much confirmed by the words of a
Pope to Duke Sebastian Ziani, Hunc annulum accipe, and, me autore, ipsum Mare
obnoxium tibi reddito, quod tu, tuique successores quotannis statuto Morisot l.
2. c. 25. and Petr. Justinian Hist. Venet.
die servabitis, and he goes on in the institution, Vt omnis posteritas
intelligat Maris possessionem Victoriae jure vestram suisse. It Is not therefore
by Donation from the Pope, who himself allows them a precedent Title, (Jure
Victoriae,) adding, Atque uti uxorem viro, ita illud Imperio Reip. Venetae
subjectum. And therefore it follows the Pope can no more take away this Right
from the Venetian, than he can take away a Wife from her Husband, because the
States hold not from him, but from the success of their Arms; as is asserted
more positively in another Author, reporting the words of Alexander to be
these, Vt omnes intelligant Maris Cyril. Michael.
possessionem jure belli Vestro deberi Imperio. And this their Ambassador
Jeronimo Donato intimated to Pope Julius II, who in raillery demanding where
the Titles and Justifications of their Sovereignty in the Gulf were, the
Ambassador as pleasantly replied, If your Holiness pleases to produce the
Original of Constantine 's donation to Pope Silvester, you will find the
Concession of the Adriatick-Sea to the Venetians indorsed upon the back of it.
For it appears manifestly by this Answer, that State of Venice founded not
their Dominion upon any pretended Donation from Alexander III: and that their
Title was not writ with ink, but with the blood of the Narantins, Normans, and
Genoeses, that they forced out of the Gulf; as also with the blood of their own
Citizens, which was freely shed in defense of the common Cause of all Italy
against the Barbarians.

The Venetians alledg moreover, that they possess the Adriatick-Sea upon the
same account as they possess Venice it self; and that the possession of the
said City having never been disputed by the Emperors, because the Venetians
built it in an abandoned place; so their Dominion in the Gulf has never been
contested, as being forsaken by the Emperors of the East, the ancient
Proprietors of it. And last of all, that if their Arguments or Writings be too
weak, they have Galleys, and Seamen, and Cannon enough to prove themselves
lawful and true Lords of that Sea. And it was answered to a Spanish Ambassador,
who signified to the States the design of the Infanta Maria Sister to the King
his Master, and lately married to Ferdinand King of Hungary, to pass with the
Spanish-Fleet that was to attend her thorough the Gulf of Venice to Triest,
That the Republic of Venice having indisputably the Dominion in those Seas,
could not admit any Men of War but her own. That nevertheless, if his Catholic
Majesty would accept the offer they made him of their Galleys, her most Serene
Highness should be received and conducted with such Honor as was due to her
Extraction, and to the Grandeur of the House of Austria: but if his Majesty
should refuse their offer, and choose rather to be take himself to force, they
would defend themselves and Nani Hist.
their Jurisdiction to the last. And the Senate caused it to be told to the
Viceroy of Naples by their Resident Mark Anthony Padavin, That if the Court of
Spain declined the generosity of their offer, and betook themselves to Arms,
the new Queen must be content to run the hazard of a Battle, and expose her
self to their Cannon before her Nuptials could be celebrated.

The Duke of Ossune had some years before experimented their resistance, by the
loss of several Ships sent into the Levant under his Banner to intercept the
Venetian Traffic; in which he was Nan. l. 3. 4.
assisted by the City of Ragusa, that received his said Ships into their Ports
of Calamotte, and Sancte Croix.

The Popes every nine years send new Bulls to the Senate, by which they continue
to them the Tenths of the Clergy for the defense of the Gulf, which imports the
Popes very much in respect of the March d'Ancona, where the Corsairs made
frequent devastations, and never landed but with rich plunder, they carried
away considerable numbers of the Inhabitants into slavery. Nan. l. 11.


THE THIRD PART.
The Holy Office of the Inquisition of Venice.
SUch is the coherence and connection betwixt the Inquisition, and Government of
Venice, that one is not well comprehended without the other: wherefore to
render my work more complete, I have made an abridgement of the Treatise of
Fra. Paolo about the Inquisition, in which we may see the Measures the Senate
took with the Court of Rome, and the Ecclesiastics. But because my design is
to give you an extract, not a translation of those passages, it cannot be
thought strange that I have not followed the order of the Original, nor pinned
my self up to the words of the Author, his sentiments being sufficient. And to
give more light to the matter, in two or three places I have added something of
his History of the Council of Trent, and of the Excommunication of the
Venetians; a method which I suppose will not be displeasing to the Reader.

When the Inquisition was first introduced in Venice, it was not by Command of
the Pope, nor by any Papal Bull; seeing the Bulls of Innocent IV, Alexander IV,
Element IV, and of seven other Popes, could not oblige the Venetians to receive
it, as the rest of the Principal Towns in Italy did: But it was brought in by
Decree of the Grand Council, to which Nicholas IV consented; framing to that
end his Bull of the 28 of August 1289, in which he inserted the Decree of the
Council, with all its Clauses; one of which ran thus, That the Senate should
assign a Fond for the necessary expenses of that Sacred Office, and should
likewise receive all the Money issuing from Amerciaments, or otherwise, to
which end the said Senate should name an Officer to be accountable to them.
Which is a thing quite different from the Custom of other Inquisitions, where
the Money goes to the Inquisitors.

The Inquisition at Venice is mixed, partly of Ecclesiastics, partly of
Seculars. The Ecclesiastics are Judges, the Seculars are Assistants, whereas
formerly the Seculars were Judges in Cases of Heresy, upon information from the
Ecclesiastics, whose Office was only to examine the Opinions of those who were
accused of Heresy; after which if the Ecclesiastics found them guilty, the
Duke and the Council condemned them to be Burned. And this Secular Inquisition
continued from the year 1249, (at which time it was established upon occasion
of the Wars betwixt Pope Innocent IV, and Frederick the Emperor) till the year
1289, when the Ecclesiastical Inquisition was admitted by the Senate. So that
there having been in Venice Secular Inquisitors against Heresy, before the
erection of this Sacred Office, occasion was given to take in Ecclesiastics
among the Seculars; it being unreasonable that the new Inquisitors admitted
only by favor, should exclude the ancient, who in reality were their Masters.

There are therefore three Senators always assisting in the Prince's name to
all Transactions and Decrees of that Court, in which nothing passes whereof the
Prince is not thoroughly advertised. The Ecclesiastic cannot bear Witness, nor
Cite, nor Examine a Delinquent, but with the participation and assistance of
these three Senators: For which reason the Secretary begins all Acts with this
form, Cum assistentia and praesentia Illustriss. and Excellentiss. D. D. N.
according to the agreement of Pope Julius III, with the Republic of Venice.
And if the Inquisitors presume to do the least thing without the knowledge of
the Assistants, it is actually void: so that if in their absence, process be
framed, it suffices not that the Articles, or particularities, were
communicated to them before Judgment, nor that they were present when Sentence
was pronounced, for the Senate will not trust to the integrity of the
Ecclesiastics: but new Process must be made from the beginning to the ending,
otherwise they cannot proceed to execution: by which means the Senate prevents
disputes with the Court of Rome, which turns every thing into President though
but once done.

And if the Inquisitors should desire of the Assistants permission to make any
Process without them, it is expressly forbidden them to grant it, because
condescension belongs to the Prince, not to the persons who represent him.
Besides this permission is not equivalent to the presence of the Magistrate,
who knows not afterward whether the Inquisitors have done well or ill: a thing
of no little importance to the service of the Public.

There are also Assistants in all places under the Dominion of the Venetians,
where there are Inquisitors; it being convenient, if not necessary that all
inferior Cities should be subject to the Laws and Customs of the Metropolis,
with safety to their Immunities and particular Privileges; and therefore the
Rectors assist in the Sacred Office, and perform all the Functions of the
Assistants in Venice. But because the other Duties of their employments, may
sometimes hinder the Rectors from being present, the Vicar of the Podestat,
Vicario Praetorio.
or some other Curial Officer, is permitted to go in their stead. And here it
may be observed that the Curial Assistant is not to serve as a Councellor to
the Inquisitor, though he be so to the Podestat, the Office of a Councellor and
an Assistant being incompatible; because the Councellor is an Officer of the
Inquisition, and by consequence depends upon it, but the Assistants dependence
is only upon the Prince whom he represents: so that if the Curial should become
a Councellor, the Assistance, which is a thing of Superiority, would degenerate
into Counsel, and render the Person subject to the Inquisitor; which would be a
great prejudice to the Secular Assistances that the Court of Rome would
willingly abolish.

This Assistance was an infinite trouble to Pope Paul V, who had an
inconceivable desire to increase the power of the Ecclesiastics. For the
Inquisition being the principal Nerve, and chief Prerogative of the Papacy, as
was pretended by Paul IV; it was very unpleasant to Paul V (who boasted, That
God had made him Pope to mortify the presumption of the Seculars) to see the
Venetians humble the Pride of the Ecclesiastics, and hold the Inquisitor in
dependence upon the Assistants. Pope Julius III thought he had gained a great
point, when in his agreement with the Republic he hedged in this Clause, Cum
assistentia and praesentia, imagining it would evidently appear that the three
Deputies from the Senate were not Judges in matters relating to the Inquisition,
but only Assistants. Nevertheless the Court have since owned how much that
Assistance is prejudicial to their Authority: and that which before they
interpreted a Victory upon the Venetians, they have since found to be a
considerable loss. Wherefore they have applied the utmost of their endeavors
to abolish that Custom, as injurious to their Authority; but the Senate has so
well defended it, that the Popes have given over all further thoughts of
contesting. The care the Assistants took to suffer no Act to pass without the
form Cum assistentia, etc. which pleased the Romans so well, has proved an
advantage to the Venetians, who have since made use of that Clause, to show the
Custom of their Assistance. The Popes would willingly deny it, notwithstanding
their Agreement in 1551, pretending that they were ignorant of the nature of an
Agreement, which implying the consent of both parties concerned, could not be
revoked or cancelled by one: It being little less than a contradiction to
affirm, that a thing concluded betwixt two Princes under reciprocal
Obligations, should notwithstanding remain at the disposition of one of them.

These Assistants take no Oath of Fidelity to the Inquisitors, seeing they are
neither Officers of the Inquisition, nor called thither by the Ecclesiastics.
On the contrary they are sent thither by the Doge to observe the proceedings of
the Inquisitors, and inform the Senate of what passes, in persuance of an Oath
they take to conceal nothing from him, nor to do any thing without his Order.
And by this it is the Inquisition at Venice seems to be mixed, both of
Ecclesiastics and Seculars. For where it is purely Ecclesiastical, all the
Seculars swear Secrecy and Fidelity to the Inquisitors. But here the Assistants
have power to suspend the Decrees of the Inquisitors, and to stop the Execution
of their Sentences, not only when they are contrary to the Laws and Customs of
their Country, but when they interfere with their private Instructions from
the Senate, or the particular Rules of their Government.

And if anciently the Dukes of Venice swore at their Election to punish
Heretics, it was to God and the Commonwealth (as the Kings of Spain do at this
day) not to the Inquisitors. But there is great difference betwixt swearing
indefinitely, and swearing to another person: the first Oath being an Act that
binds him only to himself and his own Conscience, whereas the other ownes a
Subjection and Obligation to him to whom he swears. And to prove that the Doges
never took any such Oath, we need no more than the Declaration of Duke Peter
Gradenique given in Writing to Friar Anthony an Inquisitor, who would have had
the said Duke sworn to have preserved the Papal and Imperial Constitutions
against Heretics: To which the Duke replied, that after the Oath he had taken
at his Election by the Contract betwixt the State of Venice and Pope Nicholas
IV, he the said Duke was not to take another, or oblige himself to other
Ecclesiastical or Imperial Orders than what were specified in the said
Contract. In the mean time the Inquisitors despairing to bring the Assistants
to any such Oath, they endeavored to oblige them to Secrecy in some things
relating to Censures and Excommunications: but the Assistants were inflexible,
being satisfied they were under no Obligation to the Inquisitors, because they
were none of their Ministers; and that the Doge ought to be acquainted with all
passages among them, for the convenience of his Government; it being more his
interest to maintain Religion, than it is the interest of the Ecclesiastics,
who respect only the service of God, whereas the Prince does it both for Gods
sake, and the Subjects, whose repose is always interrupted by Heresy. In
short, if the Senate meddles in matters of Religion, it only imitates
Constantine, Theodosius, Charlemain and others, Debes incunctanter advertere
Regiam Potestatem tibi non solum ad Mundi Regimen, sed maxim ad Ecclesiae
praesidium esse collatum. Leo I. ad Imperat. Leon.
who did the same, and were so far from being thought Usurpers, that they were
applauded, and had thanks both from the Popes and the Bishops; the Popes having
many times exhorted them to undertake that Care: And if at this day
Ecclesiastics, are sole Judges in Cases of Heresy, it is by the Concession of
Princes, who are not thereby stripped or divested of their Right, which is
inalienable; nor of their Power, for which they are equally responsible to God,
whether they execute it themselves or by Deputy. And by consequence it is their
Duty to have an eye over the Conduct of those, to whom they commit so great a
share of their Power, and to remove them if they abuse it.

The Inquisitors pretend that at least the Seculars have no right to Assist at
the Process of an Ecclesiastic; supposing erroneously that the Secular
Assistance was introduced only for what regarded the Laity. The Venetians
reply, that their Assistance is not appropriate to the Person, but to the
Crime; and that therefore Heresy being a Secular, as well as an Ecclesiastical
Offense (it being on the one side an Invasion of the Faith, and on the other an
Invasion of the Peace of the Public) it follows that all Heretical Causes are
to be Judged by the Ecclesiastics, with intervention of Seculars, which is
contrary to the practice in other Countries, where if the Cause be Spiritual,
the Secular person is Judged by the Ecelesiastick; if Temperal, the
Ecclesiastic is judged by the Secular. Besides, by a pretension of the
Inquisitors the Cause of a Priest or Monk turned Heretic, (though his
accomplices are Secular) ought to be judged only by Ecclesiastics as being
Ecclesiastic, which is to open a door for the Inquisitors to drive out the
Assistants,

In the year 1610, the Inquisitor of Brescia upon occasion of a Capuchin of
that City's being accused at Rome, made an Essay to take from the Assistants
the Cognizance of such Processes as were begun at Rome: By which the Secular
Assistance would have been abolished; for the Inquisitors of the State of
Venice would have found means to have engaged the Accusers either by promises,
or pretenses of Religion, to send their Depositions in Writing to Rome: upon
which that Court having examined the Information, would have returned their
Process to the places where the Inquisitors would have been Masters. But the
Wisdom of the Senate defeated that artifice; and order was sent to the Rectors
of all their Towns to have a strict eye upon the Conduct of the Inquisitors,
and to see they exactly observed all the Statutes and Forms of the Venetian
Inquisition, without receding one jot for any thing the Monks could allege.
For the same reason the Senate ordered their Assistants to take care the
Inquisitors did not insert in their Processes any Foreign Statute, that the
Court of Rome (which makes advantage of every thing indulged to them) might not
innovate in the Venetian Inquisition, which ought to be regulated by her own,
and not by the Customs of the Inquisition of Rome, upon which it had no
dependence being not of Papal Institution. In effect, if the Congregation of
Inquisitors General at Rome should take the Privilege to derive Orders to the
particular Inquisitors of Towns under the Jurisdiction of the Venetian, as they
do to several places in Italy, it would be the same thing, as if the whole
Process was perfected at Rome, because the other Tribunals could act nothing
but according to their Instruction from thence. Moreover, if the Acts made by
the Inquisitors without Assistants be Null in Venice, a fortiore, the Acts made
out of their Territories, and by consequence without any participation of the
Assistants, are vain and invalid. Not but if the Congregation at Rome send any
Directions or Rule that is convenient to be observed, and does not clash with
the Temporal Jurisdiction, the Inquisitors, ought to receive it with respect,
and put it in execution; provided it be done according to the Style and Custom
of their Country, the form of the new Decree running in the name of the
Inquisition of the Place, and passing in presence of the public Assistants,
without mentioning that the Decree came from Rome, lest the Venetian
Inquisition should seem subject to the Inquisition of Rome, upon which it has
no dependence: for it imports not much though the Direction comes from Rome, if
in the publication no Authority be acknowledged but the Authority of the Senate;
for it is that Authority which animates the Decree, because if the Duke admits
it not (as it happens many times in Venice) the Decree is void and and of none
effect. Again when the Inquisitors execute any Command from Rome, they examine
not whence it comes, but whether it be useful to the Public, and conformable
to the Custom of their Country, not enquiring whether it was done by their own
motion, or instigation from other People, so no other name be mentioned in it,
than the name of the Inquisition of Venice.

The Assistants are likewise to hinder the Inquisitors from publishing any Bull
old or new, without permission from the Duke; and this is founded upon the
following Reasons.

1. First, Because a compact cannot naturally be, but by consent of the parties
contracting, and therefore is not to be changed but by common accord. Thus the
Inquisition being established in Venice by Agreement, no new Law ought to be
admitted, but by consent of both parties concerned; and therefore the Bulls and
Decrees of the Court of Rome made since this Agreement, have no obligation upon
the Commonwealth of Venice.

2. Again, If the Court of Rome makes Orders and Laws according to their own
sentiments and designs, it is not equitable that the Republic of Venice
receive his new Decretals without examining first, whether or no they be
consistent with their affairs. Every Prince knows the Interest of his own
State, the Popes do not concern themselves for the interest of Secular Princes,
it is therefore the Princes duty to watch that nothing new, or dangerous to
their affairs be foisted upon them by the Papal Order; for that which the Popes
propose of running to them in case of disorder is a remedy worse than the
disease, seeing by that means they would make themselves Arbiters in all Civil
Controversy whatever. Wherefore the State of Venice has been always very shie
and cautious in that case; no Prince in Europe having pried more narrowly, seen
farther into the designs of Rome, nor opposed them with more vigor and success:
and her caution is continued to this day, the Publication of no Bull being
permitted but after long and mature deliberation. And if it so happens, his
Holiness sends a Common Bull to several Princes, the Venetians are always the
last who receive it; not that they may Regulate by the example of the rest, but
to have time to sift and discover the subtilties of that Court, which are
always introduced with pretenses of Religion. In fine, as the Popes apply
themselves industriously to the augmentation of the Ecclesiastical Power, and
the subjection of the Secular; the Senate on their side are as solicitous
against it, using all possible care at the reception of any Bull, that nothing
may surprise them: and to this end they cannot be presented to the College,
till they have been canvased and subscribed by two Doctors, entertained on
purpose by the State to give the Doge notice if they contain any thing of
Mystery or Innovation. And this difficulty in the Senate at the reception of
their Bulls, makes the Court of Rome as cautious how they offend them.

Thus much for the Assistance; let us now examine how far the Jurisdiction of
the Inquisitors in the State of Venice extends.

First, The Jews living in the Territory of this State, are not punishable by
the Inquisition for any Crime they commit; and this Rule is founded upon St.
Paul's Doctrine Quid mihi de iis qui foris sunt judicare? 1 Cor. 15.
, that Ecclesiastical Authority extends not to those who are not, nor never
were of the same Church: and by a decision of Pope Innocent III, it has been
Declared, that the Jews not being subject to the same Law, should not be Judged
by the Law: and therefore in Poland they are judged by Palatins, and not by
Ecclesiastics. Moreover, it is well known that Sixtus V, and Clement VIII,
granted Safeconduct to the Maranes, to remain, and traffic in the Town of
Ancona, without being molested or disturbed by the Inquisitors, contradicting
the Bull of Gregory XIII, of the year 1581, which subjected Jews, and all other
Infidels to that Sacred Office. Besides the Inquisition being erected only
against Heretics, Judaisme being no Heresy, falls not under their Jurisdiction.

If a Jew speaks irreverently of our Religion, if he blasphemes our Mysteries,
prophanes our Sacred things, debauches any body to his Religion, the
Ecclesiastics, and other persons concerned, bring their complaints to the
Officer on purpose for Blasphemy, who fails not to punish him severely
according to ancient Custom in the Church, by which the Ecclesiastics
concerned themselves no farther than to judge whether the Opinion complained of
as Heresy was contrary to our Faith; which having determined, they committed
them to the Secular to be Judged. And this was the Practice of the Church under
the Roman Empire, till the Division in the year 800; and in the Eastern Empire
to the last.

2. The Inquisition Judges not the Greeks, for these following Reasons.

First, Because it is unreasonable the Ministers of Rome should Judge the Greeks
in their own proper Cause, the Greeks insisting upon the observation of the
Canons which submit every Nation to its own proper Prelates; and the Romans
pretending to be above the Canons, do challenge a right of changing and
vacating the ancient Constitutions and Laws of the Councils and Fathers. This
Doctrine has caused the separation of those two Churches, which lived in unity
and Christian Charity the space of 800 years before; the Greeks acknowledging
the Pope to be St. Peter's Successor, and first of all the Catholic Bishops,
whilst he contented himself with the Power the Canons allowed him, and kept
himself within the bounds of his Primacy; without pretending to Sovereignty
over the rest of the Bishops.

Secondly, Because the Doge permitting the Inquisition to meddle with the
Greeks, would lessen his own Authority over them, and leave it to such as could
not exercise it without great trouble and confusion. The Power of punishing
Offenses in matters of Religion, has been always invested in the Civil
Magistrate quite through the Grecian Church, as the Greeks of this age do
readily confess, as desiring that Custom might be continued: and thus Justice
is administered to the Greeks by the Civil Power with general satisfaction;
whereas if the Inquisitors interposed in their affairs, the whole Nation would
oppose themselves against their Judgments, and mutiny against their Sovereignty.

Thirdly, Because the State of Venice receiving the Greeks under the Venetian
Protection, permitted them to live secondo il Rito loro: But their Customs and
Statutes would subject them to Princes for punishment of all Temporal Crimes,
and to Prelates of the Church for Spititual Offenses. From whence it follows,
that it belongs not to the Inquisitors, either to Judge or Examine what the
Greeks do, or believe privately, but only to inform the Civil Magistrate of
such as are scandalous, either in their actions or words. Besides, the
Republic of Venice does no prejudice to the Church, by permitting the Greeks
to live according to the general Custom of their Country, because that
permission was the principal Condition of their Obedience to that State: and
for the Senate to subject them to the Inquisition, would be no less than of good
and faithful Subjects, to make them Rebels, and implacable Enemies; from whence
no advantage could accrue to the Inquisition.

For these Reasons the Commonwealth of Venice (that Governs its Subjects by
peaceable Principles more than any other Prince in Europe) have been unwilling
to consent that the Greeks should be liable to the Judgment of the Inquisitors,
let the nature of their Charge be what it would.

Thirdly, The Inquisition of Venice has no Cognizance of such as have two
Wives, though they pretend to it, alleging that Crime to be an abuse of the
Sacrament of Marriage. To which it is answered, that the first Marriage (which
is good) rendering the second void, there is no abuse of the Sacrament, and by
consequence it belongs not to the Inquisitors to rectify, but to the Civil
Magistrate, who is obliged to punish the injury the Husband does to his Wife;
because it is an offense against Civil society as much as Adultery, which every
body knows is not subject to the Inquisition. Bigamy is Judged by the Lords
Criminal of the Night, as also the Jews who live in Adultery with the Wives of
Christians.

Fourthly, The Inquisition meddles not with Blasphemy, because it belongs to
the Secular Magistrate according to the Civil and Canon Law, and Custom of all
Christendom. But if the Blasphemer gives any suspicion of Heresy against the
Informer, the Inquisition Judges of the suspicion, and with him the Magistrate
for Blasphemy, so by that means the accused person is never unpunished, there
being two sentences against an Offender, one of the Sacred Office, for
Spiritual chastisement, the other of the Civil Magistrate, for Corporal
correction.

As to what the Inquisitors say, that it is too great severity for a man to have
two Sentences, alleging an old Aphorism, That one Judge is sufficient for one
Offense; the Venetians reply, It is no inconvenience to have two Judges in the
same Cause, when the punishments inflicted are of several kinds, and the ends
of those Judgments are different. So in the case of Blasphemy (which savours of
Heresy) the natural end of the Inquisitor is to convince the Blasphemer of the
truth, and to absolve him from the Censures incurred by his Blasphemy; whereas
the end of the Civil Magistrate is to punish the injury to the Divine Majesty,
whose Service and Honor all Princes and Magistrates are obliged to regard,
because it is he who has put the Sword of Justice into their hands, to be the
Ministers Non enim sine causa Gladium portat; Dei enim Minister est Vindex in
iram ei qui malum agit. Ep. ad Romans c. 13.
of his Indignation and Vengeance.

From whence it must be concluded that Princes, being charged with the care of
Religion, which God has recommended to them so often both in the Old and New
Testament, are bound in Conscience to employ their Authority against
Blasphemers, for whose punishment the Inquisition has no Pains suitable to the
greatness of their Offense, because the pains they inflict are Spiritual, and
not being so sensible, the Blasphemers and Swearers do frequently relapse into
the same Impieties; so that it is absolutely necessary for the service of God,
and the good of the Commonwealth, that the Secular Mastistrate has Jurisdiction
in these Cases, to retain people in their Duties by fear of Corporal punishment.

For the same Reasons, Sorcerers, and such kind of Delinquents are not judged
at Venice by the Inquisition, which notwithstanding has Cognizance of Heresy,
when indicated by abuse of the Sacraments.

Fifthly, The Senate suffers not the Inquisition to take notice of Usurers,
Victuallers, Innekeepers, nor Butchers who sell flesh in Lent; The Magistrate
being qualified for the punishment of such offenders when accused by the
Ecclesiastics, because in appearance the exorbitance of those kind of people
proceed only from Covetousness: for to imagine a Butcher that sells Flesh in
Lent does it, because he thinks Abstinence at that time unnecessary, is a fancy
that may make all sorts of whimsies Heresy.

Sixthly, It is not allowed the Inquisitors to make Information against either
the People or Magistrates for any thing relating to the administration of
Justice. The reason is this, Because Heresy being a personal fault, the people
cannot be accused of Heresy, though every one were Heretics: and by
consequence the Inquisition ought not to proceed but against particulars, the
Commnoalty being under the Protection and Authority of the Prince. So the
Magistrate considered as a private person, may render himself suspected of
Heresy by his words or his actions; but considered in his Office, he cannot
either for the one or the other be subject to the censure of Inquisitors,
because as such, he is invested with Public Authority, and can be responsible
only to his Prince.

If the Magistrate gives impediment to the proceedings of the Inquisition,
either by hindering the appearance of a person accused, or summoned in as a
Witness, the Inquisition is not to proceed but only by remonstrating to the
Magistrate or Prince, by means of the Assistants.

And forasmuch as the Inquisitors have often endeavored to insert new orders
in the Edict of Justice, which by Custom they publish at the entrance into
their Office, some of them have reiterated the said publication five or six
times, to foist in such Commands and Inhibitions as are suitable to such
occasions as they think ought to be favorable to them. To prevent this
inconvenience, the State has wisely limited the form and ordinary tenor of the
said Proclamation to six Heads, to which nothing can be added by the Inquisitor.

The First is against such as are Heretics themselves, or knowing others to be
so, do not discover them.

The Second against those who hold meetings or discourses to the prejudice of
the true Religion.

The Third, against those who Celebrate Mass, or Confess Sinners, without being
Priests.

The Fourth, against Blasphemers, whose Faith is suspected.

The Fifth, against those who obstruct the Office of the Inquisition; who
offend its Ministers, and threaten to abuse the Informers or Witnesses per
causa del Officio, that is to say, by reason of their Office, or out of
animosity to the persons concerned. For if it be upon other occasion, he who
did the injury to the Officer of the Inquisition ought to be Judged by the
ordinary Magistrate: otherwise it would be a great abuse, by which the
Ecclesiastics would quickly establish a right of punishing all sorts of
Offenses, and bring all Causes before them, and therefore the Senate has wisely
added this restriction, Per opere spectanti ad esso Officio.

The Sixth against those who have, Print, or cause to be-Printed Heretical
Books tending to the subversion of Religion. In these cases the Assistants have
power to stop the proceedings of the Inquisitors.

There was a good Law made by the Council of Ten in the year 1568, by which the
Confiscated Estate of a person condemned for Heresy went to the right Heirs,
upon condition no part of it was applied to the use of the Condemned person. So
that the Ecclesiastics were wiped of the advantages they formerly made of
those they condemned, the Seigniory of Venice-holding it cruelty to deprive the
Son (who perhaps is a good Christian) of his Estate, for the Heresy of his
Father. Against this Law the Court of Rome continually mumurs, but with little
success

As to the Books forbidden by the Court of Rome, the Commonwealth of Venice
will not allow the Inquisitors to publish in their Dommions any other Catalogue
of prohibited Books, than that which they received by agreement with Clement
VIII, 1596. And as this Catalogue has been Printed several times since, and the
Inquisitors have used all imaginable Artifice to foist in new prohibited Books,
and by that means elude the agreement, so the Senate has doubled their
vigilance, and put themselves in a condition not to be imposed upon by the
Ecclesiastics: and when the publication of any new prohibited Book that treats
not of Faith, is in question, before the Senate consents, the Tenor and Doctrine
of the Book is thoroughly by their Order examined, and the Reasons soberly
considered that moved the Court of Rome to condemn it; after which, if the Book
be prohibited, the prohibition runs in the Doges name, and not in the name of
the Inquisitors.

But because the Inquisitors have caused the Catalogue of 1595 to be Printed
very often, all out of ostentation, and to let the World see that the licensing
of Books belongs wholly to the Ecclesiastics; the Senate has given Order that
the said Catalogue should not be Printed for the future, but with the
Articicles of Agreement at the end of it: by which the Ecclesiastics have lost
much of their heat and desire of Printing the Catalogue again, because they
would have no Copies of the Articles, that contain in them many checks and
restrictions of their Power in those Affairs.

As to defamatory Libels writ against the reputation of their Neighbors,
though by Ecclesiastics themselves, the Venetian affirms that the Inquisition
ought not to take Cognizance of them, because their Office was established for
the extirpation of Heresy, not the castigation of Calumny; that Function
belonging more properly to the Civil Magistrate, to whom God has recommended it.

If the Ecclesiastics be sufferers in it, they must apply themselves to the
Magistrate, and he will do them Justice. If any man writes against their
Immunities, the Prince only has Right to punish it, because it is from his Grace
and Liberality they hold them, and it is he only can preserve them: nor indeed
is it agreeable that priviledg'd Persons should have the defense of their own
Privileges, or be Judges in their own Cases. But there are few such Libels in
Italy to be seen, though new ones are dispersed every day by the Romans against
the Power of the Seculars, for zealous are they in the diminution of the
secular Authority, and so furious in augmentation of their own.

Moreover the Ecclesiastics are not competent Judges of Books relating to
Civil Government: it belongs to Princes who have States to govern, to approve
or reject the Maxims contained in such Books, seeing such matters fall not
under the cognizance of Ecclesiastics, to whom God has forbid the meddling in
secular Affairs. Neither are they to be admitted Judges in Causes where they
concern themselves with so much passion, as to call Tyranny and humane
Invention the power which God has given to secular Magistrates, and Heresy and
Blasphemy that Doctrine which impugns their Opinions. Thus Cardinal Bellarmin
in one of his Books has the confidence to pronounce those Heretics who affirm
Kings and Sovereign Princes to have no Superior in Temporal things but God.
Insomuch that to follow his Doctrine, and the Doctrine of the Romans, we must
believe there is no Sovereign Power but in the Pope.

Again, the Venetian suffers not the Inquisitors to censure Books of Love or
Gallantry, though they contain many things of Honor, and good Manners; First,
because the Inquisitors are instituted to judge of Heresy, but not to censure
Manners. Secondly, according to St. Paul's Doctrine, the public Honor and
Tranquillity are entrusted with the Civil Magistrate. Thirdly, because offenses
committed either by word or deed against the reputation of another man, or
against civil decency or decorum, or things indisputably belonging to the
secular Judge, and by consequence the same offenses in writing belong to the
same Judges. And here it is worth observation, that the Court of Rome pretends
not to Jurisdiction over Books that treat not of matter of Faith, but since the
year 1550, and that this Usurpation is turned into Custom and Right by the
negligence of the Princes of Italy, and their Ministers, who shifting that care
upon the Monks, insensibly divested themselves of that part of their Authority,
which they never perceived till it was too late to recover.

There has been no State, but the Republic of Venice, that has always
discerned the importance of this caution, and by consequence not suffered
diminution in their ancient Rights: but the Venetian Ministers continue to
peruse all the Books that are Printed, to the end that nothing may slip in of
erroneous Doctrine, hindering likewise such Books as have been Printed
formerly, from being Reprinted or exposed to sale, to prevent the increase of
that mischief which otherwise they might do.

Again, the Cardinal Baronius magnifies exceedingly the Enterprises of
Jurisdiction made formerly by the Court of Rome, affirming boldly in a Letter
of the 13th of June 1605 to the King of Spain, to complain of his Ministers for
stopping the sale of the Eleventh Tome of his Annals in the States of Naples
and Milan, That the Pope was the sole lawful Judge of Books, and that therefore
neither Princes nor any of their Ministers could condemn such Works as his
Holiness had approved. To which the King replying, not by words, but deeds, and
suffering the Prohibitions published by his Ministers to proceed, the said
Cardinal in his 12th Tome printed 1607, added a Discourse to this purpose, That
it was an horrid and impious thing for Kings or their Ministers to censure such
Books as had been approved by the Pope, or to forbid the Stationers to sell
them. That it was to rob St. Peter of one of the Keys that Jesus Christ had
given him, that is to say, the knowledge that is to discern betwixt good and
evil. And at length, that the Ministers of Spain had prohibited his Book,
because it reprehended the injustice of their Masters. Which evidently
discovers the passion of the Romanists, who think it lawful to speak
irreverently of Kings, and to decry their Government by invectives under the
Cloak of Religion, whilst Princes are not allowed Power to hinder the reading
of such Books in their own proper Dominions. What disorder would it produce in
the World, if the approbation that Popes for their own interest have given to
Books written against the Secular Power, should oblige all Princes to receive
them? What could be more unreasonable than to require a Book wherein the King
is called Tyrant and Usurper, his Ancestors defamed, and his Subjects excited
to Rebellion, should be printed, read, and sold publicly even in the Territory
of the said Prince? And yet this is no more than Baronius pretended to, who
after he had spoke dishonourably of several Kings of Aragon, and particularly
of Ferdinand in his Discourse of the Sicilian Monarchy, believed that Philip
III had done him great injury not to permit the sale of his Book, though full
of Baron. Tome 11. Ann. Eccl.
acrimony, and invective against his Predecessors and Parents.

As it is undoubtedly true, a Book treating of matter of Faith, and licensed by
the Pope, cannot be condemned by any secular Power; so it is as certain, a Book
treating of History or Civil Government, may as justly be prohibited by
Princes, or their Ministers, though licensed by all the Prelates in Europe.

For the Expedient Baronius proposes of repairing with humility to the Bishops
for suppression of such Books as the secular Magistrate shall judge pernicious
or scandalous, I have said already the Remedy is worse than the Disease, seeing
thereby the Ecclesiastics would make themselves in a thousand things that
belong not to their Jurisdiction. Besides, that Government would be very
imperfect that had not in it self power to provide what was necessary for its
subsistence, but must attend till remedy be applied by those whose interest it
is to have the mischief continued, and who will never address themselves to
reform it, but as their own interest prompts them.

And therefore, in my judgment, Princes are not to rely upon the diligence of
other People in things that concern the good of their State, God Almighty
having given them Authority to secure themselves. In short, it is only the
Prince understands what is proper for his State, and therefore no reason he
should be beholding to the Pope for what he has of his own, which made John de
Monluc Bishop of Valentia say, upon occasion, That it would be madness to see
Paris on fire, and to expect till water could be fetched from the Tyber to
quench it, when the Seine was so near. The Venetian Policy is quite contrary to
the Policy of the Pope: What is good for the Ecclesiastical State, is otherwise
for the Civil: and if it were not, nothing could oblige the Civil State to
conform; and therefore a Doctrine may be good at Rome, that may be pernicious
at Venice, Vienna, Madrid, and every where else. Wherefore the Pope's
approbation cannot divest Princes of their Authority to condemn such Books as
are likely (if not intended) to breed disturbance in their States.

But the truth is, so far are Popes from being lawful Judges of all manner of
Books, that they have usurped upon Seculars in the very power of suppressing of
Heretical Books. In the eight first Centuries all Books were examined, and
censured by the Councils, but prohibited by Princes for reason of State. The
Council of Nice declared the Doctrine of Arius heretical, and then Constantine
by an Imperial Proclamation prohibited his Books.

The second Council of Constantinople pronounced Eunomius an Heretic, and
Arcudius the Emperor published an Edict against his Works.

The third Council of Ephesus condemned Nestorius, and the Emperor Theodosius
commanded his Books to be burned.

The fourth Council of Calcedon having condemned the Eutycheans, the Emperor
Martianus published a Decree against their Books. Which shows that the
prohibition even of heretical Books belongs not so properly to the
Ecclesiastical, as to the Secular Power: for though the Ecclesiastics may
judge whether there be Heresy in a Book, it follows not but a Secular Prince
may, by his Edict, forbid that Book that is censured by the Ecclesiastics, and
they have no reason to complain that one of St. Peter's Keys is taken from
them; seeing the prohibition of a Prince gives more force and vigor to their
censure.

As to the Stationer, the Senate consents that those who keep or sell Heretical
Books, be punished by the Inquisition: but it suffers not an Inventory of their
Books be taken by the Inquisitors; that they receive permission to sell them
from the Inquisitors, nor that they give them an Oath; which the Inquisitors
have endeavored many times to obtain, as also to insert into their Edicts
Commands beyond their power, alleging that they pretend not to give an Oath to
a Stationer, but for things to which their conscience obliges them, that is to
say, not to sell prohibited Books; and that by their Edicts they only intend
them advertisement of what they ought not to do: but these are but cunning
pretenses, for to give an Oath, and advertise by Edict, (though in things that
are just to be done) are acts of Superiority and Jurisdiction. Besides, the
Edict and Oath are things of that nature, that he who transgresses either
against the one or the other, is worthy of punishment.

To these the Inquisitors add another reason, that seeing they are Judges of
Heresy, they ought (in consequence) to judge every thing that relates to it, and
therefore they have a right to command the Stationers, because Heresies are no
way more dangerously disseminated than by Books.

To this the Venetian answers, That for Books which contain Heresy, the
Inquisitors have right to prohibit them, and punish the Stationer who sells
them; but for all other sort of Books, the Stationer is not accountable to the
Inquisitors, nor to bring their Inventories before them. For it is but ill
Logic to infer the Inquisition may extend its Authority to all Books, because
Heresy is often taught in Books, for all Books treat not of Faith, which is the
only subject belonging to that sacred Office, and therefore those that treat
not in that way, fall not under the Jurisdiction of that Court. If the
Inquisitors were Judges of all that had reference to Heresy, though never so
remotely, there would not be any Crime nor Error but might become matter for
the Inquisition; there would be no need of Civil Magistrates, and by degrees
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction would worm out the Secular.

There is but one point in which the Republic of Venice seems to have
over-shot her self, and that is in having suffered the Popes to send foreign
Inquisitors among them, when their own Subjects might execute that Office with
as much charity and discretion, as they who know nothing of the customs and
practices of their Country. In Spain the Inquisitors are all Spaniards: in the
Duchy of Milan the Natives are not excluded; and therefore the Venetian, in
other things so jealous of their Authority, in this seems to be in worse
condition than the King of Spain.

Nevertheless, if it be considered that the Inquisitors cannot be received into
the Towns to which they are sent, unless they first present themselves before
the Prince for his Letters Patents directed to the Rectors of the place, it
will be found the danger is not great, seeing that if an Inquisitor be not
liked, the Prince has the remedy in his hands, and that is by delaying (if not
denying) his Patent, without which, his Patent from the Pope is ineffectual.
Which is a good way of discouraging foreign Monks, by making difficulty to
receive them; and this is a true secret (when they please) to oblige the Court
of Rome to name their Inquisitors, out of the Subjects of that State.

The Inquisitors of Venice hold their Court in the Palace of St. Mark, where
they meet twice a week.

Such of the Assistants as have business with the Court of Rome, cannot remain
in the sacred Office, their intelligence there rendering their fidelity
suspicious to the State, which puts others into their places. So the
Inquisitors have no capacity to corrupt any of the Assistants, because the
Office of these Gentlemen ceases that very moment in which they address for any
favor from the Pope.

This is all I have judged necessary to be known relating to the Inquisition at
Venice; I shall pass now to the true Causes of the decay of this Magnificent
Commonwealth.

A Discourse containing the Chief Causes of the decay of the Venetian
Commonwealth.
IT has happened to the Commonwealth of Venice as it happened anciently to the
Commonwealth of Sparta; both the one and the other flourished whilst they
contented themselves with the little latitude of their own Countries, and both
began to decline when they had acquired more than they could manage.

Sparta was Mistress of all the chief Provinces in Greece, and no sooner had
two Theban Pelopidas and Epaminondas.
Captains rescued their Country from the Dominion of the Lacedaemonians, but all
the other Towns they had conquered, followed the Example, and revolted. The
State of Venice, grown to be great and formidable in Italy by its prodigious
increase, and the detriment of the Princes she had over-reached, lost by one
single Battle as she had usurped upon the Terra-firma, because her foundations
were not sufficient for the weight of so vast an Edifice. Which makes it
evident, that as the health of the Body proceeds not so much from the meat it
takes in, as from the digestion that is made; so the strength of a State
consists not in what it gains, but what it is able to keep. And if it be true
that a State can never maintain it self, but by means conformable to its
principle, no wonder if the Republic of Venice conceived in Fear, brought
forth in the Waters, brought up in Poverty, and elevated in Peace, began to
decline from its greatness, by engaging in a War with the Dukes of Milan and
Ferrara, without considering the nature of their Forces, or the difficulty of
maintaining their Conquests Facilius est quaedam vincere quam tueri. Cart. l. 4.
. Had the Venetians followed the wise counsel of their Doge Thomas Moccineguo
which he gave them upon his deathbed, to content themselves with their
Conquests at Sea, where they had acquired so many fair and rich Islands, the
delights of the Terra-firma would not have debauched them, nor provoked the
emulation and jealousy of all the Princes of Italy who were obliged to unite in
a War against them, to curb their extravagant ambition. They might better have
resisted the Turk, who finding them otherwise employed, began from that time to
invade Greece, and infest their Maritime Provinces. And Politicians have
observed, that the recovery of their Lands upon the Continent, was the first
cause of the loss of Cyprus and Candia, places of much more importance than
their Towns upon the Terrafirma. And therefore P. Scipio had reason, when to
the Officer who cried about the Streets in Rome, Jupiter auge Rempublicam, he
told him he had much better pray to Jupiter to preserve, than Valor. Maxim. l.
4. c. 1.
to increase it, Satis esse auctam, dicens, dummodo Conservaretur. Though the
Lacedaemonians were all professed Soldiers, they punished not those who lost
their Swords in the Battle, but those who lost their Bucklers, it being then an
infamy among them, as since among the Germans Scutum reliquisse precipuum
flagitium. Tac. Ger.
: to show that they esteemed it less Glorious to Conquer than to Defend, the
Sword serving for Invasion, the Buckler for Defense. With much more reason, the
Venetian being a People of the Robe, and for Council, ought to have employed
their Buckler against their Neighbors, and applied themselves more diligently
to their Interest in the Levant, where Fortune had been so favorable to them.

A Second Cause of their decay is the slowness of their Councels. It Is true,
this fault is common in all Commonwealths, but with them it may be said to be
in extremity, their Senate seeming sometimes to be asleep, with so much
heaviness and inactivity it moves upon several occasions. They had seasonable
advertisement of the vastness of the Ottoman preparation for the Invasion of
Candia, and yet they thought no more of putting themselves into a posture of
defense, than if they had had no former experience of the Turkish perfidy, or
had been assured, by Revelation that that great Force was not intended
against-them. This Confidence was founded upon the Promises of an Infidel who
deceived them, by making them believe that the Designs of the Port were
against Malta, though Hungary and Poland might have given them wholesome
instances of fear, and distrust. And John Sorance, their Ambassador at
Constantinople admonished them of their danger, and exhorted them constantly to
provide; but apprehending to disgust the Grand-Seignior if they should discover
any open suspicion; and fearing to precipitate themselves by false Measures,
into a War against which they thought themselves safe by virtue of their
Alliance, which they had lately renewed, they saw the Fortress of St. Theodore
surprised; and the City of Canea besieged, before they would believe their
Country was to be the Theater of the War, and the whole Charges to be defraied
by them. Which shows there is a certain Fatality that governs all things, and
blinds the wisest persons living when misfortune is at hand Adeo obcaecat
animos fortuna cum vim suam ingruentem refringi non vult. Live.
.

The loss of Canea drew after it the loss of Retimo, and the Field. And when
there was nothing remaining to them but the chief City and some few Villages
and Forts, they began to deliberate in despair: The greatest part were for
delivering it up freely for Peace; and it had been certainly done, had not John
Pesaro, since Doge, bravely Remonstrated to the Senate, That if they gave up
that place to the Turk, it would be the way to make him more insolent; to
increase his Contempt of them, and raise in him an insatiable desire to Invade
them, by the easiness of his Conquests; and therefore it was his Judgment
better by a vigorous resistance to discourage him. That if he were once master
of Canea, he would quickly demand the three Isles, and the rest of Dalmatia.
That to be Conquered and Submit to their Force would be no scandal; but to
submit for fear would be dishonorable and base; that though an Enemy be never
so formidable, we are not to publish our apprehension; That States are not
maintained by Pusilanimity and Trusting Non ignavia magna imperia contineri.
Tac. Ann. 15.
. That if it be almost imposible to preserve a Country already more than half
lost, it would be the more honorable to defend it Courageously, the less
likelihood there was of success. That the Commonwealth of Venice like a
Corpulent man, had need to Exercise to dissipate the gross Humors it had
contracted by too long repose. That the War in Candia was like a Wound, to be
kept open, to prevent a Gangrene: That the Eyes of all Christendom were upon
them to observe how they followed the steps of their Glorious Ancestors, and
what expression they made of their Constancy and Courage. And that if their
Forces were not strong enough for the Turks, yet they were strong enough in
such a desperate juncture, where their Honor and Safety was at stake. This
Discourse turned the Scale, and put the Senate upon a resolution to maintain the
War to the utmost extremity, which they did a long time with prodigious expense.

And here it is to be observed, the Venetians who are naturally very fearful
and superstitious, were not so when they should have been. Some Months before
the Turks landed in Candia, a Nobleman of that Country, being present at Mass
with the Senate, in the Chapel of the College, stole the Pax which is usually
given about to be kissed; and not many days after, in the Court of the Palace
of St. Mark, the word Pax out of the Verse, Justitia and Pax osculatae sunt,
fell down out of the hands of Justice in the sight of several persons; which
was taken as a certain presage of the War In Prodigium and Omen imminentiam
Claudeum vertebatur. Hist. 1.
wherewith that Republic was threatened, in the opinion of all People: and the
Omen was much more intelligible than that whereby Ceditius Prognosticated the
coming of the Gauls to Rome. But the Senate made no use of these Prodigies,
either willing to conceal its distress, according to the Custom of Princes
Tristissima quaeque occultantem Tiberium. Ann. 1.
, or else insensible of its danger.

Thus the Venetians lost the Kingdom of Cyprus by their irresolution, though
the Procurator Hieronimo Zane, and Pascal Cicogne, their Generals in Dalmatia
and Candia, remonstrated to the Senate, that they were not to expect till
Selymus declared, but to look upon it as certain, and provide to meet him with
a good Fleet at Sea, to hinder his descent in that Kingdom. The Senate
understood the importance of their Council, when it was too late to make use of
it Optima viderentur quorum tempus effugerat. Hist. 1.
, for Selymus gave them no leisure to repent Sed non Senatui libertas ad
poenitendum. Ann. 3.
, so ill it is to comply too much with an ill Neighbor, or to discover a fear.

By the same irresolution the State of Venice lost her interest upon the Terra
firma not many years since; because they came not to a determination before the
Consederate Princes invaded their Territories. They might easily have judged
their Power too weak to have resisted the united strength of the Pope, the
Emperor, the French, and the Spaniard, and therefore it had been their
interest to have divided them, as they might easily have done by giving up part
for the safety of the whole: But ambition to grasp what they could not hold,
dazzled them for discerning their true Advantages, and made them lose what they
were unwilling to leave. They gave the Enemy time to join their Forces, and
never opened their Eyes till they were beaten at Vaila by the French, after
which they began to think of peace, and having surrendered to the Pope, Rimini,
Faienza, Ravenna, and Cervia, they begged his Mercy, as if they had been his
Rebellious Subjects, promising never to intermeddle in Guichard. lib. 8.
Ecclesiastic affairs, nor to tax their Lands without permission from the
Pope: They offered the Emperor, Verona, Vicenca, Padua, and several places in
Friul, of which they owned themselves Usurpers: They proffered him an Annual
Tribute of 50000 Ducats, protesting that if he would pity their Condition,
they would Record him in their Annals for their Father, their Redeemer, their
Founder, obey his Commands, and for the future never separate from his
Interest. So poor Spirited and abject does Adversity make many People, and
those especially who before the danger are most huffy and high, Sunt molles in
Calamitate Mortalium animi. Tacitus.
as were the Venetians Ante discrimen feroces in periculo pavidi. Hist. 1.
.

In short, to the King of Spain they restored Frani, Otranto, Brindes,
Monopoli, Mola, and Pulignan, all which they held in Pouille. To the Duke of
Ferrara they delivered up the Polesin; and this they did rather in despair and
a fright, than upon good deliberation, as is franckly confessed by Andrew
Moccineguo who writ in the heat of the War Patres turbati animis, trepidabant
magis quam Consulerent.
. Whereas had they thought in time of satisfying the King of France, or of
dividing the Pope from the League, they might have been able to have defended
against the rest of the Princes, as appeared afterward; for Julius II.
conceiving a jealousy against the French (whose progress he feared) and
retiring from the League, the face of the Venetian affairs quickly changed, and
several of their Towns returned to their obedience.

The same thing almost happened before in the League that Pope Sixtus XII made
against them 1483.
with the King of Naples, the Duke of Milan; and the Florentines, for Ferrara.
For if Lodowick Sforza Governor of Milan had not left the League, the
Venrtians (who had lost their Fleet upon the Po, and all the Territory of
Bergamo, Brescia and Verona, that the Duke of Calabria Son to the King of
Naples had taken from them) had without doubt been deprived of all their
possessions in Lombardy. But upon Capitulation with Sforza, whose Quarrel they
Espoused against the Calabrians, who would turn him out of his Government of
Milan, all was restored, without being obliged reciprocally to the restitution
of the Polesin to the Marquess of Ferrara: so that they who were vanquished in
the Field, were Victors in Council, and recovered all by their management of
the Treaty. To which I shall add my Reflections upon one thing the Senate of
Venice did after the loss of Candia; by which the truth of what I have said may
be judged.

It was resolved an extraordinary Council should be held every Week for the
carrying on of the War, which could hot be obtained at the beginning by all the
Remonstrances of the Chevalier Molin, who very well understood the condition of
their affairs; and yet most ridiculously, at an unseasonable time, two Months
after the Peace was concluded, this Council was set up, like a Physician, who
prescribes after the Patient is dead, or like the Phrygeans, who assembled
their Council after the mischief was happened, to consider how they might have
prevented it. The proposition made by the Senate, at the same time to the
Emperor, to purchase the Towns of Friest Gradisque, and Goretz, to repair
their losses in the Levant, was as much out of time; For if they had Money to
purchase more, it might as well have been laid out to keep what they had.

The Third cause of the disorder of their affairs, is, because the Senate
consisting of so great a number, and their Affairs determined by plurality of
Voices, ill Councels (provided they be covered with plausible appearances) are
oftener followed than good, which most commonly displease, either from the
difficulty of Execution; or because the good or ill Consequences are not
generally foreseen by several of the Members, who discern not what is True from
what is False, nor what is Convenient from what is Destructive: So that it is
sometimes at Venice, as Anacharsis said it was formerly at Athens, where the
Wise Consulted, and the Weak Resolved; for Voices are counted, not Reasons
considered Numerantur sententiae, non ponderantur; nam cum sit impar Prudentia,
par omnium jus est. Plin. l. 2. c. 12.
; for the Vote of a Fool is equivalent to the Vote of the wisest, and they
being always fewest, no wonder if their Council miscary. Thus did they conclude
to League themselves with Lewis XII, against Sforza Duke of Milan, to have in
Recompense the Town of Cremona, and the Country de la Ghiara d'Adda, because
the advantage was present; whereas the Graver of the Senators advised the
contrary, according to Principles of true Policy, not to drive out a
Neighboring Prince, to let in a more Potent into his place: and this
occasioned afterward the League of Cambrey, which Melchior Trevisan had
Prognosticated before, telling them in full Senate, That the King of the Romans
would join more readily with the King of France against them, than with them
against so powerful a King; because united with France it would be easy for him
to Conquer the Venetians, whereas with them, it would be very hard to prevail
against France; and by consequence, the Republic of Venice having already so
many Enemies upon their hands, they must either beat all the Princes of Europe,
or be beaten by them.

Besides, there are those in Venice, who to flatter the Genius of the People,
and show themselves zealous for their Country, accomodate their Councels to
the depraved Palats of others. For Example, If it be in debate to render some
Town that has been unjustly usurped from some great Prince who threatens by
force of Arms to revenge himself, It Is most certain, the Senator who would
persuade Restitution, should not willingly be heard; and he who should advise
to keep it, would hay a Torrent of voices on his side, and be esteemed a good
Citizen, though he betrayed his own Conscience and Country by a Council he
knows must be the detriment of the State. In this manner it was that the
Procurator Dominick Trevisan prevailed against the just Demands of Julius II,
who contented himself Guichar. lib. 8.
with the restitution of Rimini, and Faenza (Usurped under his Papacy) to
refuse his Ratification of the League of Cambray. An effect of the feebleness
and ignorance of the generality of Mankind, who not regarding the future, chose
rather to lose all afterward, than at present to part with any thing, though
for the safety of the rest: like the Merchants that perish in the Sea, because
they will not suffer any part of their Goods to be thrown overboard. Or like
those obstinate People, who will rather run the hazard of a Gangreen, than
endure the pain of an inconsiderable Incision: so that whatever Exprience the
Venetians have had, they will not change their Method, and thereby verifying
the saying of the Italians, That the State of Venice never releases any thing
willingly, that she has once got into her clutches.

But we are not to admire such ill Councels are given in the Pregadi, seeing
ill Counsels are most acceptable, and good, not only rejected, but heard with
indignation. The Council that Bartholomew Alviani gave, them to carry on the
War into the Enemies Country, according to the old Rule of the Romans, and to
invade the Duchy of Milan, before Lewis XII. passed into Fuit propriam Populi
Romani long a domo Bellare. Cicero.
Italy, was looked upon as rash, though no more than their affairs required,
and in appearance that rashness would have 'been happy; but it seems the Senate
wanted both Courage and Providence Nec ausus est satis, nec providit. Hist. 3.
. Besides, the wisest of the Senators do many times forbear giving their
advice, as knowing the danger of exposing themselves to the Capriccio of the
weaker sort, who are as much their Judges as the greatest of the Sages. For the
Proposers of great Enterprises, like those who throw up great Stones into the
Air, are in great danger of having them fall upon their heads: and again, if
they succeed, every one will pretend to the Glory, as Tiberius told the Senate
Cum recte factorum sibi quisque gratiam trahet, unius invidia; ab omnibus
peccatur: Ann. 3:
: but if they miscary, the Blame redounds to the Author, though the fault be in
the ill management of all. Those who at Rome advised that the Consulary
Tribunes should be indifferently chosen out of the Nobility and People, were
generally blamed both by the People and the Nobility (though the People had
Espoused the Interest of the Nobility against the Senate) when they understood
that the first Popular Consul who Commanded the Army, was defeated by the
Enemy: and almost the same thing happened at Venice during the War; They
condemned at last what they approved in the beginning, and they judged of the
Actions of their Generals only by the success of their Arms, which many times
is a wrong and irrational Argument. They have another ill Custom likewise, and
that is, How good soever the Resolution is, that their General takes in any
dangerous exigence; how advantageous soever the terms they make with the Enemy,
they always find fault and account it the worst Quae Natura manis timoribus,
deterius credebant quodunque evenerat, Ann. 15.
. And therefore after they had received with satisfaction and great applause
the News of the Peace which General Morosini had made in Candia, and had
ratified it with all expressions of extraordinary approbation, in a few Months
time they changed their note, and made the deliverer of their Country (as they
called him before) a Criminal, and a Traitor.

Moreover, the State of Venice is much subject upon any ill-conjuncture of
their Affairs, to take the middle-way, which is commonly the worst Media
sequitur quod inter ancipitia teterrimum est. Ibid.
. That is to say, of two Counsels proposed, one generous and brave, the other
poor and pusilanimous; they frame a third out of both, without examining their
incompatibility or danger.

Nor is their parsimony less pernicious to the Venetians; for the want of
keeping a foreign Militia in time of Peace, whenever War is declared, they
are sure to be surprised. No sooner were they delivered from the War in Candia,
but they disbanded their Forces, as if they had been sure never to have had
occasion for them more: and yet within a year they engaging in a new Quarrel
about limits in Dalmatia, and were in danger of losing that whole Province,
before they could have reinforced it with 2000 men, had the Port been willing,
or known how to have made use of the opportunity. The Author of disbanding
their Army, was the Procurator Nani, and his advice was preferred, because it
pretended frugality. So that it may be said of this State, as it was of Perseus
King of Macedon Pecuniaequam Regni melior custos. Live.
, that he knew better how to keep his Money than his Country. The Kingdom of
Cyprus was lost partly by their Avarice, refusing to pay the 50000 Crowns
(owing to Selymus, as Successor to the Sultan of Egypt) according to agreement
with the said Sultan, and King James, whose Heirs they were; which drew upon
them the displeasure and Arms of that Emperor Zuritann. Arragon. Marian. Hist.
Hisp. l. 28. Suavedra Emp. Pol. 75.
. Historians have likewise observed that their Avarice was the chief cause of
the ruin of their Trade in the Persian Gulf; for (...) willing to allow the
Portugals should be their companions in so profitable a Commerce, they
contented not themselves to excite the King of Calecut, and the Sultan of Egypt
against them, and to send them Gunners and Engineers to assist them, but they
called in the Hollanders, who after they had settled their Correspondencies and
Magazins, in requital, they supplanted the Venetians. In the same manner they
were handled by the Turks after they had brought them out of the Black-Sea into
Europe, at the rate of 25000 Crowns; for those Infidels having invaded Servia,
Bulgaria, and Bosnia, advanced at length against Greece. God permitting by a
just Judgment, that those who for their base interest had sacrificed their
Neighbors to those miscreants, should at length in their turn be buried in the
common ruin.

And to these may be added another reason of their decay, and that is the
ill-Education of their Youth. For in Venice it is a common thing to see the
Father courting his Concubine, and treating the other instruments of his
Debauchery in the presence of his Son, who perhaps learns the act, before he
understands the evil Nostras amicas, nostros concabinos vident. Discunt haec
antequam sciant vitia esse. Quin.
; involving himself farther as he advances in years, being corrupted by an
example he thinks himself bound to follow: so that these young Gentlemen
entering into public affairs with so wicked dispositions, it is impossible but
the Administration must be infected. And therefore Sixtus V in a Letter to the
Archbishop Matteuzzi his Nuntio at Venice, had these words, J am venit hora
eorum, Their time is coming. And truly, if we consider the loss this
Commonwealth has sustained within these hundred years, and what they are like
to do more, unless God Almighty prevents it, it is in danger of being reduced
to its Primitive Patrimony, that is to say, the bare Dominion of their Lakes
and their Marshes, and which is worse, do Homage to the Grand Seignior, as
Ragusa does at this day.

Let us now take a Prospect of their Governors, I mean, consider the Manners
and Maxims of their Nobility Vt olim plebe valida, vel cum Patres pollerent
noscenda vulgi natura. Senatusque and optimatium ingenia, qui maxim
perdidicerant, callidi temporum, and sapientes credebantur, Ann. 4.
: For as Tacitus observes, to discover the Nature and Qualities of a
Government, we must inform our selves of the genius and humor of the Prince,
who is the Soul that informs it. Which occasioned an ancient Author to say,
That Nature would sooner be defective in her Operations, than a State in
imitating their Prince Facilius errare naturam, quam Principem formare
Rempublieam dissimilem sui.
.

The Manners and general Maxims of the Venetians.
IT being natural to Republics to dread Ambitious and Popular Servants. The
Venetians are no less suspicious than other Nations. They love great Exploits,
but many times they hate those that perform them Oderunt merita regnantes;
quibus tum unerandis impares existimantur:
; believing that those who have been able to preserve their Country, may be as
able to destroy it; and that therefore it is more danger to advance such, than
dishonorable to debase them. For this cause it is they often crush those
persons who have delivered their State; because they fear lest those tutelar
Angels should out of Ambition or Revenge become Domestic Enemies, and Carve
out their own Recompense with their Swords: thus they rid themselves of a
Gentleman of the House of Loredano, who by his presence had appeased Machia:
lib. 3. dise: 122.
a Commotion of the People, when all the Magistrates of the Town with their
promises and their threats could do nothing; supposing the said Loredano might
some time or other set up for the Government, having had so great success in
working upon the People, like Tiberius Tac. An. 1.
, who conceived an implacable hatred against the Wife of Germanicus, for having
stopped a Sedition which himself could not appease.

In the same manner they caused the person to be put to death who discovered
the Conspiracy of Duke Martin Falier; first making him a Noble Venetian, and
then taking away his Life when they had done. But it is no small part of their
care to conceal this procedure to Strangers; whose Assistance they cannot want
in their Wars; and to draw whom into their service, they have caused several
Statues and Monuments to be erected in their Churches and Public places in
Venice and Padua, for Strangers that have served the State, thereby to allure
others with hopes of the same Honor.

They bear a hatred to any that are great with the People; the common
inconvenience of an Aristocracie, where the Nobility living in constant
Jealousy and distrust, every man fancies that his Companion designs by
insinuating with the People, to enslave the Commonwealth; and this imagination
has caused the death of many a brave Person. One Cornaro, who in time of Famine
had distributed Corn among the Poor, was Poisoned for his Charity, upon
suspicion that it was not innocent; Non enim simplicis eas Curas. Tac. Ann. 1.
but that like Andrew Sforzi in Florence, he aimed to make himself Prince. For
in such States it is the Custom to apprehend those very actions which they
admire Manib at admiratio viri, sed Oderant. Hist. 1.
, and to make away the Authors of them. How far this was the case of Antonio
Foscarini the Senator, I cannot determine, for the Senate afterward put to
death those persons by whom he had been charged with suppositious Letters from
the Spanish Ambassador. By all which we may see how fatal the favor of the
People proves to particular Persons Breves and infausto; Populi Romani amores.
An. 2.
, especially in an Aristocracie. No wonder then if at Venice we see Gentlemen
odious to the Commons, for their Extortions, and Excess. Nor is there any thing
more safe, than to avoid Popularity. Thus was one Priuli called Taglia-braccia
not only tolerated, but preferred to great employment; because having no
interest with the People, they thought there could be no danger of his
designing against the Nobility. Besides, these kind of Extravagants are useful
many times in Seditions and Tumults, to assuage the fury of the People, who
wreaking their indignation upon such hated persons, all the rest are left free:
whereas those who are Popular cannot be touched, but it increases the Flame,
and hazards a general Conflagration. Hence it is that sometimes in Venice it
may be dangerous to have too great a reputation Principibus gratum est domi
aliquem esse ei quem odia Dominis debita exonorentur. Strada.
, because it may create a man as many Enemies as there are Noblemen whom he
excells. And this perhaps was the cause of the Banishment of Ange Badoer the
Senator, who was by some thought more Popular than was convenient for the
Government: For some stick not to make it an Aphorism of State, That great Wits
be kept under, lest elated by the applause of the People, they should be
encouraged to aspire. Moreover, they seem not to approve of Persons above their
Sinistra erga iminentes interpretatio, nec minus periculum ex magna fama quam
ex mala. Tac. in Agric.
business and employment; and therefore they do not much countenance Learning,
because they think it fills the mind with Notions, and hinders that gravity of
Judgment which ought to be brought to Public Debates, where good sense with
experience suffices; whereas your Scholars many times spoil all with their
Criticisms and subtilties, and rather entangle and perplex Councils than clear
them. But Novandis quam Gerendis rebus aptiora illa ingenia. Curtius.
though they are not Persons that do generally apply themselves to profound
Learning, yet they are content that Strangers should think otherwise of them.
And therefore they were offended at the expression of an Ambassador of theirs,
who pretending to give a reason why his Superiors had in their Banner put the
Book of St. Mark open, and not shut, which had been more proper, in respect of
the War, said, It was to show that the City of Venice was recalling good
Letters, which had been Banished from them so long. Which expression caused
such Commotion among the Senators, that some of them cried out aloud to have
the Book shut, and in anger returned to their Houses.

The knowledge of the Venetians lies generally in understanding their own
affairs: they trouble not their heads much with Books, beyond their own
Histories and Customs, and except some few Gentlemen who have been Ambassadors
abroad, or gone along in their Equipage, they are generally very little curious
of foreign transactions. There goes a Story that a Senator finding his Son
reading the History of France, snatched it away with this Reprimend, Balordo,
leggi le cose della sua Republica, e non altero. You Blockhead, if you must be
reading, read your own History, and no other.

They believe the Government of Venice a Model for all the World, and no Nation
under Heaven so happy as themselves, though herhaps they are (as Tacitus says)
Magis sine Domino, quam in liberate; Rather without a Master than at Liberty.
The Florentines call them Grossolum. And yet they laugh at the Florentines, who
with all their exactness and delicacy of breeding have not been able to keep
themselves in liberty Hebetiores quam acutiores ut plurimum melius Remp.
administrant Thucyd. Hist. 3.
. So true it is, that the finest and subtilest wits are not always fittest to
Govern, and that men of moderate parts, so they be settled and stayed, are more
useful than sublime and exalted heads, which commonly are unquiet and unsteady,
and subject to sudden and temerarius attempts. Which made that Noble
Florentine Guide. Ant. Vespicui.
say, The Venetians were much more capable of Discipline and Reason than the
Florentines, whose wit was too sharp. In effect, the Thebans who were dull, and
the Spartans who understood nothing but Obedience, and the Mysteries of War,
were better Governors than the Athenians with all their Eloquence and
Learning: The Athenians studied nothing but fine speeches, and plausible
Orations, without bringing any thing to Action, as if their Senate had been only
a School for Orators or Sceptick Philosophers: But the Thebans and Spartans
executed what they debated; and when they had bandied Arguments at home, they
went to fight their Enemies abroad: But the Venetians are not arrived at this
perfection, they are slow in Council, and slow in in execution; and we see that
many times that is taken for wisdom, and Vt quod segnitia pro erat, sapientia
vacaretur. Hist. 1.
great caution, which is nothing but heaviness or diffidence.

And though they are not so fine and polite as the Romans and Florentines, yet
they know their own Interest, and can manage it as well as the best. All
Treaties and transactions with them are fair and smooth ar first, but their end
is not always so: as the Comoedian said of the Lacedaemonians, That they did,
like Vintners, bring good Wine at first, and then dash it with Vinegar. And
indeed we see men are apt to promise any thing in danger, and to perform
nothing when out of it, according to the Proverb of their Country, Scampato 'l
pericolo, gabbato il Santo: When the danger's past, the Saint may go whistle.
Possibly Commonwealths are the more inclined to equivocate and falsify in
Treaties, because every man may hide himself in the throng, and can be no more
discovered than the Elements in the Body of a man; a shelter which Princes have
not. To which may be added, that the Venetians having no Commerce or
Conversation with Foreign Ambassadors, they do not fear discovery from their
Companions, nor by consequence the Clamours of Ambassadors, nor the Malice of
their Masters, which is an advantage they have above all other Commonwealths;
And indeed, if the Historians of the last age do not wrong them, their manner
of observing Treaties with Sixtus IV. the Pisans, Hercules d'Este Duke of
Ferrara, and some other States, is not much to the commendation of their
fidelity. They are generally very frank and open in their Countenances; gay and
complasant outwardly, but close and reserved at the heart. This was manifest in
their Carriage to Francis Morosini; on the day of his entrance into the
Procuratorship, all the Nobility flocked to him in throngs, contending with one
another who should Caress and flatter him most Certant adulationibus caeteri
Magistratus.
; and three Months after, the same persons who magnified him so extravagantly
before, cried out bitterly against him, upbrading him for his Conduct as
General, and promoted his Process with such fury, that one would not have
thought it had been the same Senate Alium Crederes Senatum, alium populum. Ib.
, or the same Nobility. And indeed in Venice any troublesome Person may raise a
tempest among the Nobility, among whom every one waits for an opportunity till
his partner declares, for it is the Custom there to follow the motion of other
People in things where they are unwilling to be reckoned the first Author
Proximi cujusque audaciam expectantes, insita mortalibus natura, propere sequi
quo piget inchoare. Ibid.
themselves.

They are accounted Enemies of those whom they have offended, as if there could
be no such thing as a hearty reconciliation Proprium est humani ingenii edisse
quem laeseris. In Agric.
; and usually fear of revenge begets perpetual distrust, which is the source of
eternal Enmity.

On the contrary, In Commonwealths good deeds or benefits make little
impression, especially what are received on the public score, in which to the
ordinary Estimate in such Governments Private Persons are but little concerned.
Revenge is natural to the Climate of Italy, and therefore it is no wonder if
this State has afforded Examples of it as well as others; and the less needful
to mention any.

I shall only add by way of advice to those who are concerned with the People
of these Parts, That their silence is much to be apprehended when they are
offended, because their Anger is the more irreconcilable, as it is more
concealed and secret; for they conceal it, to revenge themselves upon occasion
with more violence. Quo obscurior ita, eo irrevocabilior: Tac. in Agricoia.
It Is to no purpose to think to mitigate them by submission; their humor
perverts all applications, and time it self cannot heal up the Wounds of an
Injury, though sometimes it may moderate the smart; for as the Proverb of that
Country says, they keep la Memoria in Cuore.

They visit one another but seldom, even those who are related; but they meet
every day in the Broglio, where they discourse of their affairs publicly
before all the World; by which means it is hard for any to Cabal, or Plot
against the State. They suffer themselves to be rarely visited by Strangers,
and they think thereby to keep up their Majesty and Grandeur, as also to avoid
the expense of their Table; and therefore, if they treat any of their Friends
by accident, it is always out of their Houses, as if it were to let them know at
what charge they do it, and to oblige them to come no more.

They are sober, whether out of Conscience or Frugality let others judge, and do
eat well at a good Meal, when it is at another man's cost. At the Duke's four
great Feasts, not one man invited will be absent, no more than the Pregadi at
the Anniversary Treat of Cardinal Zell, and all is because there is a
distribution of a Ducat a Head. So that Ambassadors would always have See the
Remarks.
the Barnabotes at their Tables if it were lawful to hold Conversation with
them. In short, Strangers that keep Tables have always, as in other Places,
some of the indigent Gentlemen to keep them company, under pretense of showing
the curiosity of their Town, and explaining their Antiquities, Feasts, and the
Mysterious Symbols of Abbot Joachim to be seen in the Church of St. Mark, which
they show with most magnificent Paraphrases, (most of them of their own
invention,) to make the things more wonderful. Thus they tell, us the
Foundation of their City was laid the same day the World was Created, that it
might appear more august and venerable to Strangers Vt miscendo humana divinis,
primordia Vrbis augustiora faciat. Livius.
. Thus they show Relics and Monuments of several Victories, which many people
believe they never obtained: among the rest the Canal Orphano, which they call
by that name instead of del Arco, upon pretense of a defeat they gave the
French there, in which those who were present left all their Children Orphans;
though all Aimon. l. 4. c. 94, 96. Adel. Ann. Regin. Ado. Baronius Tom. 12.
Leand. Albert. descript. Ven.
Historians Ancient and Modern agree that Pepin was Victor, and received
Tribute and Homage of the Venetians as King of Italy.

The account they give likewise of their Victory at Sea gained against the
Marshall Boucicaut in the Levant, is of the same nature; as also the great
advantage that Melchior Trevisan got over Charles VIII, at the Battle of
Fornoue See the Remarks.
; to which they might have added the defeat of the French at the Battle of
Aignadel, to triumph at least over the Credulity of the ignorant.

They are much given to their pleasures; and their Mistresses are much more
chargeable to them than their Wives, whom they use as their Servants. There are
a sort of People among them, who make so little reckoning of Marriage, that
they say, It is nothing but a civil Ceremony that binds the Opinion, but not
the Conscience; and that a Courtesan that is to be hired for money, is in no
worse condition than a Wife, saving for Politic reasons. One thing is strange,
and peculiar to them, and that is, that they frequently keep Mistresses in
common, viz. two, three, or four men to a Miss, and yet agree very well: Nay
that which in other places occasions Quarrels and Murder, is an indearment
among them, and makes their intimacy the greater. In their Amors, they talk
freely, and will discourse of their Alliances, Designs, what Persons they
intend to recommend to such a charge, and who shall be excluded, as the De
jungendis affinitatibus, and ad sciscendis Principibus; de Bello ac Pace, in
Conviviis consultant. Tac. Germ.
Germans did of old in their Feasts.

But how indifferent soever they are for their Wives, they are so jealous of
them, that in Carneval-time they dog them wherever they go; some have gone so
far as to stab them upon bare suspicion, and have been thought brave Gentlemen
for their pains. Strangers have felt the Effects of this humor, as Don
Dominick de Gusman, Brother to the late Duke de Medina de las Torres can
testify, who was Cudgelled by the appointment of Julius Justinianus, to whose
Wife he had presented a Spanish Catholicon. But they may well be jealous, for
as wise as they are, or think themselves to be, there will be stealing into
their Quarters, and the Senate must keep Guards upon their Ladies, as the Regum
Vxores ab Ephor is custodiuntur, uti provideatur ne ex alio genere Rex clam
fiat, quam ex Heraclidis. Plat.
Spartans did upon the Wives of their Kings, unless they can be contented with
a Contreband Nobility.

The natural timidity of the Populace is such, and renders them so
Superstitious, that they take many things as Judgments from Heaven, that are
but Accidents, and perhaps natural effects. A Fire happening in a Magistrates
House, a Steeple blown down by the Wind, the pitiful Prediction of any
trifling Astrologer, are Subjects enough to set their Brains on work,
especially in time of War, when every thing puts them into an apprehension, and
staggers their Prudence; the Inmetu consilia Prudentium, and vulgi Rumor juxta
audiuntur. Tac. Hist. 3.
voice of the Vulgar going as far with them, as the judgment of the Sages. From
whence it happens, that upon any misfortune in their Army, instead of stopping
it is course, the Remedy is deferred; and because they will hazard nothing, they
many times lose all: Being of the mind of that Roman General, who never thought
of Conquering till he had secured himself against being Conquered Satis cito
incipi victoriam ratus, ubi provisus ne vinceretur. Hist. 2.
; and he who would please the Venetians must do the same. Upon this score it
was, that they had a greater esteem for Count Petillan who was slow and
cautious, and seldom to be drawn to a Battle, than for Seignior d'Alviano who
was always for fighting, and held it as Cunctatio servitii statim exequi,
Regium, videtur. An. 5.
Cowardly to decline, as Courageous to attack an Enemy. This consideration has
likewise lost them several opportunities, of which their Enemies have made good
advantage. So when they recovered Padua from the Emperor Maximilian, they let
Vicenza and Verona escape, for not accepting at first the offers which these
two Towns made them to surrender*. When, not long after, they reduced Andr:
Moccen. Bell. Camdr. l. 2.
Vicenza, they let Verona slip again; which, as Moccenigo confesses, was ready
to have received them. Thus did they stand in their own light, when they
refused to join with the King of Poland, Ladislaus IV. against the Grand
Seignior, Amurath IV. from whom they had received several injuries, and were at
that time in danger of a War; which War was undertaken and inferred afterward
by Ibrahim Brother to the said Amurath, in Confidence that the Poles being
offended that the Venetians had refused them, would not be tempted to give the
Turks any diversion.

It Is reported of them, that in the choice of their Generals they differ from
all other Governments in Europe, who generally make choice of Commanders that
are Valiant and wise; but when any such happens to be chosen, they many times
give them such rubs and mortifications, that they are quickly taken down, or
else renounce their Command, to save their reputation. For it is said, that the
great reason why Strangers are entertained in those Commands, is only to bear
the blame, and that all miscarriages of the War may be shifted upon them; which
made Count Pettilano Complain, That the City of Venice was readier to find
sault, than to furnish him with necessaries for their service, etc. To this may
be added, That the young Noblemen put upon these Generals as Companions, under
the Title of Proveditors-General, are so jealous of their Authority, that they
do often choose rather to ruin and spoil all by following their own heads, than
to succeed never so well by the Wisdom and good Conduct of a Stranger. Pia
tosto (said one of those Nobles in a Council of War) voglio errare da me, che
far been con il parere de gle alteri: and where this has been their practice,
they have thriven accordingly.

They easily believe whatever they desire, and good News, though false, is
always welcome to them; and therefore they gave more credit to the Reports given
out by the Turks, that they would besiege Malta, than to their Advice from
Constantinople, to look to the defense of Candia: Nay the Senate forbad the
Nobility to speak of that War, under the penalty of Banishment; which Order,
and the Imprisonment of some Persons for the same, did but the more frighten
the People Facili Civitate ad credenda omnia nova, cum tristia sunt.
, who are easy to believe any thing they apprehend. During the Siege of Candia
they made them believe sometimes that the Grand Seignior, sometimes the Grand
Visior was dead, and sometimes that Constantinople was revolted, Credula sama
inter Gaudentes, and incuriosos. For they must be flattered in their
distresses, and many times the vanity of their hopes make them neglect the
application of seasonable Remedies.

The Ministers of Princes are always suspected by them, especially if they find
them wise and close, as People harder to be managed or deluded than the rest.
At their first coming, the Senate causes all their Discourse and all their
Actions to be strictly observed, in order to discover their parts and
dispositions; and the better to succeed in this design, they sound them
sometimes by affronts offered to their Retinue, sometimes by cunning and
insidious propositions; sometimes one way, sometimes another, and all to
perplex and experiment his Prudence.

Thus they tried the Count d'Argenson, causing it to be asked him at his Entry,
whether he would be received at the Abbey of St. George not far from the Town,
pretending to save him the labor of going to the Saint Esprit An Abbey three
miles from Venice, where the Ambassadors from Crowned Heads are received.
, in respect of the badness of the Weather that day: But the cunning Ambassador
replied, That he was not come thither to lose any of the Rights, or lessen any
thing of the Honors of his Embassage; and that if he were to go as far as
Chiozza, or farther, neither Rain nor Snow should hinder him. At the beginning
of the President de St. Andrew's Embassy, four of his Gondolieres carrying
certain Merchants Goods out of the Town in the night, were intercepted by the
Saffs or Guards at the Town's end, without regard to their Livery, or the name
of their Master, which they often repeated, though otherwise there is no place
where Ambassadors are used with more formality than in Venice: which makes
wisemen imagine, it was done by private Orders from the Senate, to take off the
mind of that Minister from enquiring after their affairs in Candia, (which at
that time were in a very ill posture) by employing it about repairing this
affront. And I remember that being in discourse one day with a Gentleman of
parts, who had much access to the chief Senators, and speaking of that
business, he let fall this Expression, after several other Reasons that he had
given, E^ sorse che l' Senato cosi l'haben voluto? And who knows but the Senate
would have it so? And indeed the little regard the Captain Grand, and the
Captain of the Council of Ten took of the business, makes it more than
probable; notwithstanding by Decree of the said Council the Offenders were put
out of their places nel solo dubbio (as the Decree ran) that is, only upon
suspicion, to Cajole the French King, and let him see how tender and sensible
they were of any injury to him, whilst they themselves were the Authors of it.
But it is not only hard, but unlawful to dive too far into the Secrets of
Princes Abditos Principis sensus exquirere, illicitum, anceps. Ann. 5.
.

Again, the Venetians are apt to be jealous of all Ambassadors, and to
interpret all their Actions as Mysteries tending to Conspiracy. They defcant
upon his walking abroad upon his staying at home; upon his absence from
Chapel, upon any word that falls suddenly from him, and a Thousand other
things, from whence they make great conjectures, and draw mighty consequences
of State. One single Vive la France by some Italian Footmen in the French
Embassador's Equipage, as he was going home from a Ball at the Secretary of
Mantua's Lodgings, was enough to put the whole Town in an uproar, as if it had
been a new Conspiracy of la Queva, when as it was indeed nothing but the
Hectoring of Footmen in revenge of an affront which they had received during
the Ball. A little journey of that Ambassadors to the Lady of Lauretto, was
interpreted a calling back into France, and a silent Rupture with that King,
though the night before his departure, the said Ambassador gave notice of it to
the College. And whilst he was absent all the World could not disabuse them,
though otherwise they think themselves too cunning to be imposed upon by any
other.

They have a great vanity to be thought good Justiciaries, and to that end,
upon Holy Days they give public Audience in the Galleries of St. Mark, whilst
the Courts are sitting, to show that no day can hinder them from doing Justice,
and that the Temple thereof is as constantly open as that of the Romans was of
old. But there are two things generally complained of in their Judicature; One
is, that few of them are versed in their Laws, and what they do, is only in a
common road that is beaten by every body; The other, that upon any Offense they
condemn People to the Galleys, as well for trifles as for the greatest Crimes,
according to their interest, that is, to their Necessity for Rowers: and this
is the reason why so few People are Executed, neither are they more scrupulous
for Banishment, and Confiscation of Estates. For there needs not much reason of
State against those who are rich, especially if of the Nobility upon the
Terra-firma. And I remember when the French Ambassador visited the
Countrey-Houses betwixt Vicenza and Verona, he never enquired for the Masters
of the Houses, lest they should have been answered, he is Banished, or
Proscribed. Some of them are so puffed up with their Nobility, that they think
themselves equal with the greatest Princes: witness that Nobleman who at Paris
had the Confidence to say, he was as good a man as Monsieur the Kings only
Brother. And one of an eminent Family, who thought all People were to give him
place, because he was a Nobleman of Venice; which made him be treated so ill,
that he carries the marks thereof to this day: For which reason he refused an
Embassy into France.

For their better justification they make themselves Princes, and will not
think themselves mistaken, when they find a descent of Roman Consuls, Kings,
and Emperors in their Pedegrees; for of all the Italians they are the most
carried away with Chimera's concerning their Extraction. The Contarini deduce
themselves in a direct line from Cotta Governor, or Count Palatin of the
Rhine. The Morosini bring their Original out of Hungary from a City of that
name. The Justiniani derive them from the Emperor of that name; and disclaim
their relation to the Justiniani of Genoa, who were Popular before the
Reformation of that Government. The Cornari derive themselves from the Cornelii
in Rome. The Quirini claim descent from the Illustrious Roman Family of the
Sulpitii, and as such they reckon the Emperor Galba for one of their
Ancestors. The Loredani bring their descent from the Schevolae: the Pisani from
the Pisosi of Rome. The Venieri, from Valerius Emperor of Constantinople, etc.

Though all their Nobility make but one Body, yet there is no necessity they
should all have the same principle and humor. The ancient Nobility have a
strong aversion to the new, whom they despise, and on the other side are as
much hated by them in revenge. The first desire War, to have the Honor and
Profit of it, because the chief Commands belong solely to them: The other are
consequently for Peace, as that which keeps up their Equality, whereas War
makes their Companions more haughty and proud. The Ancient Nobility decline all
Embassies as chargeable and troublesome; the New are ambitious of them, as a
true way to make themselves known in the World; aspiring moreover to the
Dogeship, to Illustrate their Families by the supremacy of that Office, whilst
the Ancient Nobility reject it as a Clog, and a degree of Servitude. The
Ancient love to have their residence in Venice, where they have all the great
Offices; the New affect employment abroad, to rid themselves of the Contempts
and Contradictions of the Ancients, who pervert every thing they do, and turn
it into Ridicule; For in the Provinces where there is nothing but Subjects, the
New Nobility are chief, and must be honored as they please. In a word, whilst
these are delighted with Equality. which the Ancients cannot bear, both parties
live in animosity like the Castelans and Nicolotes among the Common People. And
perhaps this division contributes to the safety of the Government, the Ancient
Nobility and the New watching one another Actions perpetually, so that neither
can do amiss. For which cause, whenever the Inquisitors of State, or Council of
ten are inquiring into the Administrations of the one, the other will be sure
to put to their Shoulder to tumble them down: and the Faction of the New were
very near ruining General Morosini when he was accused by the Avogador Corraro.
And upon these advantages the Nobility do frequently express their private
aversions.

The Nobles of the Colony of Candia are contemptible to both; their hatred is
without any other cause than an old animosity which the Venetians have retained
against the Greeks, with whom they have had several Wars: and therefore it is
reckoned a great injury to a Nobleman of Venice to say he is a Greek, and
they will take it more kindly to be called by a worse name. Upon this score a
Gentleman of the House of Dandolo thought himself highly abused in a Health
which one of the Contarini began to him in Candian Wine, with these words,
Seignior Dandolo, Brindesi in Greco, which the said Dandolo took as a reflection
upon the place of his birth. And here I must hint by the by, that a Noble
Venetian does not love Raillery, and that the memory of a Jest never goes out
of their Heads, especially if it has any thing in it of truth. In my time two
of the Illustrious Senators, looking upon one another Gloves, one told the
other, Caro Seignior, i vostri guanti hanno le dita ben corte, Eli mei hanno
ben lunge. Sir, the Fingers of your Gloves are very short, and mine are as
long. To which the other replied, And with good reason Sir, because my Nails
are not so long as your Lordships. Mi sta been Cosi, per che non ho l'unghie
come lei. Which words as he thought reflecting upon his Extortion, of good
Friends before, they became immortal and implacable Euemies.

But it is time now we turn our Medal, and in the Revers give you a view of
their Virtues and Perfections, as a balance to their Vices; and this I intend
as the last stroke of my Pencil at this time.

The Venetians are Grave and Prudent, uniform An Elogy of the Venetians.
in their Actions, at least visibly, constant in their Friendships, firm in
their Resolutions, because long in their Debates, always quiet without whatever
their agitations be within: Patient in difficult and tedious affairs, gentle
and tractable to those who know how to manage them, insomuch that with little
Complaisance they may be made very good Friends, especially if we have their
Government in Admiration, and look upon them as Princes. Though at home they
live frugally and nearly, in their foreign Impolyments they are splendid
enough, and particularly in their Embassies, where they will spare nothing that
is for the service or honor of their Country, whose Face and Authority they
may be said to carry along with them Secum peregre affert faciem and
authoritatem Reipublicae. Cicero,
.

It Is with mavelous ease and facility that they discern the Methods of all
Courts to which they are sent; and there are but few People so quick and well
disposed for Negotiation; there being seldom any thing so knotty and intricate,
but they will find some expedient or another to weather it. In Paris, they are
French, at Madrid, Spanish, and Natural Dutch at Vienna, as if they were born
only for that place where their Residence is appointed, or had stripped
themselves of their Countrey-Fashions, to put on the humor of Strangers: and
therefore they seldom fail of one thing that is not easily learned, and that is
of ingratiating with the Prince to whom they are sent, which a great Statesman
pronounced to be a great sign of their Wisdom who can do it Non est majus
meritum, quam gratiam invenisse Regnantium. Cassiodor.
.

Though they are naturally ambitious, yet with great quietness they lay down
the Command of their Armies, and return as contentedly to their private
affairs, as if they never had had the whole Power of their Country in their
hands, or at least were very glad to be discharged of the burden. So that we
may say of the Commonwealth of Venice, as Theopompus said of Sparta, That the
great reason why they had lasted so long under one Government, was their
Citizens knowing so well how to obey. They are very secret and close, not only
in their Stateaffairs, but in every thing wherewith they are entrusted, which
they will never discover, though afterward they fall out and become Enemies.
They are People of great Order, Providence, and Judgment, and if compared with
the rest of the Italians, they will be considerable as well for their own
Virtues as for the Vices of their Neighbors. And Lastly, amongst their Moral
and Civil qualifications, they have much of Christianity. The multitude and
Magnificence of their Churches, prove their Piety and Religion, whatever their
Calumniators say to the contrary, as that they are generally Marsilians, and
deny the Immortality of the Soul: but it is without any reason that they asperse
them, unless it be from the defamatory Libels published against them by the
Court of Rome, whilst they were under Paul V. Excommunication. Their Hospitals,
the best endowed in all Italy, speak their Liberality and Alms, especially that
which they call La Pieta, in which all exposed Children are provided for with
great Care, though sometimes their number has been so great as to amount to
6000. In which thing they have expressed great Gratitude to God, and Mercy to
Mankind, by saving or rather giving new life to thousands of poor innocent
Babes, thrown daily by the Courtesans into the Canals of the Town, where
without this provision they would certainly perish. In a word the State of
Venice having had many Friends, and Historians that have wirt their Praises
more Copiously, and more Elegantly than I, I shall add no more; what I have
already said being in my opinion fully sufficient. Ex ungue Leonem.


REMARKS UPON Certain Words AND PROPER NAMES Employed in this HISTORY.
I Have not put these Remarks in the Margin, because I must have repeated the
same thing every time the same word was mentioned: Besides the Margin would not
have contained all the Passages and Remarks, of which some are long, but very
necessary for the Illustration and clearing of several obscure places in this
Book.

Andre Contarini, Duke of Venice. In the Cloister of the Augustins in Venice,
his Tomb is to be seen, with his Epitaph in Latin Verse, and this Inscription
in Prose, Me nulla tacebit aetas, cum Januenses profligaverim, Clodiamque (that
is Chiozza) receperim, and a maximis periculis Patriam liberaverim. No Age but
will mention me, I having defeated the Genoeses, reduced Clodia, (or Chiozza)
and delivered my Country from very great Dangers.

Andre Strozzi. This Gentleman had so ingratiated with the People of Florence
by selling them Corn at an under-rate, that one day he assembled above 4000
men, with whom he marched to force the Gates of the Senators Palace, designing
by seizing upon them to have constrained them to proclaim him Lord of Florence.
Machiavel, lib. 2. of his History.

These Largesses from private Persons have in all Ages and Commonwealths been
suspected. Witness Agesiaus, who was by the Ephori condemned in a great fine
for having sent an Ox to every Senator: The State of Sparta apprehending it an
artifice to cajole the Senate, and debauch them by his Bounty.

Antonio Foscarini. This Gentleman was of a Gentle, Courteous, and Insinuating
disposition; his life was exemplary, a great distributer of Alms, and for that
was highly esteemed by the People, and adored by the Monks, who selling their
Shells to him at a dear rate, cried him up everywhere for a Saint: by which
means he became odious, and suspected by the Senate, who to complete his
Saintship thought nothing wanting to him but the Crown of Martyrdom.

Antonio Venieri, Duke of Venice. Matina in his Elogy on the said Duke, tells
us he made an example of his Son. Brutus (says he) Manliusque Romanae
severitatis exempla, in Antonio Venerio revixere...... Totius Domus, quae unici
Filii capite nitebatur, ruinam, sicco spectavit oculo. Qui in Matronae famam se
injurium prebuerat, vinculis mancipatum, publico pudori victimam adolevit.
Brutus and Manlius, two great Examples of the Roman soverity, revived in
Antonio Venieri..... With dry eyes be beheld the ruin of his whole Family,
which depended upon the life of his only Son, who having offended against the
Honor of a Lady, was by his order clapped in Chains, and made a Sacrifice to
the public dishonor.

Aristocracy, is when the Government rests in the hands of the Principal
Citizens. There are two sorts of Aristocracies, one where the Nobility only
Govern by right of their Birth, and such are the Governments of Venice, Genoa,
and Luca, in all which it is sufficient to be born a Gentleman to have a share
in the Civil Administration. Whereas in the other kind of Aristocracie, all is
carried by Election and Merit, as in Lacedemon where nothing but Virtue was
regarded. The Latin Historians seem to describe these two Aristocracies by the
Words Primores, and Optimates. Primores are the Nobles, and in that sense
Tacitus tells us, Cunctas Nationes and Vrbes, Populus, aut Primores, aut
singuli Regunt. Ann. 4. But Optimates implys the Government of Persons chosen
and called to Office upon consideration of Merit, without respect to their
Extraction. The Senate of Seleucia was composed of both, as Tacitus observes,
Trecenti opibus aut sapientia delecti ut Senatus: Opibus denoting the Rich or
Noble, and Sapientia the Worthy, and and men of experience.

Avogador. I do not think fit to call this Officer an Advocat-General, because
the name of Avogador sounds well enough, as also because it has a certain
propriety in it, and ought not to be changed: Besides, those who have been at
Venice, or have any notion of their Magistrates, will better understand the
word Avogador than Advocate-General, which many People would take to be
different, nor would the Avogador be known to a Venetian under any other Name.

Bajamont Tiepole. This Gentleman being unable to suffer the election of Peter
Gradenigue, to the rejection of his Father whom the Populace had proclaimed
Duke, resolved, with the Quirins Badoers, Baroces, and other families
dissatisfied with the late Reformation of the Government, to kill the Duke and
the Senate. But on the day appointed for execution of their Design there arose
so furious a Tempest, one would have thought Heaven it self had been angry, and
put Nature in Arms against so horrid a Plot; for the Conspirators being
frighted (as is ordinary in such undertakings) fled and dispersed as not
thinking themselves safe in their own Country. In the Rialto there is still to
be seen the Relics of the Palace belonging to the Quirins, which they have now
turned into a Shambles. And in St. Augustins (which is the Parish of Bajamont,)
there is a marble Pillar with an account of the Condemnation of that Nobleman
inscribed, which Stigmatizes the Conspirators with the brand of perpetual
Infamy. The Senate every year visits the Church of St. Vito the 15 of June, and
the Duke treats the Ambassadors and Senate in memory of their deliverance.

Barnabotes, are the Nobles of the Parish of St. Barnaby, which for the
greatest part are indigent and poor, so that to anger a Nobleman heartily, you
need no more than to call him Barnabote.

Bartelmi d' Alviane was General of the Venetian Infantry at the Battle of
Ghiarra-d' Adda, where he was taken Prisoner by Monsieur de Vandenesse, Brother
to the Marshall de la Palipe: he was chief cause of the loss of that Battle by
his precipitation, fighting contrary to the opinion of the Count de Petilane
the Generalissimo, whose advice was to protract. Machiavel speaking of the said
Fight, tells us that the Venetians, Non harianno person la Giornata de Vaila, se
fusinoti secondando i Francesi al manco dieci Giorni, ma il furore d'Alviano,
trovo un maggior furore. They had not lost the Battle of Vaila, had they
followed the persuasion of the French and protracted but ten days. But Alviane
's heat was overmatched by a greater. But afterward he recovered his Honor at
the Battle of Marignan, where he did very good service for Francis I. who in
recompense permitted him to bear in his Escutcheon the Arms of France.

Battle de Vaila. Historians call this Battle by several names: some call it
the Battle of Ghiarra d' Adda, others of Caravas, others of Aignadel, and
others of Rivolto or Ripalto; but it is the same Battle called by the names of
several places adjacent in the same Canton. Questa fu (says Guichardin lib. 8.)
la Giornata famosa di Ghiarra d'Adda O come altri la Chiamano, di Vaila, fatta
il 14 di Maggio,..... Il Renado il di seguente a Carravagio, e batte con l'
Artiglieria la Fortezza, la quale in spatio d'un di se debt libramente. This
was (Guichard. l. 8.) the famous Battle of Ghiarra d'Adda, or as some others
will have it, the Battle of Vaila, fought the 14 of May,..... The next day the
King removed to Caravaggio, and battered the Castle with his Cannon in such
manner, that in a days time it surrendered. And this gave occasion to confound
the Battle of Vaila, with the taking of Caravas, which happened but the day
after.

Leander Albertus in his description of Venice has these words, Omnes prope
modum Orbis Christiani Principes societatem contraxerant adversus Venetos, quos
cum Ludovicus XII. memorabili apud Ripaltam pugna caecidisset, Imperium eorum
exuere Bergamum, Brixia, Cremona, Verona, Vicentia, Patavium, etc. Most of the
Christian Princes of the World confederated against the Venetians, who being
beaten by Lewis XII. in the memorable Fight at Ripalta, the Towns Bergamo,
Bressia, Cremona, Verona, Vicentia, and Padua, revolted, Cardinal Contarini in
his lib. 5. of that Commonwealth has these, Cum omnes Christiani Principes
conspirassent in perniciem and exitium nominis Veneti, fususque noster
exercitus fuisset a Ludovico Gallorum Rege juxta Cassanum oppidum agri
Cremonensis. When all the Princes of Christendom conspired the ruin and
destruction of the Venetians, and our Army was defeated by Lewis King of
France, in the Territory of Cremona.

Machiavel, lib. 3. of his Discourses c. 31. says, speaking of the Venetians,
Dipoi che hebbero una miza rotta a Vaila dal Re di Francia, Perderono tutto lo
stato loro. After the Venetians were defeated at Vaila, by the King of France,
they lost most of their Government. And again lib. del Princi. c. 12. Come
intervenne dipoi a Vaila, dove in una Giornata perderono quello che in Otto
Cento anni con tante fatiche averano acquistatato. As it happened afterward at
Vaila, where in one day they lost what in Eight hundred years they had gained
with so much difficulty and trouble.

Monsieur Bayard, c. 29 of his History speaks of this Battle, as fought 14
Maii, 1509, in the Village of Aignadel two days after the taking of the Town of
Rivolto, by all which it appears that those were not different Battles as some
People imagine.

Battle de Fornove. Guichardin lib. 2. of his History speaks thus of this
Battle, In modo si Forzarono i Venetiani d'attribuarsi questa Gloria, che per
Commandemento publico sine fice per tutto dominio loro, fuochi, and altri segni
d'allegrezza. Ne seguitarono nel tempo avenire piu negligemente l'esempio
Publico, i Privati, per che nel sepolera di Marchione Trivisano nella chiesa de
Frati Minori furono scritte queste parole, Che su l'fiume del Taro Combatte con
Carlo Re di Francio prosperamente. And in his Epitaph are these words, Melchior
Trivisano, qui cum Carolo Franc. Rege ad Tarrum prospere conflixit. Et
Nondimeno, (says the same Author) il Consentimente Universal aggudico la Palma
a Franchesi, perch scacciarono gl'Inimici dal fiume, and per che resto loro
libero il passare innani, che era la contentione per la quale procedui era la
Combattere. So careful were the Venetians to appropriate to themselves the
Honor of that day, that by public Command Bonefires were made, and other
expressions of Joy. Nor afterward were particular persons less diligent in
following the Example of the Public, for on the Tomb of the Marquess Trevisan
in the Chapel of the Minor Friars, were written these words, Who upon the
River Faro fought succesfully against the King of France. And upon his Epitaph,
Melchior Trevisan, who beat the King of France 's Army near the Taro.
Nevertheless (says the same Author) Universal consent gave the Victory to the
French, because they forced the Enemy from the River, and opened their Passage,
which was the great end of their fighting. And thus the Venetians flatter
themselves by robbing their Enemies of their just reputation.

F. Benoist General of the Cordeliers. Fra. Benetto ando dal Re di Ungheria, e
divotestamente lo supplico, stando sempre Zenochiado, che gli piacesse in opere
di misericordia per sua Benignita, voler far pace col Commun di Venetia, e
similmente in dur Genovesi, and il Seignior di Padoa, con il Patriarch del
Friul in Pace con loro, accio che le Sangue de Christiani non si spandi
aggiungendo, Noi siamo pronti de far quello che voi volette. To which the King
of Hungary Replied, Carissime Domine, Jo non intendo di far Pace con Venetiani,
se non prima lascianc quello che devono lasciare de Raison. Friar Bennet
addressed himself to the King of Hungary, and with great devotion upon his
Knees begged of him, that in his Princely Benignity and Compassion he would
please to be Reconciled to the Venetians, and be instrumental in making their
Peace with the Genoeses, the Patriarch of Friul, and the Lord of Padua, whereby
much Christian Blood would be spared; (adding these words) and we are ready
with cheerfulness to receive your Commands. The King of Hungary replied, My
Resolution is never to come to Terms with the Venetians, till they restore what
in reason they are bound. This I took out of an old Manuscript lent me in
Venice.

Bouches Ouvertes, are the Marble heads about the Galleries of St. Mark, whose
mouths are made open to receive the Billets and Memorials of Accusers. They
call this Denuncie Secret, or the Secret Discovery, and there is one for every
Crime.

Boucicault. The Venetians having advice that the Marshall de Boucicault
Governor of Genoa had taken the Town of Barut in Syria, notwithstanding by
private intelligence they were assured he was marched against the Saracens,
they attended till he came back, and gave him Battle betwixt the Isles of
Sapienza and Modon, pretending that when they sacked Barut, the French and the
Genoeses had plundered the Magazines of the Venetians. However he fought them
with Eleven pitiful Galleys, though they were more than Thirty: after which
Charles Zen their General having boasted of this Victory, the Marshall gave
him the lie in a Letter, and challenged Duke Michael Sten, and the General, but
they were too wise to fight with him twice. Hist. de Mar. de Boucicault. 1404.

Broglio, is a close Alley in the Palace of St. Mark where the Nobles meet to
make their Parties, and therefore it is called Far Broglio.

Bucentaure, is a kind of Galion in which the Senate of Venice pass when they
go to marry the Sea.

Carmignole. The Venetians accused him of Intelligence with the Duke of Milan,
and of betraying the Public Cause at the Siege of Cremona, where-as they
pretend he suffered himself to be beaten: but 'twas but a German trick, because
they had no mind to keep him any longer, and yet feared to dismiss him lest he
should take Arms with the Enemy. Machiavel in c 12. of his Prince, speaks of
him thus, Vetutolo Virtuosissimo, battuto che hebbero sotto l'suo Governo il
Duca di Milano, e cognoscendo dall' altera part come Egli era freddo nella
Guerra, giudicorono non potere vincere piu con lui, perch non voleva; ne
poteano licentiarto, per non perdere cio che avevano acquistato. Onde che
furono necessitati per assicurarsi, d'ammaezarlo. Finding him a great General,
under whose conduct they had overcome the Duke of Milan; but finding him
afterward cool, and not prosecuting the War with his former vigor, they
concluded nothing more was to be done by him, because he himself had no mind to
it, nor durst they venture to Cashier him, lest they should lose what they had
got: whereupon as the only means to secure themselves, they were forced to make
him away. However after they had caused him to be killed, they made a solemn
and magnificent Funeral for him, and Buried him in the great Church of the
Cordeliers

Case Vecchie, are the ancient Families in Venice, who if we may believe
themselves, flourished before the very foundation of their State, whose first
Magistracy was executed by them. The Families are the Badoers, the Bragadins,
the Contarins, the Cornari, the Dandoles, the Falier's, the Gradenigues, the
Justinians, the Memmes, called formerly Monegares, the Michiels, the Morosins,
the Sannutes or Candians, and the Tiepoles. There are other Families put in the
rank of the Case Vecchi, because they follow them next, as the Belegnies, the
Delfins, who reckon themselves a branch of the Gradenigues; the Quirins, the
Sagredes, the Sorances, and the Zens, or Zenon.

Chevalier, or as they will have it Cavalieri, is a Title proper to such
Noblemen as have been Ambassadors with Kings, from whom they receive a Chain
and this Honor at their Audience of Conge. I say with Kings, because
Ambassadors to Dukes have not that Prerogative. These Chevaliers in the Town
wear a Black Stole edged with a Gold Galoon; they have a Girdle about their
Wastes, with gilt Buckles. Upon any great Ceremony their Stole is of Cloth of
Gold, from whence they are called Chevalieri della Stolo d'Oro: and their
quality is expressed in all Public Acts by putting a K after their names, as
Andrea Contareno, K.

Christofle More. In the year 1469, this Duke arriving at Ancona, Pope Pius II.
sent five Cardinals three miles into the Sea to meet and receive him. The Popes
Galleys struck when they approached the Venetian Squadron; and saluted them
with several pieces of Cannon. The Duke was complemented in the name of the
Pope, and harangued by the Magistrates of the Town, where Bonefires were made
in all the Public Places. The same Night which was the 12th of August the Pope
died, and the 15th of the same Month the Duke introduced by two Cardinals, and
attended by two more, was carried to Audience in the Sacred College, where he
took his place next to the Dean which is the usual Place for Kings. Relat. M.
S. dell' andata del Doge Chr. Moro, in Ancona.

Colonnes de la Palace S. Marc. are two great Pillars of Marble, betwixt which
their Criminals are Executed; from hence comes their Proverb, Guardarti dall'
inter Columnio. The Nobles are so superstitious in this point, that for a World
they would not pass betwixt those Pillars, believing if they did, they should
certainly die there; and this Whimsey of theirs is grounded upon what happened
in that case to Duke Marin Falier, who coming to Venice after his election
because the Waters were high, not being able to pass under the Pont du Canal de
S. Marc, he Landed betwixt those two Columns, and came afterward to be
unfortunate; but though it might be a presage, it could not be the cause of his
misfortunes.

Corn Ducale, is a Bonnet with a point rounded behind: Sansovin gives the
reason why the Duke pulls it not off, in these terms, La Republica (says he)
Mostra con questo, che e l'autorita del Doge limitata, e che non puo disponere
del dominio a suo piacere. The Commonwealth intimates thereby, that the Doges
Authority is limited, and that he cannot dispose of it as he pleases.

Democracie, is a Popular Government, as in Holland, and Swizzerland. There is
a sort of Democracie called Ochlocratie, when the meaner sort of People have
more Power than the substantial Citizens. The Government of Venice under their
Consuls and Tribunes, was rather an Ochlocratie than a Democratie, because the
Populace had the greatest share in it: and from thence proceeded all those
disorders and altercations in their Assemblies, in which many times after they
had baul'd and huffed a good while one against another, they fell at length to
Cuffs, a common thing among those kind of People; so that it might rather have
been called Chirocratie, all things being managed by Violence and Tumult. But
from the Election of Duke Sebastian Ziani, to the Dukeship of Peter Gradenigue
the Government of Venice was Democratical, with a mixture of Ochlocratie; for
the Mechanics had part in it, as appears by the speech of Marc. Quirin
speaking to Duke Gradenigue, where he has these words, Questo dose spento da
Spirito Diabolico, ha vo-giu serrar el Mazor Consiglio, e privar qualunque bon
Citadin de poter pervenir alla prerogativa de Nobile Veneto; donde che Convien
seguir un pessimo fatto, che cosi come tutti li Cittadini, Grandi, Mediocri,
and Infimi sono state sempre prontissimi di metter la vita per la Republica
nostra, cosi essendo stati esclusi, sevedera in loro male contentezza, etc.
This devilish Spirit has prevailed so far, as to shut up the Grand Council, and
deprive the substantial Citizens of capacity to arrive at the Prerogative of
Noble Venetians; a thing of very ill consequence, for by this means the
Greatest, the Middle sort, and the Populace, all of them ready to lay down
their lives for our Country, finding themselves excluded, nothing but
dissatisfaction and discontent will be found in them. By Grandi he means the
Nobles, by Mediocri the Citizens, and by Infimi the Populace. In my judgment it
is clear, but if any desires to be satisfied further, let them read 5 Chap. du
squitinio della liberta Venetia; out of which I have taken those words.

Doria, General for the Genoeses. The M. S. History of Venice that I quoted
before, gives us an Answer of this General's to a Secretary of Venice in these
terms; Jo non son stato mandato qui dal mio Commun per aver di voi ne del
vostro Commun Misericordia alcuna; Anzi jo ho Commission da Quello, deprivarvi
del tutto della vostra Citta, come ho fatto de questa (meaning the Town of
Chiozza) e con piu strage, non perdonando ad alcun de voi la vita, di tal modo
che may piu per alcuno tempo questo nome Venetian sia per alcuna banda visto ne
mentionato. Pero ritornate a Venetia con si vostri Prigioni (for the Venetian
Envoy had brought him six or seven Prisoners from the Senate) che jo non li
voglio, perch non passera troppi Giorni che noi veniremo in Venetia, e questi
e d'altri a mal vostro grado traremo fuor di Prigion, and cosi detto voltoli le
spalle. I am not sent hither to have Compassion either of you, or your
Government: My Commission is rather to dispossess you of your own City as I
have done of this, and with so much severity am I to proceed against you, that
I am neither to spare any of your lives, nor to suffer the very name of Venice
to be mentioned hereafter: Return therefore with your Prisoners (for the Senate
of Venice had sent him six or seven Prisoners) I will have none of them, being
resolved e're many days pass, to be in Venice my self, and in spite of your
teeth to deliver them, and all the rest that are there; and having said so, he
turned his back upon him and departed. This Answer gives us to understand the
greatness of the Animosity betwixt the Venetians and Genoeses, and the hopes
the Genoeses had to have been Masters of Venice in few days, as doubtless they
would have been, had not General Doria been slain at the Battle of Chiozza,
which put a new face upon their Affairs.

The Name of Doria has been always fatal to the Venetians. In the year 1284,
Hubert Doria defeated their Fleet, and took their General Morosini Prisoner,
with all the most considerable Nobility of Pisa. In the year 1298, Lamba Doria
having found their Fleet at Curzole in Dalmatia, burned 67 Galleys, took 8, and
7000 Prisoners with their General Dandolo. Pagan Doria obtained great Victories
over them, one 1352, near Constantinople, where he took 48 of the 89 Galleys
that made up their Fleet: and the other defeat he gave them was 1354 near the
Island Sapienza, in which he took and carried off with him 36 Galleys, their
General, and 5000 Prisoners. In 1379 Lucian Doria gained the Battle of Pola in
Istria against Victor Pisani the Venetian General, taking from him 15 Galleys
and 2400 Prisoners. Not long after, this Victory was followed by another, that
is, by the taking of the Cities of Carolo, Grada, and Chiozza by Peter Doria,
of whom I have spoken before. And last of all, Andreas Doria General of the
Emperors Galleys made it appear, that he inherited the indignation of his
Ancestors and Contrymen, not being to be persuaded to engage at Perveso in
the Archipelago against Barbarossa, though earnestly tempted by the Popes
General, and the Venetian General Vincent Capet had opened a way to the
Victory, by already sinking several of the Turkish Galleys, so that the
crosness and aversion of Doria frustrated the designs of the League, and lost
them a fair opportunity of vanquishing those Infidels.

Dragon Borguese. Pope Paul V. being of the House of Borguese, bore Azure, a
Dragon Or, with an Eagle Sables in chief.

Ducales, so they call all the Letters Patents of the Senate, because they
always begin with the Dukes name in this form, N..... Dei Gratia, Dux
Venetiarum, etc. Vniversis and singulis Rectoribus and Representantibus nostris
quibuscunque dilectis salutem and dilectionis affectum: and then all the rest
is in Italian to the Date, which is commonly in Latin. Datum in nostro Ducali,
die, etc. The Superscription of the Ducals directed to the Provincial
Magistrates is likewise Latin, in these words, Nobili and sapienti viro N.....
Praetori Nostro Carissimo.

Eloge of the Venetians in the Royal Hall of the Vatican: it runs thus,
Alexander Papa III Frederici Imper. iram and impetum, fugiens abdidit se
Venetiis. Cognitum, and a Senatu perhonorifice susceptum, Ottone Imp. Filio
Navali praelio a Venetis victo, Captoque, Fredericus, Pace facta supplex
adorat, fidem and obedientiam pollicitus. Ita Pontifici sua dignit as Venetae
Reip. beneficio restituta. Pope Alexander flying from the force and indignation
of the Emperor Frederick III. absconded in Venice; being discovered and
treated honorably by the Senate, upon a Victory obtained by the Venetians at
Sea, in which Otho the Emperors Son was overcome and taken Prisoner, Frederick
was not only forced to a Peace, but upon his Knees promised obedience and
fidelity to his Holiness for the future, so that the Pope was restored to his
dignity, by the Beneficence and Generosity of the Venetian Commonwealth. Anno
1577. Cardinal Baronius in his 12 Tome would persuade us, that the Restitution
of Alexander III. by the Venetians was a Fable. Urban VIII. was of the same
opinion, or at least pretended to be so, when he caused the same Elogy to be
expunged, which expunction was the more offensive to the Venetians, because it
was a step toward the removing them out of the said Sale Royale, as they had
removed the Elogy: For if Alexander III. had not been restored by them, by
consequence it would follow the Title by which the State of Venice enjoyed all
its Royal Preheminences was false, and the Pope might degrade it from the rank
it held among the Crowns. The Procurator Nani in his History of Venice, lib.
10. says, All' auviso che ni pervenne in Venetia, furono gle animi
indicibilmente Commosi, e nelle consulte de Senatori si ponderava con gravi
riflessi.... Alcuni se dolevano che denegasse Urbano di Riconoscere quel merito
della Republica alla quale i suoi Predecessori non avevano sdegnato di
confessarsi tenati..... Confessavano tutti non poter piu la Republica inviar
Ambasciatori a venerare in quella sala, vicario di Christo, fin tanto che
restassero sospese, e sipuo diri condannate le di Lei piu illustre Memory.
Upon the news of it at Venice it is not to be expressed how much their minds
were disturbed, and in the Senate it was highly resented,.... Some complained
very sharply that Urban should refuse to own that Service, which his
Predecessors had not disdained to confess...... Others declared the
Commonwealth could not with honor send Ambassadors to pay their reverence to
Christ's Viccar in that Hall, whilst their merits were suspected, and the
memory of them condemned.

E'pee, is the Sword carried in their Ceremonies before the Senate; the Nobleman
who carries it, is always one of those who are named to go as Rectors into the
Provinces.

Francis Carraro was a great Lord, who being brought Prisoner to Venice, threw
himself at the Doges Feet, and begged his Pardon in these words, Peccavi
Domine, miserere mei. I have offended, Sir, I beseech you forgive me. But the
Venetians being never excellent at forgiving, the Duke returned him this
Answer, Voi trovarete da noi quella misericordia che le tradimenti e scelerita
vostre meritano. We will show you such Mercy as your treasons and wickedness
deserves: and then reproached him by the benefits his Family had received from
the Venetians. To which Carraro only replied, Non e lecito al servo respondere
al suo Seigniore. It is not lawful for a Servant to reply upon his Master.
Hist. M. S. de Ven. The Venetians had given to his Father the Seigniory of
Padua after they had driven out the Seigniors Albovin, and Mastin de l'Escale.
In the year 1404, Francis usurped the Principality of Verona from Guillaume de
l'Escale, who poisoned him, of which the Senate of Venice took advantage, and
his Crime having made him odious to all people, they made that a pretense to
invade him, and take away his Territories. This Nobleman Francis Corraro had
put himself under the Protection of France, and done Homage to that King for
the Towns of Padua and Verona, to the Marshall de Boucicault at Genoa, which
extremely incensed the Venetians against him.

Francisco Foscaro Duke of Venice, his Epitaph describes him speaking in these
terms, Accipite Cives Francisci Foscari vestri Ducis imaginem -- Maxima Bella
pro vestra salute and dignitate, Terra Marique per annos plusquam triginta
gessi, summa felicitate confeci. Labantem suffulsi Italiae libertatem: Brixiam.
Bergamum, Ravennam, Cremam, Imperio adjunxi vestro, etc. Accept good Citizens,
this Monument of the General Francisco Foscari -- Great Wars for your safety
and honor, both at Land and Sea for above thirty years I not only managed, but
finished with success. Your tottering Liberty I sustained, and added to your
Empire Bressia, Bergamo, Ravenna, Crema, etc. Yet all these Services and great
Actions did not hinder the Venetians from deposing him, and putting another in
his place before he died, of which he was too passionatly sensible to live many
days after: so that his Funeral had this extraordinary, to be honored with the
presence of another Duke, a thing seldom known in Venice.

Francisco Morosini was accused by the Avogador Antonio Corraro of having
surrendered Candia without Order from the Senate, and of having made a
dishonorable Peace that he called in his speech Pace mostruosa conclusa senz'
autorita, sentita con amarezza, Pace senza cantare, Te Deum. An abominable
Peace, concluded without Authority, and received without Joy: a Peace incapable
of a Te Deum. By virtue of which the said Avogador moved that he might be
suspended from the Procuratorship till he had cleared himself of his Charge.
But Morosini was defended by the Chevalier John Sagredi, and the Senator
Michael Foscharini. Sagrede in an Oration in his behalf, said, That Corraro
imitated the Gentiles, who Sacrificed to their Gods innocent Victims for the
Graces they received from them, for being honored with the Office of an
Avogador, he, in acknowledgment, would Sacrifice an innocent Citizen, who with
his Sword in his hand had defended his Country for the space of 26 years. That
it was hard to suspend him his Procuratorship now, after he had possessed it
peaceably 14 Months. That he should have opposed himself against the resolution
of the Grand-Council when it was given him; But having consented then to his
election, it was unjust to dispossess him now, before he was convicted a
Criminal. Concluding with the Example of the Jews, who never meddled with the
Garment of Jesus Christ till after he was Crucified. Eli Ebrei (said he)
volsero serbare gli ordini della giustitia; Lo condussero inanzi a Giudici, lo
presentacono a Caifus and a Pilato; e vero che lo spoglianno della Vest, e se
la divisero, ma non gliela levarono, si non doppo Crocefisso. The Jews
observing the due methods of Justice, carried him into the Judgment Hall,
presented him before Caiphas and Pilat, and though they stripped him, and
divided his Garment, they did not do it till after he was Crucified. Corraro
replying in the next Counsil, flew out into such invectives against Sagredi,
that he called him Poisoned-tongue, telling him he was like the Roman Orator
who was esteemed more Eloquent than Honest, Prosperiore Eloquentiae quam Morum
fama. Tac. Ann. 4. which had like to have put all the great Families into
Parties, and the whole Commonwealth into a flame, had not the Senate with great
dexterity nipt their Animosity in the Bud, by Commanding the Avogador to desist
in his Prosecution. For there is nothing the Senate fears more than dissension
among the Nobility, as being persuaded the Neighboring Princes would propagate
it with design to oppress both parties in the conclusion, as it happened to the
Seleucians and the Rhodians, Vbi dissensore (says Tacitus) accitus in partem,
adursus omnes valescit. Besides this, there is an example of the Veronois, now
subject to the Venetian, who lost their liberty by a Quarrel betwixt the
Monticoli, and the Crescences, who were Gibilnes, and against S. Boniface who
was a Guelfe.

Ghiarra d'Adda is a Country in Milan, betwixt the Rivers Adda and Serio, and
the Mountains of Bergamo. Paul Merula calls it Insula Fulcheria, because it
resembles an Isle. It was delivered to the Venetians upon a League into which
they entered against Lewis XII.

Gradisque is a place of importance in Sclavonia, that was for some time in
possession of the Venetians, but since returned to the Emperor, the Venetians
have often attempted to retake it, upon pretense of driving the Corsairs out of
the Gulf.

Interdicts de Venice. The Commonwealth of Venice has been five times
Interdicted. First upon score of the Church of St. Geminian, which they had
pulled down without the Popes permission, to enlarge the Place Saint Marc. I
could not understand the precise time, but it is certain for that reason the
Senate goes every year the next Sunday after Easter to visit the said Church,
which they have rebuilt at the end of the Palace, renewing every time their
promise to rebuild it in the ancient place, but that is only a formality.

Their next Excommunication was for Invading Ferrara, which Pope Clement V.
would have had; and to take off this Excommunication, Francis Dandoli the
Venetian Ambassador, threw himself at the Popes Feet, laden with Chains and
Irons like a Thief and a Slave, by which means he prevailed for their
Absolution. This shows how much they formerly apprehended the censures of the
Church. But the Venetians nowadays are not so tender, since they have
considered that the Popes make use of their Spiritual Arms upon Temporal
occasions, a thing that of late years have rendered their censures very
contemptible. Haec poena, ex quo Romani Pontifices dirarum prodigi fuere, minus
virium habuit, Pap. Masson. Besides the Venetian is now better instructed in
the force of the Ecclesiastical Laws, and of the independance of the Temporal
Power.

Their third Excommunication was by Sixtus IV. who grown jealous of their
proceedings, was forced to Excommunicate them, and join with the other Princes
of Italy, to make them give over the Siege of Ferrara.

Julius II. Excommunicated them the fourth time to compel them to the
restitution of Rimini and Faenza to the Church, and it answered his design.

Their last Excommunication was by Paul V. in the year 1605, upon the
Imprisonment of two Ecclesiastics, and for some Edicts of their Senate, which
he pretended were contrary to the liberty and immunities of the Church; but it
was done with so little success and satisfaction, that since that time the
Popes have been very cautious of renewing those kind of quarrels, as serving
only to insense the Princes against them, and lessen their Veneration for the
Court of Rome.

Lion Venetien, Venice bears Azure, a Lion sedant aile d'Or, holding an open
Book Argent in his Foot, the Lion is Sedant, to show the Venetians are
peaceable and deliberative, sitting being the posture of Men in Council, as
also to signify they know how to prevail by address and cunning, as well as
Fighting, like the Romans, of whom it was said, Romanus sedendo vincit. It has
Wings, to imitate its promptitude and readiness to execute what is maturely
deliberated. Upon discourse about the Wings of the Lion, an Ambassador from the
Emperor asked Where those Winged-Lions were to be found? The Doge replied, In
the same Country where the Eagle with two heads is to be found. The Lion has
in its Paw an open Book, with this Inscription, Pax tibi Marce Evangelista
meus, to declare that the State of Venice prefers Peace before War, and,
according to the Emperor Justinian's Precept, is armed with good Laws, which
are the true Arms of Peace. But in time of War the Book is shut, because then
the Laws are without Authority, and silent, Inter Arma silent Leges. And the
Lion in the other Paw holds a naked Sword, as the Simbole of War.

Maria de Gonzague. The Chevalier Ange Corraro in his M. S. of France, speaks
thus of this Princess. Tengono per indubitabile tutti i ministri che la
Principessa fissa nell' impressione che 'l Duchino non debba vivere lungamente
habbi procurato dall Imperatore il nome di Duchessa, per far passo all
Conseguimento dell investitura in se de' feudi, etiandio ad Esclusione di
Guastalla, ma con segreta promissa, venendo il caso della morte del Duca,
d'accasarsi coll' Infant Ferdinando. Negotio, che se travesse effecto, all'
Italia tutta, ma piu alla serenita vostra riuscerebbe di pregiudicio ben grave
per li stati di essa trala Germania e Mantoua ininterposte. Onde sara effetto
della prudenza inseperabile di questo Augustissimo Senate l'applicar, ben fisso
l'occhio, e col riflesso, il remedio all novita che potissero andar
insurgendo. It is unquestionably believed by all the Ministers, that the
Princess taking a fancy the young Duke could not live long, had obtained of the
Emperor the Title of Duchess, in order to investiture afterward, even to the
Exclusion of Guastalo, But with private engagement if the said Duke died, to
marry the Infant Ferdinando: A thing of great consequence to all Italy if it
had succeeded, but of more than ordinary prejudice to your serenity, in respect
of your Territories betwixt Germany and Mantua: wherefore it will be an effect
of the Wisdom inseparable from this August Senate, to apply such solemn remedy
as may prevent the ill Consequences which are like to ensue.

Marin Falier. This Duke being unable to obtain Justice against Michael Sten
who had Debauched his Wife, or at least one of his Daughters, resolved to
revenge himself by Murdering the Principal Nobles, and oppressing the Common
Liberty. But one of the Conspirators named Bertrand Pelizare discovered his
design to the Inquisitors of State, who the same day caused his Head to be
chopped off in the very first year of his Regency. Every year there is a General
Procession made about the Place Saint Mark, the 16 of April being St.
Isidor's-day, in memory of their deliverance. In the Hall of the Grand Council,
where hang all the Pictures of the Dukes, with their Names, there is only a
Black Board for this Duke with these four words, Locus Marini Falieri
Decapitati. He was the third Duke of his Family: the other two were Vital and
Ordelafe, the first of which received Investure of the Provinces of Dalmatia
and Croatia from Alexis the Emperor of Constantinople: the other was killed
with a Lance in a Fight at Zara in Dalmatia. Since the said Marin, they have
always depressed that Family which before was one of the most Illustrious,
not only in Venice, but in all Italy, where it was allied to most of the
Princes.

Monarchy is a Government by a single Person, as in France, Spain, Portugal,
etc.

Oligarchy is a Form of Government in the possession of a few: The Commonwealth
of Sparta was Oligarchick, because the Senate consisted but of thirty men, viz.
two Kings and twenty eight Senators, to whom afterward were added five Ephori.
Aristotle, Isocrates, and Plutarch confound often times the names of
Aristocracy and Oligarchy. Isocrates ad Nicod. calls the Lacedaemonians
Oligarchical, whereas Aristotle and Plutarch say they were Aristocratical, and
Plato says, Negare eam esse Optimatum administrationem, omnino absurdum. lib.
4. de leg. But in strictness an Oligarchy is an imperfect Aristocracy; so that
when an Aristocracy is reduced to a small number, it is a sign of its corruption
and defect, and is a step to Monarchy, as Tacitus observes, Ann. 5. Paucorum
dominatio Regiae libidini proprior est.

Orso participatio, Grand Escuier of Constantinople. This Office has been
enjoyed by five Dukes of Venice, who in that quality were the second Persons in
the Eastern Empire. Peter Gradenigue the twelfth Duke, was the first of them
who received that Honor from the Emperor Michel. Class 60 triremium (says
Leander Albertus in his description of Venice) Michaelem Imp. Constantinop.
adversus Saracenos Apuleam infestantes juvit, eoque Proto-spatarius ab eo
dictus, qui tum temporis secundus ab Imperatore Grecae censebatur honor. With a
Fleet of 60 Galleys (says Leander) he assisted Michael Emperor of
Constantinople against the Saracens who infested Apulia, and was therefore by
the said Emperor called Proto-spatharcus, which in those days was esteemed the
next Honor to the Emperor of Greece. His Successor Orso Participatio was
continued in his place by the Emperor Basil, as the same Author reports. The
three other Dukes honored with this Dignity were Peter Tribun, Vrse Badoer,
and Peter Candien, the second of that name.

Part. The Venetians call Part the Arrests and Decrees of their Councils.
Thus they say Part del Gran Consiglio; Part del Senato; Part del Consiglio
Dieci. And to say a thing was resolved in Council, we must say Fu presa la
Part.

Pipin King of Italy. Pope Leo in his Elogies of the Dukes of Venice,
ingeniously acknowledges the Victory King Pipin had over the Venetians, how
partial soever he be for their Glory; speaking of Obclere Duke of Venice, and
his Brothers, Ab his Caroli, Pipinique agmina ad Patriae sunt vocata
excidia...... Heraclea obruta, Matamancum and Albiola dedita, populata Clodia,
and nisi Mumina obstitissent, ipsa foret deleta Civitas, (that is Venice)
Acerrimae pugnae locum Orphanum appellant Rivum, quasi patre se liberisque
viduatam tunc Patria. By these were the Troops of Charles and of Pipin called
in, even to the destruction of their own Country..... Heraclea was demolished,
Matamancum and Albiola lost, Clodia plundered, and had not the Gods opposed,
Venice it self had been ruined. The place of this unhappy Battle was upon the
River Orphanus, called so, because the Venetians seemed at that time to be left
like Orphans, without either Parents or Children. By which it appears that
Venice remained as an Orphan after the great losses it sustained in that War,
which the People revenged afterward upon the Duke and his Family. Sabellicus
has not spoke his opinion thereupon, lest he should have displeased the
Venetians had he said what he knew. His words are Adeo vary res traditur a
Venetarum scriptoribus, ut quid potissimum sequar difficile se discernere. So
variously is this Action imparted by the Venetian Writers, it is not easy to be
desided whom I am to believe. The Author of the Squitinio della liberta Veneta
has found out the true cause why the Venetians would rob King Pipin of so
famous a Victory, Accortesi (says he) che attribuendo la Vittoria a Pipino, la
Liberta sempre perpetuata andava di male: si accordarono poco a poco di dire
tutti ad una voce che loro furono Vittoriosi, e Pipino perdente. When they
considered, (says he) that by attributing the Victory to King Pipin, it would
reflect upon their Liberty, which as they pretended had been perpetual without
interruption, they unanimously agreed with one voice to affirm the Victory was
theirs, and Pipin defeated.

Podesta is a Lombard word taken from the Latin, and is as much as Potestatem
habens.

Proveditor. In French he would be called Proviseur, but because the Italian
word is easily understood, and to be found every day in the Gazette, I have not
thought fit to change it any more than the Sopra-Proveditor, who is the same
with a Sur-Intendant.

Quarantie. I know it is no French word, and it is possible to call it
Quarantine might be better'; I say possibly, because it is an equivocal word,
and signifies forty men, or forty days. But that which gave me most confidence
to call it so, was because I heard it called Quarantie by persons who
understood all the delicacies of the French Tongue.

Rectori is a name common to a Podestat, or Captain at Arms. They are
promiscuously called Rettori, because they govern the Cities under the dominion
of that State, together, but each with separate Jurisdiction: and it is in this
sense they say Andar in Reggimento.

Regates, are the Courses or Combats of their Boats upon the Grand Canal for a
Prize, not unlike the Carrousels. These Contests were instituted first by Duke
John Surance to accustom the Common People to fight at Sea. Vt Cives doceret
Maritimis assuescere Bellis, ludicras instituit Naumachias. Matina.

Rois de Sparta. There were always two Kings in Sparta, one, of the elder
Branch of Euristenides or Agides: The other of the Branch of Proclides, or
Euripontides who were of the younger House. Mos est, (sais Probus in Agesilao)
a majoribus Lacedemoniis traditus, ut duos haberent semper Reges ex duabus
Familiis Proclis, and Euristinis.... Harum ex altera in alterius locum fieri
non licebat. Itaque uterque suum retinebat Ordinem. It was a custom derived to
them from their Ancestors to have at the same time two Kings, of two particular
Families, the Proclis, and the Euristinis..... And it being unlawful to
transpose one into another place, each retained his own proper order. The
Emulation betwixt these two Kings kept them constantly within the bounds of
their Duty, as is observed by Plato 3. de Legib, Dens (says he) opinos aliquis
de vobis curam gerens, geminam vobis Regum Progericem ex una stirpe producens
ad moderationem eorum potestatem retraxit. Some God (says he) having more than
ordinary care of you, provided you a double Race of Kings out of one Stock, and
thereby reduced their Power to moderation.

Sebastian Ziani. To this Doge it was Pope Alexander III. gave the Silver
Trumpets, the Parasol, the Folding-Chair, the Cushions, the Banners, and the
White-Wax carried before the Senate in their Public Ceremonies; as also he gave
him permission to Seal his Ducals with Lead, as the Court of Rome does, Vt
Veneti Senatus gravitatem praedicaret, says Matina, in Seb. Ciano.

Serenita is a Title the Venetians give their Doge to distinguish him from
other Noble men, and they think that a greater Title than Highness.

Superscription of Letters from the Senate of Venice, to the Duke of Savoy, is
always Latin, and in these Terms, Illustrissimo and Excellentissimo Principi
N..... sabaudiae Duci dignissimo, filio nostro Carissimo. But the Duke of Savoy
pretends they should give him the Title of Serenissimo, as they do the Title of
Altezza in the middle of their Letters. And for this reason the Duke of Venice
never himself receives the Credentials of the Venetian Ambassadors, but causes
them to be received and opened by the Secretary, without looking upon the
Superscription,

Title of Most Christian given by the Popes to the Republic of Venice.
Honorius, dignissimo titulo and merito quidem, Venetam Rempublicam
Christianissimam nominat, utpote que relictis Schismaticis, Romanae Ecclesiae
adhaesisset. Quo amplessimo titulo gloriosa, Terra Marique feliciter dominium
propagavit. Honorius justly calls the Republic of Venice by the Honorable
title of Most Christian, because renouncing the Schismatics, She stuck close
to the Church of Rome: under which honorable Compellation, She performed many
brave things, and enlarged his Dominion both at Land and Sea. Baron. Tom. 8.
Ann. 630. Pius II. confirmed it to them, by this Benediction in a full
Consistory. Benedicti sint Filii nostri Veneti, Benedicat Deus Christianissimam
Rempubl. and Senatum eorum adjuvet, eisque adversus Turkas praestet Victoriam.
God Bless our good Sons the Venetians, God bless their Most Christian
Commonwealth, God bless their Senate, and give them Victory against the Turks.

Thomas Moccineguo. This Duke before his death called into his Chamber the
principal Senators of Venice, and desired each of them to tell him upon whom
they pitched for his Successor. The greatest part named Francis Foscaro, the
Person of all, to whom the said Thomas had most aversion, because he knew him
strongly inclined to make War upon the Continent. Upon which Consideration he
told them, Sapete Seigniori quanto odio glorioso, per amor della Patria jo
habbi conceputo contro di questo soggetto circa l'interprender la Guerra. Vi
tornerible piu a conto d'attendere alla Conservatione di cio che avete
conquistato nel Mar, che procurar di piantare in Terra le Palm. Ma prego
Seignior Iddio sia propitio ed a voi edalla vostra Republica. Know Gentlemen,
my Love to my Country has made me always averse to enterprises of War at Land,
It will turn better to account if you apply to the conservation of what you
have gained at Sea, and not think of planting Laurels on Shore: but I beseebh
God to be Propitious both to you and your Government. And these were his last
words. But the Venetians interpreted this grave advice to be only jealousy
against Foscaro, as the Romans did of Augustus when he advised them not to
think of extending the Bounds of their Dominion. Tac. Ann. 1.

Turks. The Venetians began their first War with the Turks about the year 1340,
and their first Captain General that Commanded against them, was Peter Zen,
Created under the Dogeship of Francis Dandole, Surnamed the Dog; and he
defeated them in the Syrian Sea. Since then they have had several Wars, but
three more unfortunate to the Venetians than the rest; for they lost three
several Kingdoms by them.

The first was the War of Negropont, under Duke Christopher Morus, and their
General Nicholas Canal; upon whom the loss of that Island was charged, because
he brought no Succor to Paul Erizze in time. This Paul Erizze, the Governor of
the said Isle, was the Person whom Mahomet caused to be sawed a-pieces in the
middle; with this pretense, That though he promised not to meddle with his
Head, he did not promise not to meddle with his Wast. This War lasted sixteen
years.

The second was the War with Cyprus, under the Dukes Peter Loredan, and Lewis
Moccenigue. This whole Island was taken by Mustapha Bassa General to Selymus,
who caused the Valiant Marc-Antonio Bragadin to be flayed alive, and the Head
of Seignior Astor de Baillon to be cut off.

The third War was that of Candia, the most Famous of all that ever the
Venetians maintained. It continued from the year 1645 to 1669, when the Capital
City was surrendered by General Francis Morosini, under the Dogeship of Dominick
Contarino.

Victor Amedee. The Procurator Nani in his 9th. Book, speaks of him thus, Il
Duca Vittorio Amedeo di Savoia per non condescendere nelle form di fresco
introdotte co' Cardinali, assunse titelo di Redi Cipro con poca approvatione
del Mondo; Ch' Egli doppo ceduto con Pignarolo il decoro, (which words show how
much the surrendting of Pignerolo went to their heart,) che gli portava la Cura
di custodire l' Porta d' Italia, si fregiasse di titoli di quel Regno, con
grave disgusto de Venetiani, che l'avevano per molti anni legitamente goduto, e
che porlandone querele all Corti de Principi dell' Europa, si di chiarono
disobligati da qualcunque corrispondenza co Savoiardi. Victor Amedeus Duke of
Savoy, not to condescend in certain forms lately introduced with the Cardinals,
took upon him the Title of King of Cyprus, with little approbation of the
World: That having lost with the Town of Pignerol, the Honor he bore by having
the Key of all Italy in his custody; to reprize himself, he assumed the Title
of that Kingdom, to the great disgust and prejudice of the Venetians, who had
for many years peaceably enjoyed it; and carrying their Complaints to the
Courts of most Princes of Europe, the Venetian declared themselves free, and
disobliged from all further Correspondence with the said Duke. Upon which
occasion, it will not be amiss if we a little consider the Title of both
Parties to the Kingdom of Cyprus.

The Venetian derives his Title from a Concession and Renunciation made to him
by Katherine Cornaro Wife to King James, and Heir to James his Son. And again,
from an investiture obtained by the Senate from the Sultan of Egypt; and they
held it from the year 1510 when Katherine died, to the year 1570 when the Turk
took it from them.

The Duke of Savoy on the other side grounds his Title from the donation of
Charlot only Daughter of John King of Cyprus, to the Nephew Charles Duke of
Savoy, alleging That Lewis of Savoy, Husband to Charlot, had been owned as
Heir apparent to the Crown; and in that capacity had received an Oath of
Fidelity from all the great Officers of that Kingdom at the Celebration of his
Marriage. That the Usurpation of James (who was a Bastard) could not prejudice
the Title of Charlot the lawful Heir, and that by Consequence the Title of the
Venetian subsisting upon a violent Usurpation, and, which is worse, a
Parricide, (it being certain the said Bastard poisoned his Father,) they could
not, nor ought not to be in better condition than the Usurper from whom they
pretended. But when the Duke of Savoy published his Manifesto, the Venetians
Sword being the longer, they returned only this Verse of Scripture in answer,
Coelum Coeli Domino, Terram autem dedit filiis hominum. By which Argument all
Usurpations would stand good, and the weakest be always oppressed. In a word,
it is one of their old Tenants, That God has left the Earth in such manner to
the Sons of Men, that all Countries belong to him who can catch them; Sicut
Coelum diis, ita Terras Generi mortalium datas, Tac. Ann. 13. And that all
Princes ought to accommodate their Justice to their power. Id in sumr^a
fortura, aequus, quod validius, Tac. Ann. 15. A (...) which the Turk has taken
out, at (...). Again the course they took to invest themselves with the
Kingdom of Cyprus, was singular, and odd. The Senate first Adopted James Son of
Queen Katherine, making him a Noble Venetian; and after his death, they caused
themselves to be reciprocally Adopted by Queen Katherine, to qualify them to
inherit from both, from the one as a Son of St. Marc, and from the other as a
Daughter and Mother of their State; Daughter by Birth, and Mother by Adopting
the Senate her Son. A neat invention to entitle themselves to a Kingdom. But to
return to Victor Amedeus.

Mal consigliato (says Catarin Belegne in a M. S. of his Embassy into Savoy) ne
suoi consigli Vittorio Amadeo in rilapar Pinarolo alla Francia, in fingere
clandestinamente l'accordo di Chierasco, and imporre a se stesso, and all'
Italia tutta nuove catene. Vittor Amedeus was very ill-advised to deliver
Pignerol to the French; to make that Claudestine Capitulation at Chierasca; and
to put new Chains upon all Italy and himself. And a fevv leaves after: In
Concambio di Pinarolo e suo finaggio, del passaggio libera della Riviera di
Cluson, assiene con tutti le valli che danno mano alla Provincia di Delfinato,
and impongono all' Italia un durissimo giogo. From whence it may easily be
gathered how glad the Venetians are of the Neighborhood of the French; who
(as the Venetians themselves say) will either be Masters or Enemies to every
body that is near them.

Vital Michaeli II. Duke of Venice, was assassinated in his passage to St.
Zechariah, a Monastery of Venetian Gentlevvomen, in visiting of which
Monastery Peter Gradenigue I. was killed before. Jannot speaks of the
assassination of Vital, in these words. Publicum aerarium ob assidua bella
gesta contra Graecorum Imp. Emanuelem cum exhaustum esset, ea quae dicuntur a
nobis Impraestita primus excogitavit...... Quae res tantam invidiam Duci apud
multos conflavit, ut ipso resurrectionis Dominicae die confossus fuerit in
itinere ad D. Zachariae. The Public Treasury, by reason of their long Wars
against Emanuel Emperor of Greece, being utterly exhaust; to supply it, he was
the first who invented the way of Loans, which Created him so much envy, that
even on an Easter Day he was slain as he was going to the Monastery of St.
Zecharies. From whence some people conclude the Sovereignty of the said Duke,
as the same Author observes. Ipse (says he) totam invidiam Culpamque sustinuit,
ex commodatis pecuniis uni fibi conflatam, propterea quod omnia virsabantur in
sua potestate. All the odium contracted by borrowing of Money, was laid upon
him, because he had the whole management of Affairs. Matina in his Elogy of
Sebastian Ziani, who immediately succeeded Vital, acknovvledges the
Sovereignty of the precedent Dukes, in these words: Sebastianus potentiae
solemn, in plura Magistratum sydera est partitus. For if he were the first who
divided the power of the Government, with his Magistrates; it follows
clearly, that before that division, the said Power was entirely in the hands
of the Duke.

It remains now that to these Remarks I add only one Article touching the
Reception of Royal Ambassadors at Venice, to serve as an Explication to what I
have already said in the Chapter of the College.
WHen an Ambassador has set the day for his public Entry, the Senate to receive
him, appoints a Chevalier of the Golden Stole, who commonly has been himself
Ambassador in the Court of the said Embassador's Master.

This Chevalier attended by 60 Senators goes to meet the said Ambassador at the
Church of the Abbey de S. Esprit, where he Complements him in the name of the
Senate. After which, he puts the Ambassador into a Gondolo richly furnished, and
conducts him to his Palace, followed by all the Noblemen, who in their several
Gondolo's give precedence to the several Attendants of the Ambassador, though
they be even in Liveries

Entering into the Palace the Chevalier keeps himself on the Left Hand of the
Ambassador, who at his going out gives him the Right, as all Servants do to the
Senators. The next morning the same Company come again to his Palace, and he
receives them on the middle of the Stairs, giving the Right Hand to the
Chevalier, as all his Officers do to the rest of the Senators. But when the
Ambassadors goes out, he takes the the Right Hand again, and his Equipage of
the Senators, and in that Order marches to his Audience in the College.

When he enters, he Salutes the Assembly three times. The first when he comes
in the Door, the Second in the middle of the Hall, and the third when he comes
up to the Seat where the Senators are set. Every Salutation consists of three
Bows, one to the Duke and Counselors, and two to the Sages of the two sides;
that is to say, to the Sages-Grans on the Right Hand, and the Sages de Terra
and des Orders on the Left Hand. After this he takes his place on the
Right Hand of the Doge, to whom he Presents his Credentials, which are read
aloud afterward by one of the Secretaries. His Credentials being read, the
Ambassador delivers his Message with the Doors open, to which having received
the Doges Answer, he returns to his Palace in the same Order he came, and when
the Chevalier and his Senators have paid him their last Complement, he conducts
them back to their Boats, and gives him the upper hand.

The Popes Nuntio is received in the same manner as the Royal Ambassadors, but
with this difference, that the Patriarch of Venice, and the Primicier of St.
Mark visit him at the S. Esprit, and the Primicier attends him with his Canons
at the Ceremony of his Entry: Besides the Nuntio never gives the hand to the
Chevalier neither coming in nor going out.

The Patriarch makes his first and last visit to Ambassadors in his Hood and
Rochet, with the Patriarchal Cross carried before him by his chief Almoner.

The Popes Nuntio does the same. Monsieur Trotti who was Nuntio in my time at
Venice, would have brought in a new Custom, by waving in his last Visit to the
French Ambassador his habit of Ceremony, per non dar (as his Secretary said)
disgusti a Nissuno: That he might disgust no body, which in plain English was,
that he might not own the Rights of France, to the prejudice of Spain where he
was born. But Monsieur de St. Andre spoiled the Plot of that Triumvirat, that
is to say of the Nuntio, the Marquess de la Fuente Ambassador of Spain, and the
Abbot Federici Secretary to the Emperor, who jointly employed all their Skill
to impose upon his Prudence, and if possible, revenge themselves for the
honorable advantage he gained upon them in the Jesuits Church.

FINIS.

