AN ACCOUNT OF THE Great Success and Victory THAT THE GARRISON in SLIGO Has
Obtained Over The IRISH ARMY, Friday the 20th of September, 1689. Together with
the Exact Quantity of the Late King's Stores of Powder and Ammunition, and the
Condition of the IRISH in general, With the Arrival of some Horse from
SCOTLAND. 7. October. 1689.
Dundalk, the 28th of September, 1689
ON September the 20th, our INNISKELLEN Garrison at SLIGO, having an Account
that the Connaught Forces, consisting of about 5000 Horse and Foot, commanded
by Colonel Kelley, Colonel Farrel, and Colonel Dillan, who came, in Revenge, to
Attack the Garrison, and to Regain their former Loss, by suppressing and cutting
off the said Garrison. To this they were animated and encouraged by one French
an Inhabitant of Sligo, and a Man of great Interest in that County. And, to
this End, the Irish forthwith marched toward the Curlue, a considerable Post
between Coylough, and the Plains of Roscomon; whence Firing at a great
distance, making several Vollies, approached nearer and nearer, did no
Execution: Our Men, not consisting of above 500 Horse and Foot, never moving
nor firing till they came within Pistol-shot, did, on a sudden, pour in their
Small-shot so thick upon them, that they immediately broke their whole Force,
and forced them to retreat in the greatest Disorder and Confusion imaginable,
flying toward the Boil, were warmly pursued by our Foot; our Horse wheeling
about, got into one End of the Town, whilst the Enemy was entering in at the
other, where in the Churchyard, between both Parties of our Foot and Horse,
above 300 of the Enemy were killed, and a great Number wounded; of our Men in
all but Six killed, and Seven or Eight wounded. There were killed of the Enemy
in this Action in all above 500 Men, besides a great many wounded. The three
Irish Colonels that commanded them, and 150 more, Officers and Soldiers, were
taken Prisoners, besides a Booty of about 10000 Head of Black Cattle, belonging
to the Creaughs of Roscomon, were taken by our victorious Men, and driven unto
Sligo. God be praised for this Signal Victory.

Last Night, for this Victory, our Army gave Three Vollies from our Batteries
and Muskets.

This Account was written by Alderman Van Humrick, one of the Commissaries of
our Army in Ireland.
Chester, October 2d 1689
I Suppose, before this come to your hands, you will hear an Account from
Colonel Stewart, Son to the Lord Mountjoy, (who left the Camp at Dundalk on
Saturday last) of the great Defeat given by 500 of the Inniskillen, to 5000 of
the Irish, killing 800 of them, and taking 300 Prisoners, Colonel Dillon,
Colonel O Farrel, Colonel Bourk, and Colonel Buttler, with several other
Officers being Prisoners, and taking 10000 Head of Black Cattle.

This Morning I discoursed one Peter Ward, who lately came from Dublin, and
made marrow Observations, whilst there, of the Condition of the Irish. He had
an Intimacy with one of the Commissaries of the Stores, who has a very great
Kindness for the Protestants. He assured him they were in very great want of
Powder; that they sent 45 Barrels to Carrickfergus, 15 of which the French Men
of War kept for their use, the Remainder was sent into the Town, when
surrendered there was but little left; That they had but 230 Barrels in their
Stores, and but 4 Shots a Man in their Camp; That they wanted Firearms, having
lost most of them at Derry and Inniskellen, which was the Reason for the Arming
most of their Men with Scythes, Half-Pikes, and Skeins; That their Horse
consisted of 7 Regiments, and 17 of Dragoons. Their best Horses were most of
them spoiled, and those that remained, were ill for Service. They have 56
Regiments of Foot, many of them without Shoes and Stockings. They are much
disheartened, and could not be induced to appear at the Camp, but for the Curse
of the Clergy, if they refused. He told me that one Captain Legallin was shot
at the Camp at Drumconnough, for Running a way, or giving a False Word of
Command, in Engaging the Inniskellen Men. At the time of his being shot, he
desired all his Friends present to come up to him, and advised them that were
in Arms to return, and not to engage longer, for that the Curse of God would
blast all their Undertakings, and that it was in vain to fight against the
English; That they should save themselves, by timely making Conditions,
otherwise they and their Posterity would be ruined, and then was shot to Death.
He denied the Fact laid to his Charge, but said he died to take off the Odium
from Hamilton.

He tells me the Papists in Dublin show much kindness to the Protestants, and
that several of them spoke to him to befriend them if it lay in his Power, they
gave themselves for a lost People, not having Aid sent from France. Tryconnel
is very much against the Burning of Dublin, telling them it will but Exasperate
the English, all the Papists in Dublin are of the same opinion. The French say
the Late K. J. minds nothing but Shooting at Flies and Sparrows, and that he
brought them to that Kingdom to be Murdered by the Irish, and they are in a
deadly Feud.

Postscript. Since my writing the Above Letter, we have an Account from a
Vessel come in hither, that the Horse from Scotland Landed on Sunday at
Carrickfergus, and that the Late King James is Decamped.

WITH ALLOWANCE.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. near Fleet-Bridge, 1689.


