Choose which you will, Liberty or Slavery: OR, An Impartial Representation of
the Danger of being again Subjected to A POPISH PRINCE.

LONDON: Printed for R. Stafford, 1692.

Choose which you will, Liberty or Slavery* etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE JACOBITE CONVENTICLE. A Poem, is just Published. Price 6 d.

THE CHARACTER OF A Bigoted Prince, etc.
IT has been the great unhappiness of the Kingdom of England, for some Years
last past, to be troubled with two very Different sort of Persons of quite
contrary Tempers; the one Party of so very Costive a Faith, that they could
believe nothing, and the other of so easy a Belief that they could swallow
every thing; the first of these could not see the Sun of Truth in its brightest
Meridian; and even Mathematical Demonstration signified nothing in order to
persuade them; they could not (or at least would not) see their Native Country
hurried to the very Jaws of Ruin, and imitated Nero in his stupidity, who
could unconcernedly Tune his Harp when Rome was in Flames; every thing about em
seemed pleasant and gay, they never suffered their minds to be rufled with
anxious Thoughts for the Future, so they enjoyed the present, and observed in
the Literal (but corrupted) sense the command of our Savior, to take no care
for the Morrow; the most surprising Relations moved them not a jot, and they
gave as equal a Credit to an Information or Confession upon Oath, as they would
have allowed to a Chapter in Rablais his History of Garagantua.

The other were of a quite different stamp, they could credit the most
improbable Stories, and the most far fetched Lies were with them esteemed as
Oracles; they were ever at Coffee-houses or places of such resort, still
listening to every idle Pamphleteer's Discourse, with more Attention than to a
Sermon; they could not see a Chimney on Fire, but immediately some Treachery
they believed was in agitation; and a Drunken Midnight Quarrel in the Streets
Alarmed their Thoughts into the Belief of a Massacre; they had nothing in
their Mouths but Plots and Designs; and Holy Writ it self stood upon the same
bottom in their Creed with some Witnesses Depositions; their Imagination
hag-rid with Suspicions and Fears, daily presented them with such frightful
Scenes, that they were not only uneasy to themselves, but likewise to all about
them, which rendered their Days unpleasant, and their Nights unquiet, insomuch
that some of them durst not go to Bed for fear next Morning they should wake
and find their Throats Cut.

From these two very corrupt Humors in the late times, were produced those two
odious Characters of Whigg and Tory, which were handed about so long in Jest,
that they soon turned Earnest, and he was thought either a Knave or a Blockhead
who would not suffer himself to be Dignified or Distinguished by one of those
Titles. This Humor continued for some Years with great Violence and Disorder,
during the latter end of the Reign of K. Charles the Second; in all which time
it is obvious whoever wore the Crown, a great Person then at Court managed
Affairs at the Helm.

That great Prince (who had seen both the Extremes of a Prosperous and an
Adverse Fortune) by his Death Yielded the Throne to his only Brother, in the
beginning of whose Reign the two Discriminating Names before mentioned seemed
to have been utterly forgotten; the former in seeing a Prince the Darling of
their thoughts and wishes now become a Monarch, and the latter in their
mistaken apprehensions of his unexpected Clemency in affording them Liberty of
Conscience.

The Storm was now abated, and Men's Tempers grew more composed, the Virtues of
the Sovereign filled every Mouth with His Praises; His Goodness, His Justice,
and His Piety was the Theme of common Discourse, and nothing but the Name of
James the Just heard in the most ordinary Conversations.

It does not become a Subject too nicely to inquire into the Miscarriages of a
Crowned Head; but this must be confessed, very ill things were done, even to the
Alteration of the fundamentals both of our Religion and Government; and this
must be owned by every one whose Ears are not stopped by invincible Prejudice or
Partiality.

'Twould be vain labor to descend to particulars in a Discourse which is
designed to be of another Nature. The Jewish Feast of Tabernacles, though long
time Abrogated by the coming of our Savior, hinders not, nor forbids me to
reflect on the Dangers I escaped in the Wilderness. I may Lawfully, I think,
select such Days in the Year to consider how Corporations were Regulated,
Bishops Imprisoned, and other Irregularities committed in the late Reign,
without assembling a Conventicle, and there in some lewd Harrang swell every
Miscarriage to a prodigious greatness. The Actions of Princes (Evil ones
especially) are their own proper Heralds, and every one of his Subjects carries
some short Remarks of his Reign in their Memories.

I do not believe that History can parallel the Joys and Triumphs of any Nation
upon their Deliverance from Oppression, with the universal Triumphs of the
English upon the never to be forgotten late Revolution; they seemed like Men
kept a long time in Durance, and now were blessed with the sweets of Liberty;
nay, even some of our present Murmerers themselves were most forwardly Active
to show their Zeal for the then Prince of Orange, who by his coming seemed to
open the Scene of a new World, and restore the English to the Poet's time of
the Golden Age again.

But like true Israelites, we long again for the Onions and Garlic of Egypt,
and would fain be under our old Taskmasters once more; the Wound which was
seemingly Healed, is now broke out again, and what we lost in the Ancient Tory,
we find revived in the Modern Jacobite.

We were told in a Prophetic Discourse some years since, what Treatment we
were to expect if a Prince of the Romish Communion should settle upon the
Throne; the effects of which every one who is not wilfully Blind must
acknowledge. Did he not drive Jehu-like in a full Carreer to Rome? Were not his
Emisaries in every great Town in England Regulating Corporations, and Poisoning
the Minds of the People with Popish Doctrins? Were not all places of Trust both
Civil and Military filled up with those of the Romish Faith, or others whom he
made use of for his own ends? Were they not come to an excessive hight of
Impudence both in their Sermons and Discourses? Was not the Torrent swelled so
high that they hourly expected the Deluge? Were not the Fences of the Law (the
Security of the Subject) attempted to be broke down? And Magna Charta, when in
Opposition to the Princes will, be valued no more than a cancelled Deed of
Conveyance; Was not an Ambassador sent to Rome, and a Nuntio Entertained here
(to settle the Protestant Religion no doubt) and a thousand other Practices
committed as directly opposite to the Interest of the English Nation, as Fire
is contrary to Water. Was all this done in a corner? Were not their Actions as
barefaced as the Sun? And after all this, and the Deliverance we Enjoy, must we
go into the House of Bondage again, and put on those Fetters we so lately shook
off?

Let the seeming warmth of this Parenthesis be a little excused; yet I must
confess, such considerations as these are almost valid enough to justify a
Passion, and make Anger appear no Fault; for were the Roman Catholics the only
Asserters of the Rights of the late King James, the wonder would be little;
bodies often Sympathise at a distance, and they by several Obligations are
bound to wish him Success; and while they terminate in empty Hopes, let them
still regale themselves with their airy Diet; I pity the deluded Creatures, but
cannot blame them, because they Act upon their own Principles; and 'twould be
as unnatural for them not to Pray for his Return, as for a Cardinal, in hopes
of the Popedom, to wish success to the Protestant Forces; or a Calvinist to
Drink a Health to Monsieur Catinat: But when a sort of Men guided, as they
pretend, by the Dictates of an unerring Conscience, shall at this time of day
openly declare for an exploded Interest, and these Protestants too, Men no ways
leven'd with Popery, or any of her Doctrin's, but Zealous Maintainers of the
Church of England, Devout and Pious, Charitable and Just, in the chief
Employments of the Church, and the Brightest of the Golden Candlesticks: For
these so openly to declare their Aversion to this Present Government, and their
Fondness for the Last, is what does not a little elevate and surprise (to use
an Expression of Mr. Bays) and comes almost as near to a Miracle as
Transubstantiation.

A late very Eminent Doctor of the Church, when the Prosecution was Violent
against the Dissenters, wrote a most Learned Tract, concerning the Nicety of a
Scrupulous Conscience; wherein he very curiously Anatomizes the several
Meanders and turnings of that invisible Operation, and Proves that Humor,
Discontent and Interest do frequently wear the Livery of Conscience. How nice
soever some may be in point of Religion, I wish these Gentlemen could acquit
themselves from the forementioned Disguise with which they masquerade their
Political Conscience.

One would wonder what strange bewitching Sophistry the Church of Rome makes
use of to blind the Understandings of her Votaries, to that degree, that they
are continually mistaking their own Interest, and tamely to deliver up their
Bodies, Souls, Reputation and Fortunes for the Reversion of Purgatory
hereafter, only for the slight gratification of their humors here; and I
appeal to the greatest asserter of King James his Interest, if they can produce
any Crowned Head in England since the Conquest, who was half so Infatuated and
Bigoted to the Interest of the Sea of Rome, as the late King: Indeed we Read
of a Religious Edward, and a Pious, Devout Henry; but our English History
cannot afford us one Instance of a Prince who would Sacrifice his own Honor,
his Kingdoms Safety, his Interest Abroad, and the Love of his Subjects at Home,
merely out of a mistaken Zeal to the Advancement of the Romish Faith; the most
solemn Oaths and Protestations esteemed do more than words of Course; and that
which was held Sacred amongst all mankind, valued as nothing in competition
with a Command from the Apostolic Chair: The old Lady at Rome with all her
Wrinkles, has still some Charms to subdue great Princes; and tho she has
Abused, Deposed, and Murdered so many of her Lovers, yet she finds every day
some new Admirers who are proud of her Charms; a Practice which comes as near a
Miracle, as any that Church in her Legends can boast of; and I hope some
passages in the late Reign are not so forgotten, but they may serve to justify
the truth of the Assertion.

Indeed for our amusement we were once told by a popular Pen, That allowing a
King upon the English Throne, Principled for Arbitrary Government and Popery,
yet he was Clogged and Shackl'd with Popular and Protestant Laws, that if he had
never so great a mind to it, there was not a Subject in his Dominions would dare
to serve him in his Design. How true this Assertion has since proved, let any
indifferent person judge; the late King himself both dared and found no small
number of his Subjects as resolute as their Master, to alter the whole Frame of
the English Government; he found not Men only of his own Communion, but Men of
all Religions, or rather of no Religion at all, whose desperate Fortunes push't
'em on to the most daring Enterprises;' his single Command added Life to their
Motions; and no wonder he found Tools to Work withal, when all the Obligations
of Law were shrunk into the small compass of a Princes Will, and the musty
Lines of Magna Charta dwindled to a Sic volo, sic jubeo.

Several other artifices were used, to let us conceive a Popish Prince no such
terrible Bugbear as common Fame represents him; as that the Idolatrous
Superstition of the Church of Rome was by a long series of time so worn off the
minds of the People, and the Reformation so strongly Rooted, the Church of
England so firmly Established, the Romanists so detested for their Innovations
in Doctrine and Absurdity in Ceremonies, etc. that it was impossible ever to fix
Popery here: But, alas, 'twas mere Delusion, we quickly saw through the Juggle,
and the State-Quacks discovered their Leigerdemain tricks too openly; and had
not Almighty God by a most surprising, and almost unparllel'd Providence
Delivered us, I know not by this time, but that the Name Protestant had been as
odious in England, as the Term of Hugonot is now in France; and the Dominicans
and Franciscans left their Cells in Lincolns-Inn-Fields and the Savoy, to have
Sung their Regina Coelorum in all the Cathedrals in England.

I am not Ignorant how some Persons do still Magnify the Merits of the late
King, as to his Private Virtues, as his being Descended of the Blood Royal, his
Inviolable tenderness for his Friend, the exact Correspondency of his Mouth and
Heart, his Courage against the Dutch, etc. but these were glimmering Rays of
his, which shined upon some few only; for when he came to his Meridian, they
changed their Nature, and the scorching Beams of his Zeal for his Religion got
the Ascenednt of all his other Accomplishments, which so clouded his discerning
Faculties, that he mistook his Friends for his Enemies, and his Enemies for his
Friends; the most sage and deliberate Advices given him in opposition to
beloved Jesuits, were censured as intrenchments upon his Prerogative, and the
single Ipse Dixit of Father Peter's, valued above the Joint Council of the
Realm; the Colleges of Oxford and Cambridg esteemed as Nurseries of Heretics,
and the President and Fellows of Magdelen College most illegally Ejected from
their just Rights, to receive upon the Foundation a sort of Sparks who were
neither Scholars nor Gentlemen. Privilege was swallowed up by Prerogative, and
Know I am your King, was a Supersedeas to all manner of humble Petitions and
Remonstrances; his Priests, those fatal Scorpions, he so hugged in his Bosom,
were the chief Incendiaries, and contrary to our known Laws, swarmed over from
Doway and St. Omers, greedily gaping after Preferments, which they needed not
have wanted, could his Will alone have placed them in Ecclesiastical Dignities;
they must be humbly content with Titular and Imaginary Bishoprics in Nubibus,
till the stubbern Heretics who Enjoyed 'em, would at once part with their
Reasons and their Livings together.

But the greatest occasion of his Arbitrary Government, and the Era from
whence he may date all his late Misfortunes, was his Friendship with the French
King, a right Son of Ishmael, whose Hand is lifted up against every Man's, and
every Man's against his; a Man who has not one single Virtue to counterballance
that prodigious stock of Vices which harbor in his Breast; a Man who has built
a Reputation upon the Ruins of his Neighbors Kingdoms; and yet with this
Gallick Nimrod did the Unnfortunate King James contract a mo^^ lasting Alliance.

I perceive I am stopped in my Assertion, and a little Dabler in Politics
challenges me to prove the Contract: It Is true, we cannot show the Original
Deed, with their Signets and Names affixt to it; but he must surely be
Delivered over to Unbelief, who cannot credit such Circumstances as serve to
clear the matter from all doubt or hesitation: Who Promoted the Marriage of the
Duke with the Princess of Modena? Who Defraid the Charges of her Journey, and
Paid the greatest part of her Fortune, but the French King? If this will not
satisfy, pray examine Coleman's Letter to Sir William Throgmorton; the Duke's
then agent at the French Court, where he tells him, That when the Duke comes to
be Master of our Affairs, the King of France will have all reason to promise
himself all that he can desire; for according to the Dukes mind, the Interest
of the King of England, the King of France, and his Own, are so closely bound
up together, that it is impossible to separate them one from the other, without
the ruin of them all three; but being joined, they must notwithstanding all
opposition, become Invincible: There are other Letters between Mr. Coleman and
Father le Chaise which carry such undeniable Marks of a Contract between King
James when Duke of York and Louis le Grand, that none but those Divested of
common Sense, can have reason to doubt it: If this is not thoroughly convincing,
let any one consult the Memorial given in by Monsieur d' Avaux, the French
Ambassador at the Hague, Sept. 9th 1688, which if the curious Reader desire to
see at length, I refer him to the 1st Vol. of Mercurius Reformatus, or the New
Observator, No. 5. wherein the Ingenuous Author of that Paper, does prove it
beyond all possibility of Contradiction. There are several other Arguments as
unquestionable as the former, which for brevity's sake, I omit.

And now it is time to breath a while, and consider what are the those Regal
Virtues, of which, if a Prince has not a share, he will hardly answer the
expectations of his People, nor the ends of Government; they are generally
recon'd to be Piety, Prudence, Justice, and Valor; but if his Piety
degenerates into Biggottism, his Prudence into unsteady Timerousness, his
Justice into acts of Cruelty and Severity, and his Valor into Rashness and
Obstinacy; what ever his Flatterers may say of him, yet certainly he is unfit
to Govern.

Let the Reader apply the Character where he pleases, and find a Crowned Head
whereon to fix these four Vices, by another name called Virtues. How much of
the Comparison may fall to the late King's share, we know not; but of his
Bigottry, Zeal, (or what other Name you please) to his Religion, I believe by
this time the World wants not to be convinced; for if for Arguments sake we
should allow (what we cannot believe) viz. a Merit in Religious Actions,
certainly the late King has bid the fairest for Cononization, after his Death,
of all the Crowned Heads who have lived these two Centuries, who would
Sacrifice three Kingdoms to the Capricios of a Priest; but be it unto him
according to his Faith; and indeed it is but just he should expect a Crown in
Heaven, if for its sake he has lost one on Earth.

This in a few Lines we have given the Character of a Bigoted unfortunate
Prince: But leaving him at his Devotions, let us a little return homewards, and
observe a sort of Men who are so very Impatient under this Government, that
their very Looks express their Discontent; they are as uneasy, tho in the
Sunshine of Liberty, as the Slaves at Algeirs are with their Chains; they
cannot take an Oath to a Government that will Protect 'em, and nothing will
ever satisfy them, but the Return of their Old Master.

Good God! to what stupidity is Mankind arrived? To dislike the most easy
Government in the World, to Espouse that which is the most Barbarous in its
Nature: A Government that in measures of Cruelty exceeds even the most Savage
Communities on the Coast of India! A Government so debauched with false
Religion, that considering the Interest of Mankind, and the ill usage it
exposes Men's Persons and Fortunes to, it could be almost wished that such a
Religion had never been known in the World. In the name of Wonder, what would
these Gentlemen have? They were many of them (at least many pretended to be)
uneasy under the last, when Popery and Arbitrary Government seemed to come as
an Armed Man; and now they are almost beyond the possibility of such Fears,
they Murmur: Of what Mercurial Temper are the English composed, that they can
never be settled? Popery was once their Terror, and now that is removed, they
fear they know not what; like Men in Fevers, they are Restless in this Bed,
and when removed to another, are as uneasy in that. I appeal to any of them, if
the pressures that gawl their Shoulders, either in their Persons or Fortunes,
was not brought upon themselves by their own perverse Obstinacy, for which
Conscience is still the pretense; the Government would have them Live easy, and
enjoy their Estates and Preferments both Civil and Ecclesiastical, nor would
molest them while quiet they might sit under their Vines and under their
Fig Trees, but they will not; and if Men will turn themselves out of all, in
compliance to a humor, who can help it?

It must be confessed, that when once the Persons of Kings grow Contemptible, or
little in the Eyes of their Subjects, their smallest Miscarriages are Magnified
to that degree, as very often Terminates in their Ruin: But there is an Error
on the other hand, when the worst Actions of Princes shall be thought Innocent
(for according to some persons Creed, a King can do no wrong) and the belief of
Passive Obedience is carried so high, that even his Arbitrary Proceedings shall
be winkt at: This is to exceed even the Arts of the Turkish Policy, who pay not
a greater Veneration of their Grand Signiors, than some of our Zealots do to
the late King, they solemnly drink his Health upon their Knees, and Pray for
him in their Private Devotions affectionately; nor do they forget him in the
Public Liturgies of the Church, for every one knows the secret Mystery of
Bless and Protect the King our Governor. To be short, nothing will serve them
but his Return, to Redeem them out of their imaginary Bondage; for this they
Wish, for this they Pray: Nay, the Jews themselves do not at this day with
greater impatience and mistaken Zeal expect the coming of the Messiah, than
these kind of Men do for the Restoration of King James to his Crown and
Dignity.

Let us therefore a little examine what specious Pretenses they have for such an
Ambition; and tho indeed they are as shy of Revealing the Secret, as they would
be of a Fairy Treasure; yet by some expressions occasionally dropped in
Conversation, it is not very hard to Conjecture some of them.

As first, they are great pretenders to Moral Justice; they say King James had
a great deal of Wrong done him, and being their Sovereign Prince, they are
Obliged to see him Righted. Are they so? but who gave them the Commission?
Their Conscience, they will tell you, but their Conscience is so great a
Riddle, that it will never be Expounded; their Conscience would have King James
in his Throne again, tho never so much Bloodshed and Miseries might ensue;
their fondness to his Person closes their Eyes and stops their Ears to all the
Calamities their fellow Subjects must necessarily suffer by such a Revolution;
nay, this very Conscience of theirs, was one of the chief occasions which
prompted the late King to commit those Arbitrary Actions in his shortliv'd
Reign; they told him he might do what he pleased, and for for his Actions, was
accuntable to none but God, tho he should turn upside-down our Laws, Religion,
and Liberties, and that we were tamely to submit our Necks to the Blow when
ever he should Command it, in spite of Laws, tho it were in the Power of our
Hands to save our selves by a just Defense. No wonder then upon such
considerations as these, and prompted by the Native Cruelty of his own
Religion, he permitted those unaccountable Actions to be committed; and he is
as much beholding to those fiery sticklers for the loss of his Crown, as he was
to Father Pretre's, and other Jesuetick Advice.

It is the Nature of Mankind to covet Liberty, and to have all things about
them easy and free: Now I would ask these Gentlemen what greater Freedom they
can expect, were their beloved Prince Reinstated in his Throne again, than what
they now Enjoy? Are not their Fortunes secured to them by the best Laws in the
World? Who goes about to Invade their Properties, or divest them of their
Estates? Yes, they Reply, some Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Persons have
lost their Livings and Means of Subsistence, because: -- Yes, the Because is
very well known, because they cannot take the Oaths. It would have been wished,
that those Reverend Persons would have Informed the World with the Reasons of
their Noncompliance, which might have regulated the unthinking minds of some
of their Bigoted Followers, who outdo even the Votaries of the Church of Rome
in an Implicit Faith; and believe it is not Lawful for them to Swear to the
Government, because Dr. such a one refuses the Oaths. A very pretty conclusion;
but allowing it to be Conscience in their own acceptance, I believe when
Humor, Prejudice, and some other niceties are separated from it, the thing
called Conscience will appear in this Case but an Airy Notion.

Some of the most Moderate of them, I confess, who are great Lovers of the late
King, could wish him here again without the Assistance of the French; but if
their Faith was but as strong and powerful as their Hopes, they might certainly
remove Mountains, and join the Alps to St. Michaels-Mount in Cornwall; but
these are Wishes as Improbable as they are Impossible to be Effected; for you
may as easily separate Heat from Fire, or Moisture from Water, as divide the
Interests of King James, from those of Lewis the Fourteenth; no, no, like
Hippocrates his Twins they must Live and Dye together; and therefore these fort
of Men deserve rather our Pity than our Laughter.

But there are another sort who will have their Old Master return again, though
by never such indirect Means; and are as glad when they hear of the Success of
the French Arms, as they would be to Receive the News of the Death of some
Decrepid Relation of theirs, who by his Exit, leaves them a plentiful Estate.
And let Mons and Flanders, Savoy, and all the Confederate Countries be reduced
to heaps of Ruins, so their Dear King may come to his Throne again, though he
Entered the City of London with Luxemburgh and Boufflers at the Head of fifty
Thousand French Dragoons.

These are hopeful Protestants in faith, blessed Reformers and Defenders of the
Christian Church; fresh Straw and a dark Chamber, cooling Purges, Leeches and
Blood-letting are only fit for such as these; they are Mad beyond the cure of
Hellebore: But because it is necessary sometimes to Answer a Fool according to
his Folly. Let us ask em what mighty Mischiefs have the Dukes of Savoy, and
Bavaria, the Electors of Brandenburgh, Mentz, and Cologne, the Emperor of
Germany, the King of Spain, and the United Provinces* done these Gentlemen,
that they are so mighty Angry with them, and could wish the Sculls of all their
Subjects were to Pave the way for King James his Accession to a forfeited
Throne? how came these involved in the Quarrel? must King James his supposed
Right, like Pharoah's Lean Kine, swallow up all other Princes Properties? What
has he done to be so much the Darling of Mankind, that other Men's Glories must
be Eclipsed to make his Glimmering Rays shine the Brighter? Are great Britain,
France and Ireland, to be the only Goshen, and must there be Darkness all over
Europe besides? These Men are a most strange sort of Political Predestinarians,
who will allow no Peace nor Plenty to any but their Master and his Friends; and
it is hard to be determined, whether Folly or Madness has the greatest share in
the Composition of their Hopes. All Pity and Humanity to their fellow Creatures
is laid aside, and they seem to exceed the Indian Cannibals in acts of Cruelty,
for how severe they may be to Strangers, they yet seldom Devour those of their
own Tribe; no Man that hears 'em Discourse, can certainly keep within the
bounds of Moderation; for who ever has the patience to hear their Arguments,
will certainly expect better. Reasons in Bedlam, from the Lucida Intervalla of
a Lunatic.

The Love of ones Country, was ever by the most Polite Nations, esteemed as the
Characteristical mark of a Noble Soul, and Vincit Amor Patriae, seemed to be
Written in indelible Marks upon their Breasts; for this the ancient Greeks and
Romans were Famous, Remarkable to this purpose is the Relation Livy gives us of
Curtius a Noble Roman, who when the Earth was sunk with a wide Gap in the
Middle of the Forum, and it was told, it would not come together again, unles
some Prime young Nobleman were put into it; he to Deliver his Country, mounted
on Horseback, Rode into the Gaping Chasma: But we on the contrary, have a sort
of Men amongst us, who would gladly see their Native Soil over run with a knot
of Villains, to gratify one Man's Lust of Power on the one hand, and their
unaccountable Humor on the other. I would fain ask them, supposing the
possibility of such Success, whether the French Arms are so well bred, as to
distinguish them from the rest of the English Sufferers by such a Revolution
(to which that of the Goths and Vandals in Italy, was but a civil Visit)? I
fear like Tarpeia the Vestal Virgin, who Covenanted with the Sabines to betray
the Capitol to them, for what they wore on their lest Arms; but when they were
Entered, into of Bracelets which she intended, they threw their Targets upon
her, and Pressed her to Death; so would these very Men Suffer in the Common
Calamity; for the French, as well as other Nations, agree in this, That though
they Love the Treason, they Hate the Traitors.

To Invert a little the Words of Mr. Dryden to the Reader, before his Poem of
Absalom and Achitophel, Every Man is a Knave or an Ass on the Contrary Side;
and there is a Treasury of Merits in Sam's Coffee-House, as well as in Richard's
at the Temple; but the longest Chapter in Deuteronomy has not Curses enough for
well-wishers to the French.

It was the Speech of a Moderate Gentleman in the Long Parliament, when the
Faction in the House of Commons was high against the Bishops, and the
Established Church, Gentlemen, (says he) let us see the Model of your New
intended Superstructure, before you pull down the Old one. If we should ask
some of these Fiery Bigots for the Interest of the late King, what Advantages
they can propose to themselves by his Return; unless like the unrewarded poor
expecting Caviliers at the Restoration of King Charles the Second, they can be
content to be Loyal and Starve; for if the latter end of King James his
imaginary Reign, should be of a piece with his first real beginning, he will
still neglect his truest Friends, and stick close to Flattering Enemies. With
so deep a Root has the Advice of a Chancellor, about the year 1660, still
remained in the Breasts of the Princes, Oblige your Enemies, and your Friends
will be true to your Interest.

But I have wandered from my Subject, by a long, but I hope, not very
Impertinent Digression, and therefore (asking my Reader's Pardon) return to my
Subject, or rather the Applicatory part of it. We have seen the Character of
the Prince and his Bigoted followers; And as all things are best set off by
Examples, let us now draw a Parallel or Landscape of the two different
Complexions of the Reigns of King William and Queen Mary, and King James, and
what we are unavoidably to Expect, should Almighty God in the Course of his
Providence, for our Punishment, and the gratification of some restless Spirits,
bring King James to his Throne again: Of the Ease and Tranquillity of the first
we are certain, but of the Horror of the latter, the most terrible Ideas we
can form of it in our Imaginations will come short of the Life; for as the
safety we now enjoy, almost exceeds our Hopes; so the Stripes we must then
feel, will transcend our very Fears.

In the Person of the King, we have a Prince who is truly (what the Historian
says of Titus) Humani generis Deliciae, who has centred in his Person all the
Valor and Wisdom of his Ancestors: A Prince so truly Great, that those Laurels
which add such Luster to another Brow, look but faintly on His, He needing no
additional Varnish to set off His Native Goodness: A Prince, Born to be the
Arbiter of Christendom, whom all the Crowned Heads and States of Europe Adore
as the only Person who must break the Jaws of the French Leviathan: Not the
greatest Dangers which so terrify pusilanimous minds, can at all move Him, who
caring not for an inactive inglorious Greatness, exposed his Sacred Person to
Rescue these ungrateful Kingdoms from the moct insupportable Tyranny of
Arbitrary Power; since which, in Ireland he gave most Invincible Proofs both of
his Courage and Conduct; the United Force of Europe could not concert their
Measures against France, till his Presence Influenced their Counsels at the
Hague, to which he went through a thousand Perils at Sea; after a short Return,
He is now gone again to Flanders to head that Prodigious Army: Victory seems to
accompany him in Attempts of War, and his worst Enemies must own him to have
the very Soul of Courage.

In the Person of the Queen, we have a Second Queen Elizabeth; but with respect
to her Sacred Ashes, we may say, the Copy far exceeds the Original. Never did a
Crowned Lady show more Conduct and Magnanimity than when the French Fleet was
upon our Coast, when her Illustrious Husband was Fighting in Ireland: A
Princess, whose thousand Charms make her fit to Rule, and Command even Respect
from her very Enemies (if any such there are;) her Majesty is Tempered with so
much Mildness, that at the same time, she neither invites nor forbids Access;
the Glory of her own Sex, and the Admiration of ours.

Under these two Illustrious Persons is England, etc. at this time Governed by
the most exact Laws that ever were made, the Prerogative of the King not
Dominaring over the Privileges of the People, the Church of England
Flourishes, not withstanding the Peevishness of some of her Votaries; and the
Dissenters enjoy their Liberty of Conscience without Design: The great Blessing
of this Nation, viz. the Parliament, does frequently Meet, and their Votes are
Unanimous for Supplies for the Nations Good: The Taxes by them Levied are
(excepting by some few discontented Spirits) willingly Paid, and the People
satisfied that their Money is Employed for the uses intended, not Lavishly and
Unaccountably thrown away on Pensioners, etc. every Man enjoys his Plentiful
or* Competent Fortune, with all the freedom Imaginable; no Tricks are made use
of to Decoy us into Slavery; from the very Prospect of which, the King designs
by his utmost Endeavors to free us by appearing himself in Person at the Head
of the Confederate Army, in opposition to the Power of France: He designing to
Rescue the Glory of the English Nation from that Stupidity, the Luxury, and
Effeminacy of the late Reigns had obscured it with; and we have nothing to
render us unhappy but our own groundless Fears and Jealousies, in which
unaccountable Humor, if we still persist, like the Seditious amongst the Jews,
we shall do our selves more Mischief within the Walls, than our Enemies could
possibly do without, when the Glory of their City and Nation yielded to the
Arms of the Romans, who could never have Conquered them, had not their
Murmurers within done more Execution to themselves, than all Battering Rams of
Titus could possibly Effect against their Walls.

But now to show the Reverse of the Medal. If King James' return to reassume
his justly Forfeited Right, as no Human Reason can possibly suppose him to come
in without the Assistance of the French, let us consider what a Field of Blood
will our Country be; he coming in like a Conqueror, will make us quickly Feel
the Difference between the Easy Government we now Live under, and the
Insupportable Tyranny we must then endure; his imaginary Zeal for the Defense
of the Protestant Religion, being long since quenched by the Affronts he
pretends to have suffered by those of that Communion; then will Rome Erect her
Standard in Defiance to all the Methods of the Reformation, and Popery become
the standing Religion of the Nation.

It cannot be supposed that the Instructions he has Received from his great
Patron Lewis, will easily be forgot; and he who when in a private Capacity
would ever hardly forgive one whom he supposed had done him Wrong, will now be
hardly brought to forget a National Indignity; he will never certainly listen
to any Overtures of Capitulation; and it is impossible to believe that things
can be ever Accomodated between an Incensed Prince, and (as he supposes) a
Rebellious People. He has not so long Breathed in the Air of France, as not to
learn its Tyrannical and Arbitrary Maxims; and the (as he thinks) Meritorious
Zeal of Propagating his own Religion, will let him stick at nothing, how
Arbitrary soever, to Establish it. We may indeed imagine him to be of a Merciful
Nature, and that all shall be forgotten as if never done, and that an Act of
Indemnity will make all even again; but those who are so blinded as to believe
these fair Promises, et them but look into an Act of his own, Dated at his
Residence in Dublin. And in a Proclamation of his, to his Pretended Subjects in
Scotland, May 4. 1689. He is most Graciously Pleased, not only to Encourage his
Friends to be Destoryers of Mankind, but likewise offers them Pardons for such
Inhuman Cruelties: Telling them in the said Proclamation, It Is his Pleasure
they should Rise in Arms, and Assault and Destory, and what ever Bloodshed and
Slaughter, Mutilations or Fire-raisings should be done to these Rebels, (as he
calls the Scotch) his Proclamation should be their sufficient Warrant for such
Acts. If this is his Kindness for the Scotch Nation, can we think the English
will more civilly be Treated?

No, no, let us no longer Amuse our selves with Fancies of his Clemency and
Kindness. We live under a Government where we may be Hapy if we please, and
nothing but our Discontent can render us Miserable; for as certain as there is
a Providence, if ever such a Fatal Revolution should happen, not Savoy, nor
Piedmont, nor all the places where the Arms of the French have Ravaged, were
ever such Scenes of Blood and Confusion as England will be. We are now in our
Crisis, and a few Months will, in all probability, determine the fate of Europe
in General, and of our own Country in particular; and upon the Success of the
Confederate Army, Headed by our most Victorious Prince, depends the Liberty or
Slavery of the most Civilized part of the World.

Postscript.
AT the conclusion of this Discourse, I imagine some Smiling Reader finding
fault, and by his Looks would seem to tell me the Landskips are as ill Drawn as
they are ill Designed, and that the Lion is not so fierce as he is Painted, nor
will the Return of a Prince of the Romish Commifon be so Terrible to his
Protestant Subjects as I would seem to represent. But in Answer to this, I must
acquaint the Gentleman, that I fear I have communited an Error on the other
Hand, and instead of adding fierce Colors to make the Piece seem Tremendous: I
have used such faint shadows as do not heighten the Picture. Partiality and
Prejudice are very ill Spectacles, and but too often cause a false Medium. I
have seen a Picture, which if one looked Obliquely upon, on the left Hand were
represented the Heads of three fair Ladies; but if you changed the Position of
your Body, and stood on the right Hand of the Design, the very same Picture
showed you a Monkey and two Parrots. I know not on which hand my Reader's
Judgment stands, which valued Faculty of ours we find to be very often deluded;
for if I may apply a place in Holy Writ, very pertinent to this purpose, only
exchanging the Case of the Father for that of the Son; they who form such
terrible Ideas of the Imaginary Severities they feel under the present Reign,
where they are only beaten with Rods, will at the Return of their Idolized
Prince, be Chastis'd with Scorpions.

FINIS.
Books Printed for R. Baldwin.
NEW Predictions of the Fate of all the Princes and States in the World. price
4.

Sodom Fair: Or the Market of the Man of Sin. Containing, a true Account of the
Prices of the Pope's Pardons and Dispensations; being a Treatise very useful
and necessary for all young English Papists, who intend to take Holy Orders, or
Travel through Italy; and all such as intend to be cheated both out of their
Souls and Money. To which is added the History of ADULTERY, as it is now at Rome
by Law Established; with the Life of Clement the Sixth, and Blasphemous Bull
which he Published for the year of Jubilee, 1350.

A Journal of the late Motions and Actions of the Confederate Forces against
the French, in the United Provinces, and the Spanish Netherlands. With curious
Remarks on the Situation, Strength and Rarities of the most considerable
Cities, Towns and Fortifications in those Countries. Together with an exact
List of the Army.

The Present State of Christendom considered, in nine Dialogues, between I. The
present Pope Alexander the VIII. and Lewis the XIV. II. The Great Duke of
Tuscany, and the Duke of Savoy. III. King James the Second, and the Marescal de
la Feuillade. IV. The Duke of Lorrain, and the Duke of Schomberg. V. The Duke
of Lorrain, and the Elector Platine. VI. Louis the XIV. and the Marquis de
Louvois. VII. The Advoyer of Berne, and the Chief Syndic of Geneva. VIII.
Cardinal Ottoboni, and the Duke de Chaulnes. IX. The young Prince Abafti, and
Count Teckly.


